Madam Chair, here, Madam Chair,
you have a quorum, OK, so we're
gonna quickly go through the
consents and then we'll hear
start on Senate Bill 81. Um, so
first item on consent is Senate
Bill 113 as amended board and
commission sunset dates, any
opposition.
2
adoption, is it adoption or
passage, I guess, of this bill.
No opposition. OK.
So there is a due pass on Senate
Bill 113 as amended. And then we
have
Let's see.
We have a search and rescue
emergency responses. It looks
like it's a committee sub for
Senate Bill 353 as amended any.
Opposition to the bill? No.
We have a due pass on.
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 353 as amended search and
rescue emergency responses. So,
All you people in orange, you're
welcome to stay, but um
we're done. OK, very good. OK.
Thank you. So we are now on
Senate Bill 81 as amended New
Mexico Property Insurance
Program Association Board,
Senator Worth, as well as
Representative Harlan and
representative.
Gonzalez.
Thank you.
Senderworth. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you
members. Uh, what I'm gonna do
is give an outline of the bill,
give an outline of the Senate
floor amendments and then
because we are gabbling in right
now, I am going to slide back to
the floor and let the two house
sponsors discuss where we are on
this bill and then uh
Representative Vincent does have
a proposed amendment that you
all can discuss and certainly
it'll be up to the will of the
committee, about the direction
that this goes. Uh, Senate bill
81, uh, deals with the fair
plan. This is a program created
in 1969, which provides an
alternative to homeowners and
businesses, uh, whose policies
have been canceled, insurance
policies for homeowner or
commercial coverage have been
canceled, uh, or soon to be
canceled and they're unable to
obtain insurance through the
regular market. This is a last
resort, uh, policy. Why is
this necessary New Mexico is
facing over 10,000 non-renewals
since 2021. Uh, I think
Representative McQueen and rep
Sapansky and I, uh, we're at a
chamber of commerce events, uh,
before the session, we had a
farmer's agent who said he is
going to lose $20 million worth
of business at the end of the
year. I went back to my law
office a couple, a couple of
weeks ago, received a notice on
a property that I have an
interest in.
Um, quote, and I'll just let you
know as of June 5th, 2025,
you're hereby notified in
accordance with the terms and
conditions of the above policy,
uh, that the above policy will
expire effective at at and from
the hour and date mentioned
above and the policy will not be
renewed. Reason for
cancellation, risk no longer
meets guidelines due to property
and high or very high wildfire
region. This is a property in
the city limits of Santa Fe just
off of old Santa Fe.
trail.
So with this notice, it doesn't
mean I go to the fair plan. I go
to two other insurance companies
to see if I can get coverage,
and this truly is a last resort
plan.
So when the, when the fair plan
was created in 1969, the policy
limits for residential were
$250,000.
Uh, that if you run an inflation
calculator, which I did for the
floor debate would be over $2
million a day today in terms of
coverage.
Uh, there's a compromise that
was reached in the journey of
this bill that was part of the
Senate floor amendment that sets
the residential uh rates at
$750,000 and I think we're past
all of the debate about that in
the Senate's, um or amendments,
we also set the commercial
property, we lowered it from 5
million to $2 million as a
proposed coverage compromise,
uh.
So what does the bill do? Uh, it
has a mitigation component,
which I think is important, uh,
and I know, uh, Representative
Vincent's been working on this
on a whole range of different
bills, uh, basically, it's tied
to an IBHS program, which is an
international business program,
uh, and it would, can be used to
qualify consumers for the fair
plan and possibly reduce
premiums when they go back into
the open market. The idea is you
want to make sure that folks are
hardening around their houses,
doing the thinning that's
necessary. So, uh, really the
goal and I think Representative
Vinson did a great job of this
and some of the committees. The
goal here is to try and get
things thinned in our forest in
a better place so that we
actually get to a point when the
insurance companies are willing
to come back and provide this
coverage.
Um, another piece that's
important that was in the bill,
uh, is that the program needs to
be actuarly sound, and one of
the discussions has been, well,
we're raising the rates. How's
that gonna impact everyone else.
Well, the fact of the matter is
with higher rates, you're gonna
pay more for insurance, just
like we all do. Everyone's
insurance is going up. Uh,
Senator Ramos testified on the
Senate floor, and he's a
co-sponsor of this. I think he,
he's going for
About $1500 to $4000. Uh, so all
these increases are happening.
Certainly the, the, this is not
any kind of a subsidy. I think
that's really important. This is
just like any other insurance
policy, the rates need to be
actuarly sound, you want to make
sure that the fund has enough in
it, so when there is a disaster,
it's able to cover, uh, that
disaster. I think the big
dispute that still remains and
is the composition of the board.
Let me just tell you what we
did.
as a, as a compromise in the
Senate, uh, on the Senate
amendments, uh, what we did is
increase the fare plan board
from 9 to 11 members, and we
changed the appointing authority
of the board to include 3
appointments by the insurance
industry, and this is what's in
the bill as it comes to you.
One appointment by the Senate
minority floor leader that
represents the insurance
industry, one appointment by the
House minority Floor Leader that
represents consumers, one
appointment by the Attorney
General that represents
consumers, one appointment by
the president pro tem with
actuary experience, one
appointment by the speaker with
accounting experience, one
appointment by the
superintendent with catastrophic
wrist experience and then the
superintendent or her designee.
And the, the, the final 11th
member would be the fire marshal
or the designee. We tried to
create a board that was 5
insurance, 5 that had consume or
own on the other side, and then
the fire marshal was the 11th.
Uh, we also changed the, the
bill so that the fire so that
the board members would choose
the chair. It wouldn't just be
the superintendent of insurance.
Uh, so that is how the bill came
off of the Senate floor, I think
with one vote in opposition, we
had a lengthy debate, and this
has been a
a journey on this bill. Uh, it
is super important for a whole
bunch of different reasons, and
I think, you know, any of us
that have kind of urban areas
that are up against wild lands,
uh, are going to be having
constituents reaching out about
this. I think both
representative Gonzalez, uh, and
Representative Vinson, of
course, have experienced the
catastrophe that has really
triggered the need to address
the situation that we're in. And
so, Madam Chair, that is what
the
does,
and I would love to sit and
debate all evening, but I think
what I will do is
Slide out that representative
Gonzalez stepped in and, and let
me just say, I think there,
there's another amendment here
that's been been proposed. I I
don't want to say that I agree
with that amendments. What I,
what I do think though that's
important is that you all have
this discussion, and I think
it's really gonna focus
primarily on the board makeup,
and what's the right right
makeup for the board. I'm just
hopeful that we can get
somewhere that we can move this
forward because I really think
this is an important piece of
legislation. And so with that.
I'm gonna jump out and I could
certainly yield to my, to my
house. I think it's important to
yield to both of them to say a
few words because their
districts are experiencing, you
know, the, the problem of post
post disaster, you can't rebuild
because you can't get insurance.
There's no one's gonna give you
a mortgage without insurance,
and again, without this plan in
place, uh, it's a really
important thing. So, thank you,
Madam Chair, I appreciate it.
Uh, thank you, sen, and thank
you for making time.
Right representatives
to proceed. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. So I'm gonna give you
the, the 20,000 ft view of this.
I think it's important for us to
do it, uh, it gives you a little
bit of history, so we had our
fires this summer in Lincoln
County that were devastating and
we've lost more homes up there
than we care to even mention.
And with that, we have had an
LFC meeting in, in uh at
Mescalero, and we were able to
take the committee around and
look, look at the devastation
because you can look at it on TV
all
you want, you need to be there
and you need to see it front and
center, you need to see the
devastation, you need to smell
it, you need to walk through it.
You need to see that people
left.
And they left with nothing.
And when they left, they had
nothing to come back to, so it
triggered me to contact the
superintendent of insurance and
I wrote several letters and, and
was responded to and um
I wanted to find out how we were
gonna be able to get our people
in Lincoln County, some
insurance. Well, it grew and it
wasn't just about Lincoln
County.
It was about New Mexico. I, I
was just right there in Lincoln
County. I didn't know that this
was a statewide issue. I didn't,
I had no idea. So,
We
had a meeting
And uh
The superintendent insurance and
uh Senator Wirth and myself.
We got into a room and we
started putting some legislation
together.
Now
I don't feel like I was told the
whole truth. I wasn't lied to,
but I wasn't told the complete
truth.
And there was a fair board, and
I'm not an insurance person, I'm
getting pretty good at it now,
but I'm not an insurance person,
and I was told that the fair
board was not moving.
So that's what made me want to
sign onto this legislation.
So I signed on to the
legislation and in my
Humble opinion, I was not.
I was not familiar with the fair
board, and I was a little bit
irritated with them because
My folks that were evacuated,
lest they, they were evacuated
like they went to Texas, they
went to Chavis County. They went
everywhere, but Lincoln County.
And they were made whole on
their insurance policies, but
It wasn't that they just got all
their insurance money could go
buy a house. Well, you can't buy
a house if you can't get
insurance. A real estate agent
cannot sell you a house.
Unless you can get insurance. So
this problem just kept
compounding and compounding. And
so we ran this legislation.
Well
As I continued to get briefed, I
decided to meet with the Fair
board, myself.
And the fare board that's been
running since 1969 that has kept
this program running for over 60
years, has done a pretty fair
job.
So I needed to get both sides of
the story, and
The meetings that we had, I
never felt like the fair board
was represented. They never had
a seat at the table.
And I know what that feels like.
And I've learned to compromise
up here, ladies and gentlemen, I
promise you that. And, and so
the superintendent ventures told
me that she was willing to
compromise.
And, and we've worked diligently
and we have tried to get this
going and we have had committee
subs and they've subbed it and
subbed it.
The amendment that I sent out.
Good. Let's get to the
amendment. Let's talk about
that. Let's move the amendment
for discussion. OK. All right.
Very good. And could you read
the 202 number um
representative, ma'am. 202
number is 0.231916.5.
OK.
Everybody have that?
0.5 version.
16. OK. All right. So if you
could tell us about the
amendment, um, directly as you
can, then I'd like to go to the
audience. I know you haven't
presented before too. I, I don't
think we'll go to the audience
for comment, and then we'll come
back and discuss the bill and
the amendment. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, so the point of my
amendment is I want to, I want
the most fair and balanced board
that I can possibly get.
I don't think anyone needs to
have control over everything. We
all need some oversight and what
this does is it just balances
out and I can read it off to you
or you can read it to yourself,
Madam Chair.
As far as the committee goes.
Well, I think there will be
questions about the composition
of the board, so I don't think
you need to go into detail. It's
listed on in the very front of
the amendment, so that's fairly
clear.
And if I may introduce my
expert, uh, Rachel Gudel. She's
our legal counsel as well as um
Representative Gonzalez and
Alice Cain, the superintendent
of insurance.
OK, very good.
So, um, why don't we go to the
audience?
We will take 5 in the audience
with up to one minute we'll take
3 online with up to 1 minute for
each side, so those in
opposition to the bill, right,
we're on the bill.
Um, please approach the
gentleman with the microphone.
And if you want to speak to the
amendment, that's fine too, but
you know.
One minute, please.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the American Property
Casualty Insurance Association
and I also worked with the Fair
plan, uh, for the past 15 years
and would tell you that the bill
that you have in front of you in
its current form is unworkable,
and the reason why it's
unworkable is it does not
recognize the fundamental
distinction between the fair
plan and the property insurance
program that the fair plan
implements.
The clearest um example of that.
Be in section 9 of the bill, and
when you go to Section 9 of and
you look to the committee sub,
what it says is the property
insurance program shall not sell
a policy um under the Fair Plan
Act and that it will move
policies to member insurers.
What happens under the property
insurance program is the
policies are sold by the fair
plan. What's in Section 9 says
that members of the fair plan
will then have to issue
policies. If you pass the bill
in its current.
form, you will shut down
operations by the fair plan. I
have no idea how long it will
take for the fair plant to
recover and start selling
policies, there's 7000
policyholders out there right
now. Thank you, thank you, Breo.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Jason. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jason
Espinoza speaking on behalf of
the National Association of
Mutual Insurance Companies. But
we do stand in opposition to the
Senate Bill 81 is before you,
uh, send anyone establishes a
new plan that will cover
significantly higher value
properties in the area, like
Santa Fe, benefiting more
affluent New Mexicans. This
expansion will require a
substantial increase in premiums
for all plan participants.
Which will negatively impact low
income, elderly, rural, and
high-risk New Mexicans who rely
on affordable coverage.
An actuarial analysis of the
current plan projects that's
inability I could lead to an
initial rate increase of up to
40%, with further increases over
time. Additionally, as Mr. Moore
stated, the bill creates an
administrative nightmare for
fairpla consumers to access
coverage since policies will no
longer be sold through the plan,
but instead directly through the
approximately 377 licensed
insurers in New Mexico. Thank
you. Thank you.
Uh, good afternoon or good
evening, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Saraiah Barnes. I am here on
behalf of the New Mexico Fair
Plan board. I am one of the 9
sitting members on that board.
I'm here to speak in opposition
to the bill in its current
draft. I do believe that the
amendment does address many of
the issues that have been
created by this piece of
legislation, um, I'm here to
answer any questions, should any
come up. Um, I, as Mr.
60 seconds. No, no, you got on.
Sorry, this is different from
when I was here last, um,
There are a number of components
with the existing bill that um
as Mr. Moore mentioned, our
procedural nightmare. It will
potentially allow uh the 7,503
policy owners that are on the
plan to potentially lose
coverage and they'll have to
reapply. There's no guarantee
that they would be uh eligible
for coverage um if they were to
come off of that plan and um I
do hope that you seriously
consider the amendment. Thank
you.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Matt Hunton. I'm here on behalf
of the Independent Insurance
agents of New Mexico, um, just
to echo what has already been
said, there are thousands of
policyholders currently in the
plan that if this bill were to
pass as is the coverage for
those individuals would be um
Up in the air. We don't know if
they would have insurance, um,
and that is not the point of
what this bill is. We do support
the amendments that are being
presented because we feel like
that would, um,
Go ahead and cover the insureds
that are currently insured
within the fair plan. Thank you.
Thank you. Um.
Up to 3 with uh on a fair plan,
raise your hand if you're in.
Opposition to the bill.
Please raise your hand if you're
in opposition to the bill.
Hey, I don't see anyone.
Um, those in the audience
wishing to speak in support of
the bill, please, um,
Approached the gentleman.
The amendment with the
amendment, right, with the
microphone.
OK, um, those online wishing to
speak in support of the bill,
please raise your hand.
OK, um, Camilla.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I am
Camilla Feibelman with the Sera
Clips Rio Grande chapter and I
would just like to point out
that the disaster that this bill
is trying to attend to is the
loss of homes that people have
experienced and representative
Gonzalez and Vincent's districts
and that any effort to help
families rebuild and gain
coverage is essential and yes,
there may be slight issues.
With the bill that that can be
worked out, um, but I think we
need to get very focused on the
fact that this is climate
sticker shock as fires continue
to burn harder, faster, and more
damaging. People are going to be
forced to pay and finding
solutions is essential to
helping families, not insurance
companies.
Anyone else online wishing to
speak.
In favor of the bill, please
raise your hand.
I don't see anyone else, OK.
sponsors, health sponsors.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I think we're ready
for questions.
Right
Um, I have Representative
McQueen, representativesansky.
gets us started anyway. OK.
Representative McQueen
And Madam Chair, I, I have
questions, um, I think they're
on the bill, not on the
amendment per se. I, I think at
this point the bill and the
amendment and the other
amendments are all sort of
Mixed together in my mind and
just ask my questions. Yes, you
can, and we have the
superintendent of insurance
here, Alice came, so she's, I, I
think is pretty knowledgeable
but the bills and obviously we
have the sponsors and the
sponsor of an amendment, who's
also a sponsor of the bill. So,
um,
go ahead, um, Representative
McQueen. Thank you, ma'am. Uh,
Madam Chair, uh, Vincent
representative Gonzalez, um,
what's the current makeup of the
board?
Take him out of the chair and
thank you, Representative
McQueen. So the current makeup.
Is going to be.
So the, the current makeup is.
It's gonna be there's 9 members.
I think there's
There's 5 industry.
representatives, can you
clarify, do you mean in the bill
as it stands or the board um as
it exists today without
legislation
schedule the, the, as it
currently exists before this
legislation. I, I looked for
where I look for that I did not
find it. OK, so the uh the sea,
it's gonna be the current fair
plan board consists of 9
members, 8 of which are industry
appointed and 9, let's see, in
the 9th is the OSI
Superintendent or the
superintendent.
Designee.
The industry appointed members
have statutory voting power
based on their relative market
share in the insurance plan
across the state.
And ma'am chair there's been
where is that language?
What are you reading from?
This is just my talking points.
But is it in statute? I did not
find it in the statute.
I'm your representative, there's
not a statutory composition of
the board. They're set up
through operating guidelines and
bylaws that are established.
Um, and have been long
established.
OK, and it's 8 industry people
and then the superintendent.
out of the chair,
yes.
Um
Ma'am chair or Saint Vincent, I,
I noticed in your amendment, uh,
there's a requirement that all
of the
Uh, board members have to be New
Mexico residents. Is that, do
you know if that requirement is
in the current bill?
Madam Chair, represented
McQueen, I don't think it is.
It's not OK.
Um
Ma'am, Cher Saint Vincent is
there a
I, I did, I was concerned about.
The state issuing um I was
concerned about the state being
on the hook, uh, for insurance
policies. I, I guess that's not
the case. But, but I do still
wonder is, is there a
circumstance where
Uh, homeowner to go to.
Um, get rejected by 3 different
insurers come to the fair plan
and still get rejected.
Madam Chair, Representative
McQueen, so what happens is if
they can't get a policy written.
Then that's what makes them
eligible for the fair plan. And
just because you get on the fair
plan does not mean you stay on
the fair plan, you have to at
least try to go get policy
written and Madame Chair and
representative, I'm with you. I,
I don't want to be, I don't want
the state to be in the insurance
business. This was.
represent, I don't, uh, we need
to have parameters, so and we
have a very long agenda and a
very complicated bill to talk
about, so I think if we just
answer the question, and I'm not
trying to be disrespectful, but
we need to move it, so answer me
directly and we can move these
things along.dam Chair and
representative McQueen, I agree
with you. I don't want to be in
the insurance business. OK, so,
so the question to
the question, Madam Chair,
Vincent is if you did get
rejected by 3.
and you came.
To the Fairpla board.
For Albert administered.
Could you still get rejected?
Madam Cha represented McQueen.
I, I, I would say yes, you
probably still could get
rejected.
They have to come out assess
your property, make sure
everything's right.
And, and make sure that you
have.
The everything like what they
want you to have as far as um
hardening of your home and, you
know, the space between uh with
your house and the trees, and
they'll assess it and if, if you
pass the assessment, then you'll
get the insurance.
OK, Madam Cherry represented
Vincent, that's the answer I
wanted to hear, uh, on page 7 of
the bill, it talks about
mitigation requirements and
property inspections.
And I
I mean, I've seen pictures of
property and I don't understand
how they get insured because
they're.
Yeah, nestled in the trees, um.
So, so
Glad to get that answer. Um, and
I'm sure representative Vincent,
uh, if the limits are raised to
750,000 from the current, I
think it's 350,000.
Um
Will the premiums go up for
people currently on the plane?
Madam Chair representative
McQueen, yes.
Ma'am Saint Vincent and I heard
that 40% figure, is that
accurate?
That is, that is going to be.
That's gonna be up to the board.
Um,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
even with without any
legislation, um, they do need to
make the current bear plan
actuarly sound, which is
reported to be at least a 20%
markup to get them to
To be to be in tune with where
they need to be to reduce
solvency.
So there will be at least a 20%
markup to get them actually
found, um.
And then only the increase in
premiums will depend upon.
Um
Ma'am Chair Representative
Vincent, can you explain to me
why this has an emergency
clause.
Um, that seems
It it seems rather sudden. I
mean, isn't isn't there a
potential transition period as,
as this bill takes effect.
Mr. uh, Madam, Madam Chair
Representative McQueen. The
reason it has that is it, it
came over that way with this.
Madam Chair and representative
McQueen, and we were still
trying to compromise at the
beginning of this bill because
at the beginning we started at 2
million, which they didn't feel
like was gonna be actual
actuarly sound.
Uh, we had originally spoke
about 750,000 and that's where
we're at now. We're back to the
750,000 I think um
representative, the other thing
to think about is that the time
that the legislation was
crafted, this was we were
working on it before pre-filing,
um, the fair plan board had a
a process in place where they
were reviewing the premium. I I
I confuse these terms. They were
reviewing coverage limits and
they hadn't yet increased
coverage limits, so they made a
decision several weeks ago to
increase coverage limits, but
there was some thought if they
hadn't done it, the emergency
was really Lincoln County
getting policies issued so folks
could get back into their homes.
OK, um, ma'am Chair.
Representatives and experts, um.
On in section 9, which was
brought up in the opposition.
Um, can you tell me, does the
Under the current system or the
policies actually issued by
Individual insurers or they
issued by
The fair plan for.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
they're issued by the care plan
board and actually this is a
mistake in section 9 if you read
the, if you read the heading,
it's supposed to be who's gonna
sell the insurance, so it's
supposed to be sold by members
and member insurers to get the
applications in, so that was a
mistake. At the fair plan would
still be the issuer of policies,
apologies, there've been so many
changes, but that if you read
the heading, the original intent
was to have to have the member.
s sell the policies because
they're the ones that had been,
we assume, the orig the people
that had the open market
policies, we want to educate
them and, and when their clients
are rejected, give them the
opportunity to bring these
people to the fair plan.
The men chair an expert is the
proposal.
But the
Individual insurance companies
will sell the policy or the.
OK, because it's a fair plan
policy may only be issued
through a member insurer.
But it's in the bill and it
hasn't been changed.
I
I, I understand we just, I
personally discovered it Sunday.
Thank you, ma'am.
Um, representative of.
Yeah. Yes, thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I have been digesting
all these amendments and uh the
bill, um, and I do have some
questions on the amendment and,
and the bill, uh, Madam Chair.
So,
Um,
One thing I've noticed in your
amendment representatives is
that we are
Striking the amendment that
removed the appropriation.
And so,
If this bill were to pass, it
would include the appropriation.
Is that right?
And I, I'm seeing that
specifically where it says uh
it's item 2 on your amendment,
strike Senate Finance Committee
Amendments 3 and 4.
So, um, Madam Chair
representative, the intent with
the amendment was to strike
everything that had happened to
date and reinsert the sections
as is in the amendment, so it
looks like a Senate Finance
Committee amendment to House
Bill 2 to clean it up because
there were amendments done on
the other side and it was
getting complicated. So the
language in the amendment.
is the language of the bill
starting with section one.
To the end
So the Senate Finance Committee,
um,
I'm sorry, the appropriation is
no longer part of the.
The bell.
Um
Madame Charing represented, I
appreciate that's the intention,
but I think by striking Senate
Finance Committee Amendments 3
and 4 we're keeping the $50
million appropriation because
that
Uh, although we still have
We still have in the in the
Subject of the bill cause I, I
don't.
I don't know that I see, was
there a subsequent amendment
that struck no Madam Chair
representative, I think if you
look at number 5, and I've got
the amendments in context
version, so my lines or my pages
don't line, strike lengths 19
through 25 on page London line,
I'm sorry, on page one and then
strike pages 2 through 12 in
their entirety.
So that would be based on the
original bill.
I see. OK, so, so.
So with your amendment, you are
replacing the entire content of
the bill.
Basically
OK.
That's helpful. Um,
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
um,
I do
Uh
There are parts of your
amendment that I like, so I like
the fact that we are, uh,
allowing for the fair plan
itself to sell the plan.
Um, and I believe you have
producers in here, which I think
is important to actually get the
product out.
To consumers.
Um
I, I really have concern about
the makeup of the board and I
think that is the part of the
amendment that uh really gives
me trouble because I feel that
we need to be responsive to the
consumers that are having so
much difficulty getting the
insurance. Uh, I certainly, I
mean, on a weekly basis, I get
an email from someone in a panic
state who's trying to close on a
home, uh, where they're trying
to sell their home and they
can't sell it because the buyer
can't.
on his shirt can't get obtained
a insurance so they can't close.
Um, and they can't buy the
mortgage or, you know, vice
versa, someone who is trying to
buy that home, and they are not
able to purchase and so I think
those voices need to be
represented on the board, Madam
Chair, and Representative and I
see that that there's a
possibility that those voices
could be there, um, but
The specifications.
That are there with uh so, so.
Letter D on the second page of
the amendment just goes through
so much professional experience
that most of the folks that are
contacting me would not fall
into any of these categories.
Um, they are just regular folks
trying to buy a home, um,
And I, I appreciate that you
took out the waiting of the
board, I think, is that correct,
um, Madam Chair Representatives
of the weighted voting is gone.
Madam Chair, representative
Sapaski yes as he came over from
the Senate. OK. Thank you. So,
So I appreciate that. Um,
Because I do think that is
is concerning, but I, I, I
really this amendment gives me a
lot of pause because of the
makeup of the board.
Um
And
Madam Chair Representative,
maybe I'll just continue on to
the
So
Um, so my understanding, and let
me just make sure I'm
understanding this correctly
that the
Premium rates have to be set in
an actual sound manner so that
it, that they will cover the
costs, basically. Uh, the
anticipated losses in the coming
year.
Um, which I appreciate because
we
don't want, we want to avoid
passing this on to other folks
that have chosen to live in
non-fire prone areas or, or have
grown up and live in non-fire
prone areas. I understand that
those of us who represent those
districts that are very fire
prone, have a special set of
circumstances we have to deal
with. Um, so I just wonder about
the necessity of the surcharge
section, and I don't know if if
any of you would like to speak
to that. Do we need to include
the surcharge.
Uh, that would be passed along
to others, uh, for this.
And and how would that come into
play?
Uh, Madam Chair representatives
leader Sapansky, uh, the way
this is set up in it's similar
to way other air plans are done.
Uh, the, uh,
Uninsured people in it are
capable of getting insurance can
buy insurance if there are
claims that exceed the amount of
reserve assessments are made on
the industry based on the
proportion of of the policies
that they have, the ins it does
not stay with the insurance
companies. What happens is the
assessments are made, they
produce the money to pay the
claims and then they are
permitted uh over the next in
the bill, not the amendment
they're permitted over the next
3 years.
Uh, to, uh, recover by spreading
it out across all their
policyholders in the state. Uh,
the thing that I think we've
done well here is to do
surcharges and not permanent
premium increases, which are
done in other states, but the
mechanism is not to leave it
with the industry, finally.
Thank you for that, uh, Madam
Chair, um, Superintendent and
Is there anything set out in
this bill?
where if we did have another
disaster when the next fire
occurs.
That we could backfill this fund
to prevent those surcharges from
being.
Placed upon
Uh
The entire book of business.
Then chair, uh, representatives
Wepans no, there's no mechanism
here. Um, even when we're asking
for the 50 million, that was
gonna be a backstop. So if there
was a a large event, the
industry wouldn't get hit with
assessments right away, but
ultimately that they would be
spread back to the uh all the
policyholders in the state.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. So,
so does that mean
Um
For this initial year.
That the
That, that anyone who's enrolled
in the fair plan we're gonna be
charging.
The premiums are expected to
cover the losses, but if they do
not, then that surcharge at the
end of the this coming fiscal
year then would be assessed or
what would be the timing of
that.
Me representatives Lee Spansky,
uh, the, uh, if they didn't have
enough reserves and the
assessments would be made on the
insurance company, they would
come up with the assessments and
then within the next 3 years,
be able to recover it through
the post spread, the palsy
spread, uh, we our actuaries
think it would take about 5
years if we're gonna have a 1 in
100 year uh event to uh build up
the reserves based on this
increase, uh, as you know, uh,
or I mean I know they did have a
$10 million in assessment this
year because the reserves
weren't sufficient to cover the
Riodosto fires and the hail on
the eastern border.
OK. Thank you. Um,
I
I have, I have a major concern
with part of your amendment. I
think part of your amendment is
uh very good cause I think it,
it, it addresses uh the issue
around the sales of the plan.
Um, and I appreciate that agents
are included because I think
agents are very important, um,
I, I think that concludes my
comments. I will have, I would
have a suggestion, it depending
on the disposition of this
amendment.
Um, on amending the original
bill to deal with the issue
around the sales. Yeah, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, chairwoman and
representatives, um,
So let's back up a little bit.
The fair plan was established to
do what exactly?
had superintendent.
Uh, the fair plan framework was
really set by the federal
government in a bill in 1968,
which New Mexico followed in
1969 and set up the framework
that we have now.
Um, uh, with the, I think, and I
guess it was uh expressed, I
guess there was a case in 2007,
which reaffirmed that the fair
plan was set up pursuant to the
uh original federal law that
would allow their plans to be
established.
OK, so thank you. I understand
that. But what is the purpose?
What, what is the function of
the fair plan in New Mexico,
Madam Chair, Representative
Speaker, uh, I'm sorry if I
didn't recognize your question.
Um, the purpose of the fair plan
and there are uh many states, I
think over 30 that have similar
mechanisms is that when uh the
uh traditional insurance market
will not ensure
calls or commercial properties
that they have a place to go,
uh, the airplane is supposed to
be a premature as Senator We
said of last resort. It's not
supposed to complete complete
compete with the open market,
uh, and that's why we asked for
3 rejections before you can come
into the fair plan and uh the
new approach, uh there was
mitigation actually in the
original federal bill, uh, not
to the level of sophistication
that we're trying to look at
through this
IDHS standards to put uh
hardening of homes and
commercial properties, uh, for
mitigation. Madam Chair, and,
and, um, Superintendent, I, I
know there's uh roughly about
100 properties, mostly homes.
In my district that are insured
with the fair plan. So
What could have led those
properties to land on the fair
planet, what, what, why would
they have been rejected through
the traditional marketplace.
Probably because, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, representative
Speaker, because they probably
had uh um uh uh we're in
high-risk areas where the
insurers thought there was too
much concentration or too much
risk, and they've uh they've
stopped writing in certain
areas, as we know, um, our, our
uh data calls showed that there
were over 10,000 non-renewals,
uh, and cancellations over the
last 3.5 years, and we expect
them to continue. That was
before the Riodoso fires and the
LA fires.
I, I live in a very urban
community. We don't have
wildfire risk at all. So I'm
wondering why those 100+
properties landed on the fair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Speaker, it's probably because
and I don't have the specifics,
but we have been hearing it's
been done in urban areas where
we're sort of surprised, but
probably the companies decided
there's too much of a
concentration of risk in those
areas.
And so I'm trying to figure out
what that risk could be, um, and
then looking just looking at the
Like the value of the property,
some of the properties were
Under $100,000 so, uh, all I can
assume is maybe the
State of the property was in
such disarray that maybe an
injure didn't want to insure it.
Would that be accurate, Madam
Chair Representative, and
Speaker, it's hard for me to go
property by property. We do the,
that could be the reason, but
also there are underwriting
criteria for the fair plan, so
that if a property is in very
bad shape, we're not, it's not
supposed to be insured, and when
we look at across the policies
that are in exist are issued
now, um, most, I'd say 90% of
the
po lic ies are under $200,000.
So Madam Chair, superintendent,
this, this, this particular
product.
It's fair to say, well, no pun
intended, I guess. It's fair to
say that it's for
Lower
Income lower value.
Properties
Um, and this is the insurer of
last resort.
Me in the chair, uh,
representatives of a speaker
that was not the intent of the
original fair plan as Senator
Wirth pointed out, $250,000 was
um today would be over $2
million in a home. I think
that's how it's ultimately
because, because, uh,
Uh, the, the coverages weren't
raised for many, many years. I
think the first coverage raise
was when my predecessor went
about 3 years ago to the board
and asked them to raise the
amount from $250 to 350,000, and
we haven't had uh a a a large uh
increase even with that, with
that number.
So, so the, the maximum value
now is 350, up from 250 a few
years ago.
Under your bill, what does that
go up to, Madam Chair?
That
Me
Me chair representatives, uh,
speaker, it's going up to
$750,000 for a dwelling and from
1 million to $2 million with a
cap of 5 million for commercial
property.
Yeah, and Madam Chair, uh,
Superintendent, what is the
reason for that?
For doubling, more than
doubling.
Uh, for, for a dwelling.
Madam Chair Representative
Speaker, uh, we, uh, the
information we have is that the
non-renewals and cancellations
are for pro many properties that
are way above the $350,000 limit
as the calls that you've been, I
understand from the cause you've
been getting from your
constituents and some of the
calls we've been getting at uh
OSI
and superintendent, um,
One of the concerns I have is
Um
That is more of these homes.
properties become uninsured.
of, of wildfire risk, which is
Ferry wheel. I mean, I think one
of the public comments spoke to
this earlier.
Um
You know, the the these these
properties will will not be
insured and, and so,
It begs the question, right?
What is the role of the state?
And I think earlier in you all's
opening.
You know, I think the comment
was made. I don't know if it was
by public comment or others
about like, you know, do we want
to stay in this business and,
and the truth is we probably
don't, but the reality is we
probably will need to meet.
Um, as much as some of, some of
us may hate government
interfering in the private
marketplace. The fact of the
matter is,
If you have an investment
property in Rio.
Right? Say you live in Texas,
and you have
The investment property or two
in Rio so that you Airbnb out.
Um, now you're not insurable.
And so this might be a way for
you to ensure. And so I do have
a lot of heartburn.
With the state stepping in.
To provide
A product
That
Quite frankly, the private
marketplace should be providing.
I mean, I, I don't understand
why these private insurance
companies literally are pulling
out of communities.
That's their whole existence,
their whole reason to exist is
to insure us.
And I do wonder,
out loud, well, maybe I
shouldn't wonder out loud. Um, I
do wonder internally, um
the
overall.
Over a cocktail maybe later man
I'm sure, but I, I, I do, I do
wonder.
And I see this playing out
across the country, right? We're
all about the free market. Oh,
wait a minute.
Not anymore.
Not in parts of California.
Not in hurricane prone Florida.
Not in readdoso, not in Mora.
And perhaps not in Santa Fe
anymore.
So, what is the purpose of the
insurance industry?
Maybe.
Maybe we should just have a
state product that we can all
buy into.
Single peer
Properties
And I don't think we would want
that.
I think if I introduce that
bill, it would die in a
heartbeat.
Yet here we are creating a
Frankenstein to provide
A public product.
century.
to
The private marketplace.
Because the folks who should be
doing this, the multibillion
dollar companies who should be
doing this.
are refusing to do it.
And I have a problem with that.
Now
In this business that we're in,
We should not let our emotion.
Or ideology get in the way of
providing help for people.
So
In that regard,
I do feel for home property
owners, many of them homeowners
here up in Mora down in Riozo,
who have lost everything, and
now they're trying to rebuild,
and they can't get insurance.
So lots to think about. Now, let
me ask you this.
Those 100+ properties in my
district that are insured
through the fair plan.
By how much will their premiums.
Increase
Once we
Absorb properties up to 750
commercial properties up to $2
million.
Manager.
Me chair representative speaker.
If we're gonna be accurate as
sound, we think all the
properties will increase 20%. It
won't matter whether we had a
$750,000 limit or $2 million
limit for those properties that
at 1000 or 200,000, it's, it's
basically goes by bands. So the
amount of the coverage, the
amount of the properties we
cover isn't the isn't the issue,
the amount of how, you know, on
by the bands uh what's actually
sound.
So Madam Chair, I, that doesn't.
It doesn't make sense to me. So,
so,
We are gonna have more
wildfires. I hate to break it to
us, but we're more wildfires,
unfortunately.
And properties will be lost and
coverage will have to be paid
out.
How is that not going to
increase?
Insurance policies for people on
the fair plan. I know they're
gonna increase for the rest of
us because they're already
increasing.
How are people on the fair plan?
The people who own properties
that are worth $65,000 in my
district. How is their insurance
policy not gonna increase if we
all of a sudden have a higher
amount of risk.
Um, madam chair, um, speaker,
um, we do have our
The, the actuary that has been
working on all this, if we can
allow him to to respond to that.
I don't you
Madam Chair, uh, representative.
So the
Uh, the current, the policies
that are currently on the fair
plan. Uh, I estimate are 20% too
low. So whether we expand the
limits to 750,000 or we leave it
at 350,000, um, if we don't
increase.
The base rates of the, the
current where we don't increase
the premiums of the policies
that are currently on the fair
plan, uh, we should anticipate
assessments um in the future. So
I think regardless of what we do
with the limits, uh, we need to
increase the prices so that we
can charge enough to collect for
the expected losses, uh, in any
uh expenses associated with with
running the plan.
On top of that, uh, once we fix
the premiums for the policies
that are priced up to $350,000
in coverage. Um, obviously, if
we write a $700,000 home that's
next to a $350,000 home. The new
property that has twice as much
coverage is going to pay. It's
not quite 1 to 1, but, you know,
more premium. So there's an
additional charge per $1000 of
premium above some certain
cutoffs. So, uh, the point is
we're
Regardless of the limits, the
policies on the fair plan are
underpriced. Uh, you talked
about, uh, I think your example
was a $65,000 home that was not
insured. So yes, the, the
premium for that home would go
up and then on top of that,
because these new policies
coming in are going to have more
coverage, we're gonna charge
them an additional rate on top
of that, because if there's a
loss, clearly the $750,000 home
is gonna cost more than the
$350,000 home, uh, if both.
Homes burned down, so the
$750,000 home should pay more in
premium.
Madam Chair, uh, and I'm sorry,
remind me of your name, sir. Oh,
I'm sorry, I'm sure I'm
Christian Myers. I'm the chief
actuary at the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr.
Meyer. So I, I, I get that.
But it seems like
In the event of a catastrophic
wildfire that you are now
covering.
I find it hard to believe that
everybody's rates wouldn't
Increase. I mean, they're
already increasing, but I find
Yeah, sure, the person who lost
the 750.
Home would maybe pay a little
bit more on top of whatever
they're already paying.
But I think everybody's going to
have to pay for it now because
now everybody's in the same
product.
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
I apologize if I misunderstood
your question. Yes, if there's a
subsequent wildfire, um,
Well, let me
Uh,
let me just say the way that
insurance is priced is that um
we look at historical losses,
things that happen regularly,
like thefts and kitchen fires,
um, you know, a pipe bursts like
those things we generally look
at the last 3 to 5 years. You
look at how they've been
trending over time, you project
it into the future, uh, you slap
on your expenses and a profit if
you're uh uh stock for an
insurance company and call it a
day for wildfire because the
losses are so
Infrequent and unpredictable
that insurance companies use cat
models to predict wildfire loss.
So they literally run millions
of simulations, um, and then,
you know, over those million
years, they look at what is the
average loss over those million
years, and they add that on to
the premium. So, uh, I actually
Anticipate
The uh Riodoso fires over the
summer are necessarily going to
lead to a premium increase for
the industry because that cat
model has already accounted for
the fact that that fire could
happen. I don't know what it
was, once every 100 years or so.
Now, as additional fires happen,
obviously, the models learn more
about wildfire, uh, maybe they
tweak the model and there's, you
know, more, uh, losses and
places with slopes or whatever
it is. But it's not like every
time there was a wildfire, we
turn around and increase
premiums because of that.
So I, I agree with that, um,
But I do think that we all bear
the risk. I mean we all bear the
risk right now.
And I'll give you an example.
I've got a constituent in House
District 11, not on the fair
plan, just marketplace fixed
income, their mortgage was about
1100 bucks.
They were getting by. Now I went
up the.
By $300 now they're on the brink
of not being able to afford it.
Right? And where's the relief
for them?
Madam Chair, right? Why aren't
we talking about relief for them
as well. I understand how
horrible these wildfires have
been, how destructive they have
been in all of these communities
and the fact that now your homes
are not insurable.
But we've got to have a very
serious conversation.
Uh, about.
Reforming that entire industry.
I don't think it's fair that
seniors are being priced out of
their homes in my community, not
because of wildfire risk to
them.
But because the wildfire risk to
others because of hurricane risk
to others because of tornado
risk to others because of flood
risk to others.
And I'm telling you all.
I can bring up in the next 30
day session, and I'm gonna have
a long line of folks lining up
against it and probably 2/3 of
this legislature against it.
Because no one's gonna want to
touch a public insurance product
or property owners would be.
300 ft pole.
So look,
Um, I've got a lot of heartburn.
Um, I'm also, as you all know,
I'm not the type of legislator
that's gonna die on any sword.
This is gonna be to the will of
the committee and the will of
the full House through this
pass, um, along with the
amendment in front of us.
But I do have a lot of
heartburn. And I don't think
it's fair.
Or
My constituents
Many of whom
We never travel to Ridoso or go
ski anywhere.
And their insurance products are
increasing every single year.
And no one's stop.
Um.
No one's talking about, like no
one's talking about the fact
that some of them made lose
their home because they don't
pay the mortgage because they
cannot afford.
The prize of insuring that home.
Uh, so I'll leave it at that,
Madam Chair. Uh, I know we're on
an amendment, I think, so I'll
I'll, I'll just wait for the
role of the committee and
follow.
Well, you all. Thank you. Thank
you, Speaker, to clarify, we're
talking about both the amendment
and the bill because they are
kind of intertwined and that
kind of thing, so just be aware
for others as well. So, um,
representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I'm, I'm also trying to look at
the web of, of ideas here. um,
and just so I'm just, let's go
back to the amendment. I think
first just because I'm trying to
understand the impetus for the
board.
To begin with, and first, what
is current and I know the
question was asked about the
current composition of the board
to what was proposed by Senator
Wirth's bill, what is now
proposed by the amendment. Um,
can we just talk about, first of
all, the, the idea of changing
the board composition generally
and what the intent for doing so
would yield.
Madam Chair, Representative
Romero.
So
I call it mileage.
Mileage means your experienced.
Experience we've had an
experience board for a while,
they've done a good job.
They wanted to, we, we
originally shook the board up a
little bit, which in my opinion,
gave a little bit too much power
to one person.
So
The way that we've got this
board set up and, and I'm not
saying that I'm a complete
professional. I, we took the
best stab that we could.
This board
In my opinion, balances
everything out.
It leaves some members on the
board.
That have the mileage.
And then we add 2 more.
So what was the purpose, Madam
Chair Representative.
The purpose of the changes if we
had a good mileage board.
And they were doing a good job.
What is the purpose of changing
it?
from your perspective, Madam
Chair, Representative Romero,
that's a great question.
And, um, you know,
I don't personally think we need
to change the board, but
everything's about compromise,
so we're just trying to
compromise to give everybody a
little bit of what they wanted,
and I feel like this is the best
way to balance that board out.
OK, so I'm not really following
if we, if we liked, if we like
what's currently happening and
we think that the composition
makes sense. The compromise is
about
what we currently we have
current.
Without legislation, we have a,
a bill that's gone through the
Senate, and we now have an
amendment. So which current are
you talking about? I'm, I'm
thinking about President Day,
current idea of where we are
right now, the status quo today,
um, why we would need to change
the composition of that board
and what the purpose of changing
it.
Perhaps from the Senate Bill 81
as current as before we amend
it.
What the purpose of that change
was, and then what the purpose
of the amendment would be.
Whenever we started this again,
I think that there was just to
be completely honest.
Conflict between the
superintendent of insurance and
the current Fair Board.
What's the conflict matter
present
actually, we are talking about
bills. So I would like to keep
our conversation about
position of the board, why you
think your new composition is
better or not, and that kind of
thing. We don't need to be
talking about the whys and
wherefores at this point. So
let's talk about
Try to focus, trying to
understand why we need to change
the board.
Um, Madam Chair, um,
representative.
The original board was very
industry-based in the and then
was or is in very current in its
current state, no changes, is
very industry-based, um, it's
all representative of the
industry with one designee from
the superintendent of insurance
representative.
The first version of the bill
kind of flip flop that power.
to the other direction where
Industry like had um had
minority representation, and it
was, it was put on a different
experts appointed a different
way.
And then come now to the
amendment and the amendment was
an attempt to reach that middle
ground between what the original
composition stands at.
To where realizing that we do
need.
some change onto the board and
so that was the, that's the
amendment, the amendment also
talks about um areas of
expertise that the appointee
should have the amendment also
lays out some guidelines for the
board that are not in existence
right now, for instance, um, it,
it gives term limits into the
board, and it gives some
structure to the board and the
amendment that does not
currently exist with the current
fair plan.
And since, uh, ma'am I'm sure
since, um, Senator Wirth is not
here to defend his version of
the board.
Do you all know why he came up
with that board version. Well.
Remember all that these two
representatives are co-sponsors
on the bill, so it's not just
Senator worse still, it's the
two representatives from the
originally Madam Chair
Representative that change
occurred when the talks were
originally brought to bring the
spill up. Um, there was my
responsiveness from the original
of the fair plan. And so, and
again, we're talking about fire
science and actuary and
actuaries and other different
things, um, the intent of the
original legislation to change.
The current makeup of the board
was to put in different experts
and to also um
Shift the power if you would say
that, so it does not remain
solely in industry.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
So Madam Cha representatives,
um, the idea to shift the power
dynamic from quote unquote
industry or one person, I'm not
sure who that is. I think you're
talking about Superintendent,
um.
creates a more, uh, a better
representation in the amended
version of the bill in your
opinion. OK.
OK, well, well,
I'll, I'll leave it at that. I,
I'll have to just figure out
what the disparity is there on
what the big changes were, but,
um, OK, I'm, that's the board.
My next question is about the
organizing of the fair plan and
underwriting Association.
Um, so I understand that in the
amendment.
When you create the association,
the New Mexico property
insurance program that we're now
diverting from federal law.
Um, that we are, and this is
just an analysis, I'm trying to
understand what this does, um.
So when we create the New Mexico
property insurance program were
creating a separate underwriting
association. Is that correct,
Madam Chair Representatives.
Madam Chair and Representative
Romero, it's already created,
and I haven't seen anything
about federal law at all. It's,
it's been created since 1969 and
this current board has been
running it.
That, that makeup since 1969.
And
They've kept it solvent.
For all those years.
Oh, go ahead.
Uh, Madam Chair Representatives,
so when you, we change in your
amendment, you strike.
Um
On page one.
11 and 12, we changed the title,
the Property Insurance Program
Association and insert in their
affair plan and then we changed
the definitions.
Um
19 through 25.
All the way through.
To, on page 2, all the way
through 12.
And we
were striking out with the fair
plan is.
And then we are now putting in
this.
New organization of the fair
plan and underwriting
Association.
And then we'd never define New
Mexico property insurance
program.
So my understanding is that when
we create this new author and
authorize authorized insurance
program.
We're now, um,
It's not itself an insurance
company.
But it's essentially what's
underwriting.
The entire process that's now
incongruent with federal
statute, probably the only one
who could answer that is the
superintendent.
Uh
Met representatives.
This is complicated. So let's
start there. The only, the only
way the fair plan was created in
New Mexico was based on
legislation that was
Federal legislation, uh, it's,
it's got a fancy name, but it's
the urban property Protection
and Reinsurance Act, which was
passed in 1968. In 1969, New
Mexico created this uh
underwriting association
following the framework that was
set up by that program, and the
program requires certain things.
It requires a certain number of
um uh non-industry board
members. It requires mitigation
and
requires that the uh
association uh be under the
supervision of uh whatever uh
insurance.
Department regulator, so let me
stop you. My understanding of of
Representative Romero's question
is something in
The underlying law proposed
statute.
Now deviates in such a way that
we're no longer in compliance
with federal law. Is that true
or false? I think.
Madam Chair representative I
think there's some technical
issues that that are a problem
in the amendment.
So that's a yes, madam chair. I
think the problem is that we are
With, with the proposed proposed
amendment. OK, OK, which, right.
It, it because of the changes in
the definition and the way the
underwriting association appears
based on what I'm understanding
is that.
Because New Mexico property
insurance program is no longer,
it's not itself an insurance
company.
It can't, um, on behalf of its
members, um.
Cannot be caused to be issuing
property insurance policies and
therefore cause it's this uh
separate underwriting
association.
It's no longer um congruent with
federal law, specifically the um
Uniform, whatever
property
uniform or urban property
protection and reinsurance Act
of 1968. Anyways.
OK, so that's a, that's a
problem in the amendment,
potentially. Um, I'm gonna
continue to
ask some more questions about
just the overall idea, because I
think at this point I'm just
getting more and more
uncomfortable with how I can
read anything, um, right now.
Um, so on the idea of the 40%
rate increases for
proper current um.
Insurance holders, um,
I'm just off the amendment. I'm
just asking questions about the
implementation now.
So, I mean, we need to get our
arms around the discussion.
We're talking about how to
restructure a board and and what
process should be used and
whether should limits be
implemented. So if we start now
getting into a lengthy
discussion about
What premium increases may or
may not happen. Yeah, I know the
speaker, yeah, I should have
shut him down, but at a certain
point, are we gonna spend our
whole time tonight talking about
Why we want to change the board,
what the board is about, what
provisions in the law we want to
change or we're gonna talk about
the whole program and we can do
that, it won't be here till 11
o'clock or 10 o'clock and what
will we have gained? And I'm,
I'm happy to listen to your
comments, representative. I
think we need to talk about it
all. I think it's important that
premium rates and it's a very
important tip. I mean, in my
district at least, so I mean I
wanna do the bill justice and
give it the time it needs, um,
that's just my opinion on it.
Fair enough.
So, um, well, Madam Chair, all I
would say is that on the
amendment, um,
Given some of the technical
issues that we've already sort
of
That have been raised, the
inability to sort of see the um
How, how it's analyzed, I think
in congruence with federal law,
how this New Mexico property
insurance program.
Um, plays out.
Not so much
Because it seems like a
compromise between the sponsors
that that that the new makeup of
the board would be fine. The
whole operational structure
changes how we currently run the
fair plan. And so Mountain, I,
I, I.
I, I don't see that the, how the
The amendment gets us to a place
where
If we're gonna analyze the
implication of the fair plan
changes.
It's, it's just technically not
ready. OK.
So, um, with regard to the issue
about discussing premium
increases and so on. I think
it's legitimate in the context
of the raising of the limits,
cause that is what the bill
proposes. So let's try to focus
on that. That's, I think, fair.
All right, so, um,
representative, um, are you, uh,
yeah, I just have a I have a
question on the rate increases,
then, um.
So I would recommend that we do
not adopt the amendment due to
the technical challenges, but
now back to the bill and perhaps
some of the hybrid situation
that we would have, um, if there
were technical fixes for some of
the bill.
When we're talking about the
rate increases of 40%, um, and
the increase in the threshold
for coverage.
Um
When we're on balance, when
we're thinking about all the
folks that we're trying to help
with the, that have 3
declinations. I guess the first
question is, if you have a
Senator Worth spoke about his um
being uninsured. So the way this
would work is that he would go
to two other insurance programs,
to be denied and then he'd come
to the fair plan.
Is that, it, it clearly does not
require any information about
what your income is, where you
live, just that you had 3
declinations and now I can be a
member of this fair plan. Is
that correct?
uh, Madam Chair Representatives,
there
You can start your application
process and in order to be in
the application process, you
have to be declined by 3
insurers, but then the fair plan
and it's it's guidelines and
procedures has underwriting
requirements, uh, it has to be
habitable at certain other
things have to happen that are
already there, and we're asking
for another requirement, which
would be mitigation uh in both
the uh uh the residential home
and the commercial that would
follow what we call the I.
DHS guidelines, which are
probably the the most accepted
guidelines, uh, for mitigation,
which means clearing the the
area around your home, putting
in a class A roof and uh working
on your ventilation. So, Madam
Chair, Representative, um,
experts, we're not talking about
just first homes like the home
that I inhabit, this could be
second homes, this could be
million dollar homes. This could
be any range, any threshold of
insurance. It doesn't
require any sort of ability for
us to understand what situation
someone someone might be coming
with other than their insurance
situation. Is that correct?
Um, Madam Chair representative,
so when they get onto the third
plan, there is an assessment
that happens for them to be
underwritten, um, as part of the
even the current fair plan
guidelines, um, annually, they
do require um
Review of the underwriting her
plan to see the status of, of
the home. So, um, the talk about
mitigation comes in, um, because
you're trying to reduce overall
risk to again hope to return to
the traditional insurance. So as
part of the current their plan,
not even the board, um, even if
you've been denied 3 times, you
still have to go through their
application process. You still
have to pass through the basic
underwriting process to be able
to be given a plan, um, as is
right now and
they review the underwriting of
whoever's issued that.
That plan, um, to make sure, to
see if again, hopefully you can
return to the traditional
insurance if you've done
mitigation on your home or
whatever that may look like to
be traditional insurance back to
the table.
So that is as it exists. It's
not just you were denied 3 times
and then you're just handed a
plan we're denied 3 times, you
have to apply to be on the fair
plan.
You still have to get approved
by an underwriter.
To get a plan, which that's that
has resulted in the current
individuals that are on the
current fare plan right now,
have passed that underwriting
process to be on the current
bear plan as it stands right
now.
So Madam Chair representatives
if
So a couple things and I don't
understand when we're looking at
taking back
Folks from the Fair plan to
traditional insurance.
When does that happen? How do we
know that that?
And again, like if the fair plan
is the most affordable, perhaps
that we're, why would they want
to go back to traditional, well,
again, the goal of the fair plan
was not to replace and be an
insurance company. It was meant
as a coverage of last resort
with the hope to return them to
traditional insurance. Um, the
fair plant was existing.
Almost as a go between, um, so
right now, um, even the intent
of this legislation is, again,
the state in the business of
doing insurance, but regardless
of Madam Chair, representative,
sorry to interrupt. Regardless
of us not wanting to do
something we're doing it through
this, right? So when we're
talking about the feedback loop
of how we get folks back into
that place. If you're in an
affordable insurance program
because the state has a
state-run insurance program. How
are we going to wean off of that
and when we're talking about
of the insurance companies being
able to
You know, continue to have that
value. That's where I get into
the 40% increase, how does, you
know, where do we recover?
Either way, as it was mentioned,
um, I think the 40% was given in
in testimony versus um it has
been proven that right now the
policy, the plan of this right
now is, is 20% under actuary
value.
Um, so that's what makes it
affordable is it's not charging
current market rates. That's the
first step.
Um
Secondly, um, again, it's that
annual evaluation that you're
hoping to do mitigation on the
home to get insurance back, um,
you're hoping to do all those
changes to your home, whatever
that may look like whether
you're in a fire fire risk, or
flood risk, um, maybe your
health, your house was just
maybe like in shambles, I guess
for lack of a better word, um,
whatever reason that may be, um,
that is the intent that every
year the fair plan under current
regulations, um, revisits the
underwriting process to.
See if you are still eligible
for a policy under the fair
plan. Um, so because it is
underwritten by the 20% at some
point they do have to match up
and either way, no matter what
happens here, they are gonna
have to be an actuary sound
place to be solvent.
So can I hope I'm sorry if I
interrupt Jack, but
As I understand it under the
current bill, one would have to
every 3 years would have to show
that they cannot get insurance
by showing 3 denial letters, so
that's part of it. Does the
amendment have a similar
provision?
Um, Madam Chair representative,
um, the amendment does not have
that, uh, but again, the current
care plan as is, um, the reason
for it not being is that under
current guidelines they do
revisit this.
This process every year, um,
and, and that was one of, one of
the changes that was taken out
that is reported.
From the original bill that the
cost of mitigation, um, per
guidelines can be very costly.
Um, it takes a lot to mitigate a
home to standards, to specs,
roofs, everything else. And so
that was the intent of removing
it from the bill version.
To the amendment version was
again appeasing different parts
for different needs, not just
taking into consideration the
fire risk areas, but also
looking at the other individuals
that are on this plan and the
needs that they have in this
plan and also trying to work
with those that are currently
Now
So, so, madam chair, just one
final question because I I'm
still trying to wrap my head
around it. Um.
When we're talking about the
rate increases for everybody
that's not on the fair plan.
Across the state. Um, and we're
concerned about the fact that
Everyday folks who already are
having trouble paying for
insurance right now we're going
to see an increase, whether it
be
I guess a minimum 20%.
possibly 40%, depending on where
you live.
Is that because folks would be
coming to the fair plan looking
for a different type of
insurance, or is this just
because this increase in the
ability to cover these homes,
explain to me why we're
concerned about
Where you agree that there will
be an increase in, in
And the cost of insurance, where
is that coming from?
Mental chair representatives,
let me try and if I don't answer
your question, I have the
actuary behind me, uh, but the
idea is we're supposed to be the
insurance company of last
resort. That means you're
supposed to be charging market
premiums or or what we call
actually sound premiums, uh,
part of the problem, what
problem is the wrong word. The
fair point sort of evolved and
they were charging below market
premiums, so, uh, it, it, it was
encouraging people to stay on
the plan.
The, the, the experts that I've
spoken to around the country
basically say it's really
important to have this just as a
bridge where you uh where people
can't get insurance, you bring
them on. We're talking about
mitigation here throughout the
state to try to make New Mexico
more attractive for insurance
companies to come back into the
market, have them look every 3
years, and if they can get
insurance, have them move off
the plan. So this is again back
to the label, it's supposed to
be the insurancesurer of land.
resort until you can get other
insurance.
OK, madam chair, I'm, I'm.
I just, I'm concerned that we're
not.
Prioritizing what last resort
means for those who may need it
the most.
Um, in the sense of who we're
trying to cover for those who
may not be accessing insurance
because it, because of the
opportunity that regardless of
the value of the home where it's
located, um,
That you can now go to the fair
plan and get affordable
insurance because I live in the
middle of the forest in my
mansion or whatever, maybe not
in our district, but, you know,
that's the same offering that I
can get from you versus anywhere
else versus those who are
living.
You know, in their, you know.
single family home or whatever
it may be in the same sort of
situation where they can't
afford insurance and we're
treating them all sort of equal,
I guess, in the sense of what
the accessibility for the more
affordable.
I don't, I'm not.
Anyways, I, I'm.
Hope we can sort of get our.
sort of fix that. Representative
Martinez.
And I'm sure it seems like
there's more and more.
condition with this bill with
Each question that's asked.
Um,
Oh
When you talk, Madam Chair
Representative.
When you talk about rejection
letters, who puts out those
rejection letters.
Madam Chair Representative, I
assume you mean the rejection
letters, the cancellations that
the that uh Senator Wirth
discussed that he's got
canceled. It's the insurance
company that he already has a
policy with.
OK, because earlier you, um, I
believe, um Representative
Gallego said that.
In order to get the fair plan,
you needed 3 rejection letters.
Who puts up those
uh what Madam Chair,
representative what usually
happens is you get your first
rejection letter, a senator
Werth God and then you, he goes
out and he turns to his agent
and said, Can you get other
insurers to write me and the,
the producer goes out and asks a
number of insurance companies
and they come back and say no,
we're not writing in that area.
Otherwise, short answers are
appreciated you get the two
other letters.
What, what I think you're saying
is you asked to get insurance,
you get rejection letters, and
you get 3 rejection letters from
the policy.
Agents.
Madam Chair, and earlier, um,
Somebody said that.
The recording the fund is
currently not sound.
representative. I don't think
that the conversations have been
the fun does not sound, it's a
self-insured pool, so it's got a
balance between 7 and $8 million
that covers any.
claims they may have, so they
are collecting premiums that um
replenish the fund while also
making payouts for folks that
are making claims. So I think
the concern has been with a
pool of more expensive houses
and or businesses, it could
become insolvent quicker and if
um
If you remember the original
bill, I believe had a $50
million appropriation. There was
a recommendation from
legislative Finance Committee to
have a $49.5 million
appropriation to OSI. This is
not a state insurance plan. It's
run by
It's run by a nonprofit, so I
think the, the finance
committees were concerned about
how did they put money toward?
How, what were, what were the
mechanics of how that would
work, so the appropriation was,
I think, fully stricken.
Correct.
Yeah
Madam Chair Representative, so
there is no corporation.
Is there any money in house 2
dedicate.
The the madam chair
representative, I do not believe
there's any money in House Bill
2 for this.
Madam Chair representative,
there are a number of other
bills being run, uh, that we
think will be providing grants
for people who can't uh afford
mitigation. Some of the
questions you've been asking,
uh, and I've been told, but it
send it they choose is not final
yet, that there is $10 million
for grants for people who would
not be able to afford
mitigation,
uh mitigation requirement in the
plan.
chair um representatives.
I don't, I'm
There are a lot of issues with
this, um.
It's, it seems like the
Senate amendments
didn't work
and the new amendment.
may not work.
Um
I'm not sure where we go from
here, Madam Chair, but I
appreciate the time.
Thank you, um, Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, um,
Representative Romero asked most
of my questions about the board.
I think the um only question I
have left is, um, I just wanna
know a little bit about the IVHS
standards. What exactly are they
and how much do they cost?
Yes, it's, it's called, it's the
institute of Business and Home
Safety is what IDHS stands for.
It's uh a research group that
does a lot of work on uh not on
perils, not just wildfires, uh,
and they've been working on
wildfires and they've come up
with.
That uh
Basically, you had 5 ft around
your home that has no shrubbery,
nothing. You have a class A roof
and you put uh uh uh sort of
screens on your ts, so the
embers that can't get into your
home if you saw the LA fires,
that's where a lot of it came
in, uh, and it costs between 5
to, we're told 50 to $7000 to
have a home hardened.
So people are gonna have to pay
$500 to $7000.
Just to get back to the
standard.
In order to be covered with the
increase in premium, correct? Is
that what I'm understanding?
Madam Chair representative, yes,
we're giving them a year. The
idea was to give them a year or
there's problem they can come
back and tell us the reason, uh,
to, to harden home. It wouldn't
be an immediate requirement. OK,
so,
They would be insured with the
higher premium and they would
have a year to get up to
standard, which is gonna cost
them around $7000 so they
wouldn't need to do it right
away.
Madam Chair representative, yes.
And is that in the bill that
shows the timeline of how long
they have them.
Madam Chair Representative, no,
that would be in the procedures
and the underwriting guidelines,
OK, but it already exists right
now, Madam Chair, Representative
expert.
Madam Chair representative,
there's no requirement at this
point to harden your home.
OK.
Those are all the questions I
had. Thank you.
OK, so I'm gonna go to
Representative Reeb and then
Representative Human.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
So
I'm just gonna say, um, the
numbers I got madam chair and
representatives, is this affects
The amount of people covered
under this 30% of them are in
Chavez, Curry and Roosevelt
County due to hail.
It's not like mountain chair and
representatives.
We chose a mountainous area
where fires are and my
understanding originally was
that this bill was supposed to
um help.
Um, the lower income New
Mexicans and, but I, I heard
something different. That was my
understanding of the original
intent when the fair play was
enacted, um, Madam Chair,
representatives, are you saying
that's not true?
Madam,
uh, Chair Representative, no,
that wasn't the original
attempt. I think Senator Wirth
tried to point that out when he
sort of said $250,000 in 1969,
would now be a $2 million home.
I think it's sort of evolved
that way where the when the
limits weren't raised for many
years, it turned into it was
only uh insurance insurance
lower lower priced homes.
So
Madam Chair representative and
experts.
So it's
This affects
Approximately 3000 fair plan
people that are on fair plan in
my districts. Again, pale,
things of that nature, um.
How is this going to impact
those people in my districts,
um, who are actually very low
income, um, this isn't, you
know, these aren't affluent
people, um, they're living in an
area where they're just are a
lot of hailstorms and damages
and
Uh premium rates raised 40% on
these people. It, I just, I'm
very, very concerned about it
for my constituents. Could you
address what I'm supposed to
tell my constituents about this
amount of chair representatives.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, again, I think the 40% was
given, you know, in testimony,
um, the amount that we can be
sure that it would increases
that 20% to get it to where it
is actually sound, um, if
they're, if they're if they are
trying to cover the same amount
of home.
Um, they should not have
additional.
Premium increases was discussed,
um, by the actuary talking
about, you know, your, your
Not ensuring 750,000, your
remaining, your, your, you're
maintaining your coverage at
250,000, the increase that you
should expect to incur is the
amount to get you to the
actuarly sound place and that
should be the increase for that
individual, um, and again, in
talking about the limits, I just
want to make the 750,000 also
includes home plus content and
so the reason even for that
level is.
An average home right now has
increased substantially. So, um,
and, and I know a lot of talk
has been, um, for fire prone
areas, but you are entirely
correct that the reasons for
somebody is on the fair plan
covers a wide range of issues,
um, right now the intent even at
750,000 is a minimum coverage
for individuals that are looking
to get the mortgage, you need a
basic coverage of the basic home
to sell their property or to
build on a property, and so it's
now that
Average home price is no longer.
200,000 150,000. That is also
the intent for the increase to
cover an average home price, um,
plus contents.
But, uh, Madam representatives
that
rate increases will affect them.
Will it not these individuals in
my, my constituents, all a 30%
of this plan. I mean, you have
to admit that is going to affect
their rate increases.
Um, everyone will be, uh, Madam
Chair, representative,
apologize, um, um, everyone will
incur that 20% rate increase as
anyone on a traditional
insurance plan has also seen an
increase just with market
changes and market fluctuations
that has nothing to do with this
legislation, but that just has
everything to do with becoming
actual actuarly found to where
we are at right now with the
current coverage of whoever is
existing on the fair plan. So
whether or not this bill
proceeds, um.
There's there will likely be an
increase to current fare plan
individuals just to be actuarly
sound. Madam Chair represented a
cash value, um, amount or
replacement.
If you were to lose your home.
Madam chair representative not
replacement.
So it's, it's not so my at my
home is worth.
Um
$10,000 or whatever, $100,000
They might get paid $50,000 on a
chair.
Representatives, I mean, if
it's, it's not the replacement
value, so
So you can't replace, let's say
redosa, for example, I'll use it
probably a, a very nicer area,
Madam Cherry of a a
Let's say it's worth 500
$600,000 will they get 500 or
$600,000 if they're home burns
down, Me share representatives.
Madam Chair Representative, can
I just have the, the act make
that clear because I don't
wanna.
Just trying to figure out if
it's the cash value of the home
or the replacement value?
Madam chair.
I chair.
out of here.
We do have the fair board here
as well. They could probably
answer that question too. I, I
hear you. So, um, could we get
an answer to
Representative Reeve's question,
sir.
Uh, madam.
Cheer representative, yeah, it
is, uh, it is actual cash value
and it, yeah, it would not.
be impacted, certainly not by
the market value of the home,
um, that you would be, yeah, you
would get a payment for the
actual cash value of your house.
Not the replacement cost
basically represents not a great
thing.
Basically.
Do?
Yes, ma'am Chair Representative,
that is correct.
And when we talk about
representatives about
mitigation.
Um
Let's talk about my area, hail,
things that we have no control
over and it's not like
We can cut trees or things like
that. These storms happen and
there's just not a thing we can
do about them, um.
So
When you say mitigate a home,
like in my area, what would they
have to do?
To mitigate their whole, um,
Time share representatives and
experts.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
sorry I haven't been clear when
we're talking mitigation uh at
the in the way I was talking
about it, about around the home
where that's really for the high
wildfire risk areas, not for
everybody who's in the plan, uh,
for the hail areas and frankly
the losses for Hale in the
industry are higher than for
wildfires, uh,
The uh mitigation would be a
class A roof.
OK. And so what if my lower
income constituents can't afford
like that roof or that
mitigation that that they need
to do and what did they just not
have insurance at that point.
Um,
Me chair representative, that's
what we were looking for the
grants to help people who
couldn't afford the mitigation.
OK.
Um
So that basically my
constituents would just be
uninsured.
I'm sure.
Represented. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, um, again that
would be up to the decision of
the underwriter. So if at some
point the underwriter, wherever
that may be determines that that
risk is too high value, then
yes, they could be.
So I, I share a lot of concerns.
I think that the speaker
mentioned my chair and it seems
to be that um
This bill 81 creates kind of
this new plan that
Will include significantly more
valuable properties in areas
such as
Santa Fe, maybe Riodosa, I don't
know, places like that, but.
It's gonna adversely affect
people in my area.
A lot of people in my area.
Um, but like I said, 30% of
these people cover under it are
in my three counties. So you can
understand the concern I have
about this bill. Um, so,
I, I don't see, I, I'm concerned
that they're not gonna be able
to afford these rate increases
that are gonna come down the
road. They're not gonna be able
to afford to get their roofs up
to par, whatever they need to
do, and also the fact that I
understand we're in an area,
Madam Chair Representative said,
does get a lot of hail. Myself,
I think in 17 years, I've
replaced my roof 4 times, and
it's just a, it's just where we
live, um, we don't choose to
live there because it's
beautiful mountains or anything
like that. We are agriculture.
And, and we're getting
We're getting kind of the bad
end of this, I think, and so.
Uh, would you like to address
that, Madam Chair
Representatives and experts.
Well, I mean, I'm looking for
you sponsors, no, we, we were in
discussion, um, we want to allow
the, the committee if they had
any additional questions, and
you are entirely right, um, you
know, this bill was essentially
brought up because of the
situation that's out of all of
our control. Um, we're all
facing different challenges, um,
and our goal was to bring
insurance to those to be able to
do all the things that we've
mentioned before, um, you know,
we want, um, if you have any
other
discussions, we are open to hear
them, but um,
I would also like to go and make
a motion if if this bill needs
work, as it is in current
version.
evil.
Come back, whatever needs to
happen, um, we were just
discussing as to where we were
at with questions and if
whatever the procedures of the
committee were, we didn't want
to interject on the procedures
of the committee, um, but again,
the true intention of this is to
try to find a solution.
Everything that has been
mentioned is entirely correct.
Are we in the business of doing
insurance? No, but we are in the
conundrum where.
For whatever reason, how many of
us of our constituents in our
state do not have insurance. So
where does that leave us? And
what do we do? So, so this bill
and all the attempts that have
been made between the amendments
and the versions were an attempt
to solidify and satisfy multiple
parties with multiple needs, um,
just to satisfy that basic need
to be able to come home and have
insurance to be able to sell
your property, to be able to
build. I appreciate what you're
saying. We got to get to the.
Are you through?
of chair, um, and I appreciate
you saying it just may not be
ready, and I agree it's not
ready, and I, I think you should
roll this bill and and go for,
you know, roll it on, but that's
just my opinion, but I have no
other questions.
Go ahead, um,
We, so it's very curious to
know, we don't have the the lead
sponsor on the bill. It's a
Senate bill, so let's keep
moving on to
Representative Hoffman V. Hill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm not
really sure if we're still on
the amendment or on the bill or
where we are, but um just to
you.
I guess more comments and
questions. I, I do with the
proposed amendment, I am unsure
as to who would have kind of
like
Soul resting authority and
making these decisions, is it
the, you know, is it OSI? is it
board?
I, I think any more information
on that in terms of um the
intent of the bill. I, I
appreciate it. I understand it.
I know that you, this is a very
important critical question that
that needs to be answered and uh
it's an issue that needs to be
fixed.
So I commend you for that, um.
I
And
Very concerned about the
structure. I think that there is
a lot more work that needs to be
done in order to put together a
program that I think fits the
understanding that
I, I think a number of us.
have as to what the purpose of
the program is to begin with?
So, um
Yeah, I, I, I appreciate
cinnamon, but I just feel at
this time I'm
I, I don't think that I, the
bills.
Ready.
Thank you, ma'am. OK.
Anyone else?
So, I'd like to first dispose of
the amendment, and I do want to
talk a few things, uh, talk
about a few things.
Um
I have concerns that
The current board
representation.
I2 industry heavy.
And not consumer oriented.
And
The bill that made it through
the Senate.
a number of those issues and
that there's still certainly
strong industry representation.
I think it's 4.
And then there are consumer
representatives on, and then
there are pointees.
um
various leaders in the House and
Senate.
So it's a diverse board intended
to represent a broader group of
people.
My concern with having an
industry weighted board is.
Um
They are assessing themselves.
That when there is an assessment
done, it's done on the insurance
companies.
So I guess we should not be
surprised that.
There
The assessments are too low
right now and haven't been
keeping up.
That's concerning and that would
continue.
Um
I like generally the bill.
I think there are some fixes
that need that came out in terms
of section 9.
And I'm disappointed that wasn't
addressed earlier and I'm
surprised the industry wasn't
coming to the board or the
industry wasn't communicating
that earlier.
Um, and
I think there was another, oh,
this issue of
Who's residence is, I agree with
those individuals who are
saying, I'm not interested in
having a policy of last resort
ensuring second homes for people
in in Santa Fe or anywhere else
or in Riodoso or Los Alamos, but
that's not how we are. We don't
have very many second homes.
Most people really live in their
homes in Los Alamos and worked
in Los Alamos, but there are
parts of the state that have
that kind of a kind of a setup
and I don't think the state
should be paying for that.
for sure, um, you know, so
that's, I think, an issue, um,
but that's an issue I think
under the current system, is it
not?
So, so let's step back to where
we are, where we are is a
program where apparently the
board develops virtually all the
guidelines, including the caps.
Um, what processes are used to
evaluate whether somebody should
be an insured or not. This
hardening process apparently is
in there procedures or
guidelines or whatever, but that
and whether or not, uh, how many
times they evaluate you for
continuation. All of that is in
the guidelines that we just got
off. We learned about kind of
offhandish and that's not a
criticism, but what, but based
on inquiry, we have no idea what
how that program is run.
Other than some of the questions
we ask that led us to to answers
that, that's how the board does
it, a board that is dominated by
the insurance industry.
So I think the current setup is
very problematic. Um, another
point is the board has already
raised the um the limits for
residences, and that's all.
For properties, excuse me,
properties, not residences right
now, so we're at 750 now. So all
of us, all this conversation
about what kind of rate
increases in the assessments and
how that will get spread out
that exists right now.
So if you're concerned about the
raising of the limit and what's
that's doing to the assessment
that is happening right now. It
will have that effect eventually
because they'll have to, they're
supposed to have an actuary
sound and all that kind of
evaluation stuff is gonna
happen. So if that this bill,
the current bill, the amended
the proposed amendment has no
effect on that because it's,
it's maintaining that process.
It's maintaining that level and
So, you know, I think it's a red
herring to start pointing to the
bill as the thing that's gonna
change the assessments. The, the
assessments are gonna be changed
right now.
So, um, there has been a lot of,
um, I think confusion inserted
into this conversation, and I
apologize if I didn't manage it
well. It's very hard to, um,
because there's a lot of stuff
that's being inserted, frankly,
that I think is relevant to the
discussion, but it's hard to
manage that.
So, um, the things that I find
objectionable about the
amendment is the board size, um,
you know, there are things like
the terms, their 3-year terms,
but they can be um renewed in
perpetuity, um, the, the bill
that's being proposed by Senator
Wirth. There are, there, I think
there's a cut off, you can only
serve for 10 number of years. It
wasn't stated. We have a one
board member on the current
board that's been on the board
for 30 years. So,
I think maybe some kind of a
circulation of some number of
board members every periodically
is obviously a wise thing. So
what the amendment does, and I
think, you know, we need to
dispose of it is, um,
It provides an in, still a
top-heavy board with industry,
no consumer representation, um,
little guidance in terms of what
needs to be done in terms of
mitigation and much of that is
and other things, other criteria
that need to apply, which is in
the original bill. So what we're
doing is
Some slight adjustment or some
adjustment. I don't want to, you
know, be unfair, some adjustment
to the current program.
That's essentially what we're
doing. And I don't think that
current program is appropriate
and I'm not comfortable with the
board. So, um,
Let's talk about the amendment
first and then we can talk about
what we're going to do about the
bill. Can I respond to that real
quick, um, actually that's not
how we do things, um,
representative.
Um, so, I'm happy to entertain
emotion on the amendment.
moved to adopt the amendment.
2.
OK, would you call the rope.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Yes.
Representative Chavez.
Yes.
This is on the amendment.
Right.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill.
No.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reed.
Yes.
Peter Saansky.
No.
Madam Vice Chair, no.
Madam Char, no.
And I'm sure you have adopted
Amendment 74.
Uh
So we have
A
We have replaced
The house built 81 with the
amendment, as I understand it.
So there it's essentially a new
bill.
have just passed, I guess now we
have to pass the bill.
Or do you want to discuss the
amended bill now.
I'd moved a table the amended
bill.
What you call the roll motion to
table.
Representative of Beta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Paul.
Representative Puckman B. Hill,
yes.
Represented Martinez. Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
No.
Representative Reed, yes.
Peter Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair, no.
Madam Chair.
No.
Madam Cha 7 to 4th.
7 years for knows to the bill
has been tabled.
OK, so we are on the next item.
Senate Bill 109.
Senator Souls.
OK.
you know
OK,
Senator, the floor is yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Senate Bill 109, we've uh
changed the process and the
makeup of the PRC a couple of
years ago, and as a result, they
come to be several places in
their
OK,
Senator, the floor is yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Senate Bill 109, we've uh
changed the process and the
makeup of the PRC a couple of
years ago, and as a result, they
come to be several places in
current practices with the
three-member appointed PRC does
not match with what's currently
in the law. So Senate Bill 109,
for the most part is a cleanup
bill that fixes lots of that
language. There have been two
amendments to the
Phil, one of them that specified
or uh dealt with the issue of
training of the PRC members, uh,
particularly having to do with
ethics training that if they're
getting ethic training in other
areas that that would count for
the ethics training that's
required for the PRC and also
updated the amount that they're
allowed to get for a meal,
somebody buys them a meal from a
maxim idea is $5 to now the $20
which just seemed to
makes sense. The other main
amendment changed a bunch of
maids to shells, uh, but for the
most part, this is a bill that
does lots of the cleanup
language and with that we be
open for questions. I do have uh
Mr. O'Connell, uh, with the PRC
and Choya Cordry, who is the
chief of staff of the PRC with
me to answer technical
questions. Thank you.
Let's go to the audience, those
wishing to speak in opposition,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone.
No one in opposition, anyone
online wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
I don't see anyone, those in
support of the bill.
Yes, sir.
One minute, please.
Good evening, Madam Chair
members of the committee.
Sheriff on horse and PNM. We
think the sponsor for his work
on this bill, SB 109 supports
the important work of the public
regulation commission. It is
forward-looking and helps
optimize operations at the PRC
for these reasons, PNM supports
SB 109. Thank you.
Anyone else?
It was on, excuse me.
Those online wishing to speak in
support. Raise your hand. I've
seen Michael B' Antonio.
Mad, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Mike D'Antonio with
Excel Energy. We serve
electricity to the eastern part
of New Mexico.
We stand in strong support of
this legislation. We are one of
the regulated entities, uh, of
the PRC and we just think this
cleanup language makes a lot of
sense, streamlines operations
and is good uh for the
operational efficiencies of the
PRC, so we are in support. Thank
you. Thank you.
All right.
Back to the sponsor or anything
else?
No ma'am, we are open for
questions. Any probing questions
numbers
or.
We have a motion for a do pass,
um.
Senate Bill 109.
Would you call the role?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall
Representative Homan B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Cha
Yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on Senate Bill 109 as amended.
OK.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee.
All right. The next item is
Pipeline Safety Act violations.
9 Senate Bill 9. So, Madam
Chair, what this bill does is
currently the maximum penalty
for and the maximum penalty that
can be levied for a pipeline
safety violation is $100,000 per
day or $1 million in total, uh,
what this would do is raise that
maximum to match with the
federal penalties would be,
which is 200,000 per day or $2
million in total, uh, this would
have it again.
the federal level of penalties.
The reason that's important is,
um, the PRC, uh,
In order to qualify for some of
the grants and other supports
from the Federal pipeline safety
people need to have our
penalties substantially the same
as what the federal penalties
are, uh, and there's
approximately, I think it, it's
about a million dollars a year
of grants and other things that
come into the PRC pipeline
safety area, provided that our
penalty structure is
substantially the same. Uh, we
do have a letter from uh the
pipe, the US.
Department of Transportation
pipeline and hazardous materials
Safety Administration that
indicates that.
Represented McQueen.
Oh, wait, we have to do the
Those wishing to speak in
opposition, please approach the
gentleman microphone.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak its support, please
approach the gentleman with the
microphone.
Those online, wishing to speak
in support. I don't see anyone.
Represented the Queen. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Ma'am, Senator
Ses, we meet again on the same
building.
The question I had before, which
I'd like to hear an answer for
again perhaps is why are
Why the state law are we
referring to federal penalties.
Why don't we just set forth the
penalties in our sales.
Madam Chair and representative,
um, and I do have Miranda with
me who, you know, she'll help.
Over if I start to to err on
things, um.
We need to have them
substantially the same as the
federal ones, uh, if we set a
penalty in our law and the
federal government changes
theirs, then we would have to
come back into law and rechange
ours by indicating that we keep
ours the same and to match the
federal ones whenever there's
changes, ours would
automatically change to match
that and we don't have to come
back and
And uh
Re pass a bill every time that
that mountain might change.
Madam chair, Senator Soul's, um,
That's a perfectly logical
explanation. I still, it seems
to me.
Uh, in this committee in the
past, we have avoided sort of
Relying on federal standards in
state law.
So I just wanted to bring that
up.
I don't know if anyone else on
the committee has concerns or
questions about that, but that
remains a concern for me.
Thank you, ma'am.
Anyone else? Madam Char like to
move a do pass on Senate Bill 9
as amended.
We have a due pass and do we
have a second?
5 seconds.
We have a Du pass motion on the
Senate Bill 9.
Would you call the role. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta. Representative Chavez,
no. Representative Paul? No.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reed, no.
Peter Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Man,
yes, Madam Chair, you have a do
pass on sitting bill 9 as
amended.
And we didn't even get to tease
our old colleague over here,
Nybert.
The whole team was here in
support of should have called
him up and said something to
him. Whisper in my ear to vote
no.
I don't know oh boy
that's I I retract that comment.
I don't want to get that sounds
familiar though. Thank you. Have
a good evening. Thank you very
much, Senator. Oh, it was the
gentleman to my left who was
whispering, OK.
So next item is Senate bill 220,
publication of legal settlement
terms.
And we have representatives
Zamora.
Presenting for Senator Woods.
Oh, you're.
Yeah
Oh, there is Senator Roodes. I
didn't see you, Senator. There's
a call or yeah, what's the
story? Did they let you off the
floor is here
right back here,
I'm sure there's a call to the
Senate.
I think they're looking to be
escorted
We need to send the state. 00,
his escort is here. Oh, very
good. You want to sit next to
him
Might take off this way. OK,
sorry guys. Alright, senator.
was. Go ahead. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair.
This is uh LFC endorsed bill and
it has two main purposes.
This bill introduces new
requirements for the
transparency and risk management
and then you Mexico state
agencies. First, it requires
hosting all and all terms of
state settlement agreements,
including those from public
schools on the sunshine Portal,
even those that occur outside of
the risk management division.
Second, Senate Bill 220 requires
Rich management division to
appoint a loss prevention review
team when a death, serious
injury or a substantial loss is
alleged or suspected to be
caused in at least partly by the
actions of the state agency.
This is a transparency bill I
have tried.
Several years to try to figure
out why we are having so many.
Lawsuits against the state
employees, and this particular
bill is trying to show them.
What claims was made the
semblances that were made.
Hopefully that we can train our
employees.
To a higher degree in order to
reduce.
Those lawsuits, Madam Chair, and
I've got.
Uh, representatives are more
here that will explain it
further.
Adam
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I
don't think we need to explain
it any further. I think
everybody's tired. We want to
get to the end of these bills.
And with that we stand for
questions.
very good emotional intelligence
there representative. Um, let's
go to the audience of those
wishing to speak in opposition,
please approach the gentleman.
OK.
Those wishing to speak in
opposite online, please raise
your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support.
Uh, good evening, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Kelly Stout Sanchez.
I'm a trial lawyer and I
particularly represent children
um who've been physically and
sexually abused. Most of my
practice, I um bring claims
against CYFD, um, for children
who have been hurt or killed as
a result of their misconduct, as
well as um misconduct by public
schools, resulting in harm to
children. Um, I stand in strong
support of SB 220 today. Um,
this is
An important step into making um
these types of issues more
transparent but more critically
is to evaluating where the
problems are, so that hopefully,
you know, there won't be as many
um harms uh upon New Mexicans
and especially our children. So,
thank you.
Thank you. Anyone online wishing
to speak and support, please
raise your hand.
Don't see anyone.
else sponsors before I go to
committee.
Madam Chairman Mala.
Fisher is, is with us today from
LFC. She is a deputy director
and program evaluation for the
Mexico Legislative Finance
Committee. So she was here to
Further explained the details
that we can't explain.
OK.
Um, representing McQueen.
Manterra make motion if you're
ready.
Any other questions?
Yeah.
We have a motion for a due pass
on Senate Bill 220.
Made by Senator Representative
McQueen and
Representative Hall, seconding.
Did you call the? I think you
might have resentative Abeta,
yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Paul.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez, Speaker
Martinez, yes. Representative
McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reed, yes.
Peter Sapansky, Madam Vice
Chair, yes, Madam Chair, yes,
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on Senate Bill 220 as amended.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
I
Oh you texted Grantly, well,
she's probably locked in on the
floor too,
but
Hey
greatly let out.
I was on this one, OK.
you know
Uh-huh.
OK. So why don't we go to the
turquoise alert system while um
we're waiting for Senator
Maestas.
too.
No.
not a good sign when they leave
from one of their colleagues is
about to sit down
all of them.
You got a We still have a
quorum. Yes,
and I
these boats.
I don't, we don't normally start
our presentation that.
You might first want to tell us
about the bill that you have
votes for. How's sadly. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you committee for
um
Scheduling this. This is Senate
Bill 41. I'm a co-sponsor along
with Senator Angel Charlie, and
this is a natural relating to
endangered persons, uh,
Mandating that the Department of
Public Safety create and
maintain a er alert system for
the rapid dissemination of
information relating to missing
American Indians, and I do have
a proposed amendment for the
committee if you'd like me to
repeat that number at the
bottom.
Yeah, OK, right.
84.1. That's what I have.
Yes, I have 22. OK great.
Right.
And I'm sure I'd also like to
Introduce my experts.
Or have her introduce herself
but Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm just that cabinet
Secretary for the Indian Affairs
department.
OK, uh, do you have anything
else?
Sorry. Did you have anything
else?
No,
does somebody want to move the
amendment for discussion.
Uh, OK, um.
we want. Let's go to the audio.
the amendment, um.
In the audience. Is there anyone
here in opposition to Senate
Bill 41 as amended.
Anyone in opposition online to
Senate Bill 41, please raise
your hand.
Anyone in the audience here that
is in favor of Senate Bill 41.
Um, if you'd like to give
comment, um, please stand up and
Oh
give you a minute each.
Think about a chair members of
the committee, uh, Troyer chief
of the Mexico State Police, um,
oh, it's really loud.
Um, so we do, uh, we've been
working with the, uh, sponsor
and the cabinet secretary, um,
and so these, uh,
We are in favor with these
amendments that are being made
to the, the bill today, uh, make
it more workable on the uh DPS
side as far as implementation.
So, um, with those amendments,
we will be uh in favor of the
bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Arturo
Castillo and I'm the director of
equity and culture at
Conservation Votrs New Mexico or
CBNM.
Uh, the creation of the
turquoise alert system will be a
key component of climate justice
for all New Mexicans because it
will create a streamlined
approach to rapidly distributing
information about missing
indigenous New Mexicans.
Native American communities in
New Mexico are some of the most
crisis
have experienced a radical and
rapid rise in missing and
murdered individuals for several
decades.
Creating the turquoise alert
system will give those
communities more resources to
slow this epidemic, caring for
our land, air and water means
caring for the original Stuart's
primarily indigenous women who
are missing and murdered at
alarming rates, often with no
justice. Thank you. Thank you.
We'll go online.
Um, anyone in favor of Senate
Bill 41. Please raise your
hands. Robert Garcia.
will take 3 folks if you wanna
um
Go ahead you have one minute.
Can you hear me? Yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Robert Garcia. I'm the president
of the New Mexico Search and
Rescue Council. I just want to
say thank you so much for the
chief coming out in support of
this bill. The New Mexico Search
and Rescue Council feels
strongly for any bill that will
help citizens of this state that
are lost, injured, or missing in
this state. That is all. Thank
you so much for your time,
members of the committee, and
thank you, Chief for coming out.
Thank you. Next.
Hm
Anthony
I'm sorry, Obia Umi.
Yeah, so, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Oamba Umi, advocacy director for
AARP in New Mexico. I'll be
briefly support Senate Bill 41
and the interest of protecting
and ensuring the safety of older
New Mexicans as it pertains to
Native Americans as well. Uh, we
appreciate the spill and ask for
your support. Thank you. Thank
you.
One, we'll take one more.
Anthony Sanchez.
Uh, good and and Madam Chair and
committee. The purpose of doing,
um,
Supports the turquoise alert
system, which is a crucial step
for safety and justice for
native communities, for us it's
more than prioritizing.
Native Americans, but also a
response to immediate needs for
our native communities and we
support the bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, back to our sponsors.
Anything you'd like to add?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee members. Um, I
would also like to introduce
Senator Charlie, who has just
joined.
Bill
For that, after that, we stand
for questions. Thank you.
Right, um, members of the
committee.
Overdue.
adoption of the committee, yeah,
we have to deal with the
amendment first. Do you want to
talk about the amendment just so
we have an idea.
Not
Mature members of the committee,
good afternoon or good evening.
Um, so we have a couple of
amendments to the, to the bill.
We uh added some definitions
redefined, uh, what the
turquoise learn who it would
apply to, so, uh, so I'mlying to
a native person, but
specifically a missing person
who is missing involuntary
unexplained or suspicious
circumstances is at risk due to
safety or health concerns or
suffers from a mental or
physical disability, and then,
um, in terms of looking at um
one of the
Sections in the alert, uh, we
looked at the cellular service
and so modifying the cellular
service so that uh it shall
apply in certain instances. Um,
so required after there's been a
determination by the Department
of Public Safety or the lead
investigating law enforcement
agency that there is evidence of
imminent danger of serious
bodily harm or death to the
missing person and that there's
a descriptive information about
the missing person test system
locating that person.
Any, uh, discussion on the
amendment.
to make a motion.
I move the amendment.
We we're already discussing it.
Does anybody want to adoption
Thank you.
That's what we're looking for.
Excellent. So, um, is there any
opposition to adopting the
amendment?
Right, you have an amended bill.
And back on the bill.
I move a dopants.
We have a Du pass motion from
Representative Chavez, seconded
by
Uh, Representative Paul the 2nd.
And uh we will take the role.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta. Yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
yes. Representative Martinez.
Yes. Speaker Martinez, yes,
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reed, yes. Peter
Sainsky. Yes, Madam Vice Chair,
yes.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have a due pass on Senate
Bill 41 twice amended.
Good to see you, Senator. I
think it's the first time in our
committee, so I just want to say
welcome.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee.
I'm back.
OK, um, we are on what I
believe, let's see. Oh, well,
here we go. Um, we're on Senate
Bill 11.
Anti-distraction policy in
schools.
Hope everybody's out their cell
phones while they're explaining
this bill.
Oh, ha ha.
I
I did, well,
I always sound sarcastic.
Anyways, welcome senators, um,
feel free to explain your bill.
Thank you, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee,
according to NEA 90% of our
teachers have identified cell
phone use as the number one
distractor in classrooms, uh,
but the average teenager
spending over 5 hours a day on
social media. This bill aims to
target not just an
opportunity to increase
proficiency rates in classrooms,
but equally important to address
a mental health crisis that is
plaguing our teenagers. We know
that it is a direct link to
increased suicide rates,
anxiety, depression, and a
number of issues. There have
been many uh cellphone policies
adopted, not just nationally,
but also in New Mexico. And so
to build before you is not a
mandate to school districts.
What it does, it does require a
school district to adopt a
phone-free classroom policy.
But the details of what that
policy looks like would be left
up to individual districts. And
so throughout the bill you will
see that we have left allowances
to elect students access
cellphones for educational
purposes, certainly for medical
purposes, um, district by
district, they can choose their
own policy, but by adopting a
phone free uh policy, some sort
of classroom, uh, electronic
device or or phone free policy
for the district. What we're
creating is consistency from
class.
ro om through classroom. And so
as this bill has been
introduced, it has been a
championed by our teachers
unions, our superintendents, our
teachers, um, PED itself has
been in support of this bill as
we've traveled through the
process. In fact, I think our
only opposition has been my two
teenage daughters. So with that,
I will turn it over to my
colleague, uh, Senator Ma.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of
According to the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and
Development, there's a clear
correlation between electronic
distractions and academic
performance.
Phones in the classroom
undermine the learning
environment, contributing to
decreased academic performance,
particularly in math, and
increased class classroom
distractions with low-income
students disproportionately
impacted.
Uh, according to the National
Education Association, 90% of
its members advocate restricting
cellphones and personal devices
during the instructional time,
and even 83% favor a full day
ban on personal devices. This
bill does neither. This bill has
no ban. This bill has one
mandate, a conversation.
in every single school district
community to come up with a
policy for that school district.
There are, uh, if I may, Madam
Chair, on page 2 line 9, so we
can save ourselves a lot of
time, uh, the shell was changed
to May on the Senate floor.
Uh, so
The, the, the school district
shall have a policy that may
include the following, but it is
up to that local school
district, uh, uh, to come up
with its own policy given uh the
the teachers, the students, and
the parents and the community
from that particular area. What
is suggested in the maze is that
um
is that cell phones have an
educational component when it
comes to.
Translation, mathematics, things
of that nature, and that, and
the main concern is for parents
pretty much is the emergency
aspect.
We hope that every single school
district deals with that
emergency aspect and maybe even
incorporates it into their uh
their school shooting, uh,
drills, and with that will stand
for questions.
Madam Chairman, there is one
final piece that we have left
out. Should a school district
choose to implement the most
rigid of policies where they
have locked devices similar to
these pouches, which many school
districts, including Taos, have
already adopted it. There's
magnetic locks that are on desk
in the commons areas and
cafeterias. There is $2 million
that sits in HB 2 to to
reimburse school districts
should they need to uh purchase
any resources contingent upon
passage.
OK, great. Um, let's go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in opposition, please approach
the gentleman with the
microphone.
I don't see anyone goes online
wishing to speak in opposition.
Don't see anyone.
Those wishing to speak and
support, please wave your phone.
Took you guys a while. Come on,
everybody's like out of it,
including me. OK, all right. I
don't see anyone, those online
wishing to speak.
In support, and I'm gonna to
limit it to 3 hands.
Um, the first one in a minute.
The first one is N.
Thank you
has appeared.
Thank you. This is Natine.
Excuse me.
This is Nat team, um, I'm a
disability advocate and um I'm
also a person with multiple
disabilities and um I've
followed quite a few studies.
About uh the distraction
factors.
Excuse me, that occur.
Um
And as a
Teacher, myself.
Um
When cell phones were first
starting, starting to come out.
Um, it was
Really, uh, quite, uh,
challenging to say, no, you
can't have your toy while you're
in the classroom. Well, they're
more than toys.
Um
But there is a key point that
came out recently in a study.
That adolescents who reported
higher total and supervised um
Levels, uh,
a
total
higher total supervised physical
activity levels and lower screen
time and mobile device used from
childhood to adolescence, had
lowered levels of perceived
stress and depressive symptoms.
The magnitude of most
associations of physical
activity with mental health
sysymptoms attenuated after
accounting for total screen time
and mobile devices. Moreover,
adolescents who have lower total
are supervised. It's.
Um
Adrian Gomez.
Adrian
Yes, good evening, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
Adrian Gomez from the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
in support of SB 11.
This is a good bill that would
amend current.
Law law on local school boards
to define anti-distraction
policy. The policy would allow
local school boards and charter
school governing bodies to adopt
measures restricting student use
of personal electronic devices
during the school day.
The chamber advocates for
policies that support teachers,
raise student academic
performance and support healthy
social development of our
students. We support this bill
because it will align with all
those policies that we believe
will improve our education
system. We urge your support of
Senate Bill 11.
Thank you. Thank you and um
Uh, John,
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is John Durge. I'm with
the American Federation of
Teachers New Mexico were here in
support of Senate Bill 11 as
amended, um, when we survey our
uh educators who are currently
in the classroom, cell phone
use, and the distractions caused
by cell phone usage and
discipline and resulting from
usage uh is one of the top
issues for educators in our
school system, um, right now,
and so we're really happy that
the two sponsors have have
merged these bills together.
I've worked through the process.
Um, one of the
important things to remember is
that um these bill, this bill is
respectful of students'
individual education, um, needs,
uh, allowing uh educational
usage, uh, when necessary, and
uh we also appreciate that there
is permissive language at the
local level, so that, uh,
districts can best create a
policy that works for students,
parents, and the wider school
community. So we do urge your
support of Senate Bill 11. Thank
you. Thank you.
Before we go to committee.
just the, just to thank you,
Madam Chair, Chandler. So just
at the, uh, the maze came from
the uh best practices of the
United States Department of
Education. Very good, thank you.
um, questions, uh,
Representative Paul.
Madam Chair, senators.
Is that a Faraday bag or just a
straight lockdown bag that you
propose giving to the children,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chairman, Representative,
we won't make any proposals, so
the flexibility of any sort of
policy is completely up to an
individual school district. So
on the lesser end, you could
have a school district that just
implemented a policy that
required phones to be in their
back pocket or in their
backpack, and that would be,
that would meet the, the, the,
the needs of what we're trying
to move forward in the event
that there's a cost associated
to a school district who wants
to implement a stricter, uh,
policy, and there's a
restriction they wanted to
purchase.
Bags, for example, at wholesale
costs these are $10. This is
what Taos has implemented, so
the phones stay in their pouches
just during classroom hours and
they can open them through
magnetic locks in the hallway,
the cafeterias, through off
periods, um, if they would like
to be reimbursed for the cost of
any sort of locked devices, the
$2 million would be in the PED
budget for reimbursement.
Madam Chair, thank you.
Anyone else with questions um
representative of beta and then
representative Martinez. Thank
you madam chair. Thank you.
ringing this bill, um, I'm a
former school board member and
parent.
And I have been visited by
hundreds of students during this
session. I asked each and every
one of them.
About this bill, and they all
did not like it.
Children are our future.
Um,
Madam Chair, senators, and so I
see the analysis as groups and
opposition, so concerned that
their voices are not in here.
Um, I did ask them for
alternatives though, and what
they thought they could do.
And they were willing to go back
to
their student councils and
classes to discuss what they
could do about it, but my
concern is that I had an
instance and I wanted to share
this with you and the reason why
I do support our students having
their phones is that um
First, the emergency situation,
which you've outlined here, but
also because my child was a
victim of bullying by a teacher.
And she had made reports and
wasn't believed and I said
you're gonna have to record it.
The only way someone will
believe you. I believe you, but
unless it's recorded.
Not, she's gonna deny it. So my
daughter did. She was brave. She
recorded it and um that was the
way that my daughter was able to
To be protected. And so I know
there's so many other students
that go through that as well and
uh that's a concern for me. I, I
want them to still have those
devices cause they serve as a
safeguard in certain ways. I
understand there's a balance
with the bullying and other
things that have been out.
Um, I
one as a parent, do my best to
do best practices at home and
teach them about respect and
putting them away. I do um
appreciate that you are giving
schools the choice and
opportunity to create their own
rules and implement them, but
just from a, from my standpoint,
um,
That's my concern, and I wanted
to make that.
Why
I um
And what I've heard from my
students who've come to visit me
here in Santa Bay. Thank you.
Representative Martinez and then
Representatives. Thank you,
madam.
Um
I, I didn't see in the bill
anywhere.
Oh.
What happens to a local school
district or a charter school
that doesn't implement.
Some type of rule.
Is there some type of
enforcement from PED.
What happens if they just refuse
to do it.
Madam Chairman, Representative,
we're, it's not our intent to
put any sort of punitive
consequences in their first
school district that doesn't
adopt policy. The, the bill
itself has been supported very
widely by not just teachers'
unions, but also superintendents
and individual school districts,
and so we want this to be more
of an incentive and a reward for
reimbursement for the districts
that do implement policies if
there, if it comes at a cost,
um, there will be guidelines as,
as it states in the bill as a
template for PED to offer to
school districts.
But, um, there, there wouldn't
be consequences, nor do I think
there should be for a district
that would just require it to to
revert to status quo.
In men senators.
It was just a suggestion to the
school.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You're welcome, representative,
um, Representative Saski.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
great to see you, senators.
I wanted to focus in on this,
uh, the piece of this bill that
uh deals with students with
disabilities.
Um, so,
One of the things that I see in
here, um, that I
I, when I read the bill last
night, I really appreciated it,
but I did not realize that this
had been changed into a May.
Rather than a shell. So, um,
page 2 lines 18 through 21.
Specifies that uh you can permit
a student to use a wireless
communication device for
accessibility purposes, um,
And that is now a May in this.
Bill, Is that, is, am I reading
that right, Madam Chair
Senators, Madam Chairansky,
you're reading it correctly and
I was
My argument for changing the the
shell to me is.
Some of the things you may like
are now maize, but.
But also, uh, it's enhanced uh
Madam Chair on on page 3.
As a paragraph C, where it says
uh.
You know, that wireless
communication devices.
shall not be prohibited uh if
the device is a medical.
accommodation for a student
with.
Or included in the student's IP
so.
So there is a shall not in the
bill uh with regards to what
you're dealing with, but the May
that you referred to on page 2
is is a me.
Thank, thank you, Madam chair
and Senator, Senators, I noticed
that, um, and I appreciate.
I appreciate that nod to it, but
I feel, um,
In Section C, we're setting a
much higher bar.
Because you're implying a
diagnosis, so you've got medical
necessity, accommodation for a
student with a disability or
included in the student's IP,
um, and speaking from personal
experience, you don't always
know what the diagnosis is. Um,
and unfortunately, there's a
nearly two-year wait for a
neuropsych exam. It can be very
difficult to get an occupational
therapy evaluation, um, you
know, and, uh, you know,
speaking in my experience,
Um
My son's been using speech
detections.
3rd grade, maybe 4th grade, um,
far before we were able to
really pinpoint what a diagnosis
was. Um, and we really had to
fight to get that into each year
into the classroom because every
teacher would say, well, what's
the diagnosis? You need the
documentation, we need a uh
medical write-up which is very
difficult to get when you're in
the middle of
All of these different
assessments and you're waiting
on a wait list. Um, so I, you
know, I really appreciate this,
uh,
speech to text, etc. section,
but it's now permissive and,
and, and
Senators, I can only speak again
from my experience with this.
It's, it's very subjective and
sometimes it's um
Totally variable based on
district, based on school within
a district, how supportive, um,
a, uh, the special ed department
or even the teachers in a
particular classroom are with
using some of those, um, because
you get into the issue where
teachers may feel that it's
unfair that someone has access
to a computer when they need
that to do their work.
Whereas the other kids cannot,
um, and I can tell you I've run
into this almost every year, um,
uh, in parenting. So,
I, I don't know if, if you're
open to, I'm not even sure what
an amendment I would propose
would be exactly, but I do feel
like this language around
accessibility needs to be
mandatory, you know, it needs to
be in section C with the
mandatory language, um, because
I think otherwise you're gonna
have
School districts saying you need
to show all of this
documentation in order to
receive this accommodation, and
I understand the districts want
to be fair, um, but sometimes it
comes at the cost of the kids
who are struggling the most. Um,
so, and, and I'm happy for you
to respond to that if you, if
you'd like to. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representativesky, I
think, uh, no, you're correct,
it's the main.
takes out some of the things
that we may agree on on the good
and the really contentious item,
Madam Chair was a subsection
one.
Prohibit a student from using a
wireless communication device
during instructional hours, that
was really where the May was
meant for on the Senate floor by
uh.
By the chair of Senate
Education.
I, uh, I have faith that the 68
school districts will have 68
conversations that that they may
not have with regards to what
you just educated us about, uh,
Madam Chair, we representative,
so I think that
The issues that you bring up
will, will move forward as a
result of this bill, but I would
ask the members
It is, let's try not to.
The debate a policy that doesn't
exist, we're merely suggesting
that every school district learn
more about
The dos and don'ts of of uh of
these devices and come up with
the good public policy.
Manager and senators, um,
I do think that
We could add.
This language to section C.
Um, just to ensure that it's
absolutely clear.
Uh, that the, you know, this
more general language.
Um, is honored and um
Is part of this.
this section C that it shall not
prohibit, um, and I, I just
would
Um, if, if mountain Cha is open
to it would suggest uh an
amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So I
think the amendment would be
Um
To strike the or on page 3 line
9.
Insert a comma and then strike
the oar.
And then at the end, uh, before
the period on
Page 3, line 10.
Insert.
And we would basically insert
including text to speech, speech
to text, or other assistive
technologies that aid in
communication, navigation, or
learning.
Senators, what do you think?
That would be friendly, Madam
Chairman, Representative.
OK.
So, could you repeat that as a
motion.
Yes, ma'am, I would, I would
move an amendment, um, on page
3.
Line 9 after the word disability
insert a comma.
Strike or
On page 3 line 10 before the
period.
Insert a comma.
Including
And then we would be basically
be taking the language from.
Yeah, um, page 2 lines 19
through 21, so it would be
including text to speech, speech
to text or other assistive
technologies that aid in
communication, navigation, or
learning.
Folks have that.
Is there a 2nd, 2nd.
2 by Representative Hall.
made by representative Sapansy.
you call any opposition, I guess
I should say.
I don't see any opposition. You
have
An amended bill.
Twice cemented now, I think.
OK, we have an amended bill. Any
further discussion about the
bill we just amended.
would do pass on.
Senate Bill 11.
As twice amended.
I'm sorry.
Yeah
So let me, let me I do pass
motion made by representative
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 11 as
twice amended.
You did. I'm sorry. I'm sorry.
I, I thought you were signaling
to 2.
But so why don't we do this? Do
you mind if we suspend the
motion? Let's ask, have
Representative Romero ask and
then have have speaker Martinez
ask, How's that?
Yeah.
See, I was
Go
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, my
question was just more so on the
list of devices.
You know, we have, um, phones,
smartphones or smart watches
listed along with another few
devices. Um, my concern is just
that as technology continues to
roll, these policies are going
to always have to be updated. I
know of smart rings and now
headphones thing the smart
glasses, there are other things
that people are using already in
schools, um.
I feel like the list is quite de
minimis cause, I mean, compared
to what we would be like looking
at expansively.
I don't know why we have a list
of just like
Kind of like just
What, what we know today or
perhaps maybe what's most
ubiquitous rather than like.
Why are we putting a list of
tech technology together versus
what
would be more of a definition of
technology.
Madam Chairman Representative,
that was just uh a common
definition used in some other
policies and so it was kind of
a, a copy and paste, to be
honest with you, and it's, and
you're right, it probably
doesn't keep up. I think it's.
sufficient today.
Meeting the needs, but as, as
technology advances, I would
imagine that that list would
continue to grow and and in fact
some of it become obsolete over
time as well.
That's my concern, Madam Chair,
is that when we're looking at a
sort of like an ideas board for
what we're asking school
districts to look at. We should
maybe think about that as a
definition, and I don't have
like again, like you said, what
would be in statue is something
that would be better encumbering
of the future of what, you know,
technology looks like. Is it
electronic devices? Is it
solar-powered, I mean, things
that we're already sort of
seeing as the future, um, and I
think this would already be um
Too small for again, smart
glasses and smart headphones and
some other devices that are
already being used, that aren't
just for gaming or just phones
and smartphones. Anyways, I
don't have a better definition,
but while we're in the midst of
Thinking about um ideas for um
amendments. That's one that I
would.
Speaker Martinez. Thank you,
Madam Chair, uh, senators, why
can't districts do this now? Why
do we need legislation?
Because as we talk about local
control.
Isn't it the ultimate form of
local control for a district to
decide not to have a cell phone
policy.
Oh
great question Madam chair and,
and speaker, that's correct. And
the fact is is that many school
districts have indicated that
they already do have a policy as
when this bill was drafted
though, it ended up in Senate
Finance and an appropriation was
stripped and so to encourage and
incentivize districts to adopt
those policies so that we see a
reduction in our mental health
prices, and we have seen uh data
to integrate increases of, of
proficiency rates. We wanted to
compensate and make sure that
there were
they were financially uh
reimbursed for any of the costs
that they incurred. And so
that's why in the budget there's
funding for any sort of devices
that a district may want to
purchase. I'm also going to turn
it over to you, Madam Chair,
Senator Representative Martinez,
no, you're correct. I think the
last time we checked.
65 to 70% of school districts
had a written policy. Only 40%
of uh charter schools had a
written policy. I think this
will just nudge nudge everybody
across the finish line. Uh, I
think they're each teacher has a
policy, student and parent has a
policy.
Uh, a school district could
literally say our policy is
every school has their own,
every teacher has their own,
but.
But it was encouraged by the
By the Department of Education
that
That this is a good idea. I
think in 2030 years we'll
probably have a statewide policy
everybody agrees upon, but for
now we want each and every
community to have that
conversation as to what's best
for their children as it relates
to electronic devices. Got it.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
senators, and um,
So the funding in the budget is
to sweeten the pot, so to speak.
For districts who may want to.
Implement the policy.
The budget for this.
Ma
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, to $2
million ask.
Wow.
Um
I thank you, Madam Chair
Senators. I, um,
I think this is probably
generally a good idea. I do have
a little bit of concern. I, I'm
thinking of.
For example, there was a school
district, um,
That
As recently as about a year ago,
had the highest rate of
Um
students.
Discipline, I think was the, the
word, I think it was an attorney
general report.
Um
And as I remember it, it wasn't
necessarily a positive thing.
There was, I think maybe some
questions about who was being
disciplined and why.
Um, and so it does worry me a
little bit that you might get
some rogue districts or rogue
charter schools, uh, you know,
maybe I'm thinking of a charter
school that maybe works with
kids who
are coming out of the juvenile
justice system may be a very
complicated home lives.
And the cell phone is it simply
a way to log on to Instagram and
Or tweet away, but a cell phone
could be.
part of their survival
mechanism.
Um, and I would only hope that
that charter school or that
school district takes those
realities into account.
Before they provide for a
blanket.
cell phone policy, right,
because as I think of my own
kids, absolutely, I don't want
them with a phone. Well, they
don't even have phones at this
point, uh, even though I'm
getting hammered by 112 year old
to get a cell phone, um, but
she's gonna have to wait a while
because
Because, um, because of all
these dynamics, but I do worry
that you might get kids that get
caught up who need a cell phone.
I mean, it's survival, right?
It's getting the right to work
because otherwise they can't pay
the rent.
And, and we do have those kids
in our community. So that gives
me a little bit of heartburn,
but nothing would stop districts
or charter schools from imposing
those policies. Now, we're just
going to sweeten the pot a
little bit.
Um, so thank you Madam. Thank
you, senators.
Thank you. So, I believe there
was a due pass motion that was
proposed by
Representative Martinez.
And seconded by whom?
All
Oh, seconded by Representative
Chavez. So we have a do pass
motion as mended.
The committee says OK.
All right.
look at the
proper motion.
Right
So we have a due pass motion on
Senate committee Senate.
OK,
we have a new pass motion on
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate bill 11 as
amended now.
Made by Representative Martinez,
seconded by Representative
Chavez, you call the rule.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavez. Yes.
Representative Hall.
Representative Cockman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed, yes. Leader
Sapansky, yes. Representative
Abeta.
Yeah.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yeah.
Sorry, ma'am sure, can you
repeat that? She said yes in a
kind of a different way, Madam
Chair, yes, yes.
But I'm sure you have a do pass
on Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 11
twice amended.
So it is more than enough. Thank
you very much. Good to see you
and I guess you're, you're, um,
your keepers are, yeah, your
escorts are gonna have to take
you back to the floor, huh?
Yeah, and I noticed they brought
the state police with them. They
really, so, so are we rolling
the bill, um,
oh, we're not rolling, Phil. OK,
I thought we were.
All right.
I am doing the bill, if you can
believe that, and Larry.
Hold on.
OK.
And I assume I got wonderful
Yes.
Now you're ready, madam chair?
Thank you.
So a few years ago, this body
passed an amendment to the state
constitution, which allowed for
State entities to provide public
support, potentially to private
and private people or entities,
um, as, and it's an exception to
the anti-donation clause for
what we defined as essential
services, so, and we defined
essential services like things
like electricity, broadband, um,
I don't know, gas service, you
know, that sort of thing, and
what we had in mind at the time,
we focused a lot on broadband
because that
that is and was and continues to
be an issue for people, and we
were concerned that maybe there
were individuals who couldn't
maybe afford, you know, hookups
to their houses, and we'd like
to be able to develop a program
where we could assist in that
way, maybe even a program that
would allow people to help pay
for their um broadband bills or
whatever, and this was during
COVID if you, if you all
remember, so, but we recognize
there were other parts of the
state that had issues with um
public utilities and um hooking
up into sewers and sewer line.
and so on and so what we um said
was you need uh specific
legislation that authorized it
and what has happened.
as they see it.
Senator Hamblin worked on
developing a bill, and I, of
course, was interested in it
since it kind of dovetailed with
a bill that I and Representative
Allison got through the house a
few years ago. So without a
minute turnover kind of the
details because um
Larry Heran here, lobbyist for
the city worked on it and is
probably more coherent than I am
at this point in the evening,
so.
Uh, thank you, Madam chair.
Larry from and registered
lobbyist for the city of Las
Cruces. Um, the, the chair is
correct. House Joint Resolution
1 in 2022, um, created this
program but required enabling
legislation. This is the
enabling legislation. This would
allow uh local governments to
adopt the programs for essential
household services in Las
Cruces, why it came to mind is
where many communities and many
houses that are on septic
systems that once they fail,
they will not be able to install
a new septic system. So for
Probably the past 15 years we've
been running sewer lines to
those properties right now,
we're limited to sewer line can
only go to the property line by,
by using this legislation, we
can adopt a program to help for
that last connection on the
private property, which would
help a lot of those communities
which are low income
communities. So what this bill
does is it's the enabling
legislation is required by the
Constitution, the local
government sets up a program by
adopting a plan, then passing an
ordinance.
And then they have to come to
the legislature for the actual
appropriation of the funding,
which could be through capital
outlay, it could be through
general appropriations Act, um,
so it has to be approved by the
legislature and the DFA also has
to in an agreement with the
local government, much like they
would do with capital outlay. So
there's lots of areas of
oversight for a program like
this and within the legislation,
there's a requirement for what
must be in the program adopted
by the local government,
eligibility, how they're gonna
apply for it, how the
will be spent and then what that
application process would be.
So, um, that's the, the genesis
of the legislation, that's why
we're here, um, and so be happy
to stand for questions.
OK. Since the audience is very
excited about this bill. We'll
go online and see how everyone
feels there. For those in
opposition to this bill, please
raise your hand.
All right, um, those in favor
are
Please raise your hand, and
online on in favor Natalie.
Go ahead.
Uh, good evening. I'll be quick.
Natalie Green, housing
administrator for the city of
Las Cruces, the city stands in
support of this bill. There is a
critical need for reliable
infrastructure, especially for
wastewater, water and electrical
systems. This bill will support
access to those essential
services that our residents need
to thrive. Thank you.
Thank you. All right, back to
the sponsor. Anything else to
add?
No manager.
OK.
Um, Representative McQueen.
Thank you, ma'am chair.
Um
Mature and Baer, uh, you might
recall I asked you about
General
Implementing legislation and
If I remember correctly, and
correct me if I'm wrong, you're,
your answer was you thought it
would be sort of on a case by
case basis.
Is, is this a different
approach, I think it could be.
It could be a general one and it
could be a specific one. For
example, we have a specific
implementing legislation that
relates to the Department of
Transportation and their ability
to um provide um access to the
rights of way, and that was done
pursuant to the the joint
resolution that we got through.
Giving them the ability to give,
you know, lower the cost of that
access to the right of way and
so on, so I think this is good
general implementing
legislation, but there could be
potentially other bills that
could address very specific
issues, if that makes sense, um,
Madam Chair and Representative.
Um
The chairman, it does. I, my, my
concern about this is I've
already heard the
The Constitutional exception
that we added to the
anti-genation clause used to
justify things that I think
clearly don't apply.
They clearly are not.
Directly connected to
residential use.
And I'm concerned about that,
so, um, Madam Chair, ma'am.
Under this legislation, does
this authorize.
Local jurisdictions to go out
and do this or do those local
jurisdictions still have to come
back to the legislature for
approval.
have to come back. Um, they have
to have a development plan or
and and an ordinance that adopts
it and it goes through, it has
to has to have certain um
elements met and then it has to
come back to the legislature for
approval or an appropriation,
and, and then they work with DFA
in terms of implementing, so if
you recall, there's always
discussion when we talk about
the anti-donation clause about
what sort of safeguards are in
place to ensure that these
public funds are going to be
spent inappropriately.
So there are a number of
safeguards in terms of, you
know, adoption of the plan
coming to the legislature, etc.
Mr. Madam Chair and represent.
Man, if a local jurisdiction was
going to use their quote unquote
own money.
Their own tax revenue, they
Did they not do that? How does
that work?
Medicare represent McQueen. No,
they could not because the
Constitutional amendment, and if
you look at the definition on
page.
Um
2, 19 for public support.
The Constitution and the
amendment is only for state
funding, and so it has to be
state funding. They could not
use their local.
funding, which is also why in
the bill, they have to set up a
separate fund because there
can't not be any commingling of
those funds, and that's pursuant
to the constitutional amendment
as adopted.
Um, OK.
I'm gonna have to wrap my head
around that, um.
So I mean they're, they're gonna
be madam chair, ma'am, they're
gonna be local.
do this
And they're not gonna be able
to, which
in terms of a safeguard.
Maybe a good thing, but in terms
of getting things done, may not
be.
At the time that we worked on
the constitutional amendment,
there was a lot of concern
expressed as there often is.
About safeguards around local
communities and how can we
ensure that they're not going to
be misusing public funds for
private purposes, and it would
have been a very difficult lift
also include the ability of low
cap local governments to do what
we're suggesting the state may
have the ability to do, um, so
this bill, it was intended to
set some framework and some
safeguards and and provide a
structure through which local
governments in the state could
work together.
To achieve these various um
programs.
OK, ma'am, chair, Madam Chair,
Mr. He.
Just
Is there some place where it's
clearly stated that you have to
come back to the legislature
because I didn't.
And pick that up.
the
Um, Madam Chair, Reverend
McQueen, the top of page 4.
Um, starting in line 2, public
support froment Services project
shall be specifically authorized
by law.
Uh, the law shall include
provisions to safeguard public
money and other resources,
including allowing the division,
which is DFA local government in
this bill to recover money and
other resources from a local
regional government if the
essential services projects are
not completed to the
satisfaction of the division or
otherwise does not meet the
requirements as provided by the
in the essential services
development.
And I'm sure, I'm sure, um.
A statue or in local ordinance
is not quote unquote by law.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
McQueen, it, it can't be because
the legislature has to
appropriate the funds in some
way because it has to be state
dollars.
So they simply can't spend
public.
A local government cannot spend
their own funding on it. It has
to be state funding, so it has
to come to the legislature.
for authorization. And Madam
Chair, I, uh, Madam Chair, I'm
gonna move on, but I, I
I read this pretty closely and I
didn't pick that up. And so I
think there's gonna be a lot of
people in local jurisdictions
they're not gonna pick that up.
I've already been asked by some
of the jurisdictions in my
district.
Oh, now we can do all this other
stuff.
And they
Zero sensitivity to what you're
talking about in here. So that's
a concern.
Um, let me ask you a different
question.
Ma'am, chair, ma'am, chair,
uh, on that, that language of
the and just quoted public
support for an essential
services project shall be
authorized by law. Is House Bill
2?
Authorized by law.
I mean if it's in House Bill 2,
is that sufficient?
Madam chair Reverend McQueen, I
believe so, yes, that's a
question that also came up on
the Senate side.
Um
Uh, again, you know, a good
thing and a bad thing, I mean.
A good thing in, in terms of
getting things done a bad thing
in terms of there's a lot of
stuff I think in the budget that
doesn't have a corresponding
policy.
That you
to implement it, which has been
concern of mine.
Um
Ma'am, ma'am, there's the
recovery is from the local
government. I'm looking on line
6 and 7 on page 4.
Would there ever be recovery
from a private partner that
received the funds? Why is it
only from the local government?
Madam share reference McQueen.
The local government is the one
ultimately responsible for the
spending of the funds and the,
the creation and implementation.
Of the actual program.
And so, um,
I just don't think it would be
feasible or appropriate to
recover those funds from a
private individual. That's why
they have to run through the
safeguards.
At the local government
establishes for application
eligibility, etc.
So Madam Chair, Madam Chair, Mr.
Ren.
The local government gets money
to extend the sewer line.
It's, you know, functional but
not
Uh, uh, doesn't meet the
requirements.
Uh, the er line is owned by a
private company.
And so now the local government
pays twice. Why, why can't you?
Shouldn't there be recovery from
that private company?
OK, um, Madam Chair, and
representative, it would be um
Upon the local government could
could potentially recover that
money from
From the entity.
To which it extended the sewer
line.
And Madam Chair and
representative, if you look on
page 5.
Um
22. This is the adoption of the
plan and the ordinance.
And it it does contemplate,
describe the safe parts of
public resources that will be
insured.
Yeah
That plan and ordinance, the
local government has the ability
to set that criteria, which
could also include clawbacks
from any contractors or anyone
else who applied.
Yeah
Um
You know, I, you know, I, we
have, we have other provisions,
uh.
Uh, we, I think.
That have really explicit
clawback provisions.
And we could have that in here,
that you could require the local
government to include a claw
back provision in any contract
they right, I'm sure.
I think theoretically you could
do that, yes.
Um
Ma'am, um,
Man cheered the other, other
question I I've had on this is
Um
There are situations, at least
in my district where you could,
you could provide
Cost for this infrastructure and
then a private corporation could
profit off this infrastructure
indefinitely.
You know, by charging
Uh, in the case of broadband
charging connection fees,
charging monthly services,
charging, uh, you know, hookup
fees to sewers.
Is there anything to address it?
Can you give me an example? I'm
trying to understand. This is to
extend services for residential
purposes. So I'm trying to
understand where the company is.
Coming into play here.
So, um, Madam Chairman, chair,
so this clearly applies to
Uh, for-profit companies. That's
why we need, if we're just
giving money to governmental
entities, we won't need an
exception to the anti-donation
clause.
Yes.
So you could give, you could
help, uh, you know, I don't.
You know, a cable company, hook
up a bunch of
Um, homes to Broadband.
And then they're all hooked up.
That's been paid for by the
public.
And then the cable company for
the next 2030 years collects.
Monthly service charges.
I mean, I, I pay, I think it's
CenturyLink, right? For my
broadband. If you gave this
money to CenturyLink and I don't
mean to single out Centriclink,
but if, if they extended their
lines to rural areas that
otherwise they wouldn't be
inclined to reach because
It won't be cost effective. That
last mile problem.
Well, now that's solved. They
extend the line down to Stanley,
Pascalteo, they hook up 2 homes
and Stanley, and those 20 homes
now pay CenturyLink.
Indefinitely for that service.
The um
And the safeguard would be.
Madam Chair and represented.
Um, you have a private company.
Uh, profiting.
From the public investment in
infrastructure.
Yes, I under your scenario, so,
um, how, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, how would we
address that?
Uh, uh, ma'am, ma'am, these are
the safeguards we keep talking
about where the safeguards. What
are the safeguards? Yes.
And as we said, there has to be
a plan in place and discussion
about how the safeguards, uh,
you know, I, I can't answer that
question for you right now, um,
Madam Chair and representative,
but I'd be interested in hearing
an answer, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Um, yeah, I, I guess I was
hoping to get an answer.
Um
Uh, you know,
We, we've, uh,
You know, we, we've opened this
up in a really significant way,
and I'm glad we're working on
this.
But
I don't see all the safeguards I
was hoping to see in this book.
So, thank you, man.
Uh, Speaker Martinez.
Will the Du pass and 357 is a
month.
Are there other, is there other
discussion on
OK, we have a Du pass motion on
um.
Senate Bill 357 by Speaker
Martinez, um, second.
Uh, leader Sapansky.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavez, yes,
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez. Yes.
Representative McQueen. No.
Representative Reed, yes.
Peter Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair,
and I'm sure you have a do pass
on Cine Bill 357 as amended.
All right, that concludes our
agenda for the evening, um, we
are adjourned.
The
Sure.
