Attempted murder penalty senator
my estus.
Thank you madame chair thank you
honourable members in senate
build ninety six deals with the
homicide statute.
And
up and this this committee in
this chamber is familiar with
this proposal it's been
introduced at least four times.
My up.
I've been co sponsorer several
times with them with
representative ream this past
the the house in two thousand
and eighteen sixty six zero.
Passed the house in twenty
twenty sixty six zero and it
increases the maximum possible
prison sentence.
On a murder from fifteen years
to eighteen years as you all
know first to be murder is
thirty years manatory secondary
murder which most of the first
degree allegations are plead to
is only fifteen years it shocks
the conscience of the families
there's other crimes trafficking
arm robbery where they're no
physical injury a kidnapping
with no physical injury is
eighteen years.
So murder up.
You know to be assisted in a
class by its up in terms of
crimes because you can't go back
so anyway it raises the maximum
penalty manager from fifteen to
eighteen and also because the
murder statute is distinct from
the rest of the criminal code
and attempt as you know ghost a
degree lower so attempted
secondary murder drops all the
way down to three years.
So we want to credit third
degree special penalty nine
years for attempted murder.
And with that will stand for
questions.
Thank you before we come back to
the committee.
I'll go to the audience those in
the audience wishing to speak an
opposition to senate bill ninety
six please stand up.
Public defender power.
The.
In the mexican legislature is we
go from winter into spring we
come back to the house judiciary
committee and talk about
sentencing
and
survives and I offer on the same
side of these kinds of issues
one we're you're just honest
disagreement about I think this
particular enhancement in the
fact that it would have.
I think we enhanced sentences in
different ways of sentencing
structure really doesn't make
sense anymore
raising the penalty here is not
going to be to fewer second free
murders I think we're all
especially concerned about the
attempted second degree murder
which is often charged as
something else agreed to solve
the daily weapon agreed battery
together weapon was
he answered who punished the
same conduct so as a public
defender
i'm asking that I can eat
consider i'm not passing this
bill thank you thank you
then only.
Now I will send him a staff.
This is what the public depender
there is no evidence.
Make the party feel like we're
acting in public safety but the
reality is that it does not have
an important
to me all the their more
creative and effective
solutions.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak
position to the bill in the
audience wishing to speak an
opposition i'm going to go now
online I see one hand grays
wishing to speak an opposition
diane cash.
Good afternoon good good morning
we are living in the most
incarcerated state and the most
incarcerated country of the
world we are getting something
wrong there's no evidence that
raising the sentence per second
agreement murder would have any
effect to increase public safety
it's also highly unlikely to
function as a deterrent for this
type of crime if an active we
would be putting three years of
someone's life and the lives of
their families on the line for
no demonstrable purpose except
perhaps to get political
credibility in an election
you're when people are clamoring
for action taking action that is
unlikely to have the desire
effect just seems wrong we need
it some point to start looking
at things that actually will
make community saper could our
considerable intelligence
creativity and desire for a
better world into those efforts
and most are very concerned with
the cost we could provide two
thousand a month of housing to a
family for at least four and a
half years for what it would
have cost to incarcerate someone
and the new mexico prison system
for three years please vote no
one this unnecessary piece of
legislation thank you so much I
think you diane anyone else
online wishing to speak an
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
The.
Okay I don't see any hands
raised now let's go to the
audience those wishing to speak
and support of the bill please
raise your hand chief and then
jd.
Chairman
mexico police we stand and
support this bill haven't spent
the majority of my career and
criminal investigations and work
in a lot of home sized over
those years I mean will be
commonly see.
In cases you know it's pretty
stephen declined to get first
remerged a lot of cases that
probably really aren't
remurdered but we're able to
charge in that way the
indication dropped the second
you've already heard from the
senator that already has the the
punishment and then a lot of
times what happens is they will
have some sort of suspension or
tweak and so i've had many
mergers that I work for somebody
was convicted the second
remerger and you know five six
years later less than
you know is out that does not
seem like an appropriate
punishment
for a crime of taking another
person intentionally taking
another person's life
so we would ask the support this
also on the attempted yeah I
think that that is out of
culture with a lot of other
things only being three years
and I will keep in mind that I
believe that the statute is
written you know there is still
discretion here there's not a
mandatories here but I think
that the ability to have a
higher students in particular on
the attempted one is is
appropriate so we help you
support this bill thank you
thank you angeli thank you
madame chairman members of the
committee my name is jady
bullington and i'm speaking on
behalf of the greater of a
cookie chamber of commerce this
morning in supporters in a bill
ninety six we employed in the
criminal element in our state
when their art swift and certain
consequences for breaking was.
For prosecutors in particular it
can be very difficult to charge
defendants properly and bring
justice per victims and called
cases where proving first agree
murder is obviously a natural
challenge and while the
punishment should be more severe
when someone takes a life no one
should get off of the slap on
the rest just because they
didn't succeed their attempt of
committing first degree murder
so the chamber supports his
legislation we're to do pass you
representatives reading and then
representative reap
madam chair and I want to move
that you cast on the bill.
They and they're with me for a
moment i'm trying to be
experienced in this but the real
difference between first degree
in second degree is a very thin
lying and has to do with
planning of the murder and the
opportunity to
decide not to go ahead and do
that but i'm a depassing
communicator alright well it
let's hold the dupascous i'll
think you're supposed to talk
and motion at the same time so
i'll come back to you okay
representative reeb and then
represent clean and thank you
madame chair and senator what
i'd like about the attempted
murder is i've had so many cases
throughout my career where for
example a lot of cases were
someone stabbed maybe twenty
times and they don't die and
sell when we would go to
actually charging that
manager and senator I would be
like well to actually easier to
charge aggravated battery
because I don't have to prove
any massive attempt am intent to
get to the attempted murder and
the same penalty and never
really made sense to me they
were just so off kilter as far
as what the punishment was that
you just as jd stated you just
work successful in the murder
and then you get three years and
so I like the enhanced penalty
here I think this fits so much
better when you're actually
prosecuting a case for someone
really definitely was trying to
kill somebody and you're not
just kind of defaulting to the
aggravated battery which is
really a charge it can fit
managed here but it doesn't fit
I mean it does but it doesn't
really should be charging
attempted murder dig that
separating that penalty in
making it a little higher is a
very good thing
and madam sure and senator also
in addition to I mean we all
probably see she loves race
penalties but I you know I think
that the second degree murder I
hear it all the time from
victims they're like fifteen
years is all you get for a
killing somebody in my family
madame chair and center in it is
it is a shocking thing to
explain to a victim and their
family that the life of their
family member is only worth
fifteen years.
And again it's discretionary
doesn't mean they're going to
get the fifteen years i'm so I
i'd like I don't think this is
enhanced penalties I think this
is more of where you have to
balance the safety of the
community and you have to
balance it with actual what is
the right punishment for
committing a crime like this and
we I wouldn't say it's
definitely necessarily a
deterrence madam chair of sender
but I think it's the equitable
punishment we need to look at
what is the equipment punishment
for doing something like one of
these crimes and it has it fit
as far as as long as i've been a
prosecutor so i'd like to spell
I notice that when I talk to you
previously said it passed many
times before there are a lot of
different chambers that I think
this is a very good bill and I
will support this bill
representative mcqueen and then
a representative come
thinking about here mentioned
center masters
is this these are exact same
building pass before.
Yeah.
Ma'am tear senator masters was
the attempted murder part of
that.
Yeah.
In them sure center masses
personally i'm okay with the
increasing the second degree
murder penalty I don't have
problem that i'm concerned about
the attempted murder and I maybe
you could.
Explained me what the specific
intent is required to show
attempted murders like does the
perpetrator have to intend that
the person die
I think
use the freeze definitely was
trying to kill someone.
I mean that's
do you have to show that they
want to kill the person if you
serve someone twenty times
that's one thing if you hit them
with a club or something you
know
are you trying to kill them or
just try to hurt.
Yeah.
So I guess the question then is
manager center masses.
You don't have to show or do you
or do you not have to show in
intent on the part of the
perpetrator that the victim die
thank you matter.
Yeah and here i.
Now i'm still concerned about
the attempted murder provisional
listen to the discussion thank
you manager thank you represent
a welcome
from representative make win
would get to
the
phone to figure out
how to describe attempted
to
how do I stand for the judge and
he attempted to murder this
person there's a take physician
called the good mentally
attempted do it
how do you get to that point
where you could say
this is what i'm charged in
attempted and this is what i've
got.
Yeah.
The.
But through
territory senator what will you
tell me.
It had to be something
physically done in order to
change it and it couldn't be
mental.
I'm listening to debate that
could be charged with the
tempted murder but they could
manage her
thank you anyone else represent
a chase
manager they could senator in
i've set next to you arguing
against enhancement so this is.
Only one comfortable
but I guess I thought
what what concerns me
is that in our committee
analysis it says the bill
proposes to abolish any
distinction and punishment
between attempted first degree
murder and attempted second
degree murder
I thought there was a real
distinction between those crimes
where the first degree murder is
planned out.
And the second degree murder is
in the heater the moment and am
I missing something manager
center.
The.
And and let me just go on with
this it's as courts of generally
recognized a necessary
distinction in the mental states
and therefore the moral
culpability of these crimes
noting the important distinction
between first and second degree
murders.
The.
Would you disagree with that.
They comment
thank you represent anyone over
oh sorry represent him
thank you madame chair senator
where where is new mexico on
sort of attempted
murder in the second degree and
comparison with other states.
The.
Okay thank you senator thank you
thank you represent of anyone
else.
Okay
thank you
thank you senator
i'm also I think just trying to
understand when we see a lot of
these bills on increased penalty
is
i'm sort of lose their sort of
plate as to what we're trying to
do one worth we're looking at it
systematically we've looked at
sort of different statutes we've
never tried to again parallel it
with with the best practice or
an understanding what is the
right amount of punishment
what's the right way to sort of
manage up to the court saying
you now have discretion between
zero and fifteen but you should
have now discretion between zero
and eighteen
I guess i'm just trying to
understand that the outside of
what I understand the motive is
that it shocking the conscience
for those that are
subject to a lower threshold of
penalty what is the impetus for
extending that for longer amount
of time that I guess when we
know there they will be released
or.
Um
after that certain point in time
you know what what do we expect
with that additional years and
an end two with good behavior
etc we know that that could get
go down to so madam chair I
guess what is the value to the
people of new mexico overall
aside from that sort of initial
shock.
To fighting crime.
Representative could you move
the might closer I didn't even
have it on sorry so anyway it's
I think and then also.
You know this body the house of
the city mixed was pride the
most progressive and forward
thinking criminal justice body
in the country what we've
learned is criminal just reform
in other states happens from the
executive.
So it is kind of maybe kind of
tricky but we have to
acknowledge that murder
in addition to rehabilitation
band the box good time
meritorious good time explains
meant.
We're not discounting about
murder there needs to be a
punishment to that person
however they talked about
punishment a lot in this body.
Um but murder fifteen years just
just shocks the conscience and I
think it I think there there's
an up there was a movement to do
it to twenty there was a
movement to put manager a
minimum there was a movement to
take away good time eligibility
this out all that stuff remains
but I believe eighteen years
consistent with those other
crimes is.
Is as good public policy.
Think you haven't chair thank
you senator i.
You know have appreciated
working with you on a lot of the
reform effort and I think as I
continued to sit here when we do
these things peace mail it gets
more and more complicated
similar to what we look at like
with swiss cheese tax perform
you know like we're just
approaching it I think in these
one offs when we're rather than
looking at it holistically and
now i'm thinking what I might
need to prefer sixty days I
think that just the challenge of
wrestling with increased
penalties and expecting a
different result is is I I think
the rub for for not me but not
just me but many of us that
where we're expecting something
different to to come out of it
and
I and I just you know we know
that that's a false positive for
for this body and and for this
effort but never the last save
you know appreciate the debate
and will consider can't consider
it thank you madame chair thank
you representing ream I believe
you want to make a motion yes
I move to do pass is there a
second we have a do pass motion
on senate bill ninety six made
by representative reading second
dead by representative read
would you call the role please
representative
about con
representative chasing.
The.
Representative yes
representatively
speaker martinez representative
mcqueen now and that th.
Representative.
Yes
representative rain.
The.
Madam based here no.
Madame chair yes.
Wants to explain his vote but
you can announce a
vote of five to three we have a
due pass representative thank
you chair manchester center as I
said
i.
I'm on board with increasing
penalty for for second dream
murder.
I just have concerns about the.
The intent
required for attempted murder in
the significance of that pump so
thank you and I believe
representative chance he wants
to explain her vote sure thanks
very much managed her and
senator
I think the piecemeal part of it
is something I i've been
talking to representative
agreement out for a long time it
seemed to me that when the sense
and commission is working on the
redraft of the criminal status
and trying to get things in
line.
They almost had it ready for
this session had we been able to
just put one bill and say these
will have another category
felonies and i'll let the
consolation commission just do
change the status but
that was not advised by the
legislative council service and
so we have to wait till next
sixty day session for that that
those results
I think that would be the time
to do it but I think the good
thing that maybe the most pass
was the
the attempted as a
representative
so because those are really
different crimes and I
understand how the family might
feel that I would feel much
more reassured if we knew this
would prevent but you know and
you've said it's not going to
and
we still need to work on that
but I think we're doing a lot of
things in that regard that
aren't in the housing penalties
so we'll keep working on manager
thank you so much for the time I
am sure I think I think the
hesitation historically was that
if we increased homicides that
would increase everything
but no not thank you as a great
conversation preset the ti.
Okay next up we have our old
friend senator nybert formerly
representative niber
when you have a partner with you
this morning
now we are on senate bill two
thirty.
The.
Hello representative ramiro and
I guess you're gonna be
presenting I guess so many chair
my.
The.
Well we we might just fill in so
many terror this bill is about
access to uhm old health data
what we had heard from folks who
are analyzing data it's really
difficult to access them of the
older data in order for us to be
able to understand some long
term
analysis and how it is that we
can use that to inform future
in information and understanding
so this is right by the
university of new mexico
and it's really on
children's mental health data
and so and children's health
data and right now currently we
can't access that even redacted
information
and what we would be requesting
is is a way to do that through
their spell arm and with me
madam chairs are your senator
neighbor who can fill in for
what he's learned they're at the
senate process they know it was
amended and
also a doctor
and i'm I will let her speak to
her qualification
hello madam chair and members of
the committee my name is hanger
mary and i'm the vice president
of research at university of new
mexico health science.
Thank you madame chair and
committee.
As madam by star said it's an
aggregation of data that can be
used and research nothing is
attributed to an individual and
it will allow the university and
other health organizations to
utilize the research to help us
deal with some issues that we
see in society and and so it's
it's needed to have this waiver
so they can use the data uh for
research without it they've.
All right let's go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised
those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand
I don't see any hands raise
those wishing to speak and
support the bill police raise
your hand down.
Thank you matter members of the
committee for as far like to
think the sponsors were bringing
this legislation that's an issue
that's come off.
Two issues on our guard reals
industrial that are proficient
sufficient to
contact personal information.
How to go to one of the and
there is also on our process
institutional process which is.
So there are some constraints on
the
second represent
early of counties working very
close ever since mexico hospital
and hoc.
Uh to grow back there um
program.
Now
providing help to help.
This is a very good thing the
future a lot.
Update and can I clarify are you
i'm speaking on behalf of the
county bernaldio county.
Anyone else.
University in the much hospital
okay thank you
anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in support
mobile bill.
Anyone on mine wishing to speak
and support them.
This is in support I don't see
any hands raised okay back to
the
responses will stand for
questions venture very good
anyone representative
thank you manager memchair.
So the
sea of the analysis apparently
says is concerned that the
confidential there's no
provision in bill to anonymise
the confidential information I
see the language that
it's subject to hipper.
But what's if you have a bunch
of information that is
confidential and you're gonna
turn it over.
What's the process for.
Taking out the the.
Ability to track it back to an
individual
madam chair and and represent my
green over on page four of the
bill on its similar language
later on because there's two h.
Page four lines twenty five page
six sir lines wanted to the
issue of aggregation of data is
in the federal
statutes as well as in the
regulations
and so you cannot utilize data
that is attributed to anyone
individual it has to be
aggregated and that's by virgin
federal laws as well as the
regulations and on the house or
on the senate floor yesterday
as a request by uh senator.
So deal opens we amended it on
the floor to
provide.
That the regular federal federal
regulations are likewise
inserted into
the bill specifically on page
five line two after the word
legislation and so there's
reference to federal regulations
and then the protocols that
exist within UNM hospital it
goes to an institutional review
board and that is the safeguard
to make sure that data does not
get a tribute.
Membership center neighbor
so
the data is released to
the hospital in the hospitals
the one that
cleans it up at.
Madam share and represent my
queen
as I understand it the date is
collected by the hospital.
The data goes to or the process
goes to a review board and then
the the researchers.
Within the hospital or elsewhere
you get to use that item doctor
racy may be able to explain the
practicalities of how that works
but that's my understanding
madame chairman represented my
queen senator neighborhood is
correct so data is collected
that you on m hospital asports
of the standards of care for our
patience when they being seen
when there is a request for a
research it goes through the
irbeam institutional review
board which for us for the logic
relations from human and health
services office of human
protection offers as part of
that there is an honest broker
involved that would deal
identify the data before it
turns into the researchers so
nobody would know who are
these patients off.
And these are all outlined in
their protocol and it gets
approval by the committee.
Okay thank you manager thank you
anyone else.
Thank you madame chair
representative doctor senator
i've been waiting for this
moment for a long time
and I have a lot of questions
for you
please not to
know just getting
no I I don't I don't have
anything and charity okay all
right well we had to rasm a
little and
so I I have a one question and
i'll take a most represent
offering
for let me visualize as you
collect data and
you use it for your own research
others may want access and who
would those others be
universities
give me some examples so
managed her and the committees
so the the
behave been collecting data sort
of a standard of care I guess
i've been serious so now if we
have an idea and you want to do
a research and look at the data
that has already been existed
protocol is return goes to ire
before review and as part of
that protocol there has to an
explanation as how data is the
identified or an honest broker
and then turned the into me to
do the recently but I thought I
heard in the presentation that
this allows you to share data
with other entities am I correct
in that if for example
department of health would like
to have some of these data or my
colleagues and I know they're
institutions that would be part
of the protocol and it would be
data use agreement to share the
identified data and is that
process also reviewed by the I r
absolutely kind of hip or
privacy and item security
yeah okay very good
representative ring.
Thank you madame chair but I do
think we should spend a lot of
time with the senator now
I move a due pass on a bill to
thirtieth submitted okay we ever
do house seconded by represent
of henry so we ever do pass
motion and senate bill two
thirty as amended me by
representative ream seconded by
representative henbry.
Would you call the role please
representative of
con
representative chasing
representative
yes.
Representatively speaker martin
reluctantly yes
yes represented every yes
representative rain.
The.
Representatives of penske.
Madam place chair
madame chair yes.
And senate bill two thirty as a
minute you have a due pass
unfortunately I wish we had an
excuse to table your bill
questions for the floor thank
you madame pleasure being back
in the committee.
Is senate bill two seventy one
and I thought I saw senator ivy
sodo here.
Yeah.
Senator ivy sodo
senate bill two seventy one.
Appreciate very much the
opportunity to be here this
morning senator sarranta said
regrets wasn't able to be here
to present the bill
that about two seventy one
is a bill that deals with fellow
me offenders
and it is a bill that does not
address.
The instant case ie about the
most recent
this is the bill that it
addresses the fact that when
somebody commits multiple fellow
cases they are uh the subsequent
cases they're violating
conditions of release from their
from their previous cases
and and so what this bill does
and
as well as.
Last time I see her I was.
So this one is nine lines
that what this bill does is that
it it has.
Are it is all it does it simply
says that the person when they
get arrested for a subsequent
felony.
They stay in custody until the
judges on the previous cases
have an opportunity to review
conditions
it does display the nad say what
the judges are to do
it does not suggest
anything at all it does not
micromanage what the judges are
to
what the judges are to the site
it meetly says staying custody
until the other judges have an
opportunity to review your
conditions of release and it is
invites the supreme court the
right rules in order to flush
this out further
and with that matter chair
members of.
Thank you center are just a one
point clarification on your last
spill it wasn't just the length
it was the multiple topics and
other complexities associated
with them just to clarify
where it were good with length
but also not some other things
so let's move to the audience
those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill police
raise your hand.
Nesa
welcome
timings not good there nasa
anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in the in
opposition to the bill.
Okay I don't see anyone in the
audience anyone online wishing
to speak an opposition don't see
anyone those in the audience
wishing to speak and support of
the bill okay chief and then jd
and then challenge child.
Where you give you the community
chief messages
haven't reviewed and be inquired
familiar with the majority of
the public safety legislation
the session I will say you can
build this bill is maybe the
shortest definitely the shortest
person in the right so
the potential most impact
it specifically deals with those
individuals that I think we all
believe or frustrating both the
public and law enforcement
because they repeatedly get
arrested at any cases get out
and commit other offenses and
personally overseen the
enforcement i'm not repeated
into program
a lot of those programs in the
metro area I can tell you from
experience that
a lot of those the things we
arrest over in overnover and
pile of cases on
because they're continually let
out and so we think that's this
this bill definitely gives the
court systems a little more
flexibility and tools to help
the keep so those in those
things by bars we think it'll
death but definitely positive
impact on public safety so we
urge you to support it thank you
thank you j.
Thank you madame chair members
the committee my name is jd
bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater album cookie chamber
commerce and i'm also going to
make a personal comment about
this legislation as a citizen of
resident of new mexico.
There's a very good reason why
there's no opposition to the
spell it's obviously
constitutional it's very simple
and it is an internal procedural
change within our existing court
system that doesn't straight to
all the other complex areas that
you've reference mad at madame
chair if a person.
Commits a felony while they are
unconditions of pre traveling
this bill simply says that the
chief clark of court.
Notifies the detention facility.
That you've got a person who
just committed to felony while
there and release that person
should be held until the judges
who were involved in in the
previous cases how the chance to
review the situation and
determine if they need to make
modifications or ravocations of
the conditions of release that's
it and that's why the chamber of
commerce supports a spell I want
to tell you why I support this
bill is the citizen my parents
did an outcome to mexico since
nineteen seventy seven i've been
a lobbyist for twenty seven
years i've heard like the chief
said we've heard bill after bill
after bill trying to deal with
this problem and they always run
into different problems were
various reasons but as the chief
said here you've got a
potentially
game changing piece of
legislation in front of you back
and finally do something to
address this problem that every
citizen in this state is deeply
concerned about I am personally
asking you to support this
legislation I had a chance to
talk to senator ivy solo about
it on a lot of talking another
subject and i'm convinced I hope
this bill wins the secretariat
award I think this is a resource
of a build it's coming around
the turn and I hope it gets
across the finished line thank
you thanks judy anyone online
wishing to speak oh i'm sorry
chair members of the committee
the new mexico chamber of
commerce the state chamber
supports this we believe this
all dresses problem around
pretend from others today
without trading constitutional
questions in our annual voter
full survey that we release in
the last few weeks your mexican
share that they're least
satisfied with crime and public
safety in the state with
satisfaction at twenty one
percent we are due to continue
to take stuffs like these
increased public save do you
think
thank you to online now those
online wishing to speak and
support of this bill please
raise your hand I see carlos on
turkey and larry son tech so
we'll start record.
Carlo
came out of chair members of the
committee on carlos santa
president ceo of the new mexico
business coalition individuals
and business owners have been
banging for help with the are
control crime in our state and
this is one very good solution
we stand in strong support and
we hope that you'll do whatever
you can to get this over the
finished line into the governor
thank you very much for your
consideration
thank you
larry santa.
The.
Larry.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee i'm
speaking as a retired obligative
police officer and an air force
veteran and a concern citizen
that deals with the crime that
we have in our state I
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this bill and state
representative bill ream said
it.
I think probably better than I
can say it I fully I hope that
this committee fully supports
its bill thank you thank you I
there concludes our public
comment.
Thank you ma'am chair and
senator.
Just a few comments.
Not to rehash the old bill but
this is three three line title
just as the other bill
which to be clear length is not
the problem it's a weather or
not i'm going to find any
surprises embedded in the bill I
don't think i'm going to find
any in this one.
I made a chair senator I think
this is a good building
I think it testimony to your
hard work senator as well as
your co sponsorer and kudos to
the governor's office to for
working so hard and diligently
on this issue
i've been a member of this body
for ten years and for ten years
I think we've really worked
hard to improve our public
safety laws
remaining you know being
committed to this concept of of
being smart on crime.
We have pushed back on ideas
that I think this committee has
failed miss the mark are the
reality is that some of the
stuff is good
you know headline grabbing type
of legislation
that meant necessarily get us
where we need to get in terms of
public safety this legislature
with the past couple years
certainly
has made tremendous financial
investments in programs that do
work violence prevention
programs for example that or
making all the difference in my
home town
as well as making investments in
our long enforcement agencies
for equipment for recruitment
for retention of officers
this is another
another piece of that puzzle
you'll crime was a problem
before the constitutional
amendment to when bell bonds in
new mexico and the crime
continued to be a problem
but there's a misconception that
just repulling that session the
constitution is going to fix
everything well that's not
what's going to happen right we
know that anyone who is serious
anyone who is serious about this
issue knows that
you know i've said it time in
time again
there's no silver bullet to fix
what's happening we've got
generations of divestment we've
got a generations of
just lack of adequate reserves
resources and support for people
and families
with the bill before as madam
chair and senator I think is
another good tool and I think it
is narrowly tailored for those
folks who should be held.
While awaiting trial that madam
chair is
part of what makes me
comfortable voting for this and
supporting this
in addition to
the context that it's in right
if you look at this bill in the
context of this legislative
session we've done quite a bit.
With the budget we concurred
with yesterday I got to do as
good a look at that budget
there's a lot of good work in
there to improve public safety
so I will happily vote for this
bill and and I can't wait to get
it down to the floor
and get it up to the governor
this governor is committed to
public safety we know that this
house is committed to public
safety we know that and the
senate is committed to public
safety we know that thank you
senator for being in this
forward
thank you we now have
representative reeb and then
queen thank you madame chair and
senator.
I know we talked about this in
the interim I believe and so I
was kind of happy to see this in
the issue being I don't know if
you remember in ccj when just a
spake and was in and we were
discussing the issues with these
repeat offenders just kind of
coming in and out and I know my
concern was always when they had
a a felony and they were out and
conditions of release and then
they violated those conditions
of release back in the old days
madam chair center it used to be
where you could just be in a
request the judge to you know
deal warrant and hold the the
person in jail immediately and
it kind of evolved away from
that you know as this time went
on and I know that lease the
judges and my jurisdiction want
to hearing on a review of
conditions of release for a new
violation or a new crime madam
chair and senator so what would
happen or what continues to
happen in the different
jurisdictions that I practice in
as you filed the motion to
review conditions of release
based on a new crime and then it
sits on the judge's calendar and
it never never gets sat
basically so the matter time you
actually get into a hearing
because under the statute if I
remember if they're in custody
of five days I think to actually
have a hearing as that correct
madam chair and representative
brief under a rule five four of
three I believe it's five days
yes better it was a reasonable
time I believe if um they
weren't in custody so it kind of
put.
Everybody had a disadvantage
when they were you know rested
on a new charge and under the
new pretrial release rules they
would get out and then you'd
have your motion to review
conditions of release for
picking up a new charge still
pending in the meantime that
individual goes out commits
another twenty burglaries by the
time you can actually get from
the judge and I know my concern
manager and senator snow there
was no time limit on when the
court needed to hear that motion
and so if I read this correctly
this will just be an automatic
notification to the judge madame
chair senator in the judge will
do a no bond hold and then is
there a time limit though were
the judge would have to actually
hear it so we don't have
defendants lingering you know
custody for two weeks without a
hearing I didn't see or is that
something to be set later chairs
center manager and
representative so what are the
things about reading this bill
was trying to be very cognitive
about separation powers
and
this bill is the predicate.
But it does not micro manage the
court stock
that's all handled through
spring court rule.
And that's also why in section
two of the bell we invite the
spring court to to issue rules
to fell out parts of this okay
we so that for example this is
written in such a way that it
says that each judge assigned to
enter the person's pending
felony
cases or another judge signed
for that purpose because again
we understand that there are
protempt judges that get
assigned or in a big
jurisdiction they might have a
single judge assigned to review.
Violations of conditions of
release we didn't want to
micromanage that
okay considers modification
rather case of the person's
conditions of release that metal
share representative read my
preference is an impersonal
hearing
but we don't put that in the but
because that's for the court to
determine their own docket plus
the other thing is if if
somebody from clovis is pending
a felony charge and then they
get arrested and albuquerque
it might entail them either
video hearing or a paper review.
Of the conditions of relief and
we need to allow for that
flexibility and and we need to
allow the supreme court to issue
rules that fill in all of those
details.
But regardless of how it happens
that personally sustained
custody until the judge does
that review whether it's a paper
review of video hearing or in
person hearing but they'll be
able to do that review and at
the very least the judge will be
aware that the person violated
conditions of release.
Before the person gets out I
believe most of these here ins
will take place with them one to
three days.
Okay madam chair center I I
believe they probably would too
of their custody and judges tend
to move a lot faster on this I I
like this I think this is a a
way that we can stop the
revolving door of you know
criminals just getting in and
then out and before they get in
front of the court it's just
kind of common sense approach
and I know we've talked about
this before and I actually liked
this approach to it and I think
this is a maybe a good way to
handle the problem that we're
having we could see a huge
impact from their cell it will
support this for sure thank you
madame chair etcetera
represent my queen
thank you ma'am chair mentioner
center so just looking at the
path of this bill it looks like
there was a wording change in
health and public affairs and
then it went to jisury and you
changed it back and I wonder if
you could just explain the
difference in the world
certainly at manchester and
represent the que actually we
didn't change it back we did a
complete committee so what it
went to state judiciary and what
happened was the bill when it
was originally written.
Was first of all heading mercy
clause we removed the mercy
clause in order to give the
spring what time to issue rules
so that this wouldn't while on
the one hand we feel like this
is.
Uh justified to have an
emergency class to put on it on
the other hand we want to make
sure that the court has an
opportunity to issue rules so
that this goes in with them in
an orderly fashioned within the
correct system
the second thing that a chair
represent the queen is that when
this bill was originally written
it directed the court clerk.
To notify the detention center
that was the word we're changing
in ****.
Um to
to put a hold on the person
really that's not the
responsibility the part clark is
really not for us to tell the
court for what to do so the way
that this is written here is
simply says wind what becomes
aware the court will
issue an order for the person to
remain in custody.
How that happens.
Is up to the court internally to
determine who wishes the warrant
or or how that order takes place
as opposed to us determining who
within the court system does
that so that's why we do the
committee south medicare.
Think manager
reprison of remarkable thinking
many chair thank you senator
mike concern is just online page
one night line twenty two.
Um and I think this is where i'm
concerned is to what the courts
can now do
when we look at line twenty two
they have to issue the order for
that person.
Do you they have the power right
now madam chair senator to make
that determination.
Manager made russia they they
they have the power to do on a
functional basis what's
happening right now is everybody
is focused on the new case and
so as representative read was
making reference to when someone
gets let's say let's say I
might.
Might think my stick is to.
Okay
and so i'm pending three
different rights residential
burglaries I get picked up on my
fourth one when I get when I get
arrested for it
I guess i'm not very good at it
the
everybody's focused on the
department
and so and so I get processed on
the new charge.
And before anybody is able to
really while any motions before
the court or or for the other
judges to become aware that that
i've been picked up and charged
already been released on the
charge and i've been released on
the the risk of being released
on the charge is because on the
new charge and I really want to
go back to the speaker sports
that he said at the beginning of
this discussion because I want
to firm.
The constitutional provision
that we have I think we have
right with the constitution is
briefly as we can we have to get
to the floor yes ma'am i'm on
the on the new charge the judge
the judge can't hold the person
on the new charge unless the day
files emotion.
And even if the day fast motion.
The analysis for the judge on
the new charge is is the person
a danger to themselves or others
or are there flight rights what
they're doing residential
burgers will not be at home
there arguably not not a rest of
others
not a rest myself and right a
flight risk as i'm hay unrounded
committee other felonies so that
on the new charge the judge has
no choice but to release me even
if emotional.
But on the earlier charges.
I violated their conditions of
release by committing craps
that doesn't require under the
constitution.
For the judge to wait for
emotion from the prospect
we're focused on here and that
is what that's what's been
missed in the process is the
problem is the person gets
released on the new charge
before the judges on the
previous charges have an
opportunity to review those
conditions of release and e.
So madame terr senator if i'm
hearing you clearly the way in
which were fixing this problem
is not to fix the process but to
just make a determination
without fixing the process is
that correct madame chair
senator lancher made by sure
actually no it's it is by fixing
a whole in the process of
ensuring that before that first
gets released the judges from
the upstream cases are aware
that the person has violated
their conditions of release and
give those judges and
opportunity to review the
conditions but that's not what
this bill does madam chair
senator with all to respect this
is just telling the court that
they have to issue the order
regardless of any of the concern
previous whatever felony it may
be whether their repeat offender
etc we're just saying that if
they're arrested for a
subsequent felony rather than
fix the process to inform the
courts of what has happened were
just now forcing the courts to
issue the order without that
reflection without that time to
actually understand why this
this person has come in and so
we're we're essentially with
this instead of going back and
saying there are problems with
how it is that we're looking at
data when someone comes before
the court where we're just
making the determination without
that assessment so that we're
just holding people i'm
indeterminately manager senator
or we don't know how long until
they get their next hearing is
that correct about insurer
senator better check represent
remember that that's incorrect
we're not holding them in the
first were holding them only
until the judges in the upstream
case review the conditions of
release and that review of
conditions of release if they're
uncustody under court rules has
to happen within five days that
is not an indeterminated period
of time.
So many chair.
Senator.
What i'm understand from the
assessment however when we're
making that determination some
of these detentions may be
unnecessary as from the from
what we've read from the aoc is
to again when we're making the
court forcing the courts to make
a determination before that
assessment is a not true from
the from what i've read from
their from the analysis
that we may be holding folks
unnecessarily it that is that
going to happen could it happen
madam chair senator not matter
which have been by sure I don't
I don't believe that will happen
at all.
Okay so madam chair senator when
we're looking at the assessment
it's saying that
while we're looking at
unnecessarily potentially
detaining individuals who pose
no risk to community preventing
release of individuals who are
going on to commit a serious
crime during that free trial
period we don't quite know how
to balance these two priorities
right now and rarely.
Madam chair senator do we
understand that there are folks
that are committing crimes
within this this these two time
frames so can we speak to
potentially any of the data
that's informing who are these
folks that are in this cycle of
continued repeat offence that
requires that holds that we're
asking of the courts madam chair
senator certain metal chair and
man investor so these these raw
people who have been given an
order from a judge not to commit
more crimes not to buy a little
law and not to get arrested.
The.
Now they're presumed innocent of
the new of the new charge but
they got arrested
there were some place something
happened and caused them to get
arrested
and that is something that
causes that should cause those
conditions of release to be
reviewed and this is only for
felony cases
manager senator so we have made
a distinction in this committee
numerous times between violent
fellows and non violent phones
and now we're putting them both
in the same category with this
provision as that not correct
mountain senator
may i'm sure and matter this the
streets all people who commit a
crime who get arrested for a
crime that is in the category of
felony the same that is correct
because all of those.
Have been elevated by this
legislature to the level of
felony and the person was told.
That you are on conditional
liberty on the condition that
you'll not commit anymore crimes
while you're first case.
So madam chair senator rather
than allow the courts to make
that determination we are making
it for them is is the way this
bell reads as that correct
matter by lumping that by
limping all found together
whether they be violent or non
violent is that right madam
chairman and advise your we're
simply saying you have to review
the conditions of release we're
not telling the judge what they
need to do.
Madam chair senator on page one
lines twenty two and twenty
three the court shall issue an
order for the person to remain
and custody for that subsequent
felony whether it's violent or
non violent regardless of
conviction we're saying the
charge was a felony and now you
have to hold them is that
correct madam chair senator and
madame chairman of my sure they
shall remain in custody until
each judge
considers modification or
ravication of that person's
conditions of release are there
to do a consider can I have to
do anything.
And as per or constitution madam
chair senator how long are they
meant to remain in custody until
that determination made don't
matter chair matter vice chair
pursuant to the current court
rules no more than five days
and manager senator do we know
that those rules are being
followed matter chairman of ice
chair those rules are being
followed and those rules aren't
being followed then there's
recourse currently right now in
the in the ports by doing out
right of the protecting control.
Manager senator I think just
because we've had we received
this bill eleven pm I think it
was a signed to our committee
and we don't have any analysis
from our current folks here and
I understand to that the bill
was presentedly in the session.
So we don't have a ton of info
and in a particular the fact
that the courts aren't here to
speak on the bill also gives me
pause since they'll inherit this
decision making process that we
deny include them and manage
your senator
i'm concerned that this is also
one constitutional we're looking
at pre child attention
with with how this process works
and what we're asking these this
order to be in particular
between balance violent felons
and non violent balance and now
treating them all the same and
by order of the court they have
to now be subject to this
that being said madam chair
senator I don't know if I can
support it I I just
this is this is extremely
challenging for me to understand
how this is going to work
managers.
Thank you we have representative
elcon and then represent of him
bree
thank you madame chair I just
I guess understand how he's
going to work but then we're
just telling where here a clerk
or somebody that works for the
court is going to be
determination.
There is going to hold this
defendant in jail is tech
madam chair and we're all going
the way this is written dust
shortly because we don't mean
that
we've been we've been informed
for the spring court that they
that with the spot passing them
before the ninety days from the
session has finished that they
will plan to roll out some rules
that will be consistent with
this bell that will that will
flush out how this process will
work within the port system.
And that will be complementary
to this station.
Still basically just right back
to a clerk is going to determine
this medium care that's great
pretty bait number one
employee and employee at the
court is going to make a
determination estimate whether
this dependent has another that
will be pending and that will
determine this dependent will be
held in jail metal chair
representative in order to sign
by a judge
but that'll be okay that's
number one number two problem
that I do have
is a separation of powers where
different legislature have the
right to tell the court what
they shall do.
In this will and I think
representatives were barely my
life tear hit over and over on
you are telling the court that
they shall do this
the legislature sitting here in
judge I don't care what you
think you're going to do or do
we do the separation here matter
share and representative on if
we were to pre determine what
the court would do when they
review the conditions of release
we would be intruding upon a
separation powers.
By simply indicating that they
will hold a hearing we're not
intruding upon separation powers
consider for example with an
election lot we all the time
tell them you'll hold a hearing
within five days that's not
intruded on separation powers.
You should issue monetary you
have issue in order.
For the president to remain in
custody thank you just down that
this is what you're going to
judge I don't care what you
think you can do this because
the legislature deemed that this
is your duty.
That correct manager and
representative like we indicate
that that win.
Somebody domesticates a warrant
we say you shall issue the
warrant
that's inspection
there's a variety of places
where where we tell ports
procedural issues of what we of
what they do as long as we don't
intrude upon the analytical side
of what it does that judging
aspect of what what does then we
don't intrude upon only thank
you
madame care just a short d I
mean
it seems like we have this but
the madame chair that the judges
are going to be able to hold a
hearing quickly
and
I don't know the considering the
way the judges dockets are I
don't think the judges have time
to just drop where they doing in
the
got that we did.
As it and they're gonna set up
a month in advance and they got
recommended through the seller
hearing into the middle of their
day that's going to happen
matcher or several sometimes
that does have to happen but
also this is written in such a
way that they don't have to hold
a hearing they could simply do a
despera.
Mm
I know we need this but I don't
know if this is the road we need
to follow thank you manager
thank you representative hembry
thank you madame chair senator
thank you I
I just too and I have a couple
concerns and I think you get
that you can address
and again on page one line
twenty two it's as a court shall
issue an order and I think you
said yes that's going to be a
judge correct
okay thank you and and madam
chair so
senator we have a
defender who has committed a
felony is out on release commits
another felony is caught that
felony is assigned to a
different judge from the first
one
so which judge.
As
shall issue an order
to keep that person in
custody would it be the is that
the new judge which has has been
assigned to the new felony.
Not matter chairworks and have
no idea they be the previous the
previous judge great new judge
can only consider based on the
constitutional provisions.
Right the previous judge however
we're talking about contempt of
that judge's orders that's a
different standard okay that and
that that was the concern I had
if it was the new judge that
seems like it would be contrary
to the
constitution what article to
section thirteen I agree okay
that that was kind of my concern
and so
and then also
and then it's the sorry madam
chair senator the last thing is.
There.
It's it's.
Remaining in custody until
the
judge has a top time to review
the conditions of release but
it's that judge or another judge
assigned to that so at that
judges on they cation or
something like that another
judge could be assigned to
handle
and make that determination is
that in my reading that
correctly and i'm sure
representative that is correct
or if that judges in a three
week trial.
Okay could have another judge
reviewing on their back okay
thank you senator thank you
madam chair
representative ream
thank you madame chair
madame chair and senator minute
tried it condensed this so that
it's easy to understand and see
if this is the way I understand
it.
So a person is arrested for a
felony they must be arranged
that's constitutional provision
when they come to that rain
there's a
a
the court has looked at his
previous criminal history they
noticed that he's currently out
or on conditions of release what
they're saying is ok.
Let's have the judge who
originally released him.
Look at this case and look at
the new one.
And the.
The judges and disrecord on a uh
revolving schedule to go ahead
and do a arrangements and so
we're going to go back to the
original judge and he's going to
handle that arrangement is that
kind of how you
envisioned.
Preferably yesterday now we have
the floor coming
and I don't mean to be rude but
we really do this bill came to
us at about eleven o'clock last
night so we need to be brief in
our answers so that we.
And
men of chair and representative
what I remember over the interim
at courts and corrections is
just as bacon was present and
she supported this concept
yes or no i'm sure
representative yes thank you
madame chair.
Do we have a motion
madame chair I moved seven
judiciary committee substitute
for senate bills to seventy one
do pass second
we have emotion for a due pass
on senate judiciary committee
substitute for senate bill
two seventy one made by
representative ream seconded by
speaker martinez would you call
the role please representative
all corn.
Representative chasing
representative andrea yes
representative lane speaker yes.
Representative macquaine yes
representative read yes
representative mean
representative sapansky madam by
share no
matter no.
I bought seven to two we have.
Two pounds on committee
substitute for senate l two
seventy one
thank you that concludes our
agenda for today
we are now adjourned better.
