Representative Rehm.
Representative Penske.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair yet here madam chair
you have a quorum.
You.
First item first item on our
agenda is house bill two
eighteen.
As amended and I believe there's
committees of the concert will
be
posing.
Okay the floor is yours
Representative thank you madam
chair members of the committee
and I'm here to present possible
to eighteen of the bill will
allow our fixed income an
elderly and elderly members of
our community to be able to pay
their utility bills without the
onerous burden of red tape that
current programs impose while
many of our elderly in fixed
income folks are.
Able to use computers and
navigate that red tape many are
not just a yesterday a friend
told me about having to help her
mother was having a hard time
uploading some a COVID tester in
for for her international travel
she was really really frustrated
and overwhelmed by the.
The hurdles that she had to
navigate online and she would
not be able to do it without her
daughter's help at that moment
serve this bill it is designed
to help people like my friends
mom maintain their dignity their
self sufficiency by creating an
assistance program that's easy
and user friendly to navigate
for everyone the bill also
recognizes that each utility is
unique it allows each utility to
set their own low income
assistance right and get each co
op the flexibility to create
their own programs if they
aren't able to offer these
discounted rates for their
elderly in fixed income
customers.
It's really important to note
here that New Mexico already
offers discounted rates to
attract businesses like Intel
Intel and Facebook to our state
we can offer these easily access
it access discounted rates to
make a businesses we can surely
offered this kind of program to
are most vulnerable madam chair
we do have a committee set up.
Could you read the can I number
please yes madam chair it's two
two five four zero six point
four thank you is there a motion
to entertain the.
Yes okay.
Motion by I.
All right perceived to me talk
about the of the committees of
yes madam chair of the committee
the committee seven incorporates
changes that were requested by
consumer advocates S. PS and
rural co ops in section four we
have new material that creates
more options for rural
electrical cooperatives each
cooperative is different they
have different demographics and
they requested that we give them
some alternatives to the low
income right so we have done
that they made some suggestions
that's in the bill now you'll
see some of the options that
they can embark on to lower the
energy burden for their
customers or they can do a low
income right a section to
section please give me allows
I used to wait to file their low
income rate proposal with their
next rate case as long as they
filed by twenty twenty five this
is a request from an I. O. U.
they didn't want to have to file
a low income right next year
only to be followed by a rate
case the year following that's a
reasonable reasonable request in
the committees of reflects that
you can either do an up front
low income rate for an inclusion
in upcoming rate basis a section
two part C. of this committee
said maintains the amendment
that was put into the original
bill at in in the previous
committee to ensure that public
notices given and that the
public has the opportunity to
participate in the development
of right proposal proposals by
the utilities
it's always been our intention
we're happy to clarify it in
this substitute lastly
throughout section two we
clarified that rates must be
just and reasonable that the PRC
maintains the authority to
either approve the rates
proposed or to a set just and
reasonable rates that they may
differ from what the utilities
proposed and that's the
traditional way that rates are
made and so we just wanted to
clarify that the PRC.
Has that ability to the final
authority on lowincome rates
just as they do on this and
madam chair members of the
committee I have two expert
witnesses we have Gabriel this
presenting from the UNM law
school and Joe was seen from New
Mexico gas company and with that
we stand for questions okay so
just to be clear the two to five
numbers two two five four zero
six point four to the point four
version point four version okay
great.
Okay very good before we go to
the committee I'd like to go to
the audience so we're going to
limit for public comment to
fifteen minutes on each side
Mr short four as we get closer
to the session so the me fifteen
minutes each side and will start
and no more than two minutes per
person.
All right and Austin is our one
of our Canadian assistance is
getting a mic for you to you all
to speak into so give us a
second.
Right.
So those wishing to oppose this
bill please raise your hand
Rico.
To start okay
Madam chairwoman and Committee
Rico Gonzales with a Paso
electric
then this bill
it's a bill that I wish I could
be going along with it because
it it it takes care of a lot of
issues for utilities I'd I'd
definitely give it that and I
haven't seen this up so I don't
know how much of it has has
helped with the PRC in their in
their right making pieces but
for our customers we're opposing
this bill and I'll pass
electric.
about fifty percent of our
customers are at two hundred
percent above the poverty level
or below
and residential rates is up is
fifty percent of our sales
inside of el Paso electric so it
is just from from the numbers of
two hundred percent above the
poverty rate in the bill it's
just a really big onerous piece
for for our customers we think
at at some point of course is
nothing in the bill that says
that we have to do any program
which I love that's fantastic
but
but it at the levels of of our
revenues and our customers it's
something that that that were
opposing I did put together a
memo that that has some language
that EP with love to see inside
the the discrimination portion
of the of the statute just a
line allowing us to have low
income rates we haven't been
able to have lowincome range
from I think nineteen eighty
four let utilities do what we do
let us work with our communities
we have
smart meters coming into out of
Paso electric territory we would
love to work with our community
in figuring out what would be
the best rates for our community
from that and so I think it pry
went over two minutes madam
chair with thank you very go.
All right next person wishing to
speak in opposition.
I madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business and we have a scenic
Committee sub so just making my
comments off Original Bill we we
do have concerns given the low
income rates and so you know we
understand the ability of the
utilities to recover their costs
and so what that means is that
we're gonna see increase of
rates on residential customers
small businesses and also in our
our industrial base which is
pretty small here in New Mexico
when we look at it from the
small business side the biggest
customer of our larger
businesses are larger industrial
base our small businesses so we
always want to encourage the
development of that so we're
concerned about the potential
for increased rates
on our small businesses and
industrial base as well
and and it sounds like maybe
from the changes it maybe went
from a more mandate to someone
of a more permissive language
that's what we like to see this
balance some of the cost so we
do have concerns about the bill
thank you thank you.
Next to wishing to speak in
opposition.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee Kelly
by heart actually and Pappa
telling market is a registered
lobbyist for New Mexico business
coalition and I just want to
point something out in the FIR
one second.
I'm in the FIR it's it's
referred to the nineteen eighty
four new with New Mexico Supreme
Court case mountain states legal
foundation versus New Mexico SEC
which is says establishing a
telephone discount rate program
which different to differentiate
between economically needy
individuals to receive the same
services and justly
discriminatory we believe that
this home this also hold for
utility companies we appreciate
what the sponsor is doing our
concern is that the right to
going to go to middle class
families that can't afford it
and that's our biggest concern
is the if that utility companies
can guarantee that the rates
would not increase maybe that
would be a different
conversation to have but this
moment we are we oppose thank
you thank you anyone else
wishing to speak in opposition
in the audience.
I don't see anyone else so
online I see two people saying
these were on opposition Leslie
Graham.
Leslie.
Hi this is Leslie Graham can you
hear me yes and this is
opposition to the bill.
Yes that is correct okay great.
Thank you for.
Madam chairman
committee members thank you for
allowing me to speak today my
name is Leslie Graham I'm the
general manager for Ziyen
natural gas company I'm one of
the three regulated gas
utilities in the state of New
Mexico we would consider
ourselves a smaller gas utility
work a little less than a tenth
the size of New Mexico gas the
other gas utility in the state
retirement for gases
approximately a tenth of the
size of the New Mexico we also
would encourage you to oppose
this legislation the low income
rates although at this good
intent creates a discriminatory
cost shifting to other customers
within the utility there are
many other approaches to low
income it's not the best
approach lowincome it does
create piecemeal right making
particularly piece where this
would go into effect January one
of twenty twenty four our does
create an additional burdens for
the utility and is really not
appropriate for small utility
and if I may let me explain
Just some quick numbers because
even trying to identify the
customers who would qualify will
become an interesting challenge
but looking at our service areas
in natural gas service and we
can County we county Colfax
County and in Dona ana county
outside the city limits of Los
crucis three of the four
counties that we operate in the
median income is less than the
two hundred percent poverty
level that means you're gonna be
shifting costs from over fifty
percent of our utility customers
to less than fifty percent of
our other utility customers who
are are other utility customers
their small businesses their
farmers and their schools
this creates some interesting
discriminatory cost shifting in
we work very hard to create
just and reasonable rates for
all of our utilities and apply
them equitably across the board
for all of our customers and so
we really believe that this is
going to end up hurting.
Either people who were to press
thank you miss Graham program
thank you thank you sorry thank
you very a problem Caitlyn Hart.
Okay late afternoon more yes yes
I'm just trying to make myself
good afternoon chairman Chandler
and members of the committee my
name is T. O. R. and the
executive director of lawn over
a coalition our members are
farmers in rural ranchers
comprising over two point five
million acres in their sixteen
different counties we stand
stand in strong opposition to
this bill well in my in the
intent in the effort of the
sponsor we have concerns with
the subsidization that will
occur as a result of this
legislation research the
civically doesn't designed with
all parties and money this bill
removes some of this authority
in places a burden on other rate
classes the agricultural
community currently operates on
razor thin margins already this
will play a significant burden
on already overburdened industry
thank you for the opportunity to
speak today.
Thank you of Leri Sonntag.
Good afternoon madam chairman
and members of the committee
Leri Sonntag and I'm opposing
this bill along with thousands
of New Mexicans who are part of
the better together New Mexico
advocacy network my
understanding your in box it
should be still with over fifty
thousand emails opposing this
legislation soaring inflation
and rising energy prices are
taking a heavy toll on New
Mexico families this bill will
only make that situation worse
for many because they will be
forced to subsidize the utility
rates of others it doesn't
matter where you draw the line
for poverty in the state
subsidizing costs for others
will push many of those who can
barely make ends meet and to
poverty.
Personally know a young family
in their mid twenties who are
both working they have saved for
years to buy a home and their
utility bills now are equaling
or exceeding the amount of that
home payment this bill would
push them into a situation where
they cannot afford both and
homelessness should not be an
option for a hard working young
family I strongly consider you
ask you to oppose this bill
thank you thank you.
So that concludes the public
comment in opposition to the
bill those in the audience
wishing to speak in favor of the
bill please raise your hand R.
I. A.
We're we're gonna start in the
back I believe there someone
from the just the coop
Association one to speak and.
We'll start with her.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee first I
would like to thank the sponsor
here I'm sure the Swanson CEO of
New Mexico rural electric
cooperative association in the
sponsoring advocates have been
collaborating with us to get to
a solution while our
cooperatives are neutral on the
bill itself we are definitely
satisfied with the outcome of
the amendment today so thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
very much so let's start in the
back of okay Amy.
Afternoon madam chair members of
the committee I will be brief as
is evidenced by Gerald was seen
my boss
testifying at the experts from
New Mexico gas company we
strongly support this bill we
just appreciate we have been
working for.
Close to a year with this group
of stakeholders and I just
overwhelmed by the collaborative
efforts that have gone into this
legislation today so thank you.
Thank you.
This gentleman over here.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm sure grown our
registered lobbyists with PNM we
estimate fifty percent of
households in our service
territory are below the two inch
percent federal poverty line
with family struggling with
rising costs everywhere we want
to be able to propose a low
income rate for the PRC to
consider additionally HB two
eighteen would allow us to work
with customers well ahead of
when they aren't able to pay
their bills we think sponsor for
leadership we believe this is an
important step to helping the
most needy New Mexicans.
And as a others have said we've
been like us.
We've been collaborating with
other partners thank you to the
partners on this important
legislation and we are happy to
stand in full support thank you
David had a meal.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee David economy I'm
a registered lobbyist for the
City of Albuquerque and we want
to thank the representative and
also the utilities and other
interested folks in putting this
collaborative effort together
you hurt somebody on the on the
zoom state that there were fifty
thousand emails in your inbox I
welcome you to see if that's
accurate but we what we all know
is our collective experiences
that there are fifty thousand
folks in New Mexico in the cold
of winter at least we know
struggling to pay their utility
bills those folks are in
Albuquerque there in Farmington
their Los crucis in their here
in Santa Fe and when US any
percentage of those folks can't
manage to pay those bills what
happens is rates are affected
across the board in all rates
are affected because others have
to pick up the loss to the
utilities that are it up
experience when the the bills
are not paid and but the
individuals themselves just
suffer they suffer and they make
the the the difficult choices of
how they're going to subsidize
their own life you hear about
subsidy subsidization and in and
out passing off all expense
these folks have to decide
between paying the utilities and
food on the table and clothes on
their kids backs and I think
that it's it's very telling that
you have a broad based support
here with the gas company PNM
the coops and others coming to a
reasonable solution for a
difficult choice that folks are
making right now and won't have
to make at this time next year
thank you thank you.
Okay.
Oh sure yes ma'am I didn't see
your hand right.
It's a.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Tony Porter and I am the
founder America at prosperity
works and I have been
intervening before the public
regulation commission on behalf
of low income people for almost
twenty years and this has been a
major issue and a major agenda
item for us during that time so
I am thrilled to be here today
to support this and I want to
give you a little peek into the
reality of low income New
Mexicans in the Albuquerque
area.
We provided energy efficiency
retrofits to over three hundred
homes actually in the speakers
district and in those we also
had a deep survey of the people
who were there and one of the
things we found was that we
seventy five percent of the
people we serve for living on
twenty five thousand dollars a
year or less in a family size of
two to five that same number had
sacrificed food medicine and
medical care in order to pay
their energy bills now what we
know is that the it that having
this essential commodity.
Is is essential in terms of
maintaining homes and that
without that that people
actually lose their homes so
we're thrilled to be here today
and appreciate the sponsor and
all of those who work together
to bring this before you today
thank you very much thank you
Charles.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Charles
Conacher speaking on behalf of
natural resources defense
council today and for that
reason so what wells spoken by
others just before me we urge
your strong support for this
bill thank you thank you smoke
over here Robert.
Madam chair members of the
committee of Robert Romero on
behalf of kicker selected co up
first we'd like to thank the
sponsor for the amendments on
behalf of the coops in addition
Kit Carson in twenty fifteen
proposed a low income right to
the PRC but because of the
state's case they were denied so
we stand in full support of this
bill thank you.
yes.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee Lewis
gonna with the circle of you're
going to tap their want to
commit to your time is been some
really great Committee just
wanted to mention someone in the
opposition to set that but this
young family that's paying
almost as much as their mortgage
this is exactly what we need
this legislation people should
not have to choose between food
shelter and other things to
participate utilities so we're
asking the will vote yes thank
you.
Thank you.
L..
Thank you madam chair the state
has a Mike for you.
Thank you madam chair L. Parke
representing project vote solar
and for all the reasons you've
heard we want to thank the
sponsored thing and stand in
strong support thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair Deborah
Condit registered lobbyists for
New Mexico voices for children
action fund we stand strong
support of this bill thank you
thank you madam chair members of
the committee Gwendolyn
Gallagher aging a long term
Services Department thirteen
percent of New Mexicans age
sixty five years and older live
below the poverty level this
bill would provide much needed
relief for those older adults
living in financial insecurity
House Bill to eighteen is
supported by aging and long term
services department thank you.
Anyone else wishing to speak in
support in the audience okay
Tammy.
Thank you madam chair and Tammy
feel corn was southwest energy
efficiency project and well now
I've been coming to you for the
last several years on lowincome
issues and this is the bill that
finalizes all that we need to do
to really help low income people
in the state of New Mexico have
an energy burden that is
affordable I just wanted to
quickly say oh over these years
the call the phone calls like in
the emails I get from people are
heartbreaking people are making
a choice between paying their
utility bills are buying food a
choice between paying their
utility bills and buying
medicine for their children and
that is not a good position to
be in I do want to say that you
know we've heard some from some
folks today that the should be
optional and I really strongly
oppose that idea you shouldn't
only get help if you're lucky
enough to live in New Mexico gas
company are PNM kit Carson's
service territory every New
Mexican that is low income needs
assistance and so it shouldn't
be where you live it should be
that you live in the state of
New Mexico and the New Mexico we
take care of our folks thank you
thank you.
Or anyone else in the audience
no go to to the online the C..
Caroline church.
Karen good afternoon madam chair
can can you hear me yes.
Okay I represent an attorney who
are representative groups before
the PRC for clean and affordable
energy I'm I just wanted to
point out that this this bill
really only makes a minor
at change and that allows for a
reasonable preference to be made
for low income residents in in
New Mexico this is it at an
important change that was needed
to address of the bar that was
established by the mountain
state case which this allowed
rates for low income customers
I'd like to point out that there
are several classes of customers
for which utilities provide
different right and for a long
time utilities were prevented
from providing low income
customers with rates that they
can afford as Tammy
noted earlier this is really
important one of the factors
that contribute most to
homelessness for individuals is
the inability to afford.
And energy bills.
So are to conclude I'd like to
provide the fact that the
commission and which approves
rates must still make sure that
all rates are just and
reasonable and that here with
this bill all over allowing
isn't just and reasonable rate
to help our lowest income New
Mexicans four their energy bills
thank you thank you
Karen.
Sammy.
Sami that's okay we can do this
sorry thank you madam chair
chairman members of Santa Fe
County climate energy advocate
with conservation voters Mexico
and for all the reasons you've
heard from the sponsor advocates
of all the environmental groups
and utilities as well as co ops
have already mentioned we are
also in strong support of the
bill thank you.
Very little.
Yes hello.
I just want to say I am one of
those seniors who lives well
below the poverty level on a
fixed income I do not have he
other than ward and I have no
air conditioning in the summer
simply because I cannot afford
it.
It would be very nice to be able
to get.
Some sort of right.
My income I get.
You know other things and but
utilities are expensive and I
really hope that the you will
consider this.
Vote for.
Thank you.
So.
Good afternoon thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Samantha
other I'm the Energy equity
fellow and register lobbyist
with center for civic policy
we support this bill to create
apple energy rate for low income
New Mexicans no one should have
to choose between keeping the
lights on and beating their
kids.
Thank you thank you.
Joan brown Joanne brown.
Yes good afternoon share
committee members and sponsors
thank you for this bill I'm the
executive director of New Mexico
interfaith power lines and we
work with faith communities
people face all of the state
many of whom assist people when
they have problems paying these
bills and so we need to care for
our neighbors which is each of
us so we very much support this
bill and thank you for all your
hard work thank you.
C. COBOL.
W..
Yes I am thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is lily and I you know I think
that the director with cops
crime advocates both of the need
to
I I just want to say quickly
that we strongly support the
bill and for all the reasons
previously stated so well by so
many and extra extra thanks to
the font there Representative
Ortez for her hard work on this
bill is so important that we
supported thank you thank you.
Stephanie was burned.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee I am representing
three fifty New Mexico
particularly the rural advocates
I live in the east mountains and
I see on my next door at so many
people talking about how
expensive propane is and how
they are depending on wood
pellet stoves and and that these
people could all have a heat
pumps with all the great
programs that are coming forward
through the state and the
federal government and then this
bill would allow them to have
lower income lower lower at
electricity rates so we are in
full support of this bill thank
you very much thank you.
Mike d'antoni Health.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee Mike
Antonio with Xcel energy we
serve electricity to
approximately hundred forty
thousand customers in the
eastern side of the state we
were originally opposed to the
legislation we want to thank the
sponsor and her experts for
accepting many of our language
changes to get us to a neutral
position and the only reason why
we're neutral as that we feel we
do have with our current rate
case filing we already have a
low income program that we're
proposing before the commission
we don't feel like the
the legislation is necessary but
but that said with what's
presented here is something we
could probably live with so just
want to make that statement
thank the sponsor thank you
thank you that concludes our.
What comment portion of
our discussion so now we'll go
panelists sponsor do you have
any concluding words before we
go to the committee thank you
madam chair.
All right
wishing to discuss the bill.
Representative Representative
Akan.
Thank you madam chair I didn't
really think I'd be the first
going to discuss this bill
anymore.
The real problem tracking the
sub.
To what was originally proposed.
That's my biggest headache.
And I have been able to.
Put some stuff together but we
have a completely different
bill.
From what was offered in the
beginning the fact is I don't
know we've been talking about
the same subject anymore we are
but that's almost to that point.
What I'd like to do madam chair
is that.
I just have this feeling that.
Bill belongs.
The.
Bernie's.
The not the little guy known as
a kid they used to say.
That the big boys play with the
big boys and let the little boys
play with the little boys and I
don't know how to make that
gender friendly in today's
world.
Madam chair what I want to do.
This is what I would love to do
is I would really.
That the committee so for our
house bill two eight he can be
changes.
By striking sections three and
four.
We think sectors three and four
of this bill I can support this
bill.
One hundred percent.
Madam chair representative on.
That is a friendly amendment.
Your friendly may madam chair
Mister Representative Cologne
proposal well at I don't know
how you can afford it it's the
amendment to the substance of
the to sub.
So okay so anyway my proposal is
to strike that part.
this way and we've section three
basically all it does is it's a
printed it's put in there thank
Nico ops and sex for of course
is the attitude of coop to the
legislation I think the coop
should be able to get together.
And for the with the own.
Bill and.
Is that what Intel's.
So with that madam chair I would
propose.
The.
The change or amendment to this
sub.
I don't know how to propose an
amendment to a sub thank.
Well first of all we don't allow
ourselves to be amended as I
understand our rules but you're
allowed to change yes and that
means a new sub would have to
come back if the languages are
proposing is adopted so this
what we would do is make a
motion to adopt my my my my and
then we'd have to come back with
the sub so I'd like to discuss
it of the proposed amendment
that would then turn into a
different and so so
Is that appropriate I'm I'm
looking for some guidance from
the more experienced cares
center is I believe.
Center for me sure Madam chair
of the personnel committee
motion with their second.
not that I've heard of yet.
Thank you you don't really need
anything okay all right.
Of Madam leader.
So committee reports it was up
for some of the discussion but I
think if it was the sponsor
amenable to the no no no no
friendly well okay
then I don't know that we should
be voting on it which public
discussion what yes okay and it
would be up to the sponsor
whether she wanted to get a
point five version well I in we
know she does not she has heard
the proposal I and she does not
so.
The option whether to proceed
with.
Okay so if we get to the point
of losing people like.
Sorry.
I do the best I was trying to
get I had a call from home I
needed to take care of an
apparently it's calling me that
So you know we can.
See if we can take action on
this because this is what the
sponsor prefers or
Representative about claim can.
See about.
Putting it all into it one of
his dummy bills or something
like that but if the sponsor
doesn't like it she's not going
to carry on with the bill or
enough that's a very good point
so it is not a friendly
amendment and there's further
discussion on the bill or the
proposed
Committee sub and I have
Representative Lane on my list.
Thank you madam chair.
madam chair so as I understand
the bill this would apply to a
New Mexicans that are at two
hundred percent.
Or lower of the.
Republican level guidelines that
correct Madam chair
representative lane only for
investor owned utilities that
that is set at two hundred
percent for co ops that level is
set hundred fifty percent should
they choose to provide a low
income right.
Madam chair can I get an
explanation for why the
discrepancy in the two numbers.
Madam chair representative I'm
gonna let Mr Bissonnette.
Thank you madam chair
representative lane that
reflects
discussions with both sets of
utilities investor owned
utilities in rural cooperatives
real cooperatives are often
treated differently under our
legislation for example because
they are non profit entities
because they have smaller pools
of customers because they have
less capital paid for example
they do not have a mandatory
energy efficiency low income
energy efficiency requirements
like investor owned utilities to
so in the same way as some of
our other bills treat you
separately from cooperatives
this bill also takes a different
approach to both.
Madam chair what is to
andpercent for a family for New
Mexico Madam chair of
Representative Lane that sixty
thousand dollars you.
Madam chair so if I do the math
rate is a hundred fifty is that
forty five K..
Madam chair representative
since.
Four cups and.
So madam chair I guess I'm just
trying to.
Understand sort of the objective
reason for.
Let's take two hundred percent.
Where that number derived from.
Madam chair representative lane
from conversations with the with
the co ops to do with the IOUs
consumer advocates MetLife again
to.
Madam Madam chair representative
lane many of our Benny low
income programs across the
country use two hundred percent
federal poverty level we also
have some programs here in New
Mexico like for example of the
electric vehicle of legislation
which also use it to a percent
poverty level
so it's a it's a number that is
often used in low income
programs across the country.
Madam chair this is just based
on adjusted gross income is that
correct.
And Madam chair representative
lane hi I believe so.
So it is a yes.
Yes and madam chair is there
any.
Investigation into net worth.
Madam chair representative Lente
I'd I don't think for the
purposes of this program.
You.
The madam chair the reason why I
ask the question is you can have
a substantially high net worth
and a very low AGI.
And it seems like.
At a minimum should require
certification.
Of a of a network threshold I
don't know what that number is I
I don't come up with two hundred
or one fifty but.
I'm concerned about people.
who live off of investments cap
gains.
Able to keep their AGI down low
that we have a lot of debt
service.
And they're able to have their
utility rates.
Stone to working class people.
So is there any consideration
given to.
Having some.
Certification for network.
Madam chair representative lane
at as I understand it a little
federal programs in our based on
AGI so I don't I don't know of a
single federal program that
takes into for low income
programs take into net worth.
Madam chair so it's possible
under the way this bill as
written.
I'm but say have two million in
net worth.
No debt service.
I live off of five grand a
month.
My jazz sixty grand.
Family for do I qualify for
this.
Madam chair representative lane
hi I suppose you would I don't
know any but a like that
honestly but.
Are you do.
Madam chair.
With the committee.
Appreciate it.
We appreciate the vote of
confidence in the wealth of the
little aspect.
So.
Another.
Area I'm curious about was there
any discussion about passing
along these rates to only the
most wealthy within these
subgroups.
Madam chair representative when
I I'm not sure what you mean by
that.
Madam chair so if I make sixty
one thousand a year do I qualify
for this program.
Family for.
And for representing the you do
not sixty thousand.
If I make sixty one thousand
your madam chair.
With this.
Because my utility rates to go
up.
And Representative Lane it we
don't know.
Possibly yes possibly now.
Madam chair can explain to me
how it would be possibly know.
Madam chair representative I'm
gonna I'm gonna start off and
then I will
of that I will ask my experts to
to weigh in here but the weight
the way I understand it right
making you in it for something
like this if a utility is is
providing a lower rate for
someone you they're looking at
that all of the rate payer
classes that that are within
that right and for something
like a low income right they're
gonna be taking into account the
other costs that they have to to
operate to do their business
right those costs that are
getting born by other rate
payers so one of the issues that
the utilities have I understand
is that you know there are folks
who are not making enough money
they are not able to pay their
bill they will have a
disconnection or they won't be
able to to pay their bills on
the go into arrears those costs
are borne across the right pair
losses right that and that will
inform the next slide making K.
so there is a very real
possibility that by offering the
low income right we.
Don't have the arrears that
utilities and co ops even
experience right now you don't
have the shut offs and you the
disconnections of the re
connections which can be costly
which have to be borne by
someone I'm gonna stop and gonna
ask Mr was seem to add.
Thank you madam chair of
Representative lane there are
some cost would be avoided we've
looked at programs in order this
in places like Minnesota the
cost from a gas utility
perspective in Minnesota is one
cent per therm the average
customer uses about fifty three
cents per therm so in Minnesota
the experience has been there's
a small cost to other customers
but it's not it's not
disproportionate to the budget
provided to low income
customers.
Madam chair so.
If I understood the argument
it's that.
If you make the rates low
enough.
That customers will be more
timely and their bills and you
won't have to try to collect on
people are saying service
workers out to shut them off is
that the argument.
Madam chair Representative Lane
we.
We believe that if you have a
right that a lot but that causes
fewer customers to default on
their bill there will be savings
as a result of that because you
don't have that that for the gas
company perspective when would
someone is disconnected we have
to send a truck out to
disconnect the service we have
to send the truck to connected
again those costs would be
avoided so that that offsets.
Part of the cost of the program
but not all of it.
Madam chair so when you say not
all of it does that mean that
the rates increase on everybody
else.
As I said the experience in
other places is that there's a
small increase for other
customers yes.
Okay.
So back to my original idea
madam chair.
I make sixty one thousand a year
I don't qualify for this program
are my rates going to go up.
It will depend on the design of
the right so I I think the short
answer is there it likely would
be from the from the New Mexico
gas company perspective there
would likely be a small charge
the experience elsewhere it's
about a cent of third average
customer uses fifty three cents
or fifty three thirds of month
but.
The design of the right and the
implementation will actually
determine the amount of.
About.
So madam chair this is that's
the heart of my concern with
this bill.
Is there's no thought given to.
Would pass on these rates.
Ensuring that we're passing them
on to people that can actually
absorb the additional rate
increase.
I don't see how this is fair
when you make sixty one grand
and your rates going to go up
the same way as some of the next
two hundred sixty gram.
We're drawn in my mind we're
drawing arbitrary lines.
And for for the working class
that fall within that region
that concerns me.
So you know I and I don't know
if it's you create a class if
you're four hundred percent
above the.
The federal poverty line and
then you bear the brunt of this.
But I'm really concerned about
the working class people that
fall right in that area.
And.
You know madam chair I I you
know finish with this.
We've you know as a state we've
decided to shut down coal fired
power plants that's fine.
Understand environmental
concerns.
We don't have replacement power
Amelie available for just
because usually rates increase.
And.
Instead of taking approach to
where I believe already have an
existing frontier.
Can help pay for low income
folks that can't afford their
utility rates.
Instead of pouring more money
into that fund.
And leading all of New Mexico
help cover the costs what we've
done instead is we recognize
that we forced utility rates to
rise because of our actions as a
legislative body.
And now we're gonna force
working class ratepayers.
To help cover the fact that low
income people can't make ends
meet right now.
Because energy bills are are
increasing and I just think
that's about approach I think
the better approach needs to be.
We don't more money in that
fund.
And if we need to tune it up
program medically that's fine.
Make it easier access either
distribute.
Make sure that low income people
are being taken care of.
But I think it's a bad policy
decision to take those rate
increases and spreading over
working class people so thank
you madam chair.
You representative
Representative ring.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair and
Mr gas company so what
percentage of your
Customers will be below that
threshold.
I don't have a precise answer
because we don't track that with
our customers but I expect about
forty percent.
Madam chair and and
representative PNM is yes fight
it's fifty percent you're
basically pretty close is same
area I'm gonna guess it's
probably pretty close to that.
So madam chair and
representative let's assume that
we have an apartment where
Of the there's a couple
individuals living there and
what one has the right to or is
the bill is under their name
because they have good credit.
And they can qualify.
What can they transferred the
right to the or the services to
the person who has bad credit
and has low income and now
they're they're on the lower
right.
Madam chair representative it.
The bill.
The bill holder whoever has the
account hold hold the account
will either qualify or not
qualify for the right I think
that's.
I can't speak to how that would
happen but that's that's it's
the it's the account holder that
qualifies or not qualifies madam
chair madam chair and
Representative let me say that
different way okay my mom is
living with me.
I have the bill currently under
my name spike give you a
disconnect notice so I move.
Now she gives you notice I want
you to go ahead and hook me up
and now
we're under the law the lower
income.
Madam chair representative re I
think it would I'm trying to
understand is.
But if your if your mother.
is now the account holder and
she qualifies for like he
should.
For for this program she will.
Get that right or she will get
lye heat issue qualifies that
hundred one hundred fifty
percent okay.
And madam chair I see that
occurring you know it's one of
the things but madam chair and
representative so we're we're
talking about gas and electric
what about the water the sewer
rates the internet all of those
the name of the discount madam
chair representative ring
they're not.
They're not included in this
bill is only the utility it's
only the utilities are regulated
by the PRC.
Excluding broadband in this
case.
Madam chair and representative
it what is your vision for a
reduction in the of low income
group a reduction of ten percent
twenty twenty five percent of
their bill what is that Madam
chair representative we don't
know yet and that sort of the
beauty of this program that the
utility can be I owe you or the
co op if they choose to do low
income right can design their
program it's not prescriptive
for reason they will you know
look at their customer base they
will look at what will help
reduce the energy burden for for
their customers who qualify for
the programs and and they will
develop a bill designed right.
Appropriately accordingly.
Madam chair and representative I
think that's problematic if you
will you know we we want to try
to figure out what is the cost
burden that's going to be
shipped and and to how many
people so we have an idea so I
think that's problematic madam
chair and Representative
following up on the coals for
our power plant that we closed
no PNM promised us that the
rates wouldn't go up they went
up
I think that like what we see in
most business is you need to
start looking at how to reduce
the cost and I think that's a
better angle than we're going to
take the right the the cost from
one group and shift it to
another thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
Just a couple questions I too am
concerned about the
Shifting.
Because the utility.
Where was part of the
Public regulations commissions
duties.
Is to.
Insurer or to allow.
The utility to have a reasonable
rate on on their investment.
Return on their investment.
And so.
That right.
Of return is going to be
established and it's just an
issue of who's going to pay.
For for that that right and so
therefore reducing the range
over here.
Are we not increasing rates with
the remaining.
Population that is receiving the
benefits from that public
utility.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I am trying to understand
your question are you are you
asking about.
Other ratepayers paying more
money or return on investment
for you for the I'll use I'm
sorry I just to let go hand in
hand don't think madam chair and
Representative if the utility is
going to receive a rate of
return on on it for investment
and it's providing the like
personal service to its
customers.
If you reduce the rate from this
group.
And this right of return does
not change.
Then you have to increase the
cost of energy to the other
group to allow that same rate of
return to you not.
Madam chair representative I'm
from what I understand there is
New.
Return of investment is that it
investment for cost of service
I'd like for again to to answer
that.
Madam chair representative
Nibert
that's correct there's there's
for the operations and provision
of the electricity they're still
return on investment the telly
but you're correct so so there's
no additional profit in any way
that would go to a for profit
utility from this program
as Representative Ortez
mentioned before and
Mr scene there we expect that
there will be reductions in cost
from this program and there will
be costs from this program
reductions in cost in bad debt
that you that customers have to
pay right now reductions in
costs from
fewer notices that go out for
delinquent payments context and
all that
As Mr receiving said there have
been small increases in costs in
other programs seen across the
country and those would be
covered by the utility this bill
silent on how that's recovered
how that's distributed that goes
to the right making process and
madam chair representative
Nibert I want to add that you
know the we should we need to
talk about cross subsidization
as well which is right but I
think you're Sir second question
is is getting at your second
point all rates right now our
cross subsidized all of them
there are some residential
customers paying for industrial
customer rates helping them
lower their rates there some
businesses that subsidize
residential
I believe you Facebook and Intel
was subsidized by by residential
and then I think that me flipped
but there there is cross
subsidization is part of the the
right making cases it's part of
what happens right now I'm
hooked the the one right Karia
class that doesn't get
subsidized up until this point
we hope are the folks who need
it most the low income folks.
Madam chair representative of.
Let's go back to what your
expert was talking about the bat
that.
I would assume that part of rate
making K. would be the.
History of.
The capture of the.
Income that that they are
supposed to receive and if that
is less than what they estimated
and have some that that that
that would be maybe part of the
right making case for the next
period of time.
Chair Mister Representative
that's correct right making is
forward looking so you look at
the past and there's a line item
that says this is how much we
include in the revenue that we
need to collect to make this
whole for bad debt for the make
utility hole for pandemic with
the customers to pay for that
bad.
And again madam chair and
representative he gets back to
the job of the public regulation
commission to make sure that the
public utilities.
Are receiving a reasonable
return on on their investment
right.
Madam chair yes Representative
not when it comes to the cost of
operation so they get that
reasonable returned when they
build things like those power
plants and solar power plants
not for they get their costs for
the services they provide.
Madam chair and representative.
Districts for.
What.
They get to recoup a hundred
percent or they get a recoup a
hundred fifty five center or.
Explained explained that to me
because I'm not understanding
what you're saying operations
are not recoverable because
surely.
Mr el Paso electric is not
providing those services and
doing its operations for free.
Madam chair Mister
Representative thank the to get
to recover the costs of the the
full costs forward looking costs
of providing that service as
long as they're it so it's in
other words when it comes the
bad debt they've put in the
number that the commission has
approved that is reflective of
their prior history with bad
debt and then they develop rates
of commission approves that are
estimated to bring in that
amount of revenue for a certain
period of time to pay for the
full cost of their operations
and to give them right of return
on their investments and in
their capital investments so
the they are the whole idea is
to make them whole and give them
the right of return but they're
not they're not making profit
off of their bad debt that's not
the intention.
Madam chair representative of
what I look at the bill I see in
on page two.
Nibert.
Section B. it allows some breath
for the public regulation
commission to deal with certain
things.
But looks like your language.
Is basically creating of a first
carve out of the legislature
really getting someone involved
in this and and so
in all.
I think the.
Are there any other areas where
where we are doing something
similar.
Madam chair Mister
Representative this is language
that is actually based on
language in another state I
believe it's Minnesota the
reason that it's important to
change this section section
sixty eight sixty two dash eight
dash six of the public utility
act is because of the nineteen
eighty four mountain states case
in that case the New Mexico
Supreme Court was interpreting a
constitutional provision that is
no longer there but that still
exist in statute in there the
New Mexico Supreme Court said
you public regulation commission
you can't decide to give a low
income right by yourselves to
elderly people for telephones
that's what the case was about
the expressly said that's the
job of the legislature and so
this is necessary because just
like these other provisions that
create economic development
rates and rates designed to
retain load that allow special
treatment for business this
provision C. makes clear that
it's not a violation of the
legislature's intent to allow
for low income rates what was
Madam chair representative Mr
experts a was that case decided
based on article four section
twenty six of our constitution.
Madam chair Mr expert know if
I'm sorry.
Representative Nibert no it was
not it was.
It was decided based on the
authorization of the public
regulation commissioner for the
predecessor to the public
regulation commission
article four section twenty six
of the constitution.
prohibits
legislation that would create a
that doesn't treat
Equally all persons under like
conditions and that section of
the constitution has been used
very rarely only three times
that ever overturned statute and
never on the grounds of low
income or anything like that in
fact I think the last case was
forty five years ago
and noticeably at the tenth
circuit court of appeals said
that this provision works
doesn't provide any more
guarantees than is this going to
be on of the equal protection
clause of the federal
constitution and that the courts
here in New Mexico been very
clear that you all of the
legislature have a broad
discretion to set reasonable
classifications however you
like.
Madam chair and representative
it would be your expert's
opinion that this would pass
constitutional muster if
challenged.
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes.
Madam chair representative thank
you that's all the questions I.
Thank you very brief thank you
to the sponsor and to all of the
different groups that came
together to resolve some of the
some of the issues that.
That had been raised earlier
very proud of your ability to
work together I appreciate that
I just want to.
Very briefly this is about
helping people that chair
representative who are
struggling to pay their energy
bills correct madam chair Mister
speaker yes at the end of the
that's all discuss.
Madam speaker yes now I think as
we are today you know I think
severe points were made about
who is lowincome in and who
isn't and and who's gonna be
paying a little bit more in
order for neighbors to be
received their lights on heat on
other madam chair representative
of I just wanna make sure that.
Income is really the only
threshold is that correct and in
terms yes it is so this will
apply to senior citizens correct
Madam Mr speaker yes this will
apply for people in rural
communities Mr speaker yes this
will apply to military veterans
madam chair Mister speaker again
this will apply to.
Maybe single parents are
nontraditional college students
who might be struggling to make
ends meet chair Mister speaker
yes thank you madam chair thank
you present.
Representative homes.
Thank you madam chair and I'm
sorry that I have a motion on
the table.
And just because a.
Every time that somebody says
it's not for the amendment
there's no action taken I don't
think that is the correct way
for the committee to proceed.
The motion on the table.
It's supposed to be taken up
it's supposed to be taken in the
staff to fill discussed if not
the motion is tabled and we have
to have a motion on the motion
to either accept my motion or to
table it Mr
Representative of a cone as I
understand it your motion is out
of order because you cannot
amend a committee sub had the
sponsor been willing to accept
the amendment then she would
have come back with another
committee so that would have
Representative
the changes that she might have
been willing to agree to you
have the ability to argue
against the bill based on the
fact that you do not like the
provisions that you wish to
strike and if that is the case
that the committee will then
have the opportunity to take
your views into account and vote
against the bill madam chair.
Thank you.
My motion was.
That house bill two eighteen V.
cadence it is not to be amended
can.
And that is acceptable we cannot
amend the and I understand we
cannot amend the substitute but
we can change by striking now
part of the substitute.
Thank you representative Nibert.
Madam chair.
I think well it's our practice
to not remand Committee subs.
And probably a good practice.
I think the representative who I
usually disagree with his
correct that.
It can do whatever it wants and
with respect to motions there's
a motion on the table we need to
dispose of it before we go on to
to the next motion and so I
there's a motion on the table in
there there is we need to
probably dispose of it before we
we do something else fairness
will call the roll the motion is
to re repeat your motion
representative madam chair my
motion is that I move the
committee substitute for house
bill two eighty eight changed by
striking sections three and
four.
I mean the the custom of the
committee that will as for what
we've been doing and what is it
and is
close to the public about
Committee subs that come in is
that we wouldn't amend a
committee sub and so if that the
will of the chair and
consistency with other bills
that we've seen it would be
improper for us to go through
this motion.
Now allow it considering we've
never done this for any other
bill we're already halfway
through the session.
it would be in my opinion
improper to change the rules for
this situation and having not
done this for anybody else
throughout the the session
so if there if it if we want to
roll the bill again to have a
new committees of presented the
custom and I would just
recommend going with what we've
been doing thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair if I could.
The motion
okay the motion was made.
The motion was four seven acted
on immediately before going on
to everybody else it's not my
fault that my motion was not and
this cause someone to that's not
a pretty amendment every time we
would do that I mean I would
love to do that when we're on
the floor that's a friendly
amendment is that and I'm for
the amendment and it dies.
I mean that would be totally
unfair to the system.
Only with that madam chair the
decision is yours.
So the question was.
Sections three and four of the
seven.
So those sessions research on
page seven.
For.
In.
Both of those actions the for.
Right.
Follow this.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey now.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative reap yes.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Penske now.
Madam vice chair no.
Madam chair no.
Madam chair you have four yeses
and seven knows.
Your motion fails
Representative.
Okay we're back on the committee
so.
The last heard from speakers
Martinez anyone else wishing to
speak.
Of the committee.
Representative.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative I
just wanted to ask a quick
question about
and your bill section one the
Economic Development rates.
Madam chair and representative
is it currently the practice to
offer.
Subsidized rates to.
Large businesses or do you tell
me about these economic
development rates and.
How those subsidies are offered
in who who pays for those those
differential rates.
Madam chair representative
Manske I think Gerald can then
here.
Madam chair representative a New
Mexico gas doesn't have an
economic development right but
as I understand economic
development rates for the
electric utilities that do exist
in New Mexico New Mexico those
those right that businesses pay
a lower rate and other customers
pay the difference.
Thank you madam chair so that
would apply to not just
businesses but also individuals
so some of the populations were
trying to assist with this
legislation such as the elderly
or other low income customers we
paying that difference for the
economic development rates right
madam chair and chair
representative Manske that that
is the case everybody like.
The other repairs are.
Paying for those hoping to cross
subsidize if if you if you got
it Madam chair representative.
The PRC makes a judgment that
attracted a large customer and
having them on the system
provide sufficient benefits to
justify that differential so
there is a yes through the
ratemaking process to justify
that is not to it's not just if
you a free pass there is a there
is a a yes a pass on that in
terms of offering that right but
that ability is there.
Madam chair representative
I I to me it seems fair when
we're seeking a social benefit
for the state.
Through what is currently the
law economic development rates
to near that for other social
benefits to our state for our
low income communities thank you
for answering those questions.
Okay.
So could someone tell me a
little bit more about the fund
that Representative plane was
talking about.
Madam chair of Madam.
I think that some I you use have
this fund they may all have this
fund that could help support
other customers but I'd like for
Gary and.
Sorry Gerald R. or again click.
Madam chair there there are a
number of existing supports for
low income people there is
voluntary programs that
utilities have where sometimes
often times throughout the last
our customers you want to
contribute in their pool of
money that they can use there is
that federal low income
home energy assistance program
LIHEAP which provides one time
payments to customers below a
hundred fifty percent of poverty
up from seventy to forty seventy
dollars
but what we know about all of
those programs is that we still
have a very high energy burden
in the state for people below
the poverty line an average of
fifteen percent of their annual
income goes to I have energy
bills sometimes as high as
thirty percent in some counties
so we know that the existing
programs don't to and
so what I hear you saying is
various utilities have different
programs that have different
criteria and all kinds of things
like that so their individual
funds are not a state fund that
supports okay all right I I'm
I'm starting understand so we
couldn't compel
you know the gas company of New
Mexico to create a fund and so
on so forth could be.
Madam chair I I I can tell you
that we do have a fund is called
the New Mexico Act we customers
contribute to that our employees
contribute to that the company
matches that salvation army of
ministers at customers can get a
one time payment through that
program but it it is voluntary
on behalf of the company we put
that out there which customers
with employees and and do the
match but it's not required
thank you so the suggestion that
we bolster for the funds is not
not an option however I would
point out the truth I don't like
the system this shifting costs
through rates I don't I I you
know I'm gonna support the bill
but I don't like the system I
don't think we should live in a
system like this where we have
utility companies setting rates
there is we don't the going
through the roof right making
process where have all kinds of
conversations about what the
profit should be and so on it is
a horrendous system to provide
I'm sorry Sir to provide
essential services to people you
know heating all of those things
it's ridiculous frankly it's
unfortunate that we live in a
society that that is driven by
that kind of a a system so we
have to that come then come up
with these contrivances you know
in the systems to try to help
people obviously deserve the
help and it's warranted but we
have to operate within this
ridiculous regulatory system and
so on so.
The answer to this is the
recapped the a joint resolution
that we just passed where we can
develop some supports for low
income people that are direct
and we're not doing all these
somersaults in a bill to try to
shift right so that those people
can afford who can't afford it
are helping to support those
people can't the whole that the
hole Tax base should be
supporting people like this who
need help with these very
critical services so I look
forward to working with all of
you.
In the upcoming years to come up
with a program that does exactly
that so we can get rid of these
kind of bills and we won't have
a conversation about whether
you're if you're above sixty one
thousand how much you know you
can have sliding scales are all
kinds of things you could be
doing with the funds that help
people pay for their essential
services but I know that's that
that's for a common other
conversation this is the tool
unfortunately we have today but
it's really a very blunt tool
and I and that's no disrespect
to you Representative I know you
did it you work very hard on
this bill Clinton I sit right
next to you I know how hard
you've been working on it so I I
will support it that I do like I
just this is ridiculous the way
we live I just.
Adding out of thank you anyone
else wishing to speak are guest
speakers and would do not pass
on house bill two eighteen is
amended but if you pass on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill to eighteen.
We have a motion do we made by
the speaker of a do not pass
house bill two eighteen but I do
pass of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to eighteen
To call the roll.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair you have six yess
and I and nose for a do not pass
on house bill to eighteen and a
do pass on committees of two
eighteen.
Thank you very thank you very
much.
Your own house bill we're on
house bill one seventy nine.
They found.
Well.
Representative Chavez good to
see you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
The floor is yours thank you
madam chair I do have an
amendment to house bill one
seventy nine yes we we just
handed out.
maybe you might want to first
give us a little bit of
background about the bill and
then your will move to consider
the amendment
Madam chair members of the
committee this is a fairly
simple bill I think.
At what this bill does is it
requires someone who is placing
a lien on your property to give
you notice within fifteen days
of when the lien is placed it
also requires that person to
give documentation of
Weidling has been placed in
terms of you know of unpaid
bills a contract that they may
have entered in with you
and as as it stands right now
anyone can come and put a lien
on your house and you'll never
know it.
Until you might go try to sell
your house or maybe you pass
away in your family finds out
that there's a lean and they
have no idea why.
So that is.
The bill rate some.
Two five.
Thank you bye.
Two two five four two five point
one is that right this correct
okay so with someone wish to
move in.
Okay thank you very much
Representative so.
yes but maybe we could ask her
to explain the the amendment for
that the
This Madam chair representatives
with the amendment does is it
adds the word certified before
mail of the original bill asked
that the person whose place in
the lean simply mail a notice so
what I've done is added the word
certified so there's
documentation that it at has
actually been mailed.
So that's page two line sixteen.
Okay.
All right so Representative
Chasey do have a question about
the amendment okay.
One
is that.
The person the mail or hand
delivery services for the staff
is.
Really
applaud to.
Is.
The revenues to go to the post
office.
The.
Because it was.
But.
So I I do
But I know you need some sort of
record.
So I just wanted to point out
the the difficulty with that I
started sending return receipt
that I I would also just mail it
to their holdings and if you
came back to me that I knew they
weren't getting it.
But
I I was mailing a final order
terminating parental rights and
I absolutely could not get it to
make what I finally.
And you know it was a sad story
but I finally.
I was able to contact a former
social worker and get her
mother's address and send it to
her but I I should have been
doing it certified mail but I
didn't and it didn't come out
so.
Somehow she got it so.
The that's the only dilemma I
see thank you madam chair
Representative McQueen.
Madam chair representative
similar experience right so so I
have certain legal requirements
to send certified mail certified
mail is your guarantee that they
won't pick it up because you
never got good news via
certified mail at and you know
other questions I was gonna ask
is why are we're requiring mail
about the email.
You know I mean if if the goal
is to notify that the property
owner I I think that's that's
laudable.
But I don't think certified mail
is the best way to notify them
in in it's not is I read the
bill unless I'm missing
something this isn't just any
debt these are mechanics and
material insulin so that so they
have to have done work on the
property you have some
contractual relationship with
the person you probably have had
some interaction so but I think
it will get to the bill I guess
but I'm I'm not I I use I
seriously like if I want someone
to receive a letter I do it
Representative Chasey suggested
which is if I'm legally required
to send them a certified letter
I do think New Mexico is that
also send them a regular letter
which will actually arrive in
their post office box or their
their health.
Thank you mentor thank you
Representative yeah Madam chair
representative the concern was
that there wasn't any evidence
that the letter had been sent.
So that's why we included
certified.
Okay.
word on the amendment because it
pretty soon need to carry out
the audience to talk about the
bill Representative night Burt.
I would not only share those
concerns which are increasing
the cost to the material then or
the labor to work on the
property.
Certified mail return receipt
requested not to now fifty some
sensors sixty cents whatever it
is now it's a it's it's.
Last six or eight Bucks yeah and
so you're increasing the cost to
the very people who who perform
the labor on the property and
and the so my question would be
thank you in creating this cost
is that part of the costs will
recoup from the from the owner.
Madam chair representative I
don't anticipate that it is.
Okay well that's a real problem
for me madam chair.
Representative local.
This
is for the death of the
amendment and we're talking
about is a certified or in
person fit in certified a lot
lot less expensive than and
delivering a.
At the piece of the mail so the
view estimated director that go
to pay a dollar sixty.
Thank.
What let's do let's do this
we'll go to the audience will
come back.
I and talk about the bill and
the and of the amendment so
those in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
No one of those wishing to speak
in support of the bill please
raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
no one so we'll come back to the
committee so we have
in amendments that it would just
move for discussion purposes we
can come back to it but let's
talk a little bit about the bill
or do we have any questions on
that Representative McQueen.
For.
Thank you Mr
to mentor Representative I two
questions on the bill of one
was.
Can we should we leave open the
opportunity to email of those
the email this is.
A pre how informal communication
and I sent an email I can lease
print out a copy of the email
that shows that I sent it.
A maybe you could take that sure
yes Madam chair representative I
don't have a problem with
including email I think that we
need to be aware that some
people in this day and age still
don't have emails
we run into that
I work for the hospital were
continually run into that
quite a bit more than I think
people realize so I think I mean
I don't have a problem with that
being an option madam chair
representative but would not
want that to be the only.
Method.
Chair representative I I guess
the way I would think it would
work would be if you had the
person's email you could meet
the email that if they don't
have an email presumably you
don't have it so you can just
send an email randomly I mean so
I think would only apply to your
people that you had email
communication with as I knew
that I think we're dealing with
contractors you probably signed
the contract hopefully the
emails included in in those
provision of the contract so.
That's something I would
recommend that we include and
then my other question was
The person filing a claim for
lean with the county clerk
percent subjects may shell mail
or hand deliver written notice
of the claim to the owner is it.
The a copy of the recorded thank
you.
Or is it just.
The lead.
Because the thirty could you
often you you have a your
document the ticket dance of
course office yet recorded yet
stamped and then you distribute
copies because then they know
exactly where to find it because
it's got the recording
information on the documents so
if we want to include that it
was a recorded copy of the lien
we should probably specify that
in the language of the bill.
Madam chair representative I
think that's a good point.
Thank you Mr.
The.
Anyone else wishing to speak on
the bill.
Can
I believe spotted recommend I'm
sorry I'm sorry to have thank
you madam chair so.
Madam welcome to our committee.
so I think I appreciate what the
Sanchez trying to do here madam
chair which is we just want to
make sure that people have
notice of these claims are filed
and I think that's a that's a
good goal I think the problem
though that I have is.
The way our civil system works
is it's built in wi we are a
recording noted state so
whenever you record.
Something in the county clerk's
office it's a public record and
the way that our laws have
traditionally been interpreted
means that you are there by
given notice at the time of
filing.
And so.
This I think I worry that that
changes that you know there's
other means for example like a
list pendants
were you can file as pendants
there's no requirement that you
sent notice.
so madam chair of the
sponsorship or had no so I think
there's a response there ma'am
I'm not correct Madam chair
representative that's not
correct.
You too you don't get noticeable
inspired filed in your home
madam chair what what do you
mean by you don't get notice
nobody notifies you Madam chair
representative you were not
notified don't so madam chair at
I think what you talk about is
actual notice.
And I don't disagree that you
don't necessarily get actual
notice what I'm talking about is
legal notice which is what
matters when you're trying to
foreclose on these types of
plans.
Madam chair representative as
far as I understand it and the
of you have reached one of my
constituents experiences she
received no notice at all that
Elaine had been filed under.
So madam chair again I think so
that that would be an example of
actual notice and so I guess
what I'm trying to articulate
maybe not very well is there
there's a different standard we
talk about legal notice.
So the question is.
Does filing a lien in of itself.
Affect the lien which requires
notice so that you can at some
point four closed on the lean.
So my concern is once we we
build into this that you have
to.
Send mail.
or hand deliver written notice
so it it I don't know where
where do you send the mail to
for example so maybe I have a
commercial building and I'm
having work done on my
commercial building.
But I don't live there and
nobody occupies it so where
where's the mail sent place of
construction is that the primary
residence of the of the.
Person again to the eight being
collect filed against what we do
if they don't live in the state.
so Madam any thought on that.
Representative I believe that
that is contained in the bill
but just give me a minute so I
can before at.
Madam chair representative I
don't find it in the bill I
thought that it was in here I my
assumption is that you send it
to of the last known address.
So madam chair I mean this is
and I that would be my typical
assumption to
If the intent is to give notice
but those are the kinds of
things end up getting litigated
if we don't make it expressly co
clearing the statue itself.
So I again I've I agree with the
concept that we want to do
everything we can to give actual
notice to people
But there is there are times
where in this maybe is not nice
to say out loud what were people
avoid getting actual notice and
that's why our system allows for
the recording of notice.
To to service legal notice.
and I'm afraid that if we start
going down this road and and
we're not touching other like.
Mortgages was pendants
affidavits of judgment there are
there's a number there's a list
of.
Filings that have the effect of
becoming a leading that attach
is to your property.
And this is just one of them
that were gonna require.
A male mailing we don't do that
with the others and so I'm just
concerned that we might be
fundamentally shifting what we
consider to be legal notice so
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair I I I just recall
one of my colleagues who is on
the your side of the aisle
Representative Lane this was a
number of years ago but she
found out there was division
lean on our property when she
filed to run for office she had
no idea and I know that that is.
A former chair judiciary's taken
his head we heard that a lot
over the years so I really
endorsed the idea of required
notice of some health so I had
suggested that and I know this
doesn't.
I don't know if this is actually
paid enough for the residents
Excuse me the evidence issue but
I have but the what we might
want to do is say that.
On
page two nine sixteen.
The.
Person funded plan shall mail
email hand delivered or sent by
certified mail with return
receipt requested to have every
single option.
And so it seems to me that
if the person who didn't receive
it.
Just as I didn't get any of
these things then.
The burden is not I don't know
Representative night we do this
kind of law and I don't so.
Twenty three.
We'll find out.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative anyone
else wishing to Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative
Hi I.
Do.
Do this kind of law if you will
and your bill concerns me.
Do you know why we have a
mechanic some of chairman's lien
statute.
madam chair representative I'm
assuming that if somebody
doesn't pay them then.
We get to keep your car.
Well maybe not carpet but the it
gives if someone performs work
for supplies.
Material.
To enhance the value of your
home or other property.
The.
Wall.
Tries to protect that person.
Because they have expanded their
labor they've expanded their
Goods.
And services to enhance the
value of your property.
And the only way the the the
law.
Allows that person to be secure
in knowing that they might get
paid for that labor for those
goods and services is to allow
them to impose a lien upon the
property.
And so we're gonna have some
examples here in a minute but
We have to have a mechanism to
protect the people who.
Perform work and supply material
to to someone's property.
And I suspect that in your
examples you have a general
contractor that supplied.
A lot of things to property and
one of the subs probably didn't
get paid.
And the sub had to file a claim.
Against the property get paid.
What usually happens the
property owner Hey the general
contractor didn't know the
general contractor didn't pay us
up.
The sub files a lane and then
somebody surprised at the end of
the day that.
Lone behold.
Subcontractors the did not
receive the benefit of his labor
for the benefit of the materials
that that here she provided to
enhance the value of your
property so so the quandary is
who should suffer that loss.
At and I'm not asking the
question I'm saying generally
that's the question who suffers
the loss.
And the way the law works is.
The property owner should suffer
that loss because their property
has been enhanced in value by
that work by that material and
we want to encourage.
Labour's we want to
encouragement chairwoman to to
do business and and and to
perform those functions so the
mid chairman mechanics and
chairman's lane is to allow.
Some assurance on the part of
those performing that labor and
supplying the the goods and
services to that property to get
paid.
Well.
Yes in many terms.
People think it's unfair because
the property owner.
Thanks are surprised but the
property owner New.
That parties the.
Drove a truck up to their
property and dropped off a load
of lumber or tile to the the
house for was out there putting
stucco patching stucco on the
house.
The property owner generally
knows that that activity occur.
And so the the the whole idea
about notice and and if we look
we look at the existing statute.
On page two line six.
The reason why the.
Mechanics might chairman lane
statute says the claim shall
state the name of the owner
reputed owner because often
times that person doesn't know
who the owner is.
I have no idea who the real
owner of that property is and
and and so.
The law tries to protect that
person because I.
They supplied their own sweat
and blood to to that effort they
supply materials to that effort
and so you were not putting the
burden on that person.
We're putting the.
Burden on the property owner to
make sure that they know and if
you deal with contractor you
need to make sure that that
contractor has releases from all
their subcontractors that
they're not going to file liens
and and there's ways to do that
but.
Your shifting the burden.
With this bill.
Yeah and so I'm gonna ask you
probably a number of questions
regarding the shifting of that
burden and and how we're
supposed to now deal with with
your bill if it if it becomes
statute.
So my first question madam chair
and representative who is the
owner property.
Madam chair representative I've
wanted to respond to the
comments that you that you've
already made this isn't about
allowing someone to get out of
paying what they owe this is
simply requiring that notice be
sent when a lien is placed right
now there is no notice required.
Well the fans are you one of the
final notice.
Madam chair representative there
have been in my build notices by
certified mail there have been
other suggestions that we also
hand deliver and
send it by email.
So I pull the statute that says
filing an instrument of record
in the county is notice to all
the world you don't like that
notice it provides legal notice
Madam chair representative I
don't believe that it does
provide legal notice it does
provide legal notice this body
this this state has said that
that instruments recorded in the
county records as to you
everyone property provides
constructive notice of that to
all the world so the so it does
provide notice Madam chair
representative the homeowner
does not receive that notice.
They may have to go look in the
county records or maybe the
newspaper I don't know but this
bill simply requires that the
person who is placing a lien
notify the homeowner so so the
fact Matt Madam chair
representative of the fact that
the.
The young man that was out doing
the work repairing the stucco on
the house that's not actual
notice.
That is doing the work Madam
chair representative that's not
notice that a that he's going to
place a lien on that person's
home and again this isn't about
allowing people not to pay what
they owe but it's protecting the
home owner from having a lien
placed on their home court
someone did even do any kind of
work at all.
Madam chair and Representative
have as a leading.
Even get.
Perfected if there was no work
or no the curial supplied.
Madam chair representative right
now anyone can go put a lien on
your home and they don't have to
provide any evidence that
they've done any work.
Okay.
I I suppose in that line of
thinking anybody can sell your
house too but but that doesn't
make it so.
Madam chair representative it
does that actually happen to me
some and put a lien on my home
they had never done any work I
spoke to a constituent a lien
was placed on their home madam
chair representative that person
had never done any work on their
home.
At and madam chair and
representative.
There was a document of record
that said there was a lean but
there can't be a lien unless
there was labor performed or
goods or services supplied
undergoing that.
If they didn't supply any of
those there may be a document of
record that says that but
there's no lean.
Then there's no there's nothing
that they are securing by that
piece of paper Madam chair
representative again this is
only to provide notice.
Okay.
Madam chair and and
Representative.
Again who is the owner.
The owner is the property owner.
The owners a property owner and
how is the party who wishes to
file the wing having supplied
that labor or goods and services
supposed to find out who that
owners Madam chair
representative if they perform
the work on their homes and I'm
assuming that they know who the
owner is.
Madam chair representative of.
Most subcontractors only have
dealings with the general
contractor would you agree with
that.
Madam chair representative I
don't know you don't know.
Madam chair representative then.
I would submit to you that in
many instances the subcontractor
does not know who owns the house
they know that the general
contractor that they're working
for told them to go to this
address on this day and perform
services or supply labor.
The lumber yard does not know
who owns a house that they're
delivering the lumber to
They know who they have a
contract with I don't know who
they're delivering to so how how
are they supposed to find out.
Who the owner of that property
is and what hoops are you making
them jump through to get to the
point where they can meet the
criteria set forth in page two
lines fifteen through twenty
Madam chair representative I
would assume that they could go
look up the property records in
the county.
So madam chair and
representative so so the owner
would be the person who the tax
assessor list of the owner of
the property.
Madam chair representative I
would assume so they but I would
assume that they would also they
could also ask the general
contractor with whom they may or
may not have a contract with
that property owner.
Hopefully they do have a quorum.
Madam chair representative
With the up to hire someone
like me to go examines the title
to determine who the owners are.
Madam chair representative I
don't know what they would have
to be face I suppose they could
if they wanted to.
Madam chair representative your
requiring them to serve notice
on the owner correct Madam chair
representative that is correct.
And.
Madam chair representative views
stated that this was some pull
and I'm suggesting to you it's
not very simple.
In many instances it is
extremely complicated.
and finding out who the owners
of property are is not a simple
process if it were my job would
be a lot easier
I'm chair representative.
Having to go through those hoops
by someone who performs labor
whose supplies.
Material goods and services to
someone's property.
The reason that we don't impose
that is because.
Those are.
Cost that.
Are often times very difficult
for that forty to fair and again
for wanting to have.
The person that's a recipient of
those that labor goods and
services to be the one that that
bears a burden not the person
that supplying the state.
And and so it this is not just
notice this is shifting the
burden as I see it as those who
bears the obligation to do that
Madam chair and representative.
How long Vigil long is the lane
good for you do you know how
long a lame last four is valid.
Madam chair representative that
I do not know.
Madam chair representative would
you take my word for it if I
told you two years.
Madam chair representative I not
going to say that you're not
telling me the truth okay well
let me read you the statute in
the you can.
You can make.
Section forty eight dash to this
ten which is only what Senator
four sections be on this section
in the statute No Way provided
for in section forty eight dash
to dash one through forty eight
has to that seventy remains
valid for longer for a longer
period in two years after the
claim of lane is been filed
unless proceedings have been
commenced in a court of
competent jurisdiction important
binding arbitration within that
time doing for Selena.
So.
We we see a lot of cases where
people are upset about wings the
amendment filed of record.
And they say well all that work
was done ten years ago and
they're worried about the lead.
Well it's unenforceable.
The lane is unenforceable they
have two years to enforce the
lean.
And then it may still be of
record but it's unenforceable.
Now that doesn't mean there's
not mechanisms for the.
Subcontractor or the material
then or the labors to suit both
the property owner for money due
them.
But it does mean that they can't
for close on that lane is
prohibited by statute so.
We create an easy mechanism for
mechanics of materials then.
To filing.
And the burden is not on them at
all.
The burning ships once they try
to enforce it.
Once a triumph for Selena M.
four closed on the wing then
they have to go to a lot of the
work that I was talking about
they have to find out who the
real loners.
But I have to because that's the
party that they're going to
bring the action.
They have to incur all those
cost at that moment that they
decide to foreclose on the line.
And you can say the property
owner of at that point you know
is at a disadvantage or whatever
but.
Again we're trying to protect
the people that supply that
labor supply of those goods and
services and and you're wanting
them to encourage these cost up
front you've already stated that
those cost would not be.
Subject to recovery.
Well you set the certified mail
would would not be in total
recovery I guess I'll ask a
question Madam chair
representative.
Would you say that they met with
chairman or them labor would be
able to recover the cost of
finding out who the owner is
Madam chair representative that
is not included in the bill this
bill is merely to provide notice
to the homeowner that a lien has
been placed on.
M. madam chair representative of
the year requiring that person
to incur costs to find out who
the owner is.
Madam chair representative I
don't see that that's the
burdensome cost and I don't know
what the entirety of what you're
talking about is in terms of the
cost if it cost six dollars to
send a certified letter.
That's not a whole lot of money
if you're talking about sending
an email that isn't any money at
all.
Madam chair representative of
Madam chair representative of.
What what happens.
For who is the owner in this
scenario.
Party a owns the property.
Forty eight agrees to sell the
property to party be.
It's on the contingency that a
retaining wall is constructed on
the property.
A labor concrete workers.
Is hired to perform the work of
building that retaining wall.
That labor then secures rebar
and Siemens from from other
entities.
The
party a the owner of the
property.
Doesn't pay.
Any of those parties.
After the retaining walls built
in the conditions of their
contract with party be were met.
Forty eight delivered to the two
party be party B. files the
Fund well party be has at the.
The material in labour's filer
lane.
Maybe eight or shortly
thereafter party be.
Records the deed to the
property.
Which party were they supposed
to provide notice to.
Madam chair representative to
the party who they have the
contract with.
I would assume.
That may not be the owner.
So you think we would get the
point.
It's been a while trying to be I
think you can talk as much as
well at this point it's just a
lot more complicated than and
and when you get when you get I
mean you're looking at a house.
There are parcels of property
owned by hundreds maybe
thousands of co owners.
And.
Your requiring notice to be sent
by that labor to the owner well
the owners may be.
A thousand people.
Your little six dollars.
Return receipt requested thank
all the sudden become six
thousand dollars.
It's not simple in every case
and and this this bill shifts
the burden away from the very
party who's supposed to be
protected by the mechanics of
the chairman's lane act and and
you know I New Mexico on on and
on on this but for the it's not
as simple as.
We get it we know you can.
Well as as you think with with
those comments madam chair I
will relate for.
K. two one eight I do because I
got some information from
somebody else who is alerted
internet and that is the the two
year duration of the Lee this
correct but the problem is
actually notice should be
required because.
When the service and paid by the
general and the homeowners never
notified of leader that debt the
homeowners.
Out there in limbo that has a
lead on his or her property so
and the home owner probably
already paid the general.
So the homeowner doesn't know
who the subs are so it's really
not unreasonable to require
actual notice and it levels the
playing field so.
Anyone can put a lien on your
home and once it's done it
shifts the burden to the
homeowner to lift the leaves of
the burdens on the homeowner not
the solver the the general so I
think we should try to.
Private providers options as
possible for whomever Services
cheapest possible whatever is
filing a lien to notify the
actual person this burden
privately.
So I support this bill and I
just want to get the amendment
right madam chair.
Is there.
Well the.
The representative proposed this
amendment and we were just
trying to we brought up the idea
that a certified mail that you
may not want to require that but
maybe it should be one of the
options and we've given.
So you've given the
Homeowner and the potential the
person who needs to get paid
almost as many options as
possible to be notified.
Yes so talk about that
truthfully.
We live in a system down with no
notice is given.
So I think it's an improvement
if you just say mail to the
address to where the work was
performed truthfully or does it
make.
It's it.
Maybe I'm maybe I should wait
for other people to talk but it
it seems like we're putting a
lot on a a guy a plumber or of
stock or or of law.
So I'm sorry I'm interrupting
you Representative but if you
want to propose an amendment.
In.
That way I think the the
representative still has a for
sale it these are you still I'm
I'm ready to turn it over to you
chair I stayed a long time okay.
Representative Alcon Madam chair
in my life that I am seeing
someone wanted to demand up on
something other than the
building that houses or anything
like that and then resolved is
the only way they can collect
twelve collect what the they
were awarded two point.
I have a stand will here when
they were awarded in court was
the with either the lead on the
on the on on to per on the other
person's home so it's not just
construction it's more of the.
More than that.
This call.
Okay
so let's assess where we are
there is a an amendment that no
one has moved it does anyone
wish to I I I I hear there's
some concern about the actual
amendment that's been proposed
so is anyone moving the
amendment that was that was
meant suggested by the
representative the sponsor we
move it for discussion we
already did that okay
I just.
I think the sponsor should weigh
in on whether she wants to
change it for stick with this
for.
Representative one here.
So Madam chair representative so
I have a question so if we add
the the
Lee in mail certified mail.
E. mail and hand deliver.
If we did that what would what
would I have to do would have to
come back and you know other
amendment.
Or I guess I'm asking for a
little bit of no we if it's a
small amendment we can amend
with a few words we have allowed
people to do that so if somebody
wishes to propose an amendment
along those lines Representative
McQueen the the the.
Madam chair representative will
we have several different moving
parts yes we have the amendment
that's propose right we have to
change the amendment that's
propose we have that this we
don't have a change to the
amendment that was proposed
because there's no amendment.
With the reserves a mentor
Representative Chasey
Representative language that
would provide a list of options
correct so that's what I meant
by the change to the right for
the front amendment actually pay
and then.
I have suggested change language
for the copy a copy of the
recorded need as opposed to a
notice of going.
Yes so there's that's two
additional changes and and you
could add language that if you
don't have the person's address.
You know something like you you
mail it to the owner of record
in the is that Representative
divert at great length made some
good points
you know like new construction
that the property might not have
that and if your subcontractor
you might not know the owner the
owner of the property you'll
probably find out
You might not you know if you
probably find something so so
those are three possibly four
changes that I think we're
contemplating and I think that's
tough to do.
On the on the fly we we do
tomorrow chair yes we do.
Thank and.
Can anybody help with.
So truthfully I don't think it's
that hard you Representative
Chasey had some written words
that were email certified mail
or regular mail there's
something along those lines they
do not more insurance I added.
Shown.
Mail comment email comma hand
deliver comment or send by
certified mail with return
receipt requested which is what.
Representative had here.
I I think that gives a lot of
options to the person with the
burden to file a lead and
provide the notice but I think
Representative McQueen.
Have another good suggestions
that maybe we should just go
with adopting or not adopting
that suggestions of money that
changes just a little bit well I
we're not changing this because
we this has not been adopted
that's true tonight utilize
incorporated this into my words
exactly so what it is is if
somebody wishes to make a
suggestion about where to place
it into the into the bill we can
we can hear motion and determine
at that point madam chair I move
that on page two line sixteen.
After the work mail we enter a
comma the word email.
Comma the word sends send by
certified mail another comma.
Moreover but madam chair don't
you you need to leave the hand
delivered as one of the options
that's correct so it's comma
email comments sent by certified
mail comma or.
got it okay that's still in the
right.
Okay so that the promotion A. L.
if you want some afterward owner
seventeen.
State as reflected on the county
assessors.
Records or rules.
Can we still the first.
The amendment online sixteen
first sure.
So the motion is to would you
repeat it Representative after
the word mail online sixteen out
of the at a comma word email
comma send by certified mail
comma four.
For handle ever growing handle
over sorry there but that would
be the chance raised the chair
of the point yes Representative
just
I think the typical freeze is
sent by certified mail with
return receipt requested.
Just like it's written here
right on the amendment prepared
by the Legislative Council madam
chair after the word email comma
send by certified mail with
return
to open the window for tested.
On the.
For.
With return receipt requested
the current nursing classes.
Okay not a friendly amendment.
Yes it is Madam chair
representative yes it is that
check last question on the the
proposed yes yes Representative
plant manager so there was quite
a discussion to about where do
you send it
and I heard a suggestion of one
point about the last known
address.
I'm just concerned that we're
now we're implementing.
Not just legal notice but actual
notice.
which is fine if you want to go
that way but I think we need to
have finally clear about where
do I have to send this thing
yeah.
Well
That's why yes that's why
representative Nibert was
suggesting a second yeah another
amendment I was just trying to
make it easier going one.
so what I hear we just saying it
but but maybe it would be better
if we just have one amendment
Representative so if you would
want to suggest the language you
were suggesting if that's okay
with you.
I just think it's better to have
one claim motion online
seventeen after owner and it
will clarify a couple things.
After the word owner.
As reflected.
On the county assessors.
And I don't know whether they
call it assessors roll records
that I would record probably
would cover up to a record.
Because the county assessor does
maintain.
A list of the property owners
right where the tax notices.
Is there a come directly after
records.
Okay yeah.
Stated in the claim and an
excellent words is stated in the
claim within fifteen days
correct.
Is that friendly madam chair
representative that is a from
the amendment.
Okay so we still take me take
motion it's a friendly amendment
is here Representative free.
Surprise.
Chair and representative.
Let's assume that I'm building a
new house so what I usually do
is I have to transfer the land
to the general contractor.
As assigned rate in which you go
so he may be the.
Still registered at the
Of at the
assessors
Office rather than me who's
played a lot get the house.
Madam chair that that was my one
of my samples.
Sorry I missed that.
Okay.
So we have a motion.
Is there anyone in opposition to
the motion it the amendment the
amendment in motion on the
amendment.
Anyone in opposition to the
amendment.
You want me to take a role okay.
Who said yes.
I
always want you to take a role.
Yes let's take a role
thank you.
Thank you madam chair taking
role.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Gleim yes on the
amendment Representative I Mr
speaker.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes
Representative Nibert.
Yes Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Penske.
Yes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair.
Yes madam chair you have eleven
yeses.
Thank you we're now on the
original bill and if we could at
all possible.
Complete our conversation
promptly on the bill that would
be great and over the past.
And it.
Madam chair alternate motion to
table.
We have a motion to table where
you call the roll.
For
calling rural Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey ho.
Representative Lane yes the
table.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen.
The table to table
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Penske now.
Madam vice chair no.
Madam chair no.
Madam chair you have for yes is
to table and seven knows to
table.
We have a bill before us happy
to entertain a motion we have
ocean you go back to the motion
you and the reason is
Session.
Representative Chasey seven the
motion for a to pass as amended.
Would you call the roll please
it's.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes like
to explain my.
Yes go ahead after that okay
where is Representative Nibert
so.
Representative re with.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair you have seven yeses
in three nose for a do pass with
amendments on.
H. B. one seven nine
Representative McQueen.
Madam chair representative I'm
good yes because I like the idea
of
We blew right past the
discussion about whether or not
you send them a recorded copy
had additional amendments make
there should be saving language
about possibly posting the
notice on the property were
alternatives if you can't locate
the owner it's just
Representative Nibert is correct
there's a lot going on here and
we haven't addressed it and if
this bill gets put on the floor
it's gonna it's gonna blow up on
the floor like it did here so
Representative I hope you
continue to work on the floor on
the bill before you proceed
thank you venture.
Thank you Representative so next
on our agenda is Senate bill
forty seven.
I believe senator
Madam chairman members of the
committee for leader were
expenses apologies for being
able to be here I'm happy to
services Senate substitute here
today to address Senate bill
forty seven Senate bill forty
seven removes the language that
provides not just the authority
to motor vehicles department but
the requirements to NVD to
suspend licenses for two reasons
a failure to pay or failure to
appear in court.
It also in addition this bill
would allow any persons who are
currently has a suspended
driver's license to have that
driver's license reinstated if
it was removed for the same two
reasons as as stated this bill
received bipartisan support is
to travel to the Senate I hope
that we can expect that that
here as well and I'm displaying.
Just as important as what the
bill does is really what the
bill doesn't do and so I'm going
to cover that before I turn it
over to the expert witness it
does not change a driver's
obligation to comply with the
original citation so if you read
received a speeding ticket
you're still required to speak
to to comply with the original
citation it does not eliminate
suspensions for dangerous
drivers so if you had your
license revoked for do you why
because there you accrue points
on your driver's license
driver's license can still be
suspended and it also does not a
limit the court's discretion to
impose the same station so
rather than in the the imposing
the sanctions the courts then
would have the authority to
impose those sanctions based on
any sort of dangerous driving or
really for any reasons that a
judge may see fit I I got behind
this bill after speaking to my
local sheriffs in rural New
Mexico who explained their
frustration that that when they
often pull a driver over many
times the drivers even unaware
that their license has been
suspended and at that point it
compounds the issue because they
can no longer let that driver
drive away from the scene and so
their afternoons spent
impounding the car taking the
driver in and it just compounded
exacerbates existing situation I
feel that this bill may be the
first step into really
decriminalizing traffic
offenders which which bogs down
not only our our court systems
but also our law enforcement I
think also there's just been the
legislator in general has
expressed a desire to face crime
to hold our criminals
accountable but I would hope
that we agree that that minor
traffic offenders do not fall
into that category and so with
that I would like to introduce
our expert witness on this bill
Monica.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is money called and I'm the C.
director of the fines and fees
justice center and a former up
public defender are very happy
to be here with you today and I
stand for questions we also have
many people here to support the
bill but we know that there's
not a lot of time so we're happy
to just move right through it
and have them raise their hands.
Thank you.
Thank you
We'll go to the audience now
those wishing to oppose the bill
please raise your hand in the
audience.
Those online wishing to propose
raise your hand.
No one those wishing to support
the bill please raise your hand.
Okay we have quite a number of
people if you could keep it
we're we have to get to the
floor.
Okay well she said there are
people in the audience.
Glad to know.
Okay so if people could keep it
very brief or if you just want
to go with a hand raise that's
okay too so what whatever I mean
happy to call you back please
keep it brief we have to get to
the floor at five thirty.
So fund raiser hands okay okay.
Okay Deborah you want to okay
good okay thank you so we'll
come back to the.
let's go online anyone online
wishing to speak and so forth.
and then there's Matt Matt's
from Santa Fe police department
press.
Fire.
And
COVID Matt.
Thank you madam speaker.
Can you hear me yes.
Okay so yeah my name is Matthew
Martin I'm one of the board
members on the New Mexico
advisory board on the landing
fees.
I'm transport.
Senate bill forty seven related
to license suspension reform I
currently work in the community
of Santa Fe with the fire
departments
we work with a lot of
individuals who are extremely
vulnerable and and more
and I directly see how our
current system affects them and
our inability to make progress
in improving their quality of
life and finding employment
And just being able to drive
take care their loved ones so I
I hope that you all can support.
Thank you madam.
That's all right we'll go back
to two one eight operating
concluding comments before we
come back to the committee.
But we stand for questions
venture great thank you senator.
Representative vocals.
where madam chair I saw you.
I used to I feel everything that
came up.
Okay in the after last sedition.
Read the full calls to
magistrate courts around the
state.
And I was really disappointed to
find out that not only were the.
Tell me the suspension group and
we do but they were slapping
that's been toward.
I would say this okay so they
had a bench warrant that they
sixty nine Bucks I mean they had
a they had a failure to pay
sixty thousand dollars to cause
that's what did we do
coordinated pay it.
Court for slapping award for a
thousand Bucks.
And the offices but in the
driver's license.
And I was I was just in shock
because I never did that I all I
ever did was just suspend the
driver's license.
In the it wasn't just one or two
with a bunch of them.
Every one of the judges that I
called again with the same
enter.
So I yes the.
At the C. that hearing that that
I do this.
Have to support this because I
just could not see.
Somebody like I said the Senator
that I've always used to
somebody is not grants is cut
driving and
then rattling.
It's food over for speeding.
The officer has today committed
Dale and that and it's usually a
dumb kid powers
I have to go live with a
thousand Bucks.
To get back on the road.
So with that madam chair after
finding out everything I did
doing the research that I did.
I I don't have to support it.
Thank you madam chair.
You've come around well I
Representative lane and and
Representative free.
Thank you madam chair so as I
understand the bill.
I get a.
Well maybe the agency process
what six only for traffic
citations is that right.
Sure Representative yes and if I
a
and and madam chair there are
payment plans that are offered
for lower income folks but if I
get behind in payment plan this
remove the ability the court to
suspend my license that correct
Madam chair representative the
court doesn't suspend your
license it now what it would
move is the court would not
notify in the D. who requires to
who they would they would
suspend your driver's license
with project.
Yes and Madam chair
representative the court still
will provide notice but the
motor vehicle division will no
longer suspend what we're we're
removing the requirement that
the division will suspend for
those reasons and also payment
plans are not mandatory under
state law.
Madam chair so it's sloppy
sloppy important question but
the result is that for non
payment you don't have to worry
about getting a license to spend
anymore is that correct.
Madam chair representative yes.
And madam chair same for non
appearance.
Madam chair representative yes
your license may not be revoked
but you're still required to you
pay the original citation.
Madam chair and there are still
other remedies available to
court if the court's concern
about my not occurrence is that
correct madam chair and
representative yes in the court
may impose their own station
should they see fit.
Madam chair so if what what I
see the issue with having a
system where we allow for.
The suspension of driver's
licenses for someone that is
falling behind in payments.
Is it really it cuts people out
at the knees because if I don't
have a driver's license that how
much was he to work and if I get
caught driving on a suspended
license then my license gets
suspended for an additional year
and it's like this viral that
goes out of control
and so.
And plus I mean the the benefit
to the legal system.
I would submit is very
negligible if any by having the
remedy of of allowing a license
suspended for traffic find
cases.
So in and I I deal with this.
That I have dealt with this a
decent amount over the years and
I always work with as a
prosecutor try to get people to
get their license is reinstated
I don't ever really prosecute
these cases I I want the remedy
of get get a valid driver's
license back that's the in goal
right.
And so I think this would be
helpful for folks that.
You know maybe they're having a
hard time making ends meet or
whatever the cases but to to
Put them in this downward spiral
spiral of losing.
Their driver's license and then
having to make this hard
decision of do I want to keep
the job and risk driving on a
suspended license or do I not
I'm glad that this we remove
that as a remedy in light and as
I heard they're still other
committees bills that the court
can pose thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative read.
Madam chair Senator eight I
guess I I my one of my questions
is and I I remember it's been a
while since I've prosecuted
suspect is there is even that
mandatory four days in jail that
can be imposed there's a fine I
believe that can be imposed are
those options still available.
Madam Madam chair representative
I'm gonna let Monica answer that
I believe there's been changes.
Madam chair representative read
there was a change to that I
believe in twenty eighteen
twenty nineteen where they
removed the mandatory forties in
jail for suspended license so
now it's administrative
suspension there isn't a
mandatory time however there
still is a fine attached to it
and there's still the
possibility of jail time.
R. A. madam chair and expert the
possibly appropriations and and
stuff they can do all those
different things but so what it
does affect please just get
caught again this is not going
to keep suspend your license
over and over and and be driving
I I know what leader lane Santa
our goal often was just to get
them to have a valid license and
so we'd end up dismissing those
charges which is the provision
that you just please go get your
license reinstated so that
wouldn't be a whole nother year
because that's what happens but
I guess madam chair expert
Senator I just wanna make sure
that those other provisions that
the magistrates have if if they
feel are necessary they can
impose those.
Madam chair representative that
is the case it also creates just
a central entity within the
courts to expected to expose it
yet and I'm sorry to impose any
sort of consequences what we're
finding is that there was often
sometimes I should say lack it
they lacked communication or
what the the courts were not
always communicating with the
MPD and there are some cases out
there and which the citation had
been cleared and that was not
communicated with and B. D. and
later they find out you know
after a really bad day being
pulled over that it it should
have been reflect on their
driving record okay and then
madam chair Senator and and
expert it can also if failing to
pay child support is also one of
the reasons you can have their
license suspended also is that
still the.
Law Madam chair representative
will have to consider as well
Madam chair representative brief
that still that's still an
option that's not this bill
wouldn't get rid of that remedy
not connected in the with that
option okay thank you madam
chair you're welcome any other
questions from the members.
Representative welcome you ready
to make a motion.
Right.
Chair I would.
The second.
It was the second
a motion for do yes made by
Representative vocals seconded
by speaker Martinez I just want
to briefly say I I as a co
sponsor of this bill I'm very
pleased to see it moving forward
I think it really it really
supports the idea that you know
we we want people to be able to
go to work and I think
Representative Lane really made
that point in the by allowing
this system it's just a cycle of
accumulating fees and suspended
licenses that really run counter
what I think we really want to
be doing some very much
appreciated working with you on
the bill senator and looking for
hearing on the floor thank you
madam chair should note that one
of the points that senator Wirth
continue to make is that there
are over three hundred thousand
suspended licenses in New Mexico
today one in five drivers so the
odds are the two of you may have
your license.
You Representative lane and so
this is good news for all of us.
we have a motion for do you call
the roll thank you madam chair
calling rules Representative
Alcon.
This.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes Mr
speaker.
Representative McQueen yes
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm.
Representative pants again yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam
chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with eleven yes is
you have a do pass on Senate
bill forty seven as amended as
amended thank you very much
thank you senator.
All right I'd like to.
begin with a house bill two
sixty eight Arroyo Hondo the.
That's all.
And thank you
Enter I do have an amendment but
I would as the chair if you
could entertain the amendment
after our presentation sort and
before you go to the audience
for public comment.
Madam chair the
The legislature is the sole
authority in determining.
The governance structures of our
Spanish land grants and madam
chair house bill two Sixtyeight
would include the are right on
the the land grants as a land
grant governed by the provisions
of chapter forty nine article
one in our New Mexico statutes
that oil on the audio Land Grant
covers the historic villages of
San Antonio and by this and is
located between.
By the New Mexico house and
madam chair the around the land
grant was granted by the newly
formed Mexican government in
eighteen twenty three.
The heirs of the around on the
land grant we're recognizes fee
simple owners of its common
lands by the H. additional
District Court in nineteen
fourteen.
And madam chair the around the
the land run is following the
same process legislative process
that other similar land grants
are pursued in being granted
political subdivisions status
for example Chiellini came to us
in two thousand and six from us
to us in two thousand and seven.
to the school came to us in two
thousand eleven but not this out
the less than us to us in twenty
thirteen the Sierra of vehicle
al the president granting to us
in twenty thirteen the Monsanto
grant these mountain Grant two
thousand twenty nine madam
chair.
Enter the at the the early on
the land grant community has
been at the forefront of
protecting our traditional in
those final communities from
gentrification and cultural
annihilation.
of our agrarian traditions by
stopping a large scale
condominium development in the
nineteen seventies and madam
chair the infusion of hundreds
of newcomers from the east and
west coast of our country would
have decimated the landscape of
the centuries old settlement and
I have with me madam chair to
experts looking at Wayland I
yield to him first and also
Arturo are to let the zoom zoom
Madam.
Welcome.
One is that is Madam chair
representative on but it's
working though is that where the
issues
I have the.
Under let's see before you
today.
Four that we're voted in by our
elders just a year to ago so
forgive me with the some of the
uncomfortable clumsiness and may
have in this process.
What we're trying to do our best
to really take.
Us centuries old matriarchal
cultural process.
And and our way of doing things
in our community and fitted into
this kind of Robert's rules of
order thing here today so with
that I try to provide you all
with as many Vigil as we can
because to us although it it is
a formal document in the
legislative bill of for us we
want you to get to know who we
are what we're about and how is
the function so with that if you
give me just two or three
moments that I to give you a
brief with the goal of nasal
story about that and and and as
you look at these pictures you
can see what the historic value
looks like.
Yes
you know decades ago to to more
modern times you know we have a
history in that area of
documentation of our people on
indigenous side from seventeen
oh six and formal letters to the
Spanish crown of some of our
ancestors who were.
Of borrowing animals and crops
without permission seventeen
forties of some of us are
banding together with them to
protect the Tafel no villages
from some of the Comanche people
with that we also married into
and so we have a very
complicated identity jollity of
of those who showed up here
along with the explorers and
those who were here before hand
right but in our valley we we
know too many research and
academic on documents that we've
been establishing that place in
our families have been there
since well before our land
grants so we're talking a
hundred seventeen fifty to
eighteen ten our our sixty
dollars are on the bus all those
other on page two you can see
have been around and you know
some of our genealogy money I
did a year ago two years ago for
money bill trail which is going
to hand out we go back fifteen
generations and were mixed from
everything from plus cutting
indigenous people from the value
of medical city two I have an
African descent it was a
dramatic about guess who came up
right and came up to Tom Boston
down the tiles as well as I have
done in French families who also
married in and helped us keep
our land so with all those
traditions you know we're trying
to figure out where where do we
fit how do we continue to move
the stuff forward and in these
pictures you can see I gave you
some pictures of some of our
major gathering sites on page
two you can see the church are
traditional just twenty that my
father in a bunch of our
ancestors used to go to school
in our campgrounds you can see
that with the sign.
In our campgrounds in our
communal sites to us that more
than just.
hobby spaces there really where
we have a lot of spirit and soul
and and memories of one example
on page of for you can see
there's on what are we lost that
forty years ago through adverse
possession quite tied to taxes
in in twenty fifteen we were
notified we didn't really do
that however I bought it for
that to register it we got it
back in
by feet in by chance we were
able to get community donations
and restore it and I think in
August we had intrude Committee
visit us and we're able to get a
wonderful tour of that you can
see on page six and seven
they're examples of our our
annual cleaning days from our
compass on to our cemeteries are
church area are sick as well as
well as our land grants will
always do that in the
intergenerational way on page
seven you can see my my well
there I mean either way it was
ninety five years old not
feature sitting there with a
five month old no I will into
eight generations were nine and
ten generations of documented
which I mean by that is some of
our families go back before a
baptisms and.
Formal government documents but
some of us
also identify with that side as
well.
So if you look on page eight
nine you can also see the way
that we do things is always
multi generational.
I do apologize that some of our
you could make here today in a
couple real is already left
because they had meetings back
home
but within that you know please
feel free to ask me for any
other follow up information
because as Representative had
shared we're under very special
type of pressure that's been
incrementally gaining on us over
the generations and I think our
esteemed resident and retired
scholar professor so we are you
guys from UNM has written many
things nineteen nine ninety four
eighty seven eighty nine on the
impact of the ski valley
industry on the real on both the
tourism gaze on gentrification
and conditions in the
subjectivism the tiles so
there's a lot of things
happening to us because we don't
have the status of the
protection of the law to make
sure some of our own because in
some of our own distant family
members don't quite titled don't
borrow any crew here in there
and then we end up with nothing
right.
so as you get towards the back
of the
The back of the a presentation
on page eleven we have a couple
basic.
Key concept into a salon
employees into is is more than a
sense of belonging for spiritual
belonging to a place in our our
generations.
The ancestors of lead sweat and
been buried there right yes the
lan I. is is the cyclical
knowledge sharing which I feel
we're doing today right I really
don't know what you all do and
how this all plays works we're
hoping you'll guide us through
this that's part of the best
online are you teaching me in me
sharing with you what we're
about and moody's most another
concept that we practice and my
board does a good job my other
do the job of keeping me in line
and it means that whatever we do
is we truly beneficial right and
we want to make sure that this
lodges doesn't help us but to be
honest with you all it's gonna
help a lot of people because the
real on the level to our valley
it's one large tributaries to
the Rio Grande river and it's
one of the endangered once and
you know couple years ago that
was about a hundred forty one
million dollars a tax money that
was proposed to go to this
development expansion but to a
lot of efforts we were able to
get that turned into five
million dollars record or in
some funding to monitor the
river that were all involved
with as well so these are the
type of things we want to make
sure you know we highlight to
you all that you all can not
just start understanding but we
want this to be an invitation
for you to help join us help
join us in in our process not
just survive but to really
figure out how do we continue
for generations to have a really
wonderful healthy wholistic
existence with agriculture with
water with land in with the
communal practice.
One of the tangible things I can
no on page fourteen it gets to
seven echo project we had a
wonderful grant to use for
service where we within three to
four hundred acres all that
money stated community we have
researchers from middle school
high school college what
happened after four years is we
didn't have an entity to receive
funding to continue it so it had
to discontinue so one of the
benefits you today about having
our bill passed would allow us
to receive that status so that
that program can be re birth and
we can continue to fire
mitigation of fire prevention
not just in our land grants but
for the surrounding private
landowners
as you know the reason I say
that is nineteen ninety seven we
had a huge fire we had a really
huge scary fire and and we're
still worried about that and if
you turn to the last page
there's just a brief timeline
there we can give you from our
research and our our own
original documents start in
eighteen thirteen with the out
of a on the graphene.
Granted eighteen twenty three
when we were given independent
status eighteen ninety two the
cry the court a private claims
approves the requests nineteen
await the path in nineteen
fourteen was a really important
court case where we had all of
that if proven legally right
within the the new US state of
New Mexico and one thing that's
not on there that I wanted to
share with you want to be happy
passes around twenty fifteen our
elders when they were board
members they went ahead in the
consolidated the hundreds of
years of documents of paperwork
all into the same name and I
know if there's any questions
about what ownership and what
means more actual we do have
stuff that's registered the
shows were all of we have all of
our documents under one name and
the other in what brings to
today.
Although my dad and the elders
have done this for the last ten
or fifteen years
and it hasn't.
Quite turned out that we we
needed it is we don't have the
luxury right now to have this go
to another session we have two
different legal situations that
we've been dragged into that we
don't have the ability to fend
ourselves from and without you
all to connection to support us
we might have to turn to selling
land gonna be for years land and
we would really hope you can
help us thank you thank you
thank you we are going to be
needing to get to the floor soon
so Arturo perhaps we could hold
off on a presentation by you and
you could be available to answer
questions is that okay.
Because I vote on this bill
today.
Senator that's perfectly fine
all right very good we'll try to
work with you on that and chair
of yes go to the amendment I
definitely Representative.
Two oh two number two two five
two two five six two nine point
one.
Thank you Representative thank
you.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair of the amendment
stems from the committee
analysis that the oil industry
one Land Grant cannot it be
included in the provisions of
chapter forty nine article one
for qualify as a unit of
government because they were not
confirmed by Congress for the
quarter private land claims of
eighteen ninety one.
Madam chair that the courts have
given the legislature wide
ranging authority in determining
the governance structure of our
land grants confirmed or not
confirmed madam chair.
Madam chair we came land when I
say we I'm talking about the
legislature we gave land grants
status in chapter forty nine
article three to the Japanese
the land grant south on Las
Vegas in the early nineteen
hundreds Madam eight years ago
we gave unit of government
status to this I'm not going on
the vehicle about the quest the
grant.
Madam chair in these two cases.
The survey of the surveyor
general along with the pan the
US patent and confirmation
degree of these two requests
sat on the desk for Congress to
ratify that they never came
madam chair.
And madam chair does that
inaction by Congress make these
two nine grants less important
or inferior and unworthy of the
dignity and integrity given to
confirmed land grants madam
chair definitely not.
And madam chair are amendment
establishes a pre requisite
in section forty nine dash one
dash two item may which allows
viable land grants like the a a
oil under the land grants
another partition land grants
the Avenue to petition the
legislature for admittance into
the chapter forty nine article
one provisions which includes
acceptance as a unit of
government.
And madam chair I yield to
October to let that if he wishes
to also add on to the the
amendment if it's a if you don't
mind I'd like to hear from the
audience I'm trying to keep us
on track if you if that's okay
with you guys so I'd like to
we've heard about the amendment
I'm sure we'll have a
conversation about when we come
back to the panel I'd like to
hear from anyone wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill
and your amendment.
I don't see anyone in the
audience raising their hand
anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill I
don't see anyone raising their
hand those wishing to speak to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand okay if
you could try to keep it one
minute or so I'd really
appreciate it Sir.
Right.
To participate agencies.
Thank you very much Sir yes Sir.
Previous president of the board
I think we're in
I have
about the Representative will
serve as vice president at the
very start of the civil war.
I have
Wanted to let you know that.
You may of twenty seven December
two hundredth anniversary.
We are.
Nine years old
in.
We have.
I will.
I will insurance.
There's no doubt we own the
land.
as of this.
I'm not ready for this committee
your committee's request on
behalf of
the committee
thousand returns and five years
in the chambers of the Senate so
of these groups really consider
of our efforts to get political
subdivisions that is which is
really really native thank you
thank you I anyone else yes Sir.
Of the name is are in Toyota and
I support this bill to sixty
eight I'm and to the upper of
the land grants I also am and I
would be working with the.
Of G. R. login I am the more
normal for the settlement of our
council we worked on that
program for four years in a
table to be a very very positive
US of programs and.
my father is father exit over
errors where they all.
Retrieve the materials to build
their homes now the land grant
is overgrown with small domestic
your trees and shrubs that need
to be thinned out so an Avenue
to find the money used to
recruit let me Adams to copy the
J. R. notice everyone a little
for federal program would really
help us if this bill was passed
thank you thank you anyone else
wishing to speak in support of
the bill.
Yes Sir.
Yes Sir and.
My name is a very Montoya hi
being a board member for.
I was a board member for about
thirty years we went through a
few lawsuit trying to get the
land back which we lost.
Three four hundred acres.
The.
We appreciate you thanks help us
on this do we can get some of
that land.
Thank you thank you Sir and one
more year madam chair committee
members my name's Megan P. R. L.
I'm not the secretary of the
refund all of the about land
grants and I stand in strong
support of this bill.
Thank you so much yes Sir my
name is a yes also served as a
vice president on the board I am
strongly for page contains
very good thank you so much.
All right I don't see anyone
else with their hands raised
we're back to the sponsor.
excuse me I'm sorry there are
people online my bad so yes
Tricia Martinez.
Good evening good afternoon my
name is Dr Tricia Martinez and
currently I serve as the
treasurer on the executive
committee for the royal Honda
Audi about community land
grants.
And conservation trust.
sedate there I am Han though
anybody executive board and
members of our land grant
request your support for H. B.
two sixty eight.
Windows or stories document the
breadth of our heritage through
land based experiences and our
history and livelihood remain
deeply intertwined with their
community land grants as my
eight year old daughter feed
stated in her last presentation
the land grants where she gets
to play with our prima Donna and
where she gets to learn about
the plants that make medicine
she enthusiastically explains
that she is a proud New Mexicans
I have a deep respect for elders
and all the time and energy they
invested protecting our land
grants now it is up to us to
have important shoes to fill to
use our working knowledge and do
everything we can to protect our
land community in traditions so
we stand before you today are on
zoom as United unity for your
support as we navigate the
legislative process these to
become a political subdivision
of the state in planning our two
hundred year anniversary
celebrations I recognize this is
a timely request provide thank
you.
Thank you appreciate it thank
you
Joe Travis.
So we need to Travis.
You need to you.
I'm sorry again I'm sorry madam
chair members of the committee
drive up Representative Garcia
my name is to open the door to
this I am the president we're
sending into the land grant
raised a hand in support of this
bill and I hope that the
committee passes do vote a do
pass thank you thank you.
Steve.
Do you know I'm Steve pelos
hello also.
Steve.
Steve okay Steve I'm gonna try
Andrea Padilla now.
And yet.
Can you hear me yes.
Yes my name is Andrea Padilla
madam chair members of the
committee I am the president of
the New Mexico Land Grant
assistance apple and we
represent twenty nine land
grants that fall under a real
and I'm speaking on behalf of
all of them to say that we
support this bill one hundred
percent we'd like to see oil on
the already but get their status
as political subdivisions so
they can continue to do to find
work that they're doing for
their community for their use
and for their elders I ask that
you vote past this and move it
on thank you very much thank you
Augustine was zero.
From.
Yes madam chair madam chair my
name is levels to settle I am
the president of the Minnesota
department will know that what
about.
And I am truly in support of of
the passing of this bill I'd
like to I'd like to
acknowledge and we can.
I'm refuse well and you know I'm
new to this process.
You know and and one thing that
I've been able to do with with
the voices it's easy to hear the
voices of the people crying go
us pleading.
But what I ask of you and your
committee madam chair is that
you would listen to the heart of
the people the heart of the
matter is we have a lot of we
all have a love for communities
we have a love for our land we
have a love for tradition and
culture I ask that you would
pass this bill on behalf of the
heart of the people not on
behalf.
Of the noise that you hear.
Once again thank you I support
this bill thank you thank you
very much Leonard Martinez.
I thank you madam chair my name
is Linda Martinez residence hall
located trauma land grants that
are we start is standard for
uses in strong support a
hospital sixty four oh one W.
are we would fully you'd
graduate status of political
status steps political
subdivisions status of the state
of New Mexico and move this
along thank you madam chair
thank you and lastly.
Marsia marsia Gonzalez.
This Gonzales.
Miss Gonzalez.
All right well let's go back to.
Madam chair of we're on the
amendment.
Okay.
So we described the amendment
Representative is a dimension is
there a motion to adopt.
We can't we have a motion to it.
I.
Made by Representative Alcon
second by.
More on discussion of the
amendment.
I.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair so.
Madam chair Representative there
were some email about this
there was a proposed amendment
which I thought was pretty good.
I don't understand this
ammendment.
on item to its is provided to
the geographic area of the
community designated as a land
grant Shelby within the
boundaries of land.
We don't doesn't need to
geographic area of the land
grants.
Their political subdivisions
it's that they don't have a
boundary like a city or county
you know that they have
jurisdiction over the land they
own there might be a tied to the
their historic plant but we
don't designate.
Their areas so I don't
understand what that's doing and
then the issue that was flagged
by the analyst was the fact that
we were we were not withstanding
things right so if you look at
the the bill.
And this is off the off the
equipment if you look at the
bill on page three not
withstanding the provisions of
subjects may we were fixing
subsection eighty to say
designated in this section I've
been to.
So we fix subsection a but then
we left them understanding
language in.
Hi to me which was the point of
fixing subsection a so we would
have to say that.
So we need to strike that was
standing language HNF in the in
I I don't know at the market
region the audience I don't
understand what the Geographic
Area references because I don't
think we anticipate a geographic
area.
Etcetera I'll to
Well both October to let the and
the our director mark Edwards
and to kind of address that
concern Madam.
Yes yes yes Representative.
Your name's market rates of
reflects the council service
here is for the sole purpose of
providing technical assistance
on the matter before this
committee you know.
Appear in support or opposition
better before you.
Madam chair representative claim
identified the heart of this
amendment which is
Item number two the.
Why am I going to a list of of
land grants as opposed to a set
of conditions for land grants
which is the way that the
statute has been.
For.
It makes you.
This amendment would updated
saying has designated in this
section so that means the
legislature for instance who
gets in and who does not get in
to chapter forty Niners one
the rest of that provided that
it's separate set of ties.
If.
The only.
For the foundation of the
Legislature designating.
Land grants as political
subdivisions the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo said there has
to be a tie to lands that were
recognized for are subject to
the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
The other.
Amendments with striking the
term land grants Merced is which
is solely in New Mexico law
Congress never use that term
that's a term that was created
by the legislature that's just
an update but the entire statute
has to get ready for at four
least be founded on the treaty
and the recognition of land
rights under the treaty one of
the things that the committee
thanks committee has struggled
with over the years in after
many presentations is that the
histories of land grants are so
convoluted that.
The fine things that don't fit
within the lines that to have
been created in the past but
clearly we're alike arrived on
reserves were created under
Mexican law were established and
somehow never got off the desk
of the surveyor general Uh but
that ties to that ties to the
treaty the idea of putting it
within the geographic boundaries
is that there were a number of
lands that were.
Designated or recognized by the
US government one shape or form
that have.
So you're saying okay if your
community was in that land that
designated area.
Then with the legislature has
the ability to say okay we just
recognize that you've been
appropriations land grants you
were tied to put to
Representative Garcia calls the
mother plant in some how you
split off from that mother grant
we're going to recognize you as
a political subdivisions or give
you quickly subdivisions to.
That means that there is some
boundary and the legislature
can't just say this homeowners
association that happens to be
inTaos they get to be a land
grant this homeowners
association in Las Vegas gets to
be able.
It it all ties back to lands
that are.
Recognized by the treaty in
which
either the.
Federal government has a
responsibility or interim
constitution the state
government has a.
Its own.
Our responsibility to respect
those land titles.
You madam chair I also you to
October to that that he wishes
to also address the concerns of
a sentiment we sure are total.
thank you madam chair
so I I think the the authority
for the legislature you know
the.
Comes from the New Mexicans
Jushin in this plan area
authority you guys have the
ability to sort of enact
legislation to cover the
different entities hi in fact
the way that land grants are
covered in statute in other
specific statutes some of those
statutes do make reference to
the treaty some do not I think
it is highly up to the
discretion of the body of the
legislature to determine how
they want to recognize as land
grants I think there is a
conflict with that not
withstanding language and and
sort of this is descriptor I
think that the treaty as
mentioned in forty nine one of
the statutes
I think what would
Representative McQueen sort of
alluded to what would be I guess
just sort of the language that
would state clearly stated that
the land grants that are covered
under the statute are as follows
you know or within the section
designated in the section the
reason why that changes sort of
important or is happened is when
the general provisions were
created in two thousand and six
nineteen New Mexico seven there
was a hundred hundred plus land
grants in the state of New
Mexico some covered by specific
provision some not we fast
forward a hundred plus years and
there's actually only a I have a
finite number of land grants
that still exist roughly around
thirty five land grants so we
know who those communities are
I'm communities like the Arroyo
on the levy but community for
all intents and purposes our
land grant communities that
function like land grants with
board of trustees and the
language that's currently in
consists section eight are
subsection a of this section
does sort of prohibit the
ability for the legislature to
recognize those land grants are
those communities with a
political subdivisions status in
the most appropriate place and
that would be under forty nine
one because the as I mentioned
the they do function as land
grants with common lands in the
management of those lands
they're not a municipality
they're not at another special
purpose in a government they are
a land grant and so that that
amendment which is help clarify
that
But I think the amendment you
know.
Personally I think it is an
extremely we need to refer to
the boundaries in the fact that
the this statutes already in
forty nine one one name the
treaty and it may be simpler to
just state that the land grants
are designated here by name on
it that would clarify things.
Let's see if we can.
I can do okay.
Madam that's in our minor
response to the representatives
questions Representative McQueen
are you.
So
your response.
The floor is yours.
And chair representative Garcia
You know I want to see this move
forward this change affects all
the land grants on the list.
You not not just wrote a hundred
the.
Read.
so we need to get this right I
don't know with that that the
language after provided that I
don't know why it's in there I
think the I think what we're
trying to do is say.
The Langrisser political
subdivisions are the ones on
this list.
And that's what that designated
in the section says.
Then we have this other language
which I don't I don't think is
needed in and we still haven't
fixed the not withstanding
language.
That is in the bill that the
triggered this discussion versus
Yes and Representative by senior
expert mark Edwards wishing to
respond if the so can you yes
and chair representative every
other the land grant that's
listed in in here
already fits those requirements
because that's existing on
that's how they.
Were approved the one that
doesn't.
Meet the.
Qualification of having been
confirmed by Congress is the
real Colorado.
And but they did have a patent.
That would from the surveyor
general so they still have the
they still fit within this if
you take out the.
If you make it confirm or
confirm by Congress.
So that is if they have a patent
for they have they were
recognized by the surveyor
general or confirmed by Congress
they're still within that number
of of land that was recognized
in some shape or form by the
federal government.
So Senator Representative Mr
Edwards.
I get that in the and I see the
benefit of preserving the the
language about confirm by
Congress for the the court
private land claims because
that's the history of the land
grants.
That being said that what we're
saying is you're a political
subdivisions if the legislature
passes this in the governor
signed.
And so with when the the
language still says not
withstanding the provisions of
subsection may which isn't of
our Arroyo Hondo read that in a
real Colorado that's
inconsistent we need to take
that language out because we've
changed the language up front
that says if you're on the list
here on the list so we don't
need to say no standing anymore
I don't disagree with that chair
representative that you could
amend the amendment to say take
the not withstanding language
out of H. and.
Whatever the other but it is so
subsection mentor Mr Edwards so
the provided that the geographic
area what hi I'm unclear what
that means because like the
geographic area of the the land
grants there's a historic
geographic area that but few if
any.
Control that is common lands.
Yeah most of them only a very
small piece but.
You know there still at that
this political subdivision
without a clear boundary and but
you're referring to boundaries
that we've never actually
doesn't need as reasons as with
in those boundaries so is within
the boundaries that were
recognized by.
Congress or the surveyor general
their their boundaries may have
diminished.
But they're still low.
Their entire existence is tied
to lant so that plan was in a
boundary of some sort that was
recognized by the federal
government Madam chair
representative okay this is
service areas I guess.
I think.
I think we're adding language we
didn't really need that but I
understand your point I think
the language at the top of
the page to needs to be fixed.
because we still have the other
that as provided in article one
install it's also.
in that think we need to strike
the two not withstanding clauses
in F. and H..
So madam chair maybe maybe I can
do this with
Okay but I don't fully
understand I into on the
amendment but all accepted
on the top of page two.
HM so the session begins on page
one but tell not apply to any
land grant is now managed or
controlled in any manner.
By virtue in should we should
strike.
Four one one and the the
statutory cetacean line too so
it's as by virtue of any.
General or support special act
in chapter forty nine is there
are some other land grants that
are listed there and then I
would strike the page three
point eight notwithstanding
through the comma so I.
I want to.
Maybe intersects this is getting
complicated in a way that is
worrisome to me
and I I would like to
accommodate on the fly
minutes of when it's relatively
small but this we have an
amendment that you're concerned
about.
We have additional amendments
that you're proposing in yeah I
think it would be cleaner and
better Representative I'm not
trying to extend the for us to
have a nice clean bill if you
would be willing to work with
representative Garcia taken we
can get it back on as fast as we
can Madam chair
I think we can get this fixed
tonight can we bring it back
tomorrow yes I will do my very
best to accommodate your.
Do that there are these friendly
amendments
I think we need to work out the
amendments and in collaboration
with the our drafter and Arturo
to let the but I'm amenable to
the recommendation of the chair
yeah I would like to I really
would like it to be clean the.
We'll do the madam chair.
Thank you so let's roll the bill
will try to get on tomorrow's
agenda I am certain
Representative McQueen will be
ready and available to help with
some of the work we're doing
here so thank you I have one
more thing folks thank you Mr
Representative reed has a
memorial
Which she would like to try to
get done it's very simple I
think the difficult come to
find.
What we have if we have
Representative remote present.
If there's a date by which you
would like to have it because of
some of them that's happening so
I'm I'm trying to accommodate
one of our members so.
Madam chair and members of the
committee or getting a Committee
set up on this this memorial why
we're trying to get it done it's
on February twenty eighth I'm
also on a
memorial with the Representative
Garcia sleeving
and it's a memorial for the
parents and victims of home
sites in Albuquerque and so we
were just going to have a both
read on that day is what we were
trying to do.
Anyway go ahead and stand for
questions with that.
Can I move the substitute for
discussion.
In the two to five number as I
see it is two two two two five
five three five point one is
that correct yes ma'am that is
correct we have a motion to
discuss the proposed substitute.
And the discussion.
Substitute.
To pass on house memorial ten
are the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
memorial ten.
We need a do not pass on I got
this right House memorial ten
and they do pass on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House memorial yes some of
and all second okay so we move
by Romero seconded by
Representative re discussion of
the memorial.
I see no discussion we've call
the roll.
Calling all madam chair.
Representative upon.
Representative Chasey.
