Here.
Representative Townsend Here.
Vice chair Cabana.
Vice chair Kevin up.
Which.
Madam chair I'm president thank
you.
So I'm I wanted to just thank
all of the staff we do have a
new Committee assistant was
Georgia Evans Georgia you have
your video that you can we can
say hello.
And
we have Lisa Mona who was with
us last year and you all have
met Lisa we don't have anyone
who's new to this committee so
I wanted to thank Ellen could
steal our chief committee
analyst who kind of gets
everyone organized our analysts
are working the committee
analysts and the major analysts
are working offsite and
so if you would like to just say
hello each of you Helen take
over here.
Your muted all right there we go
I think hi I'm Ellen Kent's deal
you know me and I am very happy
to see you all again.
The analysts have we've been is
doing every morning and trying
to keep ourselves get ourselves
on track so we're anxious to.
Take over all these bills what
five hundred bills
Representative all poems that
we've already got okay work work
work on board.
Thank you.
Attempt at nextel in.
Okay go ahead.
Hi this is Christina this what
we are from this part of the
state Representative Kevin
Boyle.
All of these hi this will be my
third year with.
Everybody.
Can you talk louder.
That's better okay.
I am I'm Sheila Lewis and I've
been analyst for awhile but not
last year I missed you all I'm
really glad to be back so let's
have a great year.
Kevin Shendo Ballater I'm that
kind of alligator this is my
third year as an analyst and we
certainly welcome back the
committee and look forward to
working with everyone.
And we work really closely of
course with the major analyst
your email post.
I'm this is my sixth regular
session or two special sessions
and I'm working this session
with Priscilla who used to be a
committee analyst but she came
over to the good side.
Hi I'm Priscilla Garcia and as
Judy said I'll be working with
her I worked twenty eighteen and
twenty nineteen House Judiciary
sessions and I'm happy to be
back.
Mr value have seniority so let
you go first for the.
Republican allies.
All only in one sense of being.
Having having great here great
beers but hi.
The two sessions back in two
thousand and seven and two
thousand eight.
And background travel more state
is not here you will be working
with any for the.
Republican in order.
I'm Travis was with us last
year.
we did get to meet her that okay
create all right
listen do you want to say hello.
Yourself.
Yourself there you go.
I worked with the committee last
year and this is my tenth year
at the session.
Thank you and charges or
anything you'd like to say.
I'm here as well.
This is George's first year to
work the legislature right yeah
all right good deal ready
Let's just go alphabetically and
Representative
Mexico next year just say a
little about your district hello
this.
Thank you madam chair I am
Roadrunner into the serial
Representative district six in
to five to see Mohan McKinley
County this is my thirteen deer
on the legislature.
And this is my thirteenth year
as a member of the judiciary and
thanks for keeping me here madam
chair.
Thank
for those of you who don't know
Representative outcomes really
are only judge on the committee
here it was a former magistrate.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I'm
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong and I represent
district seventeen which is in
the north valley of Albuquerque
I chair the house health and
Human Services Committee also
and
this is my fifth year in the
legislature my third on this
committee so I'm happy to be
back you tax my
my legal knowledge on on this I
am a non practicing inactive
attorney whose always focused on
public policy and not
representing clients thank you.
Mr chair emeritus.
I'm.
On I'm Daymon Ely I
Representative district twenty
three which is Corvallis
northwest sector job growth in a
tiny bit of Rio Rancho I think
my message to everybody as has
been pretty consistent we're
gonna have to be patient while
other this is going to be a
historic session in many ways
but it's also I think going to
be difficult because of these
inmates and you know we've
already seen a Legislative
Council Service they're backed
up so I mean I think all of us
it's incumbent on all of us to
be patient but I am really
looking forward to this session
shall we should be fine thanks.
Thank you.
Representative Lewis.
Thank you madam chair hi
everyone I'm charging Lewis I
represent house district twenty
six which is located in
southwest Albuquerque I have and
and the Legislature cents twenty
thirteen and I've also served on
this committee as as a member
since twenty thirteen and
I was the vice chair as a
freshman so I had a great mentor
via.
Her Chasey and I'm happy to be
back on this committee I'm happy
that we have a lot of our staff
thank you guys are all great and
I definitely agree the brains of
the operation so you guys keep
us on our feet and I look
forward to having a very
productive Committee thank you
madam chair.
Thank you so we really have
another vice chair emeritus here
although.
You've got other titles now to
we would work included
Representative Cook but as as we
know he's on his way back home
Representative the queen.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair
so Representative Matthew
McQueen house district fifty.
Persons of Santa Fe towards
fluency in Bernalillo county's
this is my fourth term.
my third term on Judiciary my
first.
And I was on a transportation
and that's not nearly as much
fun as Judiciary so I'm glad to
be back I am a practicing
attorney.
But like Representative divert
I'm a transactional turning on
the litigator so I have a little
bit of a different focus
and I think I probably bring
that different focus to the
committee thank you.
Thank you Representative night
Burt.
Who went to middle school with
one of my husband my husband's
oldest daughter in Clovis right
school great right okay.
Greg Nibert Representative
district fifty nine choose link
and and Chavis counties so kind
of the central part of the state
I've been on this committee
sensor.
I was elected to office and can
buy.
I just can't seem to to extract
myself I know very little about
the going to court I'm like your
Representative McQueen I I sent
us do early morning work all the
time we are looking at abstract
so my background basically oil
and gas title examination and
contracts.
Thank you.
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair I will
remind Representative far
northeast heights of Albuquerque
it's district thirty one this is
my sixteen year and the
legislature I've been on this
committee all the way back to
work and chair part which is
here.
Thank you yes and
Representative Townsend.
Yes ma'am thank you madam chair
Yeah down to my Representative
district fifty four which is
portions of any Otero and Chavis
County.
I am not an attorney I've got a
background in business of
predominantly and all and gas
so I look forward this is my
second year I feel like you
can't the dog down with all of
these attorneys
when I was in business it wasn't
good if you had to be an
attorney for a.
Office very often so I I
I tried to thanks to always have
the best internet and not to
spend very much money with
things so very are thank you.
So I don't know really if you're
doing penance are entertaining
yourself here.
Representative.
I don't at the speaker joined us
yet.
Okay I'm gonna go to the new
vice chair.
Thank you madam chair and good
afternoon I am grateful to be
beginning my second term with
you all the house Judiciary
Committee my name is Nick I
allowed act as an up and I
represent New Mexico's health
district thirty three and then
you Ana County about four hours
south of here the district
includes three historical
communities come follow up there
to that amendment at the end
where my family that for
generations the where I raise my
little one it also includes the
west side and south side of what
proved that New Mexico State
University in Las not the bad
lands on the west side of the
valley there in the I think and
feel every day that district
thirty three of the microcosm of
our incredibly diverse New
Mexico
I am definitely a little bit
intimidated and overwhelmed but
also excited and ready for this
incredible opportunity to serve
as the vice chair for our help
due to sherry Committee I look
forward to learning from each
and everyone of you and
appreciate the relationship that
we've built so far on both sides
of the aisle especially in the
moment and and learning
conversations I've had with
leader Townsend and
Representative neighbor in the
Energy powerful another state
that so thank leader Townsend I
also not an attorney my
background of the public policy
and research so I'm a policy
nerd at heart you're going to
but I also have a background
mostly in health care policy and
public safety including criminal
justice department a couple of
years as they've used very cheap
of recidivism reduction of the
New Mexico corrections
department so I appreciate being
in this incredibly deliberative
body and look forward to our
session ahead thank you madam
chair.
Thank you so much I really
appreciate that so I on my I'm
Gail Chasey and I'm here in my
neighborhood in my district
right now I I have the
university area of Albuquerque
the knob hill area is downtown
some of south Broadway and
I was in special education for
many years and when I started
serving on the house Judiciary
Committee in the year two
thousand and one I really I
served as the vice chair and I
was not an attorney and our
former speaker can Martinez was
chair of judiciary at that time
and when I.
Would go through the meetings I
and I have a lot of attorneys
and my family and I just thought
I want to know what they know so
I ended up going to law school
and with with a lot of my
children's friends.
My friends children.
So I really really appreciated
this committee I I really love
it some people think it's too
boring but I don't find it that
way I I think it's exciting and
right now we don't have a single
freshman on this committee so we
might have
the ability to speed up a bit
but I really wouldn't say how
much I agree with Representative
Eli that.
I want to be patient and I hope
everyone will be patient with us
and if anybody has a good idea
about how to do something better
with regard to communicating
with we're not all in the same
room we're used to walking into
a room and seeing our our books
on the table and we can look at
that at all and we can look at
the analyses from that everybody
gets a committee analysis and we
all get our party analysis and
it's it's just going to be
different
I do use two laptops but we
still haven't you know I don't
think it's going to salute for
me for a couple weeks and
We we have a couple of
presentations planned the
Representative Maestas was going
to talk about the work of the
criminal justice reform
subcommittee today because we
went so long on the floor we
decided that he's going to
actually come next week and this
Friday we're going to have a
presentation by the legislative
finance committee on their
perspective financially on some
of the criminal
justice reinvestment issues and
criminal justice reform
We will hear some bills on and
when state and this particular
Wednesday my husband's getting a
second comment vaccine at one so
I I'm gonna be a little bit late
and our new vice chair is going
to have to step right in and
actually have a bill to present
that day too so
that'll be interesting so I as I
said we're going to really try
to be flexible so before we talk
about anything further Deborah
would you wanted to give us your
orientation to the technology
and how we can perhaps make this
work well for us.
Yeah sure so I think hopefully
that you know zoom will be too
complicated for folks we run
these committees assume weapon
are so we have two pots of
people we've got the panelists
were all the folks you see on
screen right now with the video
and audio working then we have
the attendee part of people
which is where we have members
of public committee want to
provide public comment as well
as where a lot of other
legislators will kind of hang
out until they're ready to
present on the bill we also
offer expert witnesses coming
out there to the right present
as well to.
We try to accommodate for the
legislators and have members of
the public and what not.
and then so during the committee
for the most part we just try to
have folks run it normally we do
recommend everybody keep
themselves on mute unless you're
speaking so we don't have the
feedback coming in there.
the chat function is going to be
disabled for committees of
moving forward I was a decision
that was made up higher than
that me so that is one thing to
know so in terms of kind of
communicating with your fellow
legislators the weight you are
used to in a normal session I
think just gonna get used to
like you know using tax threads
or or U. motions or something
similar like that it's probably
the best way since we want to be
using the chat function here.
and then I think the only
mothers really mean thing for
folks to know is if you're on
the attendee side you know you
have a raise hand function
whenever you want to do public
comment it's something that the
panelists can also used to so
for trying to you know see who
wants to speak on a bill among
the members we can also use the
right hand function to kind of
go that route and for public
comment folks to do that as well
and then you know also I T.
staff just gonna temporarily on
mute you for the time that the
term would like to allow for
public comment you're allowing
the maybe you put your mac and
go down the line there.
So I think for the most part
that's the The New York with run
down of what the tax stuff is in
here it has twenty questions to.
Different we had been hearing of
the potential for
and pulling application yes.
Those who wish to have public
comment you know how we always
begin a meeting and say how many
here in the audience are in
favor of this bill and how many
are in opposition so do you want
to talk about that sure yes so
we are going to start using the
point option moving forward
we've as this tors in best
practices DOCSIS is just
something will have to train up
committee staff and get used to
use of the next day or two
that's certainly something we'll
create and it's going to be a
fairly simple Paul that can
either be who is here in favor
or in opposition to the bill and
if staff get comfortable they
can actually start making them
even more specific bills who's
in favor of House Bill whatever
Senate bill whatever going down
the line madam chair if you like
I can actually create a poll in
the background of this meeting
it'll take me a couple minutes
sure I have an example of that
as well so if you'd like to.
Yeah let's do that.
One thing that I was told is
that I needed to I have is the
count because I visit clients
that way the kids that I
represent and
I was told that I needed the
newest version of the zoom thank
you.
I don't know exactly how to do
that can I talk with you later
and anybody else ever these
kinds of questions now sure that
I've got the latest version.
Yes it's something I'm happy to
help with and I can send out the
most recent version of those in
best practices drive all the
legislators as well too there's
a section that tells his human
make sure it's the most recent
version that's probably good
just because you know it
sometimes little features a kind
of be wonky for example some
folks at issues during the race
hand function about a week ago
and updating zoom is sort of
that out so that's something
that's going to do and I can
difficult folks on that as well.
Right now I just raised my hand
and it worked but I thought
there might be a different way
to do it with the latest version
if you all want to be sure that
on to practice that it's more
reliable than waiting at me but
if you I know we were going to
ask each of the members and I
think Allen and for Lisa may
have done that if you're willing
to share your mobile number not
for publication but for us to
share so that like if I can text
Representative Ramin Seyed your
next all I have his number
already but I may not have
Representative Johnson's number
but if I could if you're willing
to share that with us and then
we will have a list that's
available to all the members so
that you've got analysts and
you've got each of the members
of the committee so I don't know
if that might help you help all
of us to be at so what's the
status of that or is that
something Lisa was working at.
Representative because he's the
only one we need.
Okay I have his number and I can
get that to you.
Gail I just posted on my cell
number okay thank you oh wait
no.
The working how it is working.
The task.
For work the chat right now is
only available for panelists
right now so ten will be able to
see any of the staff.
Okay but we can write that yeah
can you see Lisa can you see
Representative Townsend phone
number.
It.
Yeah yeah your panelist.
You should say yes but we
already have it okay we have
everyone but Representative Cook
okay.
I don't get that to you.
Right.
A different anything else.
you know tell folks as we are
doing some tests of a timer to
be able to display on screen
along with the bill number that
we're currently on so that is
something that we're all kind of
perfect but that's definitely
something we're looking to you
know start utilizing Committee
scare in part today but like
later on the week will start
trying to those more complex.
That's in the pipe said the bill
number and what else would you
put on the screen and a timer if
we want to use into anger yeah.
So I we could say please keep
your remarks under three minutes
and then.
If you know I can we have a lot
of people who want to talk for
example yeah I'm working on is
having like a square in the
screen the way I am here that
would just kind of I am for you
could start up will so we're
doing some testing should works
properly one of the other things
in members please feel free to
chime in here one of the other
things I thought might be
helpful is if people.
Want to be sure they make a
certain point or two.
And if they want to send me that
are written Clemente
you know maybe no more than a
paragraph
If
if there might be a way to do
that where Pat before for the
panelists could access that you
know just how in the sometimes
during the committee will have
someone come in and say I'm
prepared on a letter to the
committee and I almost always
approve that to be distributed
so what about distributing
written materials from.
Members of the attendees.
The question for me.
It's sort of.
So one thing we would ask is
that then this I think any kind
of hand outs we try to get them
to go to the committee secretary
so that we can then provide them
online the
Committee calendar there I think
that would be the best way to
try to handle those and so how
we access them.
With the try to be put online on
the the what's happening under
each committee there so if you
want to Judiciary Committee
members of the bills and be able
to do that that's the idea.
Wait isn't on my screen right
now.
No okay this is going to be a
feature that you're adding.
This is something the other
Gabby on later working on okay.
Make this.
Got it.
Okay.
You know different committee
chairs have H. committee chair
has his or her own
methodology I.
I'm taking public input the
I don't want people to feel that
they're not able to participate
in we generally for their
present we give people.
It's a good opportunity unless
we have hundreds and hundreds
and will ask them to appoint
spokespersons for each side.
Much
We'll just we'll just keep
trying to get it figured out in
such a way that we everybody
feels heard and that it's fair
for them but so do we have okay.
Members and right now I'm.
Click to do a test all okay
right now.
We're setting it up as
instructor had scheduled this
meeting we have to have her read
the whole so okay they look.
All right madam chair do you
want to see what a poll looks
like for the public comment.
Yeah.
Awesome so what I can do right
now is launch of all right now
that becomes available to all
the attendees seven twenty
session the poll that says our
test public comment and it's got
two choices are you in favor are
you in opposition.
So I can keep this pulls long
open as long as we need to.
It says at the bottom that the
host and panelist cannot vote.
Thank you now but I can use all
all share the results of that
vote and also be able to see
okay.
It.
Clicking well.
So that now I share.
You can see that we had three
attendees participate in they
are you in favor and opposition
and all three of them separate
or.
Thank okay.
Well that's.
The of using those polls I think
that's great yeah yeah the
polling I think we were
designing was support mainly
members of the public to kind of
get the in opposition in favor
we have decided to do members of
the committee itself you don't
need that because we'll be
voting so I figured yes this is
an idea that you know if you
have five hundred folks and
there's a really easy way to
gauge how many folks in
opposition what's up sure.
We can several those out in the
future.
That's great I think that would
be helpful.
Helpful.
Okay Representative did you have
a question.
Yes madam chair I did have a
question if the user warning is
going to be the same every time
is there some way of doing a
short cut so that we don't have
to keep looking for George's
emails.
I would I did tell.
The committee is.
State government this morning we
got.
An invitation from that
committee where I replied yes
and then it populates my
calendar.
So I don't know if you all have
calendars like that but we could
do the same thing and Judiciary.
Yes two options I would suggest
there is a one but we've been
doing this creating
individualized analyst links for
legislators that's the email you
get command that says Hey you're
being invited to assume let that
are called House Judiciary
Committee you know those links
to have an option to add to your
calendar but if it's a little
bit easier to you know what we
can actually do is half of send
out the on the it can dealing
the other ones for members of
the public those are a lot
easier to kind of the calendar
requests with and we can just
manually promote legislators
members of the committee into
the panelists side.
You're actually been easier work
from the do calendar invites
rather than you know you might
have to manually add on on that
point madam chair
so for health and Human Services
my committee assistant sent out
an invitation that have a link
in it to add to the calendar and
I have all the assume to dates
through the session and our one
click on add your calendar and
they're all on all with the late
with the zoom link is in my
calendar.
That's the recommended way of
doing that panelists think
should auto populate all those
dates coming up.
And obviously at some dates may
change down the line and that's
what that's what I accomplished
with the state government.
Went to.
Yes Representative neighbor we
can meet up with with yourself
in your LA to kind of get those
on your calendar if you want to.
But I think Lisa Georgia can do
what
this cause added for state
government to.
I would think it would help for
the analyst as well.
Everyone who's participating.
Yes our distribution list for
committees includes all the
members of the committee along
with the analyst.
Well to staff we can be
consistent across the board.
Representative Armstrong it were
you going to say something in
addition to that or do you have
another
yes madam chair and we can talk
off line but I was gonna say
wait and health and Human
Services this morning I found it
very helpful to be a co host on
the meeting and if you don't
want to do that maybe your vice
chair but that way I could see
the hands raised in attendees I
could call on them I could allow
them to speak and bring them
over I could send them back I
could also for all those people
who forget to to improve mute
themselves I could do it
it or if they're having trouble
on muting themselves I could
feel it so it made it
much easier to manage
to manage the whole group and
of the polling would be great if
we don't yes at some point we
don't have that I just had
everyone raised their hands who
was in opposition for instance
and then I went in order and I
said you can put your hand down
if you don't want to speak raise
your hand it's not going to work
if there's hundreds but it
certainly worked fine I could
count up there's five or six
people with their hands raised
another just to they kept their
hand up to speak and then I
could call on him in order
because the hand in your list
those hands will
move people around so there in
order.
Thank you.
When you're the co hosted agency
at around four years well it
doesn't over around just because
you're the co host but you're a
lot but you can I could allow
them to talk which move them and
the panelists and then I could
a remove that privilege which
took them back into attendees
but it sorts it just like for
the panelists it will sort the
hand raising in order so you can
just start at the top and work
your way down of his madam chair
we are trying to make a common
practice for the chair and vice
chair to be made of some these
meetings as well that worked
really well yeah okay the
attendees side for any panelists
you should be able to see the
hands raised the right to the
top.
I know of course we were using a
different platform in the
specials but I could do that.
Our committee Matt month on.
Well I'm not sure do we meet in
the second would.
With that in a personal.
Representative Armstrong did
Representative.
Miss Lewis did you have a
Question no okay what was just.
It will be staged anybody have
him race now.
Okay.
So we will try to begin at this
time latest possible of course
we we have a long for session
and it's a day of judiciary we
might very well be doing what
we're doing right now and we
will try to continue to get
through our agendas
We are set up and intend to try
to abide by the twenty four hour
rule you know the way we've done
that is to get substantive
amendments and Committee sobs in
twenty four hours in advance so
the analysts have an opportunity
to look at them and give
feedback to the members.
There's
We have almost always allowed
occasional.
Adding of a word or two on the
fly and as long as people are
comfortable with that I'm
certainly willing to.
To move things along that way
How are you we.
Testing how would be best
Look at our agendas and our
analyses and the built in it in
an efficient way by using
obviously I mean it's really
hard to do have a screen and
then have all those documents on
one half of of of one screen so
what's recommended there and how
are we.
Going to work with that.
Dual monitor set something that
me and wait can help with as
well to and also any kind if you
just need to click away from the
soon to go to the internet read
about a bill I mean you can do
that the single seat keep going
okay with your camera.
Yeah I think recommend would be
try to you now we can strip the
to monitor I think maybe just
and the vice free to kind of
read the bills are being posted
online they build tools also.
I think I would recommend of
those two as by the easiest ways
to come accommodate having the
zoom as well as another screen
you can look at that with and
then we have the analyses that
are are private to certain
members we have the majority
analysis in the minority
analysis so those will just be
provided through email to the
committee member the appropriate
committee members yes madam
chair and then they would it
will be our individual
responsibilities to get a hold
of those and have access to them
during the meeting.
That's my understanding yes
ma'am.
Anybody have questions about
that are.
Concerns.
You know I think probably unless
we Avid you know occasionally we
pass something out
with all members present voting
in the affirmative in the
beginning I'm not going to
assume that just because I don't
hear any opposition but
you know I suppose that may
happen but we'll be doing at
least initially anyway roll call
votes.
Thank just to kind of ease our
Transition to make sure we're
completely accurate.
So
One thing that I have always.
Insisted on is that I don't want
anyone to feel attacked and that
includes you.
The analysts any of the staff
and I don't want members of the
audience who have come to
testify to feel like that and I
don't want them attacking any of
you or I don't want Bama tacking
each other and we will remove
people from the public comment
if they are doing is they are.
I don't know I can just I
remember one time where I had to
have someone come in and removes
I would just because I.
He was attacking someone was
putting on a bill and there was
someone there for public comment
you didn't like the bill and I I
just want to make a point to him
I wouldn't allow anyone else to
do that to him either so we're
I'm gonna try to maintain that
kind of.
President of court in the
meetings and if we have a zoom
bombers is
Destructive and disrespectful or
profane I and I believe that
person is going to be removed by
our our technical staff right
away.
Yes madam chair if you give the
technical staff that discussion
is chair we can.
Absolutely.
I think we probably all remember
what happened in June when we
had our first rules committee
meeting on the floor and and
frankly I was embarrassed for
those people who call then.
Because I don't.
Whether what they're what
they're thinking that
Unfortunately that was short
lived and it did not reoccur.
So are there any questions from
anybody I'm not sure if you want
to see an example of what public
comment can look like real quick
I would love that right yes so
we have a couple of our staff is
actually meet and decide on a
regular shall we do want to do
an example raise hand function
and I can unmuted show what that
looks like.
Right so Meghan Dorsey and
Shelby see other hands of popped
up to the top of that list now
on the attendees side maybe go
over there.
I see and there's a number to
buy it very good great and so
then I think we just kind of go
in order down the line there.
Okay you know Meghan Dorsey will
give and we don't want to talk
what I do that as I click allow
to talk you'll see her name pop
up at the very bottom down
there.
You herself provide public
comment she will have any video
going and when she's done I can
remove the ability to speak.
So the attendees are allowed to
show their faces no the twenties
don't have any video
capabilities and can stand.
So Meghan Dorsey what is your
public comment.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for allowing me to listen
into this organizational
meeting.
And then when she's done we're
happy to have you here with us
making.
And so you see her name's
disappeared off the screens that
moved back.
Now we've got Shelby of the
topless.
That's just kinda how we repeat
the process it is a.
It looks good.
Just so the members of the
committee to can kind of see how
that works and none of the Intel
attendees can share the screen
and show any materials only if
if I have an expert with me
who's presenting
This material to the committee.
Who's gonna do this screen
sharing so we would promote them
to the panelists and then either
the extrovert agency can share
their screen or if they want to
provide their presentation
beforehand to committee staff
one of us could do it as well
to.
We've had other committee this
morning with expert witnesses we
just put in the panelists I
don't allow them to share
screen.
Okay.
Our
advanced zoom instructions it's
going to tell us how sure is
great.
Yes okay.
Okay sounds good.
Rick about.
Any questions for members.
Any questions from staff.
Ellen.
Two quick things one for Debra
M.
Because of the delay that we had
today and
It some of us were talking would
be very nice if on a new website
and maybe the webcast website if
we could put something like
Actually Senate Public Health
they did today they put that
they were delayed they put up
the stand by notice.
Up which I think would help us
and the public and everybody
know that that something is
going on but.
But we're to later where we
faster work whatever we are.
Yes if you could help with that
that would be great.
Sure yeah the stuff is something
we can do you know we can work
with IT staff to put that on the
website a little the golden rod
put on put that kind of tells
and committees me no end of the
work to make sure that you know
reflects any delays at the floor
sessions doing then also yeah we
can definitely have committee
staff started zoom on time and
then just have a screen showing
that says you know the late
because of the floor session
convening at four thirty or
whatever that says stuff is
something we can do okay.
Great the other thing is if we
could go back to communication
for a minute and I think
What one of the things that that
we analysts have talked about is
if we need to say something to
you madam chair or to the the
body you know we can just put
our hand up and then you can
call on us and we can say
whatever we need to say maybe
but what we're concerned about.
Is every once in awhile an
analyst will have to say
something to a particular
member that isn't really to be
shared with the entire body or
vice versa and if you all could
think about that and maybe tell
us how you want to accomplish
that.
we were told that the vice chair
said you know tax really are
difficult because you all
continue to get a hundred tax
from your constituents during
a meeting and so.
Are trying to text you which is
probably very inefficient.
So we can figure out some way to
Efficiently communicate with you
if we had to that would be a
real good thing so whatever is
convenient for you.
You know I don't know if the
email solves that problem.
Because it's.
Well I think for some people to
getting to getting taxed but
Madam chair if I might clarify
and then after follow up
question to that round my
consideration for me within the
moment where I'm gonna have to
ask that they didn't care I know
that I want my full focus and
attention to be in the meeting
and and potentially will have
the capacity to keep up with my
acting over the course of a
conversation as I might in real
life when I can look at my phone
and be actively listening at the
same time
that might be different when one
of us is not sharing we might
have more capacity to pay
attention to your other devices
including tax.
But I also and we resolve that
question I just wanted to
clarify something up with that
from I really appreciate it the
point of information about how
the league Representative will
be the same and we offered at
like one hundred thirty eight we
can put that out in perpetuity
are expected meeting very.
Make sure the public is clear
will
they
or should they need to register
everything looks fine and the in
in the audience have to straight
Committee if you could clarify
that as well.
no the public will be able to
use the same link as well to so
these are designed as what they
call recurring webinars so we
keep the same might the
information the joint on just
says this is not gonna be a one
time thing this occurred I so
week three times a week whatever
it is so yes yes every time the
public wants to jump in for
House Judiciary if they go to
the calendar or if they just
have the link from two weeks ago
that's the same one the
attendees I would try to do that
so there's not now fifty
different aspects.
Every every time we meet they
can have the funding
registration and make and be
able to join the thank you and
not sure if that would further
debate about anybody out there
but you are communicating from
the avid for the.
I'm.
The committee thank you and
thank you madam chair.
One of the reasons we wanted to
get everyone a list with
everyone's taxed to telephone
numbers on it our mobile numbers
on it is so that they that they
can taxed and then we we can
again by being patient plant by
year and
Right I agree with you spilling
any frustration I ate I urge you
to think about potential
solution and oppose it because
it would be it would be great to
know that Representative
Armstrong.
thank you then chair just one
other thing that we talked about
in our commitment Health Human
Services this morning that I
think helps I know when folks
send around the analysis or it
was invitations and all that
if you're trying at the last
minute just before during
committee to remember who sent
it is like is impossible to find
so my suggestion is that
everything that comes to us
actually comes to our assistant.
And let our assistant forward to
us because of Dennis for looking
for the information we remember
our assistant's name and we can
go find it but
I won't it and you could have
multiple analysts sending us
stuff and I won't remember who
sent it and I won't be able to
find it again so that's just a
suggestion.
This Madam idea because I'm I
was trying to think to did this
morning now from state
government sent me the last link
and so that would be really
good.
Madam chair sure I I need to
step I need to step out for a
minute I hate to leave good
company but I I got another fire
burn and I gotta go I.
Thank you and your members can
fill you in I think we're we're
close to finishing just now that
we want welcome year
suggestions for yes okay.
One thing about cleaning
legislative staff is that that
stuff the request we've had from
other chairs such definitely we
can do moving forward is include
legislative assistants we did
that for the link for the house
floor session today to discuss
the that helped out so all the
level a shipping to have that
link as well as a back up so I
think you will be you not moving
forward for Committee links as
well to just stop if any issues
in director LA.
Christina.
Get close.
It's quite
example.
In our is being like a
and what we and I the person
that will always be you correct
notify almost never be me
actually just because I have to
do a million work session yet
well we know who the I. T.
person is we're working yeah we
have for working on the schedule
right here we see if we have an
assigned person to do to sherry
at.
we do yeah but we were always
going to have an I. T. person
assigned to this committee we
can definitely down to make sure
it's kind of one consistent
person on for with that it will
likely be me or wait just
because we are ultimately
different directions care about
yes.
Because that would probably help
both lease and are not madam
chair I would be I as we need
help.
Yes definitely that's something
I'm really working on we've got
like a tentative schedule right
now with many committees with us
at present just a few more
training and all those gaps on
their to.
And just one other quick item
that members meter reading
public discriminate
Representative analyst would you
very quickly reveals that we no
longer have that works for the
members are especially if we
have an amendment or is that
legislative very warning up
hearing.
How that's all going to be and
our legislators are the
suspense.
And if we want to make sure I'm
Ellen what I do Madam chair.
It madam chair is not available
I'm sure that.
Vice chair make sure that all
the committee has the document
that the need for a hearing.
Actually I think what we're
going to need to do is have I
don't think I could be in charge
of.
I I think it's going to be Lisa
and Georgia.
To make sure that we all have.
The documents we need.
Does that sound reasonable.
Okay.
That but you're not going to be
getting Committee subs on the
morning of the hearing and have
us here that day because the
unique Committee subs twenty
four hours in advance.
So that.
If you get one warning the next
coming off the agenda.
Unless everybody knows that
there's one word changed or
something you know and we and
and and all the analyst and had.
Our.
Whether.
Anybody else.
Now this was cool because this
time.
And showed right on your screen
when you raised.
But then I also got a little
message down here about who's
healed was up.
Is that gonna be typical
delivering.
I sounds like you're really good
up there I don't have to go
looking for who wants to talk.
No no.
Race and that would.
The.
I think cope with that because I
think that it could be that
differently once we are promoted
to call.
Okay.
that's all it took to get the.
I see okay.
About myself to every day.
It's very good.
Well I think this is better than
webex.
The the one we use during the on
June
session.
So folks is there anything else
anybody would like to say or any
questions anyone house and
any words of inspiration they
were prayers Representative
Nibert I appreciated that this
morning and and I appreciated
the.
The friendliness of the some of
the amendments on the floor our
representative Ely and was
grateful for that.
So thank you yes yes
Representative.
It is George you're going to
send out the email that has the
