Um, so Madam Chair, we then
added the word or at the end of
line 19 because we
Alternative exemption, uh, which
is now item 17. This deals with
the fluoro polymers that were
discussed by many commenters
last week.
Um, so that was all of 17 was
added as an exemption.
And then Madam Chair, moving on
from there, there's just 2 more
edits, and they start on page
15, sorry, Madam Chair, 16.
Uh, letters C and D line 4 and
line 12 of the committee sub, it
used to say prior to January
1st, 2028. Now it says honor
after inherently Madam chair, if
we had left it as prior to
January 1, 2028. That would be
when the bill went into effect.
And that was a um
Construct or where we meant to
say honor after January 1, 2028
in both items C and D, and Madam
Chair, those are the um
About 6 changes we made to the
uh that represent this committee
so.
All right, um
Any questions just on what we
just went through, you know,
what changes, not a full blown
discussion of the bill.
I'd like to move a do paths.
The committee substitute, um.
Or has
2
you call the rules.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavis. No.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Hoffman V Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reeb, no.
Leader Sapansky. Yes.
Representative of beta.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair
Yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on committee substitute 212.
That's good.
You have a due pass?
Madam Chair and committee.
So we are now on House Bill 60,
vice chair.
Romero will take
Charge
All right, we are on house Bill
60, you have the.
chair and do have a committee
sub that would probably the
focal point of our discussion.
So does somebody want to move
that for discussion?
Believe it's being handed out
the 202 number last three digits
are 26.6.
I have with me um two experts,
Madam Chair. One, you get their
name, and I also have Chris
Moore with me, who is with the
Santa Fe Institute has presented
to a number of interim
committees on the subject. Um,
thank you, Madam Chair and
committee.
This bill is.
I know it's, it looks appears
very dense when you look at it
because it has a lot of
terminology that I think many of
us are not familiar with, but
the concept is very simple. It
What it does is it provides a
framework for um.
Companies that create, develop.
AI that is predictive, that is,
it's used to help.
Human beings make decisions and
it screens out people
potentially for important
opportunities like employment
and housing and access to loans,
rental, so it puts obligations
on the developer of that kind of
AI that's being used here, it
also puts obligations on the the
individuals or companies that
are using it, we call them in
our bill, the deployers.
And there's some words maybe I
think we should maybe understand
before we talk about what the
bill does.
There's something called
algorithmic discrimination, and
that's defined in the bill.
And it talks about um.
It means a condition in which
the use of a artificial
intelligence system results in
unlawful differentiation of
treatment. So this is a concept
we're all very familiar with in
discrimination law. You can't
treat um distinguished on the
basis of sex and national origin
and those kinds of things, and
we want to make sure that
electronic tools that are used
do not factor in those kinds of
things.
There's a term called
consequential decision. That's
an important part of this
because we're not trying to
ferret out all predictive AI in
a way that there's, you can't
discriminate. It has to be
focused on what we're calling
consequential decisions, and
that's on page 3.
And that's a decision that has a
material legal or similar
significant effect on the
provision or denial to a
consumer or the cost or terms of
and then it's educational
enrollment, employment or
employment opportunity, a
financial or lending service,
healthcare service, housing,
insurance, or legal service. I
think we would all agree these
are very significant issues in
all of our daily lives, and we
do not want
The fact that a machine has
screened you out or made some
part of a significant decision
to be discriminatory and lastly,
I think we need to be talking
about what is a high risk, um,
artificial intelligence system
because that's what we're trying
to regulate those systems, and
it's on page 5. Any artificial
intelligence system that when
deployed makes
Or is a substantial factor in
making a consequential decision
and we just talked about what a
consequential decision is, but
it does not include.
Um, a relatively long list of
routine.
Type um electronic or computer
type activities. We put that
list in because we were getting
emails from people saying, but
what about this? And we'd say,
no, no, that's not what we're
talking about. We're talking
about when consequential
decisions are being made, so we
try to address some of those, so
having done that, what, what's
next? Well, we impose duties on
the developer, a duty of
reasonable care to make sure
that they are not deploying or
developing systems.
That are likely to be
discriminatory and we put such a
duty of care on the developer,
and that's on page 9.
And we put such a duty of care
on the person who's deploying.
Deploying the um
The, the software that might be
making the consequential.
Lastly, there are various things
that we we impose on the
deployer. We, we, um, we require
that they do risk assessments,
so periodically they need to be
looking at the tools that
they've developed or are using
to ensure that they continue not
to have a discriminatory effect.
We talk about what a risk
incident is, and that's when a
deployer, that's the person
using the.
Let's the developer know that
they just found out that it
looks like there may be some
discriminatory impact. That's to
alert the developer that certain
actions need to be taken and
those actions are notifying the
uh the attorney General has
plays a role in enforcement of
this act.
The deployer must do, I believe,
and impact assessment or when
they change how the um software
is being used or if they make a
significant change to it. A
deployer can turn into a
developer if they start changing
the software that they initially
purchased or received. There are
notices requirements to let
customers know when they first
of all, the developer has to
post um information.
About the, the um AI systems
that they've developed on their
website.
The um the employer has to let
customers know, and a customer's
person using it, that they are
interacting with a high risk.
Um, AI system, OK, so when you
get online, you're applying for
a job, something's gonna pop up
and let you know you're
interacting with AI and that's
part, um.
If they also when someone is
screened out and and not and
denied an opportunity through
this application of this high
risks AI, um, they have a right
to know that, right to know why
and have a right to correct any
misinformation. This is not a
new concept. We see this in
credit reporting, um, and, and
we, why do we have that
incredible reporting because
that's a big deal to have a bad
credit rating in your life. So
we want to make sure that
correct information and that
person should
have an correct the information
that perhaps improperly screened
them out of a job. Um, so that's
pretty much the framework uh uh
in terms of how this bill works,
um, I don't know, Steve, if you
want to add something and then
I'll ask um.
Doctor
Madam Chair representatives just
wanted to further frame this
conversation to exclude
generative AI because that
particular technology has been
very explicitly omitted or I
should say excluded from the
language so these typical
interactions that you would have
with natural language with
spoken word, with typed in
information, those types of
technologies have been removed,
so the, uh
The platforms such as Chat GBT,
uh, Gemini and the like. Those
are not being.
scoped and not being affected by
this techno by this legislation
at the.
Yeah, just to reiterate, it's
important that you know we're, I
think at this point we're all
using AI every day. I know I do.
So using it to draft an email is
fine. That's not what this bill
is about. Please proofread it
before you send it, of course.
And you know, using it to help
us sort things using it, using a
database to organize data that
is already in our possession,
sorted.
Screen people to see if they
have a degree, things like that
is fine. But once you're
Helping a human decide who to
hire, who to loan to, uh, who to
accept into an educational
program in in terms of
enrollment.
Then these are consequential
decisions and they should be
made as transparently as
possible, and we should be
vigilant about the possibility
that without any ill intention
that these tools might be
allowing discrimination into the
system.
Um, Madam Chair, with that we're
ready to hear public comment.
Oh, thank you.
Great, um, we'll go to the
audience who is in opposition
of.
0.
Right, if, um, we'll give you
all a minute.
want to stand up.
And uh
Reach the microphone center.
You want to speak.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore, and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the American
Property Casualty Insurance
Association, the American
Council of Life Insurers and
America's Health Insurance
plans. Those are 3 national
trade associations in various
lines of insurance, and they all
stand opposed to the bill. The
reason why they stand opposed to
the bill is insurers in the
state of New Mexico and
throughout the United States
comply with the requirements
that are in the respective
insurance codes in the insurance
code in.
Mexico, they're really robust
requirements for how the
insurers should conduct
themselves and how they should
go about treating policyholders.
In the insurance area there are
choices that are made through
underwriting where certain
factors are taken into account,
putting age and gender in in
various lines of insurance in
the in, in the one state, sorry,
the one state that's done
comprehensive AI legislation.
This is Colorado. They have
included a safe harbor provision
in that law, and that takes into
account the unique way that
insurers function and that type
of safe harbor.
He's also in Virginia. They have
uh they passed it through the
legislature but it hasn't been
signed. Thank you very much.
Madam, excuse me, Madam Chair,
uh.
Committee. My name is Ward
Tisdale. I'm with the National
Association of Mutual Insurance
companies work very closely with
with Brent and other members. I
really just want to echo his,
his point. We are already
regulated by the superintendent
of insurance, this would create
a scheme.
Um
That would not be an efficient
use of your resources, Brent
mentioned, Colorado is another.
state that I handle.
Uh, insurers were carved out of
that, as well as Virginia and
also Nebraska, so each time this
comes up.
states recognize.
This would create
Confusing
And costly and duplicative
regulation, so we would um
We would urge that you.
Exempt the insurance industry
from this bill for the sake of
efficiency. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair, I
share grown horse with uh PNM.
uh PNM appreciates Cha
Chandler's efforts in initiating
an important conversation on the
need for an artificial
intelligence governance
framework and security standards
for New Mexico businesses and
businesses and consumers,
however, HB 60 as currently
drafted, is overly broad and
lacks clarity.
Additionally, it does not
adequately address the
complexities of generative AI
rather than moving forward with
this legislation and its current
form, New Mexico should
establish a task force or
working group composed of
industry experts to develop
targeted and effective policies,
specifically for generatingative
AI. Any framework should align
with best practices, including
those set by the National
Institute of Standards and
Technology and IST for these
reasons, PNM poses HB 60 is
currently proposed. Thank you.
There anyone else, um, in the
audience in opposition. Oh good.
Ah yes, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Ann Conway, I'm the
registered lobbyist for the
State Farm insurance companies,
and for the reasons that have
already been set forth here, um,
we have talked with the sponsor,
we'll continue to work with her.
I think it's appropriate to have
an insurance exemption because
this is already regulated in the
New Mexico insurance code. Thank
you.
Chair members the committee. My
name is Alison Riley, public
policy director at the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce in
opposition to House Bill 60. We
oppose the bill as it the
language is identical to the
legislation that was signed in
Colorado, and what we're seeing,
they're still in the processes
of creating a cleanup bill to
address the unforeseen
compliance standards, and this
raises serious concerns about
rushing a similar law here. The
extensive disclosure
requirements mandate that
companies to reveal detailed
information about their AI
systems, including sensitive
data about their algorithms and
training methods, which
jeopardize
trade secrets.
The requirement to provide
direct consumer notice and an
appeal process for every adverse
decision poses practical
difficulties and could overwhelm
companies with processes that
may not even be necessary. We'd
also ask for a 30 day right to
care provision, similar to what
has been written in the Texas AI
law to provide businesses with a
reasonable opportunity to
address potential issues. For
these reasons, and those
mentioned before me, we oppose
this bill. All right, um, anyone
else in opposition that would
like to speak?
Right, we'll go online, if you
please raise your hand if you're
in opposition to House Bill 60.
Give you um one minute each.
Donald Maurice
Thank you.
Yes, thank you. Uh just setting
up here.
I don't know if my video is on.
We can hear you, that's.
OK. Thank you. Um,
Chairperson and respected
members of the committee. I'm
Donald Maurice. I'm outside
counsel to the receivables
Management Association
International. It's a trade
association of various financial
institutions, our concern is
with the definition, uh, the
exemptions that are provided for
only banks and credit unions,
federal law provides various
protections in the space of
anti-discrimination such as the
Equal Credit Opportunity Act,
fair lending laws, also.
Graham Leach Bliley act applies
to data security and data
privacy. It broadly covers
financial institutions which are
greater than the banks and
credit unions that are defined
in the act. We believe that in
order to properly align the act
with existing federal law that
the definition of financial
institution is provided under
federal law be included in the
act.
Our second concern is the
private right of action.
Colorado does not have it. We
believe that you could wrap up.
Uh, next
We have a Dean Ikas.
Good afternoon chair members and
chair and members of the
committee. My name is Aidan
Gass, and I serve as policy
analyst at Chamber of Progress,
a tech industry association
supporting public policies to
build a more inclusive society
in which all people benefit from
technological advances. Our
corporate partners include many
companies working in artificial
intelligence, but they do not
have a vote on our veto over our
positions. And before your
committee today to oppose HB 60,
which is intended to address
discrimination, but would render
many online services unusable.
Without meaningfully advancing
civil rights. The sponsors of HB
60 are justly concerned about
the civil rights abuses,
particularly discrimination,
housing, employment, or lending.
However, pinpointing the source
and catalyst of discriminatory
outcomes of an AI system, it's
not always possible, nor is
consistent nor is consistently
determining who or what is
responsible for an act of
discrimination.
Section 8A1's requirement that
online platforms notify
consumers every time a high risk
AI automated decision tool is
used to make a consequential
decision, presents a complex
challenge.
While addressing harmful.
Thank you so much.
Renzo Soto.
Uh, Madam Vice Chair and
committee members, my name is
Renzo Soto here respectfully
opposed to House Bill 60 on
behalf of TechNett. We continue
to share the goal of ensuring
that AI is developed and
deployed responsibly in the
state as well as nationwide. We
are still reviewing the
committee received this morning,
um, but there are still
provisions that maintain the
untested framework borrowing
from Colorado, and we understand
the concepts within the bill,
but because of the complexity of
the AI ecosystem, we believe
it'll lead to massive burdens in
practice, uh, that will
ultimately
discouraged
AI development and deployment
within the state.
There are also highly uh
concerning deviations like the
extremely detailed and
infeasible reporting
requirements that could risk
security incidents as well as
the punitive private right of
action. Uh there also seem to be
some concerning new additions
that further broaden the scope
of the bill.
We believe House Bill 60 will
introduce significant
uncertainty, uh, within the
state. Uh, so we do maintain our
recommendation that the state
first establish a clear
interoperable data privacy
framework to the benefit of
consumers and businesses as well
as to study the AI issue in the
interim to account for any
unique state contexts and avoid
unintended consequences. Thank
you.
OK, um, includes opposition.
We'll go back to the audience
live. Um, is there anyone here
in support of House Bill 60.
Um, if you'd like to speak, if
you would go ahead and um stand
up if you can, um.
And uh we'll do one minute each
for folks in, Madam vice chair
members of the committee. My
name is Lena Weber, policy
director with the ACLU of New
Mexico. We think the sponsors
for bringing this bill forward
and are in strong support. AI is
reshaping and influencing core
social domains that impact our
daily lives. From the criminal
legal system to education to
healthcare and beyond.
Unfortunately, AI systems are
often developed in ways that do
not adequately consider existing
racism, sexism, and other
inequities.
built an algorithmic bias can
undermine predictive decisions
and and result in very real
discrimination, as these systems
are deployed, they exacerbate
existing disparities and create
new roadblocks for already
marginalized communities. This
bill will be an essential piece
of a broader framework of
urgently needed guard rails
around how New Mexicans'
personal information is used
against them, and as
complimentary with other data
privacy bills in our legislative
session this year. We urge a due
pass. Thank you.
afternoon chair members of the
committee. My name is Kara. I am
a fellow with the Quality New
Mexico. I stand here in support
of House Bill 60 as we believe
it to be a decisive step in
protecting LGBTQ folks and all
New Mexicans. Queer and trans
people face specific kinds of
discrimination based on sexual
and gender identity. An AI
systems are known to be trained
through programs that impart
bias, which result in act of
discrimination. The LGBTQ
community is already facing bias
and discrimination in several
aspects of life. Alrithmic
discrimination is going to
amplify this in all aspects.
of our life. Health care,
employment, and housing are also
areas, and they are heavily
impacted by the use of these
systems, which also have the
potential to impact her mental
health. We face much higher
rates of suicide already, and AI
can play a role in what
resources we're able to access.
We truly, we strongly urge you
to support this bill as a means
of protecting uer New Mexicans.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Melanie Moses, a professor of
computer science at the
University of New Mexico and
chair of the New Mexico AI
Consortium, uh, that consortium
consists of, uh, CNN, the
National Labs, the New Mexico
Consortium, and the three main,
uh, major research universities
in the state. We were recently
uh able to give some input into
this bill, uh, which we believe
has made some substantial
improvements in the revisions
you have in front of you.
Uh, this bill, uh, I believe,
uh, is superior to similar law
that was passed in Colorado and
was recently passed as a bill in
Virginia.
It addresses real risks of AI
discrimination while protecting
the innovative use of AI in
research and education, which
the NMAIC advocates for.
The bill requires developers and
employers to alert the public
when AI is used to make
consequential decisions,
requires reasonable and sensible
steps to ensure AI is not
illegally discriminating, and
the revision has more clear and
focused definitions and closes
loopholes.
Uh, I know there have been, uh,
some concerns expressed, and
this revision does, uh, address
those concerns. So I thank Chair
Chandler for, uh, accepting
uh the many uh recommendations
we made.
All right, we'll go online. I
understand they're about 5
different.
lk s that are
You up to speak and just go
ahead and call you, um, as our
list.
Enrico Pontelli.
My name is Enrico Pontali and I
serve as the Dean of Arts and
Science in New Mexico State
University, as well as the vice
chair of the New Mexico Air
Consortium. I would like to
express my sincere appreciation
and gratitude for the
opportunity that was granted to
the New Mexico Air Consortium to
review earlier version of the
bill and provide feedback. I
would like to positively comment
on our carefully and seriously
our comments and feedback have
been considered.
And how carefully the bill has
been revised to reflect and
address our concerns. The
presentation of the bill
provides much clarity and
important direction
recommendation which would be
either beneficial to the states.
Uh, the respect that the bill
makes to education and research
institutions is key to promote
the growth of AI training in our
research and contribute to
bringing the state of the, uh,
to being the state at the
national forefront in AI. We
there to express our
availability and commitment to
continue helping and supporting.
The creation of guidelines and
regulation to lead and guide the
process of developing and
adopting AI solution across all
disciplines in the state. Thank
you.
Grace eddy
Hello, can you hear me?
Yep, go ahead.
Wonderful. Madame Vice Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Grace Getty, a policy analyst at
Consumer Reports focused on
artificial intelligence, where a
nonpartisan nonprofit with 6
million members across the US
and I'm here to respect the urge
a do pass on HB 60. HB 60
addresses a critical issue.
Right now companies can use
biased and sometimes erroneous
black box AI systems to help
decide who gets a job, who gets
into their dream college, who
gets access to medical
treatments, and more. For
example, a health care algorithm
used widely by hospitals to
identify which patients would
receive additional care was done
by independent researchers to be
biased against black patients.
Why was this? In attempting to
predict which patients would
become the sickest. It instead
predicted who would spend the
most money on care. While there
are ways in which we'd like this
bill to be stronger, HB 60
represents a compromise solution
to this problem. We appreciate
the chair's careful revisions.
This bill provides a critical
patch for New Mexico's civil
rights and consumer protection
laws in the AI era, and we
encourage an
I vote.
Mattreer
Hi, uh, my name is Matt here,
Madam Vice Chair, members of the
committee. Thank you. I lead the
workers' rights Project at the
Center for Democracy and
Technology. I want to thank
Chair Chandler for her diligent
work on this excellent bill, HB
60 attacks the growing problem
of companies using hidden
algorithms to make key decisions
like whether job applicants are
hired, what a bank customer's
mortgage rate will be and how
much we all pay for life's
necessities like health care and
rent. There's considerable
evidence that many such AI
systems are biased or simply
don't work. HB 60 would
provide crucial protections for
workers and consumers who are
subjected to such decisions,
providing them with basic
transparency and guardrails
against bias and arbitrary
decisions. It would not touch on
trade secrets, contrary to what
you might have heard. Crucially,
it avoids the narrow definitions
and fatal loopholes that appear
in most bills relating to AI
driven decisions. I've submitted
written testimony to the
committee expanding on these
points, and thank you very much
for your attention.
Ben Winters
Apologies was muted. Uh, Madam
Vice Chair and members of the
committee, thanks for allowing
me to testify in support of HB
60. My name is Ben Winters,
director of AI and privacy at
the Consumer Federation of
America. Algorithms increasingly
mediate critical determinations
for New Mexicans without
transparency and with
significant discrimination. HB
60 would create common sense AI
regulation to enable
accountability and increasingly
automated age with critical
transparency provisions to allow
people to hold entities
accountable and create clear
ground rules to allow consumer
first innovation.
flourish. I'll spend the rest of
my time with a few brief replies
from the support. Um, one, it's
critical that safe harbors do
not get added here.
For example, insurance decisions
have life changing impacts on
people and discrimination made
in that world can't get a free
pass. The existing regulatory
infrastructure should actually
allow them to follow the rules
more easily. 2, if an entity
cannot explain their decisions,
they should make that decision
differently or figure out a way
to be able to do it. It's not a
free pass just because you can't
do it. 3, generative AI is
exempt from this bill, as the
person in the first panel
mentioned, but just wanted to
flag that since it was mentioned
again. And for the text is no
longer identical identical to
Colorado, as it said. It's
stronger, a good thing.
Uh, we have one final speaker,
but I don't see your is it's
Kara Williams.
Can you hear me? Yes, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Kara Williams, and I'm a
law fellow at the Electronic
Privacy Information Center, an
independent nonprofit focused on
tech issues. I'm here today to
urge a due pass on HB 60.
Passing this bill would be a
significant step toward
protecting New Mexicans from
opaque AI systems that are often
biased or inaccurate. Companies
across sectors use high-risk AI
systems to make important
decisions about our lives, such
as whether we get a job or
admission into a university. If
we qualify for a mortgage or a
loan.
And how much we pay for rent or
insurance. Right now, consumers
and workers have no way to know
whether companies use AI in
making these decisions about
them or how these decisions are
made. HB 60 requires real
transparency from companies
about AI systems and gives
important rights to New Mexicans
who are subject to them. The
harms of high risk AI systems
are real. This bill would go a
long way toward mitigating those
risks, and Epic would urge you
to support this legislation.
Thank you for the opportunity to
testify today, and I'm happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you, Kara. That concludes
our um.
Representative Hochman.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and I'm just being clear,
this is on the committee, my
comments are just limited to the
committee substitute.
So thank you, Madam Chair, and
Madam Chair, experts, so I see a
couple of differences in
definitions between the
committee sub and the original
bill, the first being the
definition of developer. Can you
kind of talk me through uh what
the differences are in those two
definitions and what led to.
Yeah, Madam chair
representative, one of the
things we really wanted to do is
make sure that the scope of the
The party that was doing the
development of the software was
very clear. We felt it was
important that we
Clearly articulate that this was
applicable to those developers
who are doing business.
OK
Um, thanks, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair. So, um, does that mean
that this would only be
applicable go or to developers
in the state of New Mexico and
other developers.
Developing software that is
deployed in the state of New
Mexico is covered. Thank you,
Madam Chair. That's Next, uh,
Madam Chair, uh, we have a
different definition for high
risk artist.
Um, and specifically the first
bill, madam chair,
Madam Cha included video games
and.
Yeah
Madam representative.
We went through the bill and
basically took a look at it to
make sure it made sense. For
example, we can all pretty much
agree that an AI powered
calculator C. So we remove
calculator from the list as a
result. We did further analyze
how these types of technologies
might in fact propagate into
existing platforms. So we wanted
to make sure that we took a look
at use cases in those areas
where technology specifically
was going to proliferate
specifically if you take a look
at the office platform that
Microsoft puts out. You can see
co-pilot making its way slow.
but surely, we wanted to make
sure that use cases that did not
involve the AI capabilities that
were slowly being added to those
platforms were specifically
excluded from any kind of
regulation. So we took a look at
the industry as a whole in
partnership with uh with, with
Chris and the folks that uh
University of New Mexico, we
discussed how perhaps these
particular categories might in
fact be modified the way that is
more representative of what
we're.
typically seeing in the in the
marketplace today.
um, and lastly, there was a
potential factor. Can you
explain that to me?
The definition, uh, again, Madam
Chair Representative, the
definition of substantial factor
was in fact simplified because
if you go back to the previous
version, it was fairly
Not specific. We wanted to go
through the language and find
something that would be much
more easily understood and
frankly applied.
And
We
Felt that this particular
Definition took the existing
work that had been done both in
Texas and in Virginia and in
Colorado improved upon that
language, and that's why we're
putting it forward now is the
solution that we feel best suits
the need at this point.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So how to
define substantial.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative
Representative Hall.
Madam Chair, madam chair, an
expert, um,
I had a question about section
13.
It went in the old one, it said,
uh.
Enforcement State Department of
Justice, consumer civil actions,
we changed that over to
Apartment
Opportunity to
pure
Consumer civil actions.
And then along those lines, um,
on the um the new sub on page
29.
Line 89, and 10.
That was added from the old one,
the developer, deployer or other
person reports the violation of
the department, cures the
violation within 7 days.
Is there
A reason for the 7 days or where
did that?
Beam.
Well, um,
Madam Chair and representative,
the intent is to allow in um
companies, but we want that cure
to be prompt because remember,
I'm madam, our high risk systems
that are used, don't want to
give 3 months or 6 months
because it's impacts people's
lives in such a significant.
And Madam Chair and experts and
and Madam Chair, um.
That's
Because in the land of and I'm
kind of ignorant as you guys
probably well know on on
computers.
They can turn this around
because my understanding is most
of this is, as the doctor, uh,
eluded is not intentional, it's
the way the system is set up. Am
I interpreting that correctly,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and represent, I
think it's fair to say that
probably or biased, um, that's
why we have this bill. We want
people really focus.
That's all I have on the
substitute madam chair. Thank
you.
Thanks.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm,
I'm.
I can usually understand a lot
of this stuff, but I'm really
struggling.
So is this basically.
vehicle to go after the.
The developers
If they misuse this information,
Madam Chair and I wouldn't use
the terminology go after. I, I
view this and I I should
emphasize it more, it's a it
allows us all the sense, and it,
it emphasizes that developers
and deployers are responsible
for ensuring that they show
reasonable care in ensuring that
the data that's um, so that's
what the, it's transparency
because we're letting people
know that AI.
and it also requires reporting
on generally what kind of
systems and it allows an
enforcement act and does because
you really not intended to
pursue wrongdoing. It's really
intended to get developers and
deployers thinking about how to
ensure that their systems are
doing what they claim they do.
You, Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
so.
When you say that everyone will
get to black box. How are we
going to do that? And I can get
help from my, I'm trying to.
It is by post, we require the
developer to post on their web
they developed and generally not
trade secrets, but we require
that for the deployer from the
developer and the developer is
required to provide information
with the act.
So how's the general public
gonna know, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair.
all the players. Um
Good question. Uh, madam, Madam
Chair and representative when
one is a customer, so this is
one way they'll know when one's
a customer, there will be a
notice that has to pop up.
That's part of the notice
provisions too, saying you are
using this AI so you want to
follow up, you have the ability
then to go look on the website
of
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair.
For a lot of it, it does, but if
I go to the doctor.
How am I gonna be able to track?
We go to the doctor's website.
How am I gonna know
We to look to see if my
information is being
represented. I can go ahead and
take that question, you in that
situation are.
Going to, you're you're not the
end user at that point.
The person who's the end user is
the physician, and the physician
it's his responsibility to know
whether or not the uh the system
that he's being used or that is
being used to render some kind
of decision is in fact in AI
system or not.
So it's really not the consumer
per se who needs to know that
it's really the person who's
using it and the person who's
using it in this case would be
the physician and not
necessarily the consumer in this
case.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madame Che
It just seems to me that if I go
to the doctor, that's my
information.
That's cool. I don't care if a
dog, I don't care if he knows.
What system he's using, I want
to know.
Because it's my.
Yes
I get you what you're saying.
But, uh, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, I think it's just a.
Understand the transparency.
Just not sure.
Just not sure that the way this
is written.
I'm gonna be
My health understand right now
that if I go on this,
There's a good chance that I'm
gonna get all kinds of ads or
they'll get my blood tested.
All of a sudden
All these medications are coming
up on my phone. I understand
that and
I do want to be able to fix
that.
If I go to the doctor, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair.
Since I'm not the end user.
That's very important
information.
I'd like to see that fixed.
Um
I'm not sure how
But I think that's, that's very
key to getting a good clean.
that I could say yes, um.
You, Madam Chair, Madam Chair.
Representative would love to
talk to you just a little bit
more to that topic because it
does hit on this, this very
important uh
The the this important aspect.
Of, of, of how do you treat
privileged information in these
situations and what you're
talking about in in this
particular situation is the
protection of your data, which
of course is super important,
but you're not making the
consequential decision. This
bill is all about who is using
this data to make with the data
at hand.
This would be the physician and
not you. So it would be beholden
onto the physician to be mindful
of the technology that's being
used, and to realize that, hey,
there is this consequential
decision that is being made. I'm
utilizing it. I need to make
sure that I understand how this
AI that's helping me make this
decision is in fact involved.
A
Hey
Um
What is the will of the
committee? Are there is there
any more discussion?
On the go ahead.
you, uh, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, um, addressing the
concerns that the a lot of uh
comments on that. Can you
address that and why they're not
exempt from this if they have
that other protection in more
detail, so I understand that
better. Yes, madam chair and
representative, and, and I tried
to explain it to him on multiple
occasions, um, yes, we recognize
is heavily regulated, but they
are not regulated by.
And um I will say that I have
spoken to the superintendent of
insurance and she does not. She
believed in representative that.
Yes, there's a lot of reporting
in terms of their technical
requirements, but there's
nothing that is comparable in
terms of how they need to test
their at they're adjusting for
risk and so on.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mount,
that was my only.
anyone else.
Is there any objection to
adopting the kidney substance.
We have an adopted.
Any other
Thank you, madam chair thank you
ma'am, sure. um, so.
And I'm sure what I do to help
myself kind of summarize really.
Huge and intense bills like this
is just try and boil it down to
the um.
Correct me if I'm wrong, so this
bill is about.
Regulating.
Um, predictive.
Uses of predictive AI.
Meaning
AI decision.
That will have consequences on
somebody's life, is that I'm
sure I'm not sure so.
For those, for that.
Specific context, this bill
regulates instances in which
people feel that the use of
predictive AI has resulted in an
unfair.
Or biased results.
Is that correct, Madam Chair and
Representative, I think that's a
fair statement as well.
Thanks. And so, Madam Chair,
Madam Chair,
this bill requires the
submission of.
Well I count 3 different
reports, so a report by the
developer.
Of the predictive AI technology,
a report by the deployer.
Of the predictive AI technology
on a report that um is required
once.
Someone discovers that
predictive AI has resulted in uh
a biased or um.
Let's just say a biased result.
Here and representative I think
that's correct as well. OK.
So, um,
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, as it results, um, as it
relates to
The submission of these reports
by the deployer.
There's
A lot of requirements in these
reports, they have to be
submitted annually and they, it
looks like they have to be
submitted once there is, let's
say um.
Uh
Substantial change in the
technology and what the
technology is, um, utilizing or
the information that technology
is utilizing to make a decision,
so my.
question, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair.
As it relates to again, just the
deployer reports.
Now, let's say we're talking
about a healthcare company.
How do we know that a healthcare
company, Madam chair, Madam
Chair has.
Access or the technical ability
include and write this
information in these reports, so
they need to like hire an expert
or how's that supposed to work?
Madam chair representative.
It is beholden upon any company
that deploys a tool to
understand how it works.
What its upsides are, what its
downsides are and the same
reason that if a a technology
that's not AI based has some
known defect if you as a company
make that product available to
consumers.
That's on you.
And this bill is essentially
trying to create a framework of
responsibility of both the
people who built the software
and the people who put it into
use for the, for the public's
consumption, making sure that
they understand what the
responsibilities are and they
take them seriously.
Because of the important and
significant downstream impact.
That's why these reporting
Uh, instructors are as stringent
as they are to provide that
level of transparency around
these tools and to make sure
those folks who are building the
software, as I said, and our
deploying it fully understand
the the downstream implications
of what they're doing.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, ma'am
sure. So, um.
Turning to the issue of, um, IP
and protected IP.
If you could, um, again, tell
me, Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
what the protections are in this
bill.
That, um, ensure.
Against the disclosure of
protected, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, neither the
deployer nor provide trade
secret and through this bill.
OK, thanks. Thank you, Madam,
sure. So let's say we're talking
about the black box, what an
acceptable response by a report
be something like, well, these
are all the metrics we use in
our black box, however, the
specific algorithm we use is
intellectually protected. That's
an acceptable response.
Chair and representative of very
OK, thank you very much. Um, and
last, Madam Chair, I'm sure I
want to turn to the um private
right of action as it exists in
this bill, so um.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, the
Attorney General, I'm sorry, the
Department of Justice is in
charge of enforcement for this
bill, let's say we have the
report of um.
A risk assessment or something
goes wrong and someone is is
wrongfully denied benefits.
What private right of action
would that individual have.
As it relates to the language in
this bill.
Madam Chair, I would refer to it
as a limited private right of
action. It's not one cannot
collect damages, one can only
enforce the act if it as it
applies to them. So let's say um
a a deployer refuses to correct
misinformation.
And, you know, the request is
made, it's refused. I think
eventually that person would
have a private right of action
to.
For an injunct does provide for
attorneys' fees, but it does not
provide, Madam Chair, for
damages. So I, I consider it as
a fairly, you know, use of the
private right of action, Madam
Chair representative.
Thank you man manager. So just
to summarize as it pertains to
this bill, let's say someone
feels that they were unduly
denied workers' compensation
benefits based upon a predictive
AI model, this bill would not
allow them to sue the deployer
who utilized that AI technology,
um, for the damages they feel
were caused by the um denial of
those benefits.
That's right, they would just be
able to say please correct the
information, Madam Chair,
representative.
Man.
Yeah, go ahead out of.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, experts, um, correct me
if I'm wrong.
It doesn't apply if the deployer
employs fewer than 50 employees.
Is that correct, Madam Chair,
Madam Chair Representative, no,
that's not correct. uh, what it,
it does not apply if the
application only involves, I
think 50 users, 50 people, so,
um, people who might be applying
for a job, it could only apply,
it would not, they'd have to.
Adhere to this if it applies to
more than efficient customers.
OK.
Not the number of employees for
the company, but the number of
people who might by the use of.
Oh, OK. I think uh I think that
makes sense. Thank you, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I'd like
to move a do pass on the
committee sub B 60.
We have a motion for a due past.
So I, I'd be happy to a do not
pass. You pass motion. OK. So do
not pass on the bill, do pass on
the committee.
Great.
All right. Um, I just wanna, uh,
thank the sponsor for this. I
know we've been getting
countless emails, um.
In, in all of the wrestling,
we're on a 0.6 version. I'll
just remind the body that
there's been a lot of iterative
process with this, a lot of
comments, a lot of feedback.
We're trying to, um, you know,
make it as solid as possible, so
thank you to the, to the um
chair for being so deliberative
about it, um.
And with that, we will go to a
vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative.
Yes.
Resent of a beta
Representative Chavez.
No.
Representative Hall.
I know, but with an explanation,
please. Thank you.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes, and I'd like to.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reeb. No.
Leader Sapansky. Yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House Bill 60, but I do
pass on committee substitute 60.
Yes, we'll start with
Representative Hall.
Thank you. This is
That's, that's OK.
Uh, I just, this, this is
incredibly, uh, and I know how
hard you worked on it and we
heard it over the interim. I
just, I didn't understand
everything, so I just, I don't,
I, this isn't complicated, but
it's scary how intricate this
is, so, um, that's all I wanted
to say. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, I, I know how much.
You, you, this has been a
struggle.
I've heard this
True
Intrus in a row
Both times it's, it scared me.
I think
Once we start putting guard
rails in, it's a little bit more
manageable.
I'm not sure that this bill, um,
Go where I wanted to go, but I
think it's, I think it's a
decent start.
I think
One of those bills that it's
gonna take.
You hacks at it to get it right.
But I do appreciate all the work
and.
I appreciate you talking to as
many people as you have.
Congrats you.
Out through the shuffle, the
We are on House Bill 178 nursing
practice changes.
Understand you all have an
amendment, we'll get that passed
out.
Sure.
Welcome, chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Am I ready?
We're ready. OK, thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm pleased to
introduce House Bill 178. The
nursing practice Changes Act
proposing changes to the nursing
Practice Act. These changes aim
to clarify the scope of practice
at various categories. The bill
also seeks to expand the
authority of the state board of
nursing, modify and streamline
licensing processes and enhance,
uh, the confidentiality uh
disciplinary actions.
The changes proposed in House
Bill 178 are designed to resolve
current challenges in the
nursing practice, ensuring that
nurses in New Mexico can operate
within a clear defined scope of
practice. This coupled with
proposed expansion of the
nursing nursing, um.
Excuse me, expansion of the
board of nursing oversight and
regulatory Authority will help
to ensure high quality patient
outcomes, professional
accountability and supportive
systems of nursing in the state,
um.
We have an amendment which I
think has been passed out, um,
it is the number is.
0.230938.1.
And I would like to defer to my
witness to um explain the
amendment.
Thank you. This is an amendment
that was brought to our
attention in the last committee,
every section of every
healthcare provider practice Act
has a conversion therapy
section, and in that section,
sexual oriented mind. Well, in
the 2023 session, the Human
Rights Practice Act when we
opened it up with the Human
Rights Amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and with
that, um, I also have Gloria
Doherty, who is also uh one of
our, our expert witnesses today
and with that we stand for
questions.
This is what I propose we go to
public comment and we can talk
about the amendment and any
questions people have about the
amendment, adopt the amendment
as appropriate and then.
Talk about the bill. So those in
the audience wishing to speak in
opposition to the please step
forward.
I don't see anyone in
opposition.
Those online.
those in the audience um wishing
to speak in support, please um
step forward, um, there's a
gentleman who will have your
comments to about a minute.
my,
um, Madam Chair and members
representatives of the
committee. I am Lisa leading.
I'm a doctorly prepared
registered nurse who has
practiced nursing in New Mexico
for 31 years, um, as a
correctional nurse and currently
in the emergency department and
as a nursing instructor. The
updates to the nurse Practice
Act include clarification of
registered nurses being able to
administer medications, which we
are specifically trained to do.
Um, one of the biggest meds is
the sedating meds which occurs
during procedures when
providers' hands are typically
busy with reducing fractures,
intubating, or placing chest
tubes. These procedures occur
daily in emergency departments
across their states, and many
hospitals are without a second
provider to push medications
while the other performs the
procedures. Since we are
specifically trained to
administer these medications,
this update clarifies nurse
practice and makes safer care
for both patients and nursing
practice.
Eric.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jared Najar on behalf
of the New Mexico Society of
Anesthesiologists and also
Loveless Health System. We think
the sponsor and the experts for
working with us and listening to
our concerns and we strongly
support this bill.
Thank you. Anyone online wishing
to speak and support, please
raise your hand.
Jason Bloomer.
Jason
afternoon, evening, madam chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jason Blumer and I'm the
vice president of the New Mexico
Nurses Association. My clinical
practice encompasses 11 years as
a critical certified critical
care nurse in New Mexico and in
California. It is my belief that
these changes to the nurse
practice practice act with
regards to the language on
sedation aligns with state or is
aligning state law with current
evidence-based practice being
utilized at the bedside. We
currently use these classes of
medications in the form of
continuous drips and ongoing
sedation.
as such as procedural or
moderate sedation interventions
for invasive procedures.
For example, utilizing moderate
sedation during procedures where
cameras, tubes, clips are
inserted through the mouth in
order to assess and intervene
upon bleeding in the stomach or
intestines. This is a very
uncomfortable and potentially
traumatizing intervention if
performed while awake. Having a
registered nurse manage these
medications while a physician is
intervening allows their focus
to remain on the invasive
intervention itself and allows
the nurse to assist the
physician in the
in the way we normally do. I am
the New Mexico Nurses
Association stand in support of
this bill as amended. Thank you.
Anyone else wishing to speak and
support online, please.
I don't see anyway, um,
sponsors, anything else? No,
madam Chair, we stand for
questions. Great. Thank you. So,
um, discussion.
S
Anyone have questions about the
amendment first.
OK,
I am happy to accept a most made
by Speaker Marti Spansky.
Um, any opposition to adopting
the see any opposition, you have
a an adopt.
Questions, comments about the
bill.
Uh, Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you
Representative
I
I voted for this in.
Oh, I'm just trying to figure
out.
Madam Chair
Yeah.
Yes
In every single um health care
practice.
17 um section.
disallowing.
If, if you don't know if like
that they're gay and they
ologist or some healthcare
professional or some not
healthcare conversion therapy
section 7.
You may go to anyone you want.
And so we had to make amendments
in it to track with the existing
law in the Human Rights Act,
which defines.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
I could go off.
Um
I just
I just don't understand some
laws, you know, what, 18, you
can't.
And talk to them until they're
18.
My procession here we passed
Bill saying, if you're 12 years
old, let's.
Make life changing decision.
It just seems kind of out of.
It, it just bothers me.
you know if we're gonna do
something, let's be uniform
about it.
It's good for a 12 year old, and
this is good for a 12 year old.
If 18 is the line, then 18 is
the line.
Um, that's just my.
Commons for the day.
but I do appreciate you bringing
this listen to the rest of the
debate.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Uh, representative Ramiro.
I thank you, madam chair, I
think you representative, thank
you, experts, um.
Going back to the uh what was
just adopted in the amendment. I
was surprised that we have.
I mean, and this isn't your bill
cause I think I understand the
parts of your bill that you are
actually updating, and I agree
with.
Um, but it is quite shocking to
see um conversion therapy
defined in law at all. Um.
I would actually recommend just
striking that section in its
entirety, um, it's not
scientific or um.
I don't know why it's even in
the statue. I don't, can you
elaborate a little bit if, if at
all, I just, I'm curious for
this, um.
Committee if, if that's
something might be friendly.
Um
I mean
Every health care Practice Act
has doctors, like kind of
therapy, they have in their act
from therapy ban.
This act, but it's still in
every other healthcare
practices. Oh, thank you, Madam
Chair, I'm, I mean, it is.
Just quite troubling to see the
uh, what it is or what it isn't.
When
My understanding.
Of the entire form of therapy is
that it's, it's unscientific and
it's um.
Inappropriate for the practice
of.
nursing or what have you, um.
And the allowance of us to
continue to perpetuate any sort
of definition means that we
would make it legal,
essentially.
Um
I
So I, I would consider just
removing
Conversion therapy as a
definition from lines 18 through
on page 26, lines 18 through 25,
um.
All the way through lines on
page 27 from 1 to 8. I don't
know what that would compromise,
however, as far as where else we
use this definition, um.
And then I know that it would
mean your amendment is also
stricken.
Um
Madam, conversion therapy is.
And all this is saying is
healthcare providers.
If you do conversion therapy,
you can do it on your boat.
There's still gonna be all and
if we remove it, then.
Like the fact that they're gay
and we don't think they should
be gay, then they would be able
to do that.
That's why
I, I hear you, madam chair, um,
expert, I think it's just.
Whether you're
17 or 18 or.
or
or whatever.
Again, my understanding is that
this is not.
I mean, it's sort of like.
Back doctoring in a in a way of
my understanding like it's it's
allowing for something to
persist that isn't actually.
Scientific and so when we have
it in the act, my understanding
is that we would.
Perpetuate something, whether as
an adult that you may subject
yourself to that is.
Um,
so I'm just concerned that if we
continue to have that in our
statute, we are allowing that
practice, somebody, and I don't
even know if it's covered by
Medicaid. I don't know who's
paying for this at the at this
time as well, but if you are,
you know, understand that you're
gonna go get your palm red or
your tarot red and there's some
other things that we subject
ourselves to that may.
The financial transaction in
nature, we don't see those
definitions in law, whereas this
is something that.
In my opinion, is.
Quite troubling to have
allowable as, as a
transactional.
Um, basis for which we have um a
medical practice provide um
these services.
Um
I don't know if it, uh, I don't
know what I'm recommending
outside of the fact that.
If it's here in another statue,
and I know that's not, this
isn't the substance of the bill.
So I agree with the substance of
the bill, and perhaps we just
work on something that where we
can, you know, sort of work
through.
Some sort of edit, um.
I would love to work with the
sponsor. And I'm just again
troubled that we allow this.
in in law, and I don't know if I
have a recommendation.
Otherwise.
appreciate
Express you express concerned. I
don't hear emotion represent.
Madam Chair, I was just gonna do
an on that point, uh, cause I
think you need. So just to add
to the conversation, uh, Madam
Chair.
I think you need that section as
unfortunate as it is because
page 25 line.
3
Is actually where we say
conversion therapy can't be used
on.
So it, um, it just strikes me
that it might be a separate bill
to just ban the practice um.
anyone else with questions on
the amended bill and I do so.
OK, um,
So on page 9,
Allow um.
And a registered nurse.
To administer anesthetics.
Um, or moderate sedation to
anyone.
I want to understand.
So does that mean a nurse, not a
anesthesiologist, doctor.
can knock somebody out for 7
hour surgery and.
No
OK, so explain to me what what
this nurse is now registered
nurse is now given authority to
do in this act cuz this is new.
Madam Chair, members of this
committee, actually this is not
new. This has been in practice
for over 2 decades and know a
registered nurse cannot
administer medication that would
keep a patient out for surgery
for 7 hours, that is reserved
for a CRNA certified registered
nurse anesthetist in this bill.
What this bill does is to put
definitions of sedation to make
sure nurses don't do that. In
fact, they are doing up through
moderate sedation, which the
definition is in there. That
includes when you go for your
colonoscopy when your child
breaks their leg and their leg
needs to be reset when I have to
put a chest tube in somebody.
Um, I practice in critical care,
and I have to use this on a more
than daily basis, both in the
emergency room and in critical.
care as a provider. I order the
medications for the nurses to
administer.
As does, as do physicians in the
emergency department.
Um, if this has been in practice
for 20 years, why are presumably
it was authorized, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, this
is.
Has anything in medicine,
basically emerging to the need
where it needed to be put in
statute to separate out the
different types of sedation to
make sure our patients were safe
and to make sure we had a public
safety mechanism in place where
we know nurses are being trained
appropriately to give these
medications and that there is an
airway specialist immediately
available as defined in the
rules that have been
promulgated.
And Madam Chair, it wasn't in
the statute. They promulgated
rules to say you're doing this,
you've been doing it, but now
there are more sophisticated
drugs and is expanded the
training that only when ordered
by a physician or another
provider. They can never give
drugs on their own. They can
never inject on their own. They
have to.
have an order.
And we clarified that in the
bill saying an order by a
physician writer. OK.
Um, my question to answer.
Anyone else?
I
Do pass motion on House Bill 1
said by Representative Romero
and seconded by Representative
Hall, would you call the roll,
please?
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative of Beta.
Representative Chavis. Yes.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reeb.
Yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair
Yes.
Madam Chair, you have a you pass
on has 178 is twice amended.
Madam Chair and thank you to the
committee.
We are now on House Bill.
169.
Public expression Protection
Act.
So my recollection is that we.
Um, discuss the bill.
We had public comment, but we
didn't fully discuss the bill,
we didn't have time to ask
questions and so on, so we're
gonna go to where we left off,
which I believe is committee
discussion and questioning, is
that your recollection, vice
chair? That's, and we had moved
the committee. So are we handing
out the sub again, just because
we're really bad about carrying
our paper everywhere we go.
And
I think it was a sub that was
introduced on.
No, just the same stuff. Yes.
It it was a 0.2. It's a 0.2 6
8.2.
OK.
Very good.
So, um, and remind me, did we
adopt this? Well, no, we
wouldn't, we'd have to have one
of those weird motions, so, um,
long weird motions.
So open to conversation or
discussion about the committee
sub which was moved for
discussion.
I asked for an allowance to
reintroduce.
Ourselves, feel free, OK. Um,
um, Madam Chair, uh, with me is
Karen Myers. Um, we again are
looking at a piece of
legislation which enacts act,
um.
This has been across uh 35
various form. The last time we
update, it's time for an
upgrade, um, the last time we
checked the institutes, um, and
this would get us back to, um,
but really the, I'm, I'm sure if
you've heard about anti-slap or
slap legislation, um.
But, uh, essentially this uh
prevents and uh sorry, excuse
me, protections for strategic
lawsuits against what's before
us. We've had bipartisan support
in other states. The last one
most recently was Ohio, which we
did, um, and that was the
thirty-fifth state. Madam Chair,
um.
You may have.
Members happy to take names.
questions.
Representative Martinez.
Madam Chair, um.
What are we trying to do here?
A chair Representative Martinez.
Well, we're trying to do is
provide a statutory remedy when
Um, someone is speaking out.
Attending a protest, coming to
testify before you or other free
speech protected activities.
That they aren't sued because
someone else did historically
what's happened is slap suits
are used to strategically to
intimidate people from from
expressing their opinions or
from testifying.
And this says that should that
happen in your suit for for
exercising your First Amendment
rights. It provides a statutory
remedy to allow the court to
have an expedited procedure to
review whether or not your
activities were indeed and then
dismissed the lawsuit before the
person or the uh the
association, for example, has to
undergo very expensive, costly
and time consuming litigation.
Oh
The the the the
Free speech doesn't have to be
true.
Madam chair.
Free speech
Doesn't have to be true as long
as it's subject to First
Amendment.
That isn't the, that isn't what
this is addressing. What it's
addressing, Madam Chair and
Representative Martinez is
assuring that a court has a
mechanism to determine whether
or not this is.
Thank you Madam chair, um,
Representative
Wasn't this fixed?
Nationally
The New York Times versus
Sullivan.
Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, this raises other
issues and provides the states,
um, which is critical at this
time to assure that state courts
have a Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, so does this
expand the protections of the
Sullivan case,
it provides different remedies
and Sullivan, I believe, and I'm
not.
An expert on Sullivan. I, I
believe primarily applies to
journalists. This also applies.
To you.
Speaking out in your public capa
in your opinion at going to a
protest, for example, or writing
a letter to the editor or me
coming to testify this body.
That I couldn't be sued because
I participated in those
activities or I, but it would
provide the court a mechanism to
determine that if I was
exercising my First Amendment
rights that I
would have an opportunity.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Madam Chair
Representative and expert so.
And I know how you and I, this
may have been asked and the
answer, but I'm gonna try a
different format if that's OK.
Does this allow someone to
knowingly make false.
Statements
Just to slander someone.
Not that that would ever happen
in our country, but just, just
in case, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative Hall,
it doesn't allow that, no, and
it's not what the.
So
not to beat a dead horse of
Madame chair, I'm sorry, Madam
Chair Representative, does this
just
This is actually to prevent.
Being hit with frivolous
lawsuits over something you
said, that's basically what this
comes out to, uh, representative
expert Madam Chair,
that's correct. For if I can
give you a couple of examples,
um.
For example, slap suits have
been used, um, to companies
who've been criticized by a
journalist.
To sue the journalist for
criticizing them.
Uh, this would cover that.
to seek a procedure to have that
dismissed.
There are other many examples,
but for the sake of time.
Thank you, Madam Cha.
Speaker Martinez. Thank you,
ma'am, just a couple of points.
Uh, the first one is just
reading the.
I think it was section 2.
Findings and purpose, that's
pretty unique, um, in terms of
that sort of construction. Can
you expand a little bit as to
Yes, um, Madam Chair, Speaker
Martinez, um, the prior
substitute that is not before
you did not have that.
Um, in researching the existing
law and there is existing New
Mexico law, but it's much, much
narrower. It just covers people
who are testifying in a quasi-ju
committee or before an
administrative agency, um, in
the cases that um are on record
in both the Supreme Court. They
actually looked very carefully
in determining the the issues on
that appeal to the purpose.
So the existing law, which is
similar to this but it's been
cleaned up and expanded the
proposed bill.
Um, but because the Supreme
Court and the Court of Appeals
relied on that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um, expert and Representative
Romero.
Um
Let me walk through just a
couple of hypotheticals, so.
This would provide some
protection, say to.
Folks
I don't know, an oil and gas
company.
Ma
This would also provide
protection, say, to a group of
neo-Nazis protesting.
Madam chair thank you.
Any other questions, abortion
provider.
Madam, yes.
and do not pass on.
House
6916 but I do pass on judiciary
Committee substitute for our
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavis.
Yes.
Representative Hall.
Yes
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reeb.
Yes.
Leader Sapansky. Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House Bill 169, but I do
pass on.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute 169. Thank you, thank
you, uh, vice chair.
Um, next item on our agenda is.
Follow up discussion on House
Bill one protect reporters from
exploitive spying.
Thank you
Thank you, chair.
Yes, for the additional time.
Absolutely, we're handing out
the.
Oh final committee sub.
Um, so let's get that handed
out, we can.
A representative to someone want
to move?
For discussion.
90, 85. Right, we have.
The sub before us representative
do you want to speak to what it
all involves. Sure. OK. So how
Bill 153, um, basically updates
New Mexico's press shield law
from 1973.
Um, and for reference in 1973,
the top song was Tie a Yellow
ribbon around the old oak tree,
and the top movie was The
Exorcist.
Um, and so, and I, and I was
just a glimmer in my father's
eye.
So, um.
So this law would update the
press shield from 1973 would
update definitions for what a
journalist is and for, um,
different modes of communication
for a journalist, um, including
internet, email, uh, text
messaging, cell phones, that
sort of thing, uh, and, uh, and
then strengthens the press
shield to update for how
journalism is done today.
Um, and the amendments that were
added, uh, bring the, bring in
line some of the words and
phrases that New Mexico courts
uses, so from serious bodily
harm to great bodily harm, for
example, um, and we were just
getting much more feedback from
the state Supreme Court. We met
with the general counsel of the
Supreme Court to get their
feedback on this. And so, um,
the second version of Amendments
includes some of their feedback
that tightens up that language,
um.
it relates to Ammerman. Um, I
want to introduce, um, also my
expert witness, Mr. Charles
Purcell, um, who also there's
anything you want to add, Mr.
Purcell, if not.
So we already took public
comment on Saturday, so we're
not gonna do that. Um, let's go,
sorry, we did not did not. OK,
my apologies. All right, so
let's go um out to the public,
those wishing in the audience to
speak in opposition to the bill,
please approach the gentleman
with a microphone.
Don't see anyone.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Don't see anyone.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support.
Um, please approach the
gentleman in the audience out
there here.
Please stand up and
Afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
Tatiana Prieto with the ACLU of
New Mexico, and we are in strong
support of HB 153, which is
essential to protecting press
freedom and ensuring journalists
can do their jobs without fear
of retaliation. A free press is
the backbone of democracy,
serving as both an information
source for the public and a
crucial government watchdog.
When reporters are forced to
reveal confidential sources or
are subjected to government
surveillance, it undermines
their ability to
power accountable. HB 153 would
create important protections,
reinforcing the First
Amendment's promise of a free
and independent press, and we
urged the committee to support
this bill. Thank you. Anyone
else in the audience wishing to
speak say that anyone online
wishing to speak.
In support move for discussion,
the sub that's before us.
Madam Chair, thank you.
Um, in looking through this
defines.
Pardon me, I didn't
Representative expert, I
apologize. It's been a long day.
Um, it defines
Broadly
The press corps, so to speak.
Is that include, um,
People who just show up with
their cell phone and blog or
Uh, just kind of.
Were there a random journalist,
uh, this morning I
Happened to witness someone in
the halls here and they had no
journalism.
Credentials, but they said they
were a journalist and so it
brought an interesting
conversation among.
Our security and I kind of came
to mind in this bill if that if
that makes sense, Madam Jerry.
So, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, yes, it
would expand the definition of a
journalist, um, to include, uh,
nonprofit journalists, which the
current 1973 law does not
include, uh, it, it would
include someone who's a
freelance journalist, uh,
someone who is a blogger, um, or
does other mediums of journalism
online, um, and the definition
does include, um,
For it to have a, you know, a
person who regularly gathers,
prepares, collects photographs,
records, writes, edits, reports
and investigates or publishes
news or information that
concerns local, national or
international events, etc. So,
and that's on page one, line 2.
And then Mr. Madam Chair and
Representative Hall, yes, that's
exactly correct and it does, it
addresses.
A perceived bias in favor of the
mainstream media that the
existing statute.
Has, um, it allows for
protection of amateur.
Journalists, as long as they
blog, for example, regularly. It
is not a
It is not intended to protect
people who blog occasionally, of
course.
courts are going to have to
Flesh that out over time.
But, um, but it does, as we've
said in a in a different
committee, it, it requires a
seriousness of purpose, but it
doesn't require that the blogger
or the journalist be paid.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
That helps clear up quite a bit
and the regular would be left to
the courts when you said
regularly does this.
Um, and I
your efforts because the press
has certainly
changes from the old days of
having a press cards stuck in
your shirt and carrying a camera
with flash bulbs, which
1973, I remember.
Um,
so, as, as regular.
That takes away some of the uh
randomness.
That I think would be some
concerns of this bill. Is that a
safe way of, of, of saying that,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative Hall,
I think so.
Uh, I, I'd like to think so in
any event. Um, it, it, it
broadens the definition
substantially, but there is
still that control that someone
has to be
In this business, whether for
pay.
Madam Chair, um.
We had the other day because we
didn't have all this put
together representative expert
witness. I had asked several
questions about.
Witness to a crime and and
looking at uh page 7.
Uh, line 5.
This, this, I think answers my
question, but it delineates.
That they're not protected if
they're a witness to a crime
unrelated to engaging in their
journalism, such as I had given
you an example. There's a crime
that goes behind a journalist.
They have their
Phone or whatever they're using
for their media.
That
They're not protected in that
point, they would have to give
over their media to law
enforcement if that became an
issue, is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative Hall,
I am not sure that that is
correct. What, what I think this
is getting at is the journalist
who is off duty as a journalist,
uh, is it, for example, um,
driving down the street and and
seize an assault, um, that, that
person is certainly not.
Engaged in journalism. The
person who is at a public
protest, for example, and is
covering that protest.
Um, even if something takes
place.
That that this journalist is not
interested in something that
takes place not quite.
In his line of sight.
he's still going to be engaged
in journalization and so this
bill probably.
Would protect.
Um
His, his sources.
So Adam Chan, so that's, that's
where we would have to like we
discussed last week, go through
the legal process of
Uh, because we discussed the
difference between admin
subpoenas and warrants and
stuff. This is where we probably
have to go to the courts.
And see if he would give it up
depending on the.
case, is that correct?
Yes, Madam Chair, Representative
Hall, I'm, uh, thank you for
bringing up the distinction
between warrants and subpoenas
and I
After we had our Saturday
session. I did want to go back
to clarify in my own mind the
difference between those and
state law is very clear that a
warrant must always be issued by
a judicial officer, and there is
no statute.
That entitles an administrative
agency.
To issue its own warrant. The
Fourth Amendment to the United
States Constitution, Section 10
of the New Mexico Bill of
Rights.
They both require
That warrant be issued by a
judicial officer and this bill
does not address what a court
can do.
Or should do
and the United States Supreme
Court has said
Administrative subpoenas.
Not the same thing as once.
Um, Madam Chair, thank you.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um.
On your definition, going back
to.
Discover somebody that posts
regularly.
Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, I believe it would.
Madam, that opens it up to.
Almost anybody.
Understand what
This opens it up to everybody. I
post.
But I would consider regularly
to Instagram.
I don't know that I post.
Stuff that's going on in the
show.
And my
Madam Chair Representative
Martinez.
I, I think the term journalist.
In the first place has a fairly
well understood meaning.
It's, it's not someone who does
journalism as a sidelight. It is
someone who
Performs it regularly and I
understand that uh
Representative, you post
regularly.
But I don't think anyone would
call you a journalist.
Under the common understanding
of that, that term.
But, and even though you could
say that I that you fit within
that statutory definition or the
the bill's definition.
Um
I don't think that a court would
classify you as a journalist
under those circumstances, but
it it certainly does.
Broaden
the protections that that is
undeniable.
But I regularly gather.
Repair
It is
Publish
Journalist
Whether I get paid for it or
not.
I post stuff that goes on.
You know, the fire department's
hiring somebody, the fire
department promoted this
department, did this, there's
this out going on.
I'm gathering and then I'm
publishing it.
Under this definition.
What I'm saying is,
I think the definition.
Unnecessarily broad. I
understand.
For me, I think that definition.
Used to be tighten just a little
bit.
I'm not saying narrow it down to
some works for a television.
Because these days everybody has
a blog.
Some of them I think are good.
Um
others are
You know, whatever
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
I appreciate that perspective
and um, someone like you or me
or like.
Last Facebook page in Las
Cruces. Um, isn't necessarily
quoting unnamed sources.
And this piece of legislation
applies to people who are
journalists who might be um
Might have to use an unnamed
source after going through a
rigorous set of practices in
their craft to to find the
source that is named, um, there
are, I think, significant
rigorous things a journalist
goes through to try not to have
a name we want to and this bill
aims to protect those unnamed
sources. Um, so for instance, if
there's a whistleblower at a
state agency that has done an
interview with a local radio
station, um.
Or even a nonprofit journalism
outfit. And that state agency
might get upset that there is a
whistleblower.
Um, they will use the interview
that was published, but they
might also want to subpoena all
the notes and all the documents
of that journalist to see what
else that whistleblower might
have said or not said.
That's what we're trying to
protect in in this legislation.
Um, and we're trying to also
protect the mediums of
communication, because right now
if a journalist collects that on
the typewriter or a word
processor that's protected, um,
but on their phone or on their
computer.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, like I said, uh.
I understand the idea.
I'm just
I'm just stuck on the
Extremely broad definition,
Madam Chair representative.
uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
representative and expert um.
I will say, um, after
representative Martinez and in
the broadness of that
definition, but I'm back to the
search warrant issue, um, as I
was on Saturday, so if if this
won't, could we add some
language in there that simply
just says nothing in this act,
that would make me feel a lot
better, um, something you
consider um as a friendly
amendment or not.
I, I mean, I, I am not the, the,
the principal drafts excuse me,
Madam Chair.
Um, and representative. I'm not
the principal draftsperson of
this of this bill. I personally
would consider it a friendly
amendment.
I don't think it's a necessary
amendment, but if it is required
to make.
people comfortable with the
bill. I, I see no.
and um representative and
expert, I appreciate that I make
myself law enforcement people
like that a lot more comfortable
with the concern I have, um,
but.
Um, if that language was in
there.
And also addressing the issue
with a little more succinct um.
That I could probably support
this. Thank you.
Manage
I, I apologize, I stepped out
for a second, was a motion
articulated? No, OK.
I see. All right.
All right, um.
And oh, Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I was just
gonna echo what Representative
Ree said, just going back to,
say, a journalist who's filming
protesters attacking the police.
What's going to compel them to
hand over the video. I think the
same thing about anti-government
YouTuber, maybe antagonizing
government agencies, videoing
them and then posting about it,
um.
What's going to make them turn
that over.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
um, this bill does not cover
inflammatory language or a
libel, um, or any of those
things, so this is simply about
what happens when a journalist
has an unnamed source, um, that
a state agency, so either the
legislative branch or the
executive branch is seeking to
To name
Um, or to also get all of
The evidence that they might
have all the notes and
recordings and have it be so
broad.
Um, that then they're now
reaching into other searching,
um, and so, so that's what this
bill speaks to, it doesn't speak
to, um, journalists position on
anything, um, or the issues that
they're working on and or liable
in any way.
Um, and so, so that's, that's
the scope of, of, um, and then I
also just want to add that to
Representative Reeb's point, um.
I, I don't believe that that
additional language is necessary
because out of the 54 or so, uh,
state agencies, departments,
commissions, boards, they're
over 54 that have subpoena power
in the state of New Mexico.
Out of all of them, none of them
have search warrant
capabilities. So, um, so I feel
like that language might be um
extra, and I don't wanna also
tell the judicial branch what
they are.
Anyone else?
I'm sure I'd like to move a do
not pass on house go 153 and I
do pass on.
Is there a second? OK, we have a
motion for a do not pass on
House Bill 153, but I do pass on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill One.
53, would you call the roll,
please? Yes, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative of Beta.
Yes.
Representative Chavis. No.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Hoffman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes
Representative Reeb.
No.
Leader Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House Bill 153, but I do
pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for 153.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Mr. Purcell. Thank you.
Thank you.
Right. Next up.
House Bill 73.
OK.
Welcome, Representative Ana. I
know there's a committee sub.
Well, let's have that passed
out. That would be great. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
And if you'll have it in front
of you, it should be version and
there was shown a little bit
earlier, uh, whether or not the
amendments applied to the
committee.
Very good. Um.
Let's get the sub passed out
before but for discussion.
All right. I, I'm happy to
discussion.
All right, um
Represent
Madam Chair and. Is your mic on?
Yes, it is. I'll get a little
bit closer. OK.
Um, Madam Chair committee
members, um, it repeals the
civil statute of limitations for
childhood sexual assault. Very,
very specifically.
Um, it also adds a retroactive
piece, uh, with the exception of
pending litigation.
Um, currently our statute of
limitations for uh on the 3
years or um someone's 24th
birthday.
Um, I also want to outline,
Madam Chair and committee does
not cover.
And not cover our general
statute of limitations for the
state of New Mexico.
It does not cover, which would
be governmental entity, um
entities within the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act, which are also
governmental entities. So,
essentially this bill does cover
private entities, uh, throughout
the years, which would be the
boys and girls club, um, the
Catholic Church and and so just
so we can get in uh the right
frame for this particular bill.
That is what it covers and
Narrow
limitations
A very narrow section of law,
specifically for childhood
sexual assault. Um, Madam Chair,
committee members, I have 2
experts with me today. I who uh
litigates in this particular uh
section of law often, and I also
have uh Alexandria Taylor. She
is the executive director of the
New Mexico Coalition of sexual
assault programs. Last, Madam
Chair, I just want to
acknowledge, um, we do have some
of our survivors in the audience
as well, um, so thank you, Madam
Chair.
Many members and we stand for
questions. Thank you.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in a bill, please.
Stand up and approach the
gentleman who will be coming
forward with a microphone.
This is opposition.
share my time limit.
On it
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Marty
Esquivel. I'm a general counsel
for the New Mexico Public
Schools Insurance Authority. I'd
like to begin by uh.
Conveying how important this
issue is, and we recognize the
duty we have to protect children
in our public schools.
Additionally, I'd like to thank
the sponsor for attempting to
work with us on this bill, um,
she's listening to our concerns,
and, but, however, we still have
two major concerns, and I have
very limited time, so I'll say.
That I, I, I think because of
the enormous financial exposure
to public schools and to our
public funds. It comes down to
two issues. So the first issue
is,
Should you have a statute of
limitations with a clear
exclusionary language precluding
claims against the public
schools and public employees, or
I think as we have here.
Um, an unclear statute without
clear exclusionary language that
could run the risk of public
exposure. I think the problem
with the proposed substitute is
a private individual.
Abortion is not really
identified, it opens up problems
in terms of how that's going to
be identified. And I think the
simple solution I would offer is
if there's clear exclusionary
language that would address the
issue. Thank you. Thank you.
Anyone else wishing to speak in
opposition and if you're gonna
be speaking, could you just come
up before um.
You know, form a line, please.
Yeah
I, uh, my name is Bridie
Ferrell. I'm the founder of
America Loves Kids, which is a
nonprofit organization that
works to
As statute of limitation bills
across the United States. I'm
also a survivor of childhood
sexual abuse, um, and I'm a suit
against my abuser all the way up
to the United States Olympic
Committee. My issue with this
bill specifically is it exempts
specific organizations, which we
have child sexual abuse in every
organization from,
unfortunately, our schools to
our pool decks or our ice rinks,
or synagogues, to our own homes.
And so I think that we need to
have a bill that doesn't exclude
any survivor that's sitting in
this audience or in our
classrooms.
Or anywhere else throughout the
state of New Mexico. So thanks
for giving me this opportunity,
and I'd love to work with anyone
on this. Anyone else?
In opposition.
All right, let's go online. This
is an opposition, Carrie Silver.
Good afternoon, members of the
committee. Um, my name is Carrie
Silverman. I'm here on behalf of
the American Tot Reform
Association. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify, Madam
Chair. We have 3 concerns with
the bill is introduced. First is
the precedented sets by
completely eliminating a statute
of limitations there and a key
part of a properly functioning
civil justice system, they allow
judges and juries to evaluate
liability when evidence is
available. If the committee
feels a longer period is needed
to file a
sexual abuse lawsuit, it can
extend that period, but the bill
before you doesn't extend it, it
eliminates it. It would allow
attorneys to file lawsuits
regardless of whether what
occurred happened in 2025 or
1955. Never before has it's been
done in New Mexico. Our second
concern is the bill's
retroactive application. These
lawsuits uh revived claims to be
filed against nonprofits,
business, schools, alleging they
should have or could have done
something more decades ago that
might have prevented abuse. Um.
Organizations are going to be
unable to respond with the
perpetrator dead, the employees
and the records.
Thank you.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support, please line
up.
I'm going to limit it to 5
people.
So you sort yourself out in
terms of order.
One minute each, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Andy Costellano. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak
for you tonight, uh, in 1987 and
1988, I attended the Albuquerque
Old Town Boys and Girls Club
after school and during the
summer for their youth programs.
I was 12 years old and 13 years
old during that time. I was one
of many boys who was sexually
abused by the director of the
Boys Club during that time. In
the year 2000 when I was 25
years old, the memories of my
sexual abuse start to flood my
mind.
And my dreams while I slept. I
was embarrassed that I had been
sexually molested and I tried to
drown my bad memories of
alcohol.
In 2003, I was 28 years old and
I had just been arrested for my
2nd DWI in 3 years.
In 2003, I finally told my mom
about the sexual abuse I endured
when I was a child.
My mom immediately helped me
find a therapist to begin
healing and an attorney to seek
justice. The attorney asked me
to find other victims to
corroborate my story.
Um, 2003 because social media
didn't exist, I couldn't find
anybody.
I decided to give up my seeking
justice in 2003.
Madam Chairman, members of the
committee, I am the mother of
Andy Costellano, and I'm here
today as a mother, as a parent,
and um
This doesn't just affect the
child, this affects.
The parents, the family, and um
I am here to to
Humbly ask for you to pass this
legislation. My son has, we have
been.
Dealing with this for 23 years.
Uh, and my motto is never should
never ever hurt a child.
Um
Because of the time limit, I
can't even tell you the, the,
the trauma that we have both
been through and and still
dealing with as a a parent and a
grandparent, I'm terrified that
there are all these predators
that are still out there and
because the law doesn't allow
for someone to come forward
after a period of time.
They're still doing it. And I
beg you, I asked you humbly ask
you, please pass this
legislation.
Thank you.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Lex Garcia.
come to you today as a survivor
of sexual child abuse and
exploitation for 2 years at
almost a daily cadence, my
teacher raped me. He convinced
me that the ticket out of
generational poverty would be an
education and that the price for
this education was access to my
body, my innocence, and being
robbed of my childhood.
Make no mistake, I did report
this abuse. I've reported it to
the school district, the police,
and PED. I made every effort to
seek justice and accountability
that was available to me, but it
was too late. My time to report
had ran out.
I didn't process this trauma
fast enough for it to matter in
the eyes of the law.
Since my since my reporting, my
abuser has now founded an
operates charter schools in our
state and outside of our state.
Today he's still entrusted with
young children. I stand in
strong support of HB 73 and the
accountability that it brings to
private entities, and I would
consider it a victory to see
this legislation passed, but I'm
begging you to reflect on who it
leaves out. Why, why are those
of us who suffered abuse in
public sector less worthy of
justice before you stands an
adult, but I'm asking you to see
the little girl who needed
protecting and deserves to seek
justice for the harm done to her
no matter what entity.
Thank you.
Sheriff Representatives. My name
is Isa Viennarajo. I'm here on
behalf of Equality New Mexico,
and we stand here in strong
support of HB 73. As a victim
myself of childhood sexual
abuse, I understand the intense
internal struggle of knowing
something awful happened to me,
but not for years, having the
ability to even begin and
verbalize what happened or what
action I wanted to pursue moving
forward. LGBT LGBTQ folk like
myself face higher rates of
sexual abuse in childhood and
throughout our lives, especially
if help is never received for
past traumas, not only would
this allow people the grace of
understanding their traumas
before having to relive them in
a court setting, but it would
give people the option to report
abuse while still having time to
decide how to proceeds of this
bill will help support LGBTQ
plus people and survivors all
across New Mexico. For this and
more equality New Mexico or just
a due pass. Thank you.
Thank you. Last one.
I'm sorry. He doesn't get, you
don't get to hold it art.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Arthur Melendrus. I'm a
lobbyist and lawyer for the
Albuquerque Public Schools. I
want to thank the sponsor.
are listening to our concerns
and working with us to
strengthen the definition
section of what is now the
committee substitute.
Um, this is very, very important
first step, and we appreciate
that. I want to say on behalf of
APS, uh, my superintendent and
what this bill is trying to do
and recognize the importance of
preventing sexual abuse.
Busy working on more prevention
and finally I want to say that
APS faces a very difficult
situation. I want to let you
know that we received today.
A letter
From the insurance company that
insures us.
Saying that we were on a
reservation of rights for a
claim that's very serious. We
have no coverage, and so where
I'm at is working with all of
you and the sponsor, we need to
be thinking about.
What happens when the
catastrophe occurs.
Like 44 million in Las Cruces,
and how can we
Work together to pay for that,
so victims are.
Taken care of, but we can't
afford to break the bank, so.
Uh, I don't know if this is
interim or thank you thank you.
OK, online.
Those wishing to school.
Raise your hand.
back to the spot.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um
Uh, use of many, many
negotiations back and forth to
make sure uh that this language
covered the intent of the bill,
um, which is private entities,
so.
Right.
I have Representative Chavez
anyone speaker Martinez and
read.
Uh
Wow
OK. Um, Representative Martinez.
And representative, right, so
representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives.
I just wanna thank you for
bringing this up and allowing me
to be a co-sponsor on this bill.
I really believe by removing the
time constraints on this, it
acknowledges the complex trauma.
Associated with childhood sexual
abuse.
And it empower survivors to seek
justice.
Try not to get emotional.
I just really want to commend
all of you here um it takes a
lot of strength.
To tell your story and I'm
thankful for that. I think it
helps us pass.
Common sense legislation and
It's not always easy, um.
Recognizing that many survivors
take a long time to come forward
into adulthood.
When we've had.
Behavioral health we've gone to
therapy. And it takes a lot and
sometimes we don't know that.
Um, I am a little disappointed
while I understand.
The reasonings that we protected
government entities.
It's a little frustrating, um,
you know, I have kids in APS
school system. I'm gonna be a
grandma, God willing, in April,
and I would hope that we are
protecting our children that are
in the school systems, most
especially because we empower
our teachers and trust them with
our children every day. Um, so I
just want to really thank you
for bringing this forward and I
just want to share my thoughts
and um strength with all of you
survivors in the room. Thank you
for sharing.
Thank you, um, Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for all of
your hard work on this bill. Um,
this is a difficult issue, and
I've been in this building long
enough. I've been, I've actually
sat in this committee where
there were victims of murder in
the audience.
And we've been asked to vote on
things that are very difficult.
And they're victim, um, so these
are highly complicated cases. I
wanna tell the folks.
We try our best to make
decisions, Madam Chair
representative.
Based on what's in front of us.
And really try to disconnect
ourselves from the emotion.
We have to, that's kind of our
job.
Understanding that.
Um, the votes that we take and
the things that we pass or don't
pass.
Have impacts that's not lost on
me.
Um, so, having said that, Madam
Chair and Representative.
Uh
You said that your bill does
not.
Apply
To public entities as as as that
the sub does not apply to public
entities.
Yet I heard one of the public
entities say that maybe it does.
So I would just like
clarification because either I'm
being lied to.
Or folks are just kind of
budging with the facts here.
So I'm gonna ask again, does
this apply to any public
institution,
Madam Chair. Madam Speaker, I
will say um.
The, the way that written
information is, um, we actually
had several different, um, but
we got to a place where
everybody was on the same.
First, we were asked to include.
The torque. Let me take a step
back. Originally, we were asked
to very specifically exempt.
Um, APS in public schools.
And I told them that it is not
done, however, think about
exempting the Tort Claims Act
and exempting uh folks within
the Tort Claims Act that this
bill is doing, um, the 2nd
iteration that uh thank you for
adding the Tort Claims Act Kids
Act. And we said, OK, sure,
yeah, we know the intent of our
bill, um, the intent of our bill
is for private, um, the 3rd
iteration of error, we added a
word not when it shouldn't have
been there, so we took that out.
Um
The that was uh a version that
we, Madam Chair and Speaker was
that I was called off the floor
by our drafters, um, to say that
that so, um, our drafters
essentially said, um, because
you have now mentioned theort
Claims Act and the have a loop
in our law sending, um, because
the New Mexico Civil rights, um,
an end sentence in there that
says.
Unless there is a statute of
limitations that is longer. It
was essentially sending folks
back and forth from our new
language that we had all the all
the drafters caught that, and
they said we can't have two
laws, uh, sending folks back and
forth. It's unclear. And so the
language you have before you
today, Madam Chair and speaker
is actually drafters language.
Um, it's drafters language with
one edition.
Um, we were also asked by um APS
to amend the language on page 2,
Um, we were also asked by um APS
to amend the language on page
29, to include non-public legal
entity to make extra, extra,
extra sure that we are not in so
we said we are totally open to
that. We added it to this
language, but, um, Madam Chair
and Mr. Speaker, this is
language directly from our
drafters who caught um
essentially a loop in our
previous language.
Thank you, madam. Got it. Thank
you, Madam Chair,
representative. That's, that's
really helpful.
Um, and I've been in that boat
myself on.
Things get caught up in this
twilight zone, Madam Chair, can
I have the uh lawyer for NEMSA.
Just give us a little bit of.
Background as to their concern.
Um
Um, OK.
Um, Mr. Escobel, would you,
would you mind?
Just giving us a little bit of
insight because I think what we
heard, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um, is that in fact, the
language in front of us.
is designed to exempt these
public entities and and I'll get
to why that's even an issue, by
the way, child abuse is child
abuse, period.
But I'll get to the why the
public thing is is an issue. Um,
can you expand on why this
language.
is not
Um
What's the issue with the
language?
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, I
think that the issue is un
conveyed that it's not supposed
to apply to public institutions
or public entities. I think the
lack of clarity that it applies
does not apply to public
employees.
Problem you have is that it
term private individuals is not
defined, and I think that
language may have been borrowed
from the statutory construction
portion of the statutes. So the
concern that you might have a
hybrid situation.
Of a public school teacher who
may have become acquainted with
a student and then something
happens outside of the school
district.
Um, is, is the issue, so my
proposal or our proposal that
you have a specific exclusionary
language with the public
institutions and the public
employees makes the most sense.
Now, um, the, the difficulty is
that you now have to
retroactively go back and make a
determination in that public
employee, not the public
institution, creates
A lack of clarity and exposes us
to huge financial resources, so
I, ma'am sure, Mr. Speaker, I
hope that answers your question.
that we're talking about.
Oh, Madam Chair Representative
Mr. Escobel, so.
I'm reading the language, so.
If the action is against a
private individual.
Is your concern that that
private individual.
It's still a public employee.
And even though the act may have
occurred.
Of
Site the republic.
entity a public space.
That the private individual who
is still be held liable.
And therefore,
Whatever protections or else.
May actually be triggered.
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, the
short answer is yes, so the, the
issue in that situation is that
the private private individual
who was a public employee could
go back to the public schools
insurance authority and say,
You need to provide me coverage
for this action going back 25
years ago.
Um, and that's the primary.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Mr. Esco. Thank
you, Representative.
Uh, so let me expand a little
bit, if I may, Madam Chair, on
why I'm asking these questions.
Um
While any type of abuse
anywhere.
is equally reprehensible and in
fact should be.
Punished through the criminal.
Uh through criminal law and then
of course victims need to be at
least when it's happened.
part of the issue and it's not
necessarily a conversation for
this committee anyway because
this bill is, I think, uh,
scheduled for appropriations uh
should it pass here today.
But
The, the, the issue that I
think.
That I'm trying to get at is
putting the legislature on the
hook for hundreds of millions of
dollars because ultimately it is
us, it is the people of the
state who pay these.
The settlements, right?
or these judgments, um, and
It's um
It's
It's easier said than done.
I mean, we just passed the
budget today that was 10 point.
$6 billion I believe.
Um, and we're kind of hitting
that plateau in terms of
recurring expenses, granted
these are non-recurrent
expenses, but still.
Um, that's something that this
be responsible for, uh, let, let
me, let me, um.
Let me move from that, Madam
Chair, so, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, the current
statute of limitations, I think
you said or somebody said was up
to the age of 24.
43 years after disclosure.
That's correct.
And why, um, the first question
is why is that?
Adequate enough and was thought
given to.
Expanding, increasing, and then
the 3 year window expanding that
to 5, 1015 years, Madam Chair,
Representative
I will give my answer, or
actually, both of my experts can
address that briefly. I don't
know that we need to hear two
experts. OK, well then I will
just, uh,
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, um,
the average for disclosure of
childhood sexual abuses over the
age of 50.
Um, and as we know, those who
have experienced childhood
sexual abuse, don't report or
delay reporting for many, um,
their own safety, their own
livelihood, um, they may be
living with the person that
assaulted them and it's not safe
for them to disclose or they
would not have a home if they
disclose, um, the reason for
delayed disclosure is, is
various, but the average age is
over 50. It's actually between
the ages.
And Madam Chair, uh, Miss
Taylor, where is that data from?
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, that
data is specifically from a
youth serving organization
called Child USA.
And Madam Chair, Representative
was thought given to a statute
of limitations that was more
within. Um, madam chair and the
only reason I raised him, ma'am
uh chair and representative, and
I don't know, maybe, maybe you
guys know, but I don't know if
there's any other, does anyone
know?
Right.
OK, so, so,
so in in in criminal law then
then we first degree murder and
are set limitations, but in
civil this this would be.
First of its kind here.
Madam Chair and Speaker
Martinez, that's correct. It's a
unique.
It's a unique
Type of claim as has been.
Address this, this body passed
that.
Or, um, a lot has been learned
about.
Childhood sexual abuse over the
over the last 30 years, it has
already been testified to and
what we know is that the.
The
Incident, the
The all of the
Obstacles and hurdles to a
person coming forward.
Are, um, the myriad and they're
very individual and
Um, the reality is any
Mm
Just like this body did in 1993,
they picked up, it's sort of
random. You just picked a random
number, 3 + 24, um, and, and
that is what this bill and in
many, many other states found.
Is that there isn't use for
these types of claims.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
thanks for the, for that
clarification that that
certainly is helpful. Um, so
you, you could, what happens?
Um
But what happens if somebody say
70 years old.
Right? And, and they
finally feel comfortable
disclosing.
That something like this
happened.
Um
The abuser is long dead.
Presumably uh witnesses are gone
or hard to come by, but the
entity say the the boys and
girls club is still there,
right? It's, it's a long
standing organization.
The Boys and Girls Club.
70 years after.
the abuse happened.
is now a responsible for
Damages to the vision. And so,
um, I'm chairman, chair and, and
Speaker Martinez um the boys
club is a good example.
Because many of those cases have
recently been resolved, and many
of those cases are.
Very, very old, mister uh
Castiliano spoke about some of
them.
Um
And the plaintiffs had to prove
it really happened.
They had to prove
It was real and it really
occurred. So the fact that it
was 2 years or 10 years or 40
years, didn't change the burden
of proof.
The the the the
Alleged victim, the victim had
to still prove her case or his
case.
And in that way, it's no
different civil case that comes
before the courts.
Yeah, Madam Chair and Mr. Hart,
yeah, I agree, and, and this is
not about believing the victims.
I mean, I've, I've
Um,
I married into a family that
like does this work for a living
like victims' rights work.
And it has been ingrained in my.
My brain that you always believe
the victim.
It's not about that.
the question is,
You have a boys and girls club,
not to pick on them. 70 years
later it's a, I would assume I
would hope I've never been to
one, but I would think it's a
different culture, different
hiring practices.
Um
Obviously different boards of
directors, um.
A different way to do business
and so we're holding an
organization.
Liable for something that
happened 70 years ago, even
though it is a completely
different.
Maybe except for the name.
Organization
Um, which I guess it's a policy
decision for us to make, right?
I mean, maybe that is fine.
In order to make victims whole
or at least attempt to make them
whole.
But the impact on the
organization itself, I think
does present.
Some, some things to think
about, right? Uh, because I
think
You know, if, if I think of of
an institution that is.
Um
Sloppy in their hiring
practices, Madam Chair
representative of that.
Maybe doesn't do background
checks or sort of sloppy
background checks, um.
Just doesn't
Do a good job in its own
mission.
Absolutely, we need to hold them
liable.
But I guess if it's 70 years
later.
Right? That's where it.
Comes a little bit
Problematic, I guess, for the
lack of a better word.
Um, given, um,
Given the amount of time that's
gone by.
Um, the last question, last
point to have, Madam Chair. Um,
You know, really goes back to
spite of the victims.
And Chavez, I think made
excellent points in her first
statements.
Um
These are very difficult issues.
And um,
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
uh, I commend you as being as
heavy as this.
Is, uh, is, is commendable, um.
It's not easy
Um, particularly when you have.
Um
Different
Groups and and and and whatnot
sort of coming or at least try
to help to.
To to to craft your bill.
Um
I think that the state of New
Mexico.
Should make um should work
really hard.
To find ways to make victims
whole.
Um
Particularly
With regard to this issue
because it's just like one of
the worst, if not the worst.
Uh, of issues, at least as far
as I'm concerned.
Um, and it is very difficult.
To
To quantify and it's almost
impossible because.
If you've been the victim of
abuse.
And the entire trajectory of
your life has changed because of
that.
Many times not for the better.
That's a, that's a real problem.
So I'll go back to the beginning
of my Q&A with you all, and I
think I told one of you, I think
one of the experts we talked
about this uh weeks ago.
Like it leaves me with a pit in
my stomach that this does not
apply to public institutions.
Like it's not
Less evil form of abuse.
And I don't know what the data
is, I don't know what it would
show, I don't know what
percentage of these cases.
More often than not happen in
public institutions ver versus
these private entities.
But I would imagine it's a lot
of them.
From public schools?
CYFD
To any other public institution
that has children in its care.
Uh
And we are gonna have to come to
terms with that. Now, how we do
that, I don't know.
I don't know because
For every $1 we invest.
In
Making people whole.
It's a $1 that we may not have
for.
My childhood or whatever else.
But that's also a public policy
decision we as a state will have
to make, um, and maybe it's not
with this piece of legislation,
but it certainly will.
Come up at some point as it
should.
Because abuse in the public
institution is not any less evil
than abuse in a.
private
setting
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you all for indulging my
questions and I'll. Thank you,
speaker.
Madam Chair, I just have a.
Thank you. We don't do this back
and forth, you know, if there's
a question, then thank you,
Madam Chair and representative.
Um,
up with kind of a lot of what
Speaker Martinez asked.
I done a ton of these cases and
I totally understand. I'm
currently being prosecuted on
the disclosure.
Um, so I definitely get that.
I also don't believe this should
just be subject to private
entities, he allowed this to
happen, then there should be,
you know.
Money
Saying that
I also though, agree with what
Speaker Martinez said and the
part that I, I think we should
try to find.
So I mean, obviously 3 years is
4, but I think at some point
trying to balance being a lawyer
and understanding that there has
to be.
At some point, a time where we
know that this is done, you
know, that we need to find
somewhere in the middle where
it's a higher age, longer years,
and it, but I, I just don't
think it can be a 2030, 40
years. I don't know what it's
somewhere in the middle there as
it is in criminal law, you know,
where there's uh that person can
now know that that that's gonna
happen to him.
But I mean, I don't know what
that that age is because as you
stated, um.
I've seen it very, very long
into a child's life or an
adult's life old and happened
when she was a child, and so.
There just is no set number, um,
but I do think we've got a maybe
find that, um, talking.
I also kind of have the issue,
and can you explain, Madam
Chair, what, what the
retroactive, it would just go
back to anything 7 as well.
And
Re
Um, the retroactivity.
And other states have addressed
this, um.
from
Quite some time, retroactivity
is, is consistent with the
notion that there, as you put
it,
There is no set time.
There is no set time.
When it's enough time.
I think those, I tried to write
down what.
Exactly what you said.
And it's a recognition that
there is no.
Set time
For these types of harms and um
the
And, and if, if this body were
to enact a statute that says,
OK, well, from today forward,
For
There's no statute of
limitations, then.
How do you answer the people?
That get cut off today.
How, how's that fair to them?
And, and, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Reeve.
No
But we have no.
in many ways it makes no sense.
But we have statutes that until
1984, you couldn't sue the
government for anything.
So we have this Tort Claims Act
and it's this huge body of law
that you can't just attack with,
you can't cut a little hole in
the side of it. It's the same
with the Civil Rights Act.
So we
It wouldn't be a surprise, I
think, for a year from for us to
be back asking you and, and
representative Anaya looking at
exactly.
But what this
With this
does it's incremental.
An incrementally opens the door.
To May.
Not all.
And that's, that's that.
That is a
A career disappointment to view
this work.
It is a career disappointment.
But it's a step forward that
that I think we can't, and if I
may address the issue of
government.
The the government um
Exemption
If you look at the bill, the law
as the bill is today.
There's nothing in there that
says no tort claimed act.
Actor. There's nothing in the
bill that the law today that
says you can't sue a
schoolteacher.
You know why? Because the tort
Claims Act says you can't.
There's nothing in the law now
that says you can't sue.
You know, a government.
You know, a mountain, a bad
actor in the government. There's
nothing in the law today.
You know why? Because there are
huge barriers to that. I have
tremendous respect for the
warrior Nipsey people.
We've worked together on many,
many things, but
This is, there's you can't read
this bill.
To see it as.
Opening up a cause of action
against the school teacher.
That doesn't exist today.
I mean, we put the sponsor put
lots and lots of language in
here to like boots, I mean, the
suspenders and belts to make
sure that the, that the schools
and the and or feel comfortable
with this.
But if you look at what the
sponsor has done.
had all this stuff for private
individual, corporation,
business trusts, all these
words, they're not in the law
today.
The reason why the schools
aren't, haven't been up here
since 1993 screaming and yelling
year after year after year
because you can't sue them.
You can't.
And that's just the law.
And it's incredibly frustrating
to tell somebody who comes into
your office.
I, I, I can't help you.
I can't help you, but that's the
law.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
next, I was going to ask you
what the current status of the
law was.
Yeah, a lot to think about and.
Oh.
Thank you Madam chair.
will be
This.
Um
Why was this not?
Why is this Madam Chair, um,
Representative Martinez, there
is a
Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's the bill that you're
talking about.
Madam Chair.
I didn't quite
If a teacher leaves the school.
He's at home
As a private individual.
And
Comes a predator in his
neighborhood.
I don't understand why he cannot
be held responsible as a private
individual, it's not at the
school.
Understand the schools are
against it because of the
liability and the cost, but.
He's
He's not an acting as a teacher.
He's not acting as a public
employee's acting as a private
person.
I, I
And I tried to listen to the
discussion, but
me.
Madam Chair and Representative
Martinez.
Yeah. A private individual.
In her or his own home.
abuses a child.
is not immune, is not immune can
be sued.
can be, it's exactly that if the
person and there's a lot of,
there's an enormous body of law
that talks about when a
Public employee if they can or
cannot be subject to claims of
the Tort Claims Act or
They don't get the protection of
Tort Claims Act because they're
acting as private citizens.
And that is the law found chair
and Representative Martinez,
that's exactly right. That's a
private individual. This
The statute of limitations would
not run out.
On a private individual.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative. Thank you.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you, ma'am, chair, um.
Meer or salmon experts.
I share many of the speakers'
concerns, so I will, I'd like to
just touch on them briefly, um.
First off, you know, I'm still
sort of wrapping my head around
the definitions.
And the
What I'm hearing is that.
Um, public employees when they
commit abuse are not liable
under this, and I'm
Uh, troubled by that.
Uh, I'm troubled by the, uh,
Representative Reed was the
Mission of public entities, um.
Uh, I'm also troubled by
Um
The fact that there's, there's
no limitation.
Uh, and you could easily have a
situation where.
Someone, um, Susan organization.
Um, for abuse.
And the alleged perpetrators
long since gone.
Uh, the organization doesn't
have records.
Um, but, you know, there could
be a compelling case made
through.
You know, personal testimony
that the person was abused.
Um
And and like it's just, it's.
After 30, 40, 50 years, it
becomes pretty hard to defend
against.
Um
So I, you know.
I the
Public testimony was compelling.
Um, it always is, as the speaker
observed in issues like this.
Um
We want to do the right thing.
Um, I'm, I'm troubled by
different aspects of the bill.
That maybe we're, we're not
quite there yet.
But I will continue to listen to
the debate.
Thank you, ma'am, chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Representative.
You know, I've been uh listening
and um.
You know, I while this bill
isn't perfect, um.
You know, I don't know if, if
one of your experts perhaps Ms.
Taylor.
Or you representative could talk
about the challenges in
reporting. How many of these
reports go unreported.
Um, because I'm hearing a
concern about potentially uh
over litigation or, you know,
sort of a flood of cases coming
forward as a result of this.
But I think what I've reviewed
in the past is that it's very
difficult for survivors to
actually come forward. I know
that's the case for harassment,
for example, but I'm just
wondering in terms of childhood
sexual abuse, which I know a
little bit less about if you
could just talk about that.
Um, Madam Chair, thank you for
that question. Um, so in New
Mexico, we know that over 50% in
their lifetime, um, and just in
the research so clearly shows
that, um, it takes time for
people to them.
Um, we heard it in the public
comment from those who stood in
support that it often that
they've been groomed, um, and
that the way they've been harmed
was actually a violation and was
sexual assault. I will say, um,
when we started the statewide
sexual assault helpline.
We had those very calls of older
people calling and saying this
is the very first time I have
admitted that I was sexually
assaulted, 70 year old, 75 year
olds, um, and
The research and those of us,
I'm a licensed master social
worker, those of us who have
been in clinical practice. We
know that even once someone
begins to understand what
happened to them and that it was
a violation. It takes them a
while to understand the actual
impact. The research also shows
that a sexual assault often
costs, um, anywhere over
$200,000 per survivor and what
they lose in weighties, um, and
job loss and other uh needing
medical treatment.
um, mental health care, um, and
so it's a pervasive issue that
you um on what healing and what
and representative, it.
It seems to me that uh the
process to seek justice is
pretty arduous.
You know, you've got to
Go up in front of a judge and
disclose what has happened,
you're prepping for that day,
you know, um, I don't know the
sort of day blow by blow day day
to day reality of that.
Um, I've certainly witnessed
that here in this building with
people who are grappling with
situations of harassment.
Um, and so I can only
extrapolate that it it would be.
Um, particularly when you're
talking about something that
happened to you as a child, that
it would be even more difficult,
so you know, to me, I think for
people to even access justice
through this bill.
It's gonna be a difficult
process for them to come
forward.
Um
Which
You know, I think putting that
in context of the understanding
that we are starting with this
first step.
Which doesn't include public
entities, and I think that there
are I think you've heard a lot
of comments today that there's a
lot of folks that are very in
creating an avenue to justice.
Um, I just wanted to go back to
that.
Is there a pathway to get out of
public entity.
And if so, what, what would that
pathway be because it wouldn't
be the Civil Rights Act.
Which I know very well.
Um, and so, Madam Chair,
representative uh experts. I, I
don't know what what would be
the pathway, cuz it sounds like
it's not the tort Claims Act
either.
Um, so how would?
Uh, the inclusion of this
language about a private
individual tea.
Chain
Represented by
Um
That is
As a
Very, very important question
and something that
And we be have, I mean, I think
it's important.
Probably don't have the
I think starting point would be.
Recognizing within the Tort
Claims Act that.
Of claims
For which the statute of
limitation, uh, statute of
limitations applies and other
and potentially these Claims
Act.
And the Claims Act has got its
own.
Like
Tor Court Claims Act has its own
statutes of limitations. You
have to give notice. You have to
give written notice.
Within 90 days of the event.
So that makes plenty of sense if
a highway.
Yeah, you could, you get 90 days
to tell.
The DOT or whoever, you, you
smashed my car.
Doesn't make a lot of sense.
For the same reasons we've been
talking here and there's a 2
year statute of limitations
general random cut-off date,
years and years ago. So it, it
is a complicated.
But it is a representative. It
is a solvable problem. This is.
This is not solving that
problem. It is incrementally
moving us to a fairer.
Fewer barriers or problems.
And I just wanna address if if I
can, I think you're referencing
sort of the
You know, the public body.
Clearly it's not, let's not
pretend the public bodies.
are concerned about my
legitimate concern.
That they, they want to.
From having to pay claims.
And there's nothing wrong with
that, but that's, that's what
this is about. Madam Chair,
representative.
I think my
Question is, given this existing
language in this legislation.
I don't see a pathway to get at
the public will assert, no,
because the statute of
limitations has expired on the
under the Tort Claims Act or um,
no, this is, you know, you can't
bring this under the Civil
Rights Act because this person
was not acting in their capacity
as a public employee. So I think
under it, it seems to me that
under the bill that we are
looking at today.
That pathway that was discussed
and as has been discussed as a
point of concern, doesn't really
Actively helped put um some of
the guard rails in for the non.
Thank, thank you for that, um.
And then finally, I, I
appreciate the retroactivity
because I think.
It creates a sort of an equal
standard and a sense of fairness
for people as they exist today,
so that folks who have
experienced this, um, whether it
be.
10 years ago or unfortunately,
in the next two weeks, um, I, I
appreciate that they're gonna be
all treated with the same access
to this form of justice, um, and
hopefully criminal, you know,
hopefully criminal penalties as
well, um, for the uh events that
will occur in the future, uh,
you know, so to me, I appreciate
this is an incremental step.
Um, I think if we do approach
the really plan for that, really
the potential cost of that.
Um, and perhaps as an
intermediate step.
You know, we can just take a
hard look at
Um, how we are dealing with
prevention of.
These kinds of abuses within the
schools and other public
entities today through training
programs and risk management and
etc. um, so I appreciate you
bringing this forward and um
just wanted to get those, those
points clarified. Thank you.
anyone else.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I would say I have worked
hundreds of these as a retired
FBI.
The litigious part of this, the
money.
I understand the concerns,
however,
When we begin to move towards.
Disclosure.
You know, that's where someone
comes forward.
We forget
Couple things.
One most critical thing is
usually someone in a position of
authority.
Could have been a coach.
Could have been a teacher.
Could have been whatever
More importantly, once the
disclosure occurs.
More than 9 times out of 10
leads to more disclosures for
the same individual.
Who's been perpetrating these
crimes.
Oftentimes, for many, many
years, I always equate it to
DWI. First time you're arrested
for DWI was not the first time
he drove while intoxicated.
I think
I don't know. I'm not a lawyer.
That shows
I know how to go after these.
People, um,
So
I tackle the speaker and I've
been whispering back and forth.
It's a very
You know, we, we look at the the
The money thing but, but we, we
have to get somehow get these
disclosures out there.
Regardless of one's age.
Um
Because it goes on in many parts
of this state in particular for
generations. It's my belief your
numbers are low and no offense.
At 40 and 50%.
I did this, uh
Working Indian country.
And I would say in many places
it's upward of 70.
So how do we do it?
Mr. Speaker, I, I don't know
this is so important. It's
almost.
It's not fair to try to put it
into.
Bill
I don't know how to start, but I
want to put that out there,
these disclosures.
are critical to finding these
predators.
Now
Some of the predators have died,
I think we still get the
disclosures out there. Maybe
there's not an ability to sue
somebody. And again, this is
more of a lawyer question.
But
Get it out there, that helps
people.
People need to talk about this,
and that's probably more of a
comment than I.
have said, ma'am, but I just,
I'm a firm believer in going
after these.
People who commit these crimes.
So, uh
Alright. Thank you, man.
Representative Abeta.
Concern is that
Our our entities are doing the
Prove that and
What?
and and
Represent the short answer is
yes, but in many cases.
On behalf in the in the Tort
Claims Act foster parents are um
subject to
The Federal Civil Rights Act. So
there have been remedies for
children in foster care either
under the state tort.
claims or the federal civil
rights.
kids in foster care, verdicts
and save my firm.
And, and that
The children in foster care, um,
are take some legal gymnastics
to get um.
But we're also aware of your,
you know, our firm is lead
counsel on the Kevin S
litigation, which you probably
heard some about too.
And so we are seeing these all
at
Layering
Particularly the most on the on
the agenda.
That's the only question I have.
Just like to move it.
Do not pass on um house.
Uh
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Yes.
Representative Chavis.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hoffman V Heel.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen, yes, and
I'd like to explain it.
Representative Reeb.
Leader Sapansky. Yes.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House Bill 73, but I do
pass on House Judiciary
Committee sub for House Bill 73.
And.
Go ahead
representative, um, you just got
a resounding endorsement for a
bill that caused
A lot of conservation.
I hope going forward you.
Continue to look at the mission
of public entities and continue
to think about whether a
specific uh time frame uh would
be accepted.
Is that an explanation.
I mean, I, yeah, I
I know what I just said an
explanation
is why you voted for what you
did, not an advisory, but let's
just try to keep that in mind.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members.
OK,
we're on our last bill.
Um
All right, let's.
Let's hear from Representative.
House Bill 339.
Housing discrimination and human
rights Act. Thank you for being
so patient.
I can barely keep my eyes open,
so I'll keep it as brief. We'll
try to jar you awake.
Thank you, madam chair.
House Bill 3339.
is a necessary step to protect
tenants from discrimination
based on their source of income.
Ensuring that landlords cannot
deny housing simply because
someone relies on vouchers,
disability benefits or other
lawful support.
Where we're we're here to
strengthen our Human Rights Act
and giving the Attorney general,
um, hopefully to uphold basic
fairness and making sure that
all New Mexicans regardless of
income, have a fighting chance
at safe, stable housing. I have
a couple of um.
Uh, experts here, but we'll open
it up to.
All right, well, before we do
that, and you get the. Correct
so you get a.
star
For that.
Evening on that.
All right, we do have to talk
about the bill for a little bit.
Let's go to the audience, those
wishing to speak in opposition
to this bill, please step up to
the gentleman with the
microphone.
About a minute.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good evening. I know
the hour is long, and I have 6
or 7 different points I'm gonna
address just one of them, um.
And that is the fact that a
large portion of our inventory,
our rental inventory in this
state is owned by.
People that don't have
Um, a lot of assets. Did you
tell us who you are? I'm sorry,
ma'am. My name is Kent Cravens.
I'm a registered lobbyist with
New Mexico Association of
Realtors, and I apologize. Um.
But they, they don't have a lot
of assets. They have this house
that's been passed down rented
to a family member, or they may
rent it to somebody else, but
this would really put them in
jeopardy of being in violation
now of Human Rights acts, um,
and we just think that's a
little like putting a battleship
in the bathtub. There should be
maybe another place to put this
as it's a transaction, uh, any
more time, Madam Chair, I
appreciate Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, Randy
Traynor with the apartment
Association, uh, that, that lead
in on the amendment, uh, it's
been a little awkward position.
I'm, I'm here to ask for a one
word amendment.
Uh, if you look at page 7, line
5.
After the words lawful, we'd
like to add the word recurring,
and the reason, two reasons. One
is an owner is supposed to
calculate the applicant's rent
ratio after.
The assistance. This is not
possible if the income is not
recurring.
And secondly, the source of
income bills in Albuquerque,
Burlio County, Santa Fe, and Las
Cruces all require the source of
income to be recurring.
And this change would align the
bill with those ordinances.
Um, let's go online.
Anyone online wishing to speak.
Online
Let's um go to the audience,
those wishing to speak and
support, please.
Caps um
Thank you, Chair and members of
the committee. Uh good evening.
Kat Sanchez with Bull Futures on
behalf of the Public Safety
Coalition, a coalition of 11
organizations.
That stand in strong support of
HB 339, HB 339 strengthens New
Mexico's Human Rights Act by
prohibiting housing
discrimination based on a
person's person's source of
income. The New Mexico Human
Rights Act is a critical legal
tool to creating accountability
for discriminatory practices,
and we are excited for this
effort to strengthen and expand
the act. No one should be denied
housing simply because they rely
on lawful income sources such as
Social Security, veterans
benefits, or housing vouchers.
This
ensures fair access to housing
and prevents discriminatory
practices that
disproportionately harm
low-income families, seniors,
and people with disabilities.
Housing is public safety and HB
339 is a crucial step towards
equity and inclusion in our
communities. Thank you. Thank
you.
My name is Ellen Ackerman and I
am a section 8 voucher holder
who last year lost the housing
that I had had for 30 years when
my landlord wanted to sell, so I
was having to find a new rental
and I have to say almost all of
the landlords who I spoke to
would not take my section 8
voucher that discrimination
absolutely exists. I finally
found um
of somebody who was a friend of
a friend who uh was willing to
rent to me. She had no idea what
section 8 vouchers were, she
asked me to help her, um, get it
set up. It was a very easy
process. All she had to do was
produce um
Her her um proof that she owned
the house, and or or the rental
and also um the inspection
process is very simple. It's
basically um
What what anybody would want to
have in a rental, um, there's no
big deal about the inspection
process, so I just wanted to say
all that. Thank you. And I live
in District 46.
Very good. Yes, ma'am.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Winter Torres, and I am
the founder of prevention and
diversion, also sit on the uh
MFA's housing Trust Fund
Advisory Board, and I want to
say in our work every day, we
deal with folks losing vouchers
and looking for another time to
go and reuse that voucher, and
New Mexico has the 6th worst
uptake among landlords for using
vouchers.
We are seeing people on the
streets, and it really does. I
don't think family, we screen
out the family cases where
they're suing each other to
evict each other because we
think something else is going on
there. Um, so I don't think that
that is really a situation that
we're going to encounter much.
Thank you.
Um
Back to the sponsor. Oh wait,
online, I see.
Or um Diane McCash.
Thank you, Chair and committee.
I'm Diane McCash. I urge you to
pass this bill because access to
safe housing should be a basic
human right, and the practice of
discriminating against renters
based on their source of income
is a barrier for families to
become and stay housed.
When we allow barriers to
housing, we increased
homelessness in our state. Not
only is being unhoused a
nightmare for individuals and
families who are directly
impacted. It contributes in a
big way to the societal problems
we say we want to solve.
This bill is a vital step in the
right direction because people
have men and are being denied
access to housing because of
unfair income discrimination.
Housing should be a human right,
allowing barriers to housing
hurts all of us. Please support
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Maria Grego. I'm an
attorney and the director of
economic equity at the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty, and we thank the
sponsors for this bill. Uh, we
stand in support of it because
it's an important step in
addressing New Mexico's
ever-increasing housing crisis,
housing vouchers are key
resources to ensure families can
access stable and affordable
housing.
Uh, despite having these
resources available over 1/3 of
voucher holders in New Mexico
cannot find housing before their
voucher expires, because many
landlords refuse to rent to
someone who is paying with a
voucher or some other legal
source of income.
Source of income discrimination
causes inequity. When landlords
deny housing to families who
participate in public programs,
families are excluded from many
neighborhoods and are
concentrated in areas with fewer
resources. This discrimination
also disproportionately impacts
renters of color. In other
jurisdictions were sources of
income discrimination is
illegal. Families were 12% more
likely to succeed in finding
housing than in places without
such a law. The result is that
more families are housed and
landlords who rent to voucher
holders can rely on
and timely rent payments. This
benefits members. Thank you
and I can talk about the
suggestion to me, so let's go to
Arturo.
Yes, madam.
OK, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, my name is Arturo
Castillo and I'm the director of
equity and culture at
Conservation Voterss New Mexico.
Conservation voters report
supports this legislation
because we believe in
prohibiting discriminatory
practices, especially as they
relate to housing and decreasing
the unhous population in our
state.
As the climate crisis continues
to increase, weather and climate
catastrophes within our
communities, um, impact on how
New Mexicans, uh, the, the most,
and in the year 2025, landlords
everywhere are permitted to and
do refuse to rent to those
receiving housing subsidies.
This will will prevent that
discriminatory practice, which
will contribute to decreasing
the cycle of homelessness in our
counties. New Mexicans are
losing their lives to the
effects of climate change every
day. Conservation voters stands
in strong support of this
legislation to prevent more New
Mexicans from losing their
lives, from being unhoused, and
from suffering negative health.
outcomes. While we continue to
address the climate crisis more
Uh, yes, good evening. Can you
hear me?
you could tell us who you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. My name is
Elizabeth Elia. I'm the
co-founder and secretary for the
New Mexico Center for Housing
Law, and uh I'm happy to talk
with you about any questions you
have about this bill. Thank you.
Well.
I don't know if I'm, but let's,
I'm gonna do it anyway.
So
I just want to understand well.
A Mr. Trainer made a trainer
suggested on page 7, we add line
5 source of income means any
lawful.
I think and recurring.
Um, and verifiable source of
money, so we would add.
The suggestion is to add
recurring afterlo.
Yes, madam Chair, thank you. I'd
be happy to, madam chair and
members of uh of the committee.
It was an intentional decision
not to include recurring in the
definition of source of income
at that new paragraph FF on page
7, line 5,
Mr. Trainor's concerns, um, are,
um, it's not necessary to
include uh recurring there,
there are two reasons that he
gave were first that for uh
income screening, uh, tended
land lo rd would not um use
would only use recurring sources
of income and uh in the income
screening provision in the bill
that is permissible. So it, it
the the not having the word
recurring in the definition at
FF for source of income does not
require landlords to use ad hoc
or one-off, uh, uh, sources of
income that a person might have,
um, a landlord in the screening
process for
an applicant could still use
simply recurring sources of
income, um, and that goes to the
parts of the amendment that talk
about uh the invalid screening
process, um,
The, the, the main reason to to
to not include recurring in that
definition. It is because by if
we did include recurring in that
definition of what source of
income discrimination means, it
would allow landlords to decline
to accept things like um
eviction prevention funds, which
we saw landlords attempt to do
during the pandemic and
afterwards when we had eviction
prevention money available, so
it's not common, but when a
tenant is able
to avail themselves of some sort
of eviction prevention funding
from a nonprofit or governmental
source, um, the definition of of
what counts as source of income
would require a limb or to
accept that source of income. It
would not require a landlord to
to change their screening
processes for applicants, the,
the bill also adds a definition
for housing applicants, um, and
their screening procedures for,
for applicants can
look at sources of income to
make sure that they're recurring
because those would be
progressive, you know, uh, uh,
forward looking, uh, screening
processes we get it.
Um, thank you. Um, I'm gonna go
back to
very good, um, Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, uh, expert.
Um, a couple of questions. Uh,
the first one because we just
heard about this the recurring
language, uh, so I, I.
I think I'm more confused after
hearing the expert on Zoom.
It might just be me, it probably
is me,
um, but if.
So everything the expert said,
Madam Chair and Representative,
why not just create like a
subsection given what we heard
from the Madam, Mr. Speaker,
great question. I think in this
case because we don't know what
kind of future assistance may
come, and this is specific to
someone already in there. We
wouldn't want to prescribe
eviction prevention. It could be
another type of funding the city
of Albuquerque, for example,
has, so I think we'd have to
describe all I think is cleaner
to justice.
Find what source of income means
first up, and then define the
screening processes to be really
clear, check minimum income
requirements, background.
Uh, so
Madam Cur, what we also heard
from that Zoom that nothing
would keep the.
From actually ask.
Proof of recurring.
I can address that if you'd
like.
Uh, I'll ask the sponsor who she
was, yes, Elizabeth is my
uh.
That's correct, as long as
they're asking for the same
things from, from all of their
applicants, then they can ask
for recurring sources of funding
Uh, Madam Chair, representative,
uh, my last question and I
probably.
Is it designed to impact, is it
just section 8 vouchers? It's
for any rental.
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Yes, it's
anybody who.
Needs to supplement, um, they
also receive vouchers, um, that.
That allow for a renter to
supplement their income.
And Madam Chair
Is the problem we're trying to
resolve might have um a packing
those folks from being.
Discriminated against because of
the source of income.
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
And under your proposal, this
would.
Amend the Human Rights Act and
bring.
That into the human.
Thank you, Madam Chair, first.
Common
You brought veteran, I would say
99% we pulled off the street
into a program.
forgot about you for the they
were able to use the voucher so
it just, it's always bothered me
when people bring in veterans
to.
Make it look better.
Uh, my question is, on page 7,
I guess mostly on line 11.
talks about pension annuity,
alimony or child support.
to ask how long that might last.
child support doesn't last
forever.
Alimony doesn't last forever.
it fair to ask
When is, what's the timeline on?
Madam Chair
There isn't.
Uh
If you're paying child support,
that child support, there is a
timeline.
Is it fair to ask?
How long are you going to get
child support?
As part of the.
The conglomerate, I can afford
it.
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, as long as you're asking
all types of questions about
their um same for employment
income, there's no guarantee
that you would be employed
longer than a week. So there's
not a lot of guarantees and and
a lot of sources of income as
well. But I hear your concern
and one.
I'm sure I wish in this bill the
issue of getting paid on.
voucher
buy a house
Except vouchers in your waiting
the 90 days for else.
I get by.
evict that person.
My gonna be liable if, if I
haven't received.
And I evict that Madam Chair,
the same eviction.
Madam Chair, the department to
somebody with a voucher.
That voucher is almost owned.
by the exception.
We in the process of evicting
that person.
Because the government I'd be
happy to answer that if you'd
like.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for that
wonderful question. It's a great
opportunity to clarify you're
absolutely right that of that of
a voucher through the Section 8
program, which is the majority
of our housing vouchers in New
Mexico are in fact contracts.
The contracts that are um
mandated by HUD and in that
contract by HUD, um, HUD.
Requires that that the public
housing authority or
organization that signs the
contract with the landlord, um,
must pay on time and is subject
to late fees if they don't pay
on time, and, uh, uh, a tenant
can be evicted for non-payment
of rent, whether it's the tenant
portion or the or the
governmental portion.
Thank you, madam chair.
Um, you know, I just wanna thank
the sponsor for bringing this
bill, I was was following some
of the housing issues over
there, um.
Just wanted to add on rental
property doesn't anymore, so I
don't have any financial
interest in this, um, and.
You know, he took section 8
housing all the time.
Oh and was happy to do it.
And
Didn't have any trouble.
And the and the nice thing, and
we were talking about this bill
or the policy kind of over the
summer about stuff is, you're
getting, you're getting paid.
Right? Yeah, there probably are
times when the government's
slow, although I never heard
that she's associated with the
section 8 vouchers and so on.
You're getting paid, so and and
the money's coming through, so
the issue now is we, there's
such a shortage of housing that
landlords are not wanting to
take the vouchers because they
can really jack the rents up and
get for for very modest.
places and get a lot of money
and I know that's true in my
community I know super happy to
see this um legislation and um
with that uh do we have?
Well, there is an amendment, but
it came before, um, I came to
us. Are you a second speaker?
Yes, OK, um, motion made by Vice
Chair Romero. Um, I do pass on
House Bill 35 Speaker Martinez.
Did you call the roll?
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavez. No.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Hoffman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reeb.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair
Yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on house bill.
339 as amended.
OK, we have a due pass, um,
thank you, everybody. I thought
it was a really good meeting,
um, see you soon.
Perjured,
well, and then you can tell
representative Rubio, what she
should do next.
