Here,
Representative Hall here.
Representative Hoffman v.
Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez here.
Representative McQueen.
Here
Representative Reed.
Here Leader Sapansy.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair
Here, Madam chair, you have a
corn.
We have a quorum. The first item
on our agenda is
Um, for consent items Senate
Bill 303 as amended, Senate Bill
302, Senate Bill 53 and Senate
Bill 221, 221 as amended. I'd
appreciate a collective motion,
if, if I could, uh, speaker, you
look poised or
Mo Du Paul do pass on calendar
sends 3 is amended Senate Bill
302, Senate Bill 53, Senate Bill
221 as amended. Second.
Any opposition?
No opposition. OK, um, next item
is Senate Bill 42 and um Senator
Padilla, I do not see in the
audience.
OK. Did you acknowledge receipt?
OK. Um, then the next item,
let's go to the next one and
we'll come back to 42, um,
Senate bill 159 as amended.
And that is, oh, Senator had a
meal, who is not here but um
representative um Romero will
handle it when she gets back.
She just had to run a quick
errand. So, let's move on to the
next item, Senate Bill 267
housing application fees. You
got lucky, senator, or
or actually, you know, you plan
for it cuz you were here, so
that's, that's a good thing. All
right, so we are now on um
sent a bill 267.
Um, housing application fees and
the floor is yours, senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. I have to say I have
mad respect for your stamina on
the floor. I've been watching,
uh, since, uh, the Senate
adjourned earlier today. Um,
Madam Chair and committee in New
Mexico, we have over 254,000
renter households. We have a
high percentage of renters
living at low incomes. Of those
low income renters, 80% are cost
burdened, meaning they are
spending more than 30% of their
income on rent.
To to help ensure renters'
future ability to secure safe
and affordable housing. New
Mexico must enact these basic
consumer protections to make
rental housing prices more
transparent and decrease
barriers to excessive housing.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 267
comes to your committee after
numerous conversations,
compromises, and clarification
of terms and intent. This bill
comes to you after impactful
feedback from members of the
Senate Tax Business and
Transportation Committee
conversations with the apartment
Association.
and the Department of Justice,
and an incredibly helpful
committee substitute from
Senator Duke and the Judiciary
Committee.
There's been a lot of work and
conversations that have done
been done to bringing the bill
that you have today.
To secure rental housing in
Mexico renters typically face a
dizzying array of unavoidable
fees. These housing application
fees render safe and decent
rental housing even more out of
reach. What Cen bill 267 does is
it reduces a major barrier to
entering housing by requiring
fee transparency, standardizing
application fees, caps, tenant
screening fees at $50 and
regulating late fees.
What it does not do is control
rent or dictate the amount of
regular monthly costs prohibit a
landlord from screening
applicants or prohibit add-on
services that come with an
additional monthly fee. My
expert today is Rachel Biggs,
who is the chief strategy
officer of Albuquerque Health
Care for the Homeless, and I
believe also we might have on
Zoom is Alison Friedman from the
New Mexico Center for Housing
Law. Um, and I look forward to
the discussion, Madam Chair and
committee.
Thank you. Um, why don't we go
to the audience and those in the
audience wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone and limit
your remarks to about a minute.
I don't see anyone.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition to Senate Bill
267, please raise your hand.
I don't see anyone.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone and limit
your remarks to about a minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Daniel Williams from
the ACLU of New Mexico. We and
the 10 other organizations that
comprise the Public Safety
Coalition stand in strong
support of this bill, all of us
are safer when all of us are
housed. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Winter
Torres, and I'm the CEO and
founder of Mexicovi Prevention
and version and urge your strong
support. There has been a lot of
work on this bill and um just
for instance, it will help folks
who say a large corporation came
into Las Cruces, bought a bunch
of the complexes that we used to
house, um, folks coming in off
the street, they have to pay the
same fee to all of the
complexes.
Even though it's one ultimate
entity that owns that for a
background check. So for, that's
just one of the things that this
will address. Thank you.
Thank you. Let's go online.
Those wishing to speak in
support, please raise your hand.
Um, Marshall.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, this is Arturo
Castillo and I'm the director of
equity and Culture Conservation
voters in New Mexico. There's no
secret that we are currently
living in a climate crisis, and
those who experienced the worst
of its impacts most immediately
are people without housing or
shelter. Anything we can do to
prevent more people from
experiencing homelessness is a
step towards protecting more
people from the climate
catastrophes happening around us
on an almost daily basis. For
that reason, conservation voter
stands in strong voter strong
support of this legislation.
Thank you.
Um, Kurt Rager.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. This
is Kurt Reeger, the director of
Lutheran Advocates of Ministry
of New Mexico. We also speak the
position of the New Mexico
Conference of Churches, and I'm
here to speak in favor of SB 267
in the interest of time, I'll
concur with the comments made by
Senator Hamblin as well as those
speaking before me, and make the
statement that with the
magnitude of our current housing
crisis, we must take every
opportunity to remove barriers
that keep the Mexicans from
getting into safe housing or
that pushed them out and this
bill is an important one. The
positive outcomes of SB2.
67 make it low hanging fruit,
please grab it. Thank you for
your support.
Uh thank you. Anyone else
wishing to speak in support.
I don't see anyone.
All right, back to the sponsor.
Anything else before we go to
committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair. No, I look forward to the
committee conversation.
Um, Representative Hall,
Representative Martinez is next.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator, um,
I saw on my handy dandy sheet
that I was given today that it
Caps fees at 50. I'm curious
what has the range of fees been,
and then I heard someone else
testify that.
You do one background check, but
they're hitting you from
multiple background checks.
Could you clarify that, please,
Madam Chair. Madam Chair and
Representative, thank you for
the question. Um, and I'm gonna
let Rachel Biggs, um, explain
that because she works for the
coalition of groups throughout
the state and one of the reasons
we brought this forward is
because what we're seeing is
outside owners of of uh
apartment complexes coming in
and overcharging residents on
that and Rachel can go ahead and
expand on that a little bit to
answer your questions.
Madam chair and Representative,
thank you for the question. Um,
the $50 was due to a national
data point around average
application fees, I will say
that a lot of the smaller mom
and pop landlords that we work
with charge about a $30
application fee, so we do see
out, we're losing out a little
bit by setting that cap to $50
what we are seeing for some of
the larger properties is about a
$100 application fee and again
these fees are non-refundable,
so folks are paying those fees
over and over again.
And this is in addition to
sometimes $100 admin fee or $200
holding fee, sometimes in
conjunction with all of those
fees that are non-refundable. So
for example, we have a senior
living on a fixed income,
they're paying $400 to apply for
a unit that they might not even
get and they don't even know if
that unit was available. And so
we're trying to regulate some of
that just to decrease some of
the barriers upfront to applying
for housing. The point that was
referenced in the public comment
that might have been a little
bit of confusion.
This was a point in the original
bill, we had a provision to
allow for a reusable background
check and screening check, um,
and in Senate Judiciary, there
were some really valid comments
and working with the apartment
association about how hard that
would be to accomplish, but we
did want to create some sort of
basic consumer protections for
folks if they are applying for a
unit in um multiple properties
that one owner owns, but they
wouldn't be charged the fee if
that same owner is doing the
background check. So if the
owner is already.
the cost in that 90 day time
frame, so it's still timely,
they wouldn't be charging the
fee over and over to the same
applicant.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, madam chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Nice to see you on this side.
Um, I, I have just one basic
question. How does this affect
me as a landlord.
It's a very good question,
representative and Madam Chair,
on those questions have come up,
which is why we've had several
conversations with those, uh,
including the apartment
association and Rachel has
really done the, the brunt of
the work and so I'm gonna go
ahead and let her answer that
question for you, if I may.
Madam Chair and representative,
so as a landlord, the three
things that this would change
for you. Number one, it would
say that you wouldn't be able to
charge other fees for processing
an application. So you could
still charge your application
fee and you can still do your
background check. You would not
be able to charge more than $50
which, um, in our data and what
we see working with the smaller
landlords is that it's typically
around a $30 application fee, so
we're, we're increasing that to
$50 as a cap.
You would have to post um all of
the costs associated with your
lease so that it's clear to the
tenant as they're applying, um,
also good protection for you as
a landlord so that you know the
person can actually afford all
of the costs associated with the
lease, to make that clear
upfront and then the third thing
is regulating late fees and
right now, late fees are 10% of
monthly rent, and it would
change that to 5%, bringing us
more in line with 11 other
states that have regulations
around late fees that are less
than 10%.
Madam Chair, and.
Thank you, Senator. So would I
still be able to charge like
Petris
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, this would not regulate the
types of fees that you charge,
you can either put those into
your base rent or list them out
and itemize them, the the way
that you choose to do that, we
are not asking to regulate those
types of fees, just the fees
associated with processing an
application.
Mount Senator, so as long as I
Clearly state this is what it's
gonna cost you to apply for
this.
Put it in plain language.
Up front, exact amounts.
Everything is fine. Do they have
to be refundable?
Madam Chair and Representative,
if you choose an applicant
before, so you have to take the
first applicant and you have
said that they get the rental
housing and then you, for some
reason we're processing someone
else's application after that,
and they didn't get the housing.
That's the only case where you
would have to refund it or if
you did not actually run a
background or credit check, or
if you did not um process their
application. Those are the
provisions that we would say you
would refunded. We did have a
time frame that the
Department asked for that you
would refund it within 30 days.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Biggs. Appreciate the answers.
Um, Representative Romero, Madam
Cherry like to move a do pass on
um Senate Bill 267 Arit
substitute for Senate Bill 267.
the proper
direct
Is there a second?
So we have a motion for a due
pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 267 made by Representative
Romero, seconded by
Representative Hall, would you
call the roll? Yes, thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta. Yes.
Representative Chavis.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hartman v. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez, yes,
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reed.
Peter Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair
Yes, Madam Chair, you have a due
pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 267.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you committee.
I hope you have a very good
night.
We, we will, no, no worries. OK.
So, I'm gonna watch it from home
and uh have respect for all of
you.
We do, and it's true.
We're aware. All right. So we
have Representative Romero who
will present for Sen Senator
Jaramillo on what bill is that
um 159159, and just
um, informational Senator
Padilla is over in um
Appropriations, so as soon as
he's done, he'll come on over
here, as I understand it. So,
here we go. Hello, senator.
It's hardly a fill in for
Senator Hatemi, Madam Chair, um,
this is Senate Bill 159. It's
actually a very simple bill that
allows in independent, um,
theaters to dispense alcohol.
Um, this is more so with the
ability for folks to look at
some of the economic development
opportunities being that these
theaters are inviting a number
of patrons into their theaters.
It allows for very narrow.
way in which um dispense, um,
dispensing would take place, so
the service of beer were to
customers of an independent
theater shall be limited to 212
ounce servings of beer or 26
ounce servings of wine per
customer, and that's it. That's
what the bill does, Medicare.
All right, um, let's go quickly
to the audience center, we'll
get to you as soon as we're done
with this bill. It's a short
bill. Um, so let's go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill,
please.
approach.
The gentleman with the
microphone.
I don't see anyone, those
online, wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill, please
raise your hand.
Um, those in the audience
wishing to speak in support, um,
JD.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name's JD
Bullington and I'm the
registered lobbyist in New
Mexico for the National
Association Movie Theater.
I've been teasing Senator
Jaramillo about this bill. I
think it's one of the most
important bills in the session
because if you pass this bill,
You're going to help to bail out
an entire industry.
Movie theaters in this state
were closed down for 18 straight
continuous months, and they're
still slowly rebounding after
COVID. What this bill does.
is it gives them a new tool to
attract customers. It's going to
help our movie theaters in the
state rebound and
Uh, I'm really serious when I
say this is probably one of the
best small business bills of the
session, and I hope you all
pass.
Yes, where's the chamber?
00, that's right. It's 10:15.
OK. So, um,
Those online wishing to speak in
support of the bill. Oh, Adrian,
you're there.
Do you want to raise your hand?
OK.
Those wishing to speak in
support of the bill.
I don't see any hands raised.
All right?
Committee members.
Uh, Representative Hall.
And make a motion for a due
pass. Oh, hold on. We have, oh,
I apologize. I leaned toward the
right. I know it's hard to
believe.
So representative uh McQueen, I
never looked towards him.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Ma'am chair uh Romero, uh, I, we
have a long agenda. I'm gonna
try to keep my mouth shut as
much as possible. Um, I have
questions on this film. Um.
Menterras and Romero. So my
first question is a 6 ounce
serving of wine seems like a
pretty healthy serving of wine.
My understanding is 5 ounce is
more typical.
So that's 12 ounces of wine
um
The understanding generally, um,
I don't, I actually don't know
what the um standard serving is
of white, um, and we, I can
Google that for you, but, um,
ma'am Rose Romero, I did Google
it because I don't drink wine
and it's a 5 ounces so
representative.
I, I, I think this is just about
probably a standard serving when
we're talking about theater, um,
locations, I, I would go with
that, I I have no idea. OK, and,
um, Romero single location.
So, so that means like
movie theater chains can't do
this. Is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative, so
that was actually amended out,
so page 3, line 2, the single
location it was amended out in
the Senate, um, that should be
in one of your amendments that's
before you. Um, so if you are a,
a chain, you should be able to
do this. OK, so I did.
Um, the amendments weren't in my
packet, so
I apologize.
That'd be great.
One
No, I just cause it might affect
my other questions
and you are correct, Madam
Chair, I understand that a
standard serving a 1 is 5
ounces, but I think this is for
the understanding that if you
happen to be a bit more heavy
handed that this would be um
just amenable to that.
OK.
Um
OK, so that's
Flo, that's right to it. OK,
thank you. Um, and, um, owned
and operated by New Mexico
resident or business.
Um
Yeah, my, my guess is the big
chains aren't looking at here,
but you might.
Yeah
Like if I, if I was running a
movie theater in New Mexico, I'd
put in LLC should be in New
Mexico LLC, so that's probably
not an issue. So, OK, here's,
here's my question that I really
gives me heartburn about this
bill.
Uh, I'm 4.
Has been in existence for at
least one year.
And I just think that makes it
really hard on startups. Like
you want to open the theater and
serve beer and that's a big part
of your marketing plan.
And you can't do it for a year.
Madam Chair Representative, so
currently the way that the
licensing works is that the
licensee must provide proof that
at least 60% of the total
grocery receipts are from the
sale of food.
So this is actually helping um
encourage the opportunity for
there to be a balance there. So
again, if you're an after hours
theater, where many people go
have dinner and then go have uh
go see a film or go to the
theater. This is actually on
balance something that would
provide that alternative income
support, whereas now, um,
The dispenser license that's
available without this type of
license, um, is not obtainable,
essentially. So that existence
for at least a year would be
like, yes, you are an
established arts institution,
the theater.
preempts any of the alcohol
sales. You're not a bar before
you are a theater, that's sort
of the, I think, the lay of what
we're trying to establish before
you can actually sell any
alcohol.
And ma'am Romero, where was that
60% language?
Um, Madam Chair representative,
it's in um some of the analyses
that were provided for us.
Um, I will defer to the
Democratic House leadership, uh,
bill analysis that we received.
Romero is in the bill?
Um, that's just current law,
Madam Chair, representative that
I'm referring to as far as um
how it sort of works so if
you've ever been to like the
Jean Cocteau, which is in my
district of the Violet Crown
Cinema, which is in my district.
They currently serve alcohol as
a sort of a, a supplement to the
theater experience. Um, they
weren't mean to be a bar or a
restaurant before they were a
theater, so the one year in
existence situation is just
establishing that.
The theater first.
So Mason Romero that the
analysis says
Um, as a condition for obtaining
that kind of license, they're
discussing a different type of
licenses. They're not discussing
this license.
That's correct, Madam Chair
Representative. This provides a
separate sort of independent
theater dispensing license.
OK, so my question is still, why
are we making them wait a year?
Madam Chair representative again
on the principle that this is a
theater before it is a
dispensary of alcohol or
whatever other spirits, um, that
this would that that's sort of
the principle here.
You're, you're welcome to, well,
you know, provide a an
amendment, but
I think this is probably a
compromise. I'm just putting in
for Senator Jaramilo, um, as his
bestie.
Madam Charibs and Romero.
Would it be a friendly?
Madam Chair, Senator, I would
love it for it to be friendly
next session.
That's.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um,
before we go to a second on your
motion, uh, you know, just to
help illuminate that what I
heard you say there's another
license that has a one year
waiting, you know, period. So if
I were thinking through how we
got to one year is they went to
that statute in our modeling it
on a similar, you know, concept.
I mean, I think that's a
reasonable approach. 11 license
has that kind of requirement,
why not this one? Um, I would,
um,
I just want to speak in support
of this to support my dear
friend and colleague, we
represent the same area and we
were approached by our theater
in town, and um they pointed out
a number of things that they
have to hire caterers if they
have an event at the place that
caterer has a license that has
the ability to do just that, and
they have to, they have to pay
that person. And so, you know,
it's more expensive. So, and
this is just a, a, a better way
for that theater that you have
the.
Same kind of events and do the
same sorts of things without the
extra need to go to a, you know,
someone who owns a license to do
this sort of thing. So I I do
agree with um JD um.
In that, I do think this will be
very helpful for a small
theaters and small communities
that are trying to revitalize
themselves and, you know, make
them themselves a little bit
more um customer oriented in the
in the way that we live now in
theaters and so on, so I think
it's a really great idea and I'm
glad the Bills made it this far,
uh, and thank you for sitting in
for Senator Ho a meal. So we had
a motion by Senator Hall, I mean
Representative Hall, and did we
have a second?
Seconded by um Representative
Chavez, uh, would you call the
role. Yes, thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Abita.
Yes. Representative Chavis. Yes.
Representative Hall, yes,
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Yes. Representative Martinez,
yes.
Speaker Martinez, yes,
representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansy.
Madam vice chair.
Madam Chair. Yes, mad I'm sure
you have a do pass on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 159 as amended.
Thank you, Representative that
we are now going back on the
agenda to Senate Bill 42
comprehensive addiction and
recovery, um, program. We have
Senator Padilla here.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Madam Vice Chair, and, uh,
ranking member and members of
the committee. I'm Senator
Michael Padilla. Thank you very
much for having us this evening.
I apologize I was across the
hall when you called me I
sincerely apologize for that. I
do have, um,
Secretaries de Blasi and uh
Casabos with me this evening. I
do have a uh whole tree or slew
of co-sponsors that I want to
make you aware of, uh, Senator
Trujillo, Bergman's Brantly, uh,
Senator Duha was very helpful in
the composition of the
legislation and on the House
side, we have a minority Leader
Armstrong. I will tell you that,
uh, you know, the secretary is
very well uh we'll just jump
right in so we respect your
time. Thank you again for having
us. Essentially what uh Senate
Bill 42 is it started out as
about
or 7 1/2 pieces of legislation
if you, however you want to look
at it, and we decided to pull
the most comprehensive pieces
together into one bill, and
that's what you have before you
right now. There were a couple
of um um substitutes that were
put together to get to arrive at
the place where we are today in
front of your committee.
Essentially the major components
are that they, that enhances
foster care prevention services
under the Federal Families First
Act, that's going to be section
13, page 58 on page 58, uh, we
do transfer programs of um the
Plant State here from C.
ID to the Department of Health
and they looked at with that
more as a help uh solution
rather than uh a uh punitive
solution, and that's on page 18.
Uh, we do implement a
multi-level response system with
the legislation and that's
Section 8 page 35, uh, and then
we do require these plans of
safe care and you're going to
hear more about those, I'm
assuming and some of the
questions that we're gonna
receive tonight, um, and then
the last major component is, uh,
well, second to last major
component is enhancing
confidentiality and data sharing
of Section 10, page 42.
And then the very last page of
the legislation, Madam Chair and
members is on insurance that and
how that will be managed in the
foster home. And I do have some
information that we'll share
with you, um, should we go
there. Why do we want to do
this? I think we all know this
is an area that we really need
to focus on as a community. I,
uh, I, uh, 13 years ago came to
this legislature and immediately
began receiving this call that
call as we all have,
um, and I have disclosed
publicly that I grew up in 7
different counties and 7
in foster homes here in New
Mexico. We used our last major
orphanage or large orphanage was
in Albuquerque called the All
faiths home. Uh, my sisters and
I lived there for about 2.5
years. I was lucky because I was
the youngest one, and they, my
sisters were older and they took
me in and I was very kind of
them. So I've been working on
these issues since I got here.
Um, you do have a bill in your
committee also on uh on
fostering, which we were able to
work on a couple of years ago.
I'm sorry, um, fostering
connections beyond 18. Uh, but,
but the major reasons we want to
do this is improved foster care
uh through.
family's first, um, prevention
Services Act, efficient resource
utilization, which you heard
about, um, expanded child safety
measures and then better data
management and data sharing and
confidentiality around that
data. So that's our opening
statement, um.
We'll just whatever direction
you'd like to go, manager. OK,
thank you very much, Senator.
Let's go to the audience, um,
those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill, please,
approached the gentleman with
the microphone.
I don't see anyone.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
And please limit your remarks to
about a minute. So I see someone
by the initials MD.
With your hand raised.
Yes. Are you speaking in
opposition?
partially, yes. OK.
OK, my name is Marcy Starr. My
wife and I have been a foster
parents for 10+ years. I'm
currently one of the
administrators for an online
group of over 500 foster
parents. We are scared. We fear
that the language on the last
page of the bill regarding
homeowners insurance could cause
our insurance premiums to
increase and even potentially be
in danger of being non-renewed
or revoked.
If this happens, many current
foster families would be forced
to stop caring for the children
in foster care.
If a child slips and falls, we
could be sued. We could
literally be bankrupted for
taking care of children in
foster care, implementing this
language in the bill could
result in difficulty recruiting
and retaining foster parents.
Thank you. Thank you, um, I see
one more hand raised.
Donalyn.
Good evening.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Dubeti we might or Sha
channelsta kohe wasta. My name
is Donalyn Lorenzo. I'm from the
Pueblo of Acama and have been a
licensed social worker for over
20 years, of which 12 years have
been directly in child welfare.
I was a director for a tribal
social services program and
founded the New Mexico Tribal
Indian Child Welfare Consortium
in 2015. I'm here in opposition
of SB 42 for the following
reasons. Using the statement,
nothing in this section shall
apply to the Indian.
Family Protection Act, um,
throughout the entire bill is
misleading and seems to be a
deliberate attempt to exclude
nations, pubs and tribes from
matters concerning their
children, families, and future.
The Department of Health Office
of Insurance, Healthcare
Authority, and CYFD are all
required to communicate,
collaborate, and consult with
nations ubs and tribes as
outlined in the state tribal
collaboration Act. If you know
anything about child welfare,
you know, most native children
are born in.
facility facilities not located
on tribal land as such, the
plans of care proposed in this
bill will require notice to the
child's tribe, and for all these
departments to ensure this plan
is developed in collaboration
and consultation with the nation
Pueblo and tribe.
If the child family resides on
tribal land, CYFD would not be
the appropriate agency to
address issues of noncompliance
regarding the confidentiality
section of this bill, it's also
in direct conflict with the
requirements under IFPA. It is
not always known from the start
of a case if the child is
affiliated with the nation Pablo
and tribe. If information is
released prior to getting this
information, the confirmation
from the tribe, that will be a
direct violation of IFPA. Had
these been
Had there been inclusion of
tribal boys during the drafting
of this bill, these are things
that may have been resolved to
ensure the bill does not create
conflict with ICA and ICA. If
put and IA,
what, what knowledgeable what
knowledgeable child welfare
professionals across the nation
know to be the gold and platinum
standards of child welfare
practice. In addition,
Thank you.
All right. Um, back, um, to, um,
the audience, those wishing to
speak in support.
approached the gentleman with
the microphone.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm JD
Bollington speaking on behalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce that supports this
legislation.
The LFC tells us that the rates
of newborns with substance
wouldra Simpson to Mexico. I've
climbed to more than twice the
national average, and yet only 1
in 7 local families with
substance exposed newborns
except referrals to addiction
treatment, and we need to close
the gaps on service delivery and
Senate Bill 42 seeks to do just
that. This is a complicated
problem that we of course want
to try to solve through
treatment rather than
penalization, yet.
Substance abuse on children is,
is very real child abuse that
needs to be dealt with.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak and
support?
Those online wishing to speak
and support, please raise your
hand.
I don't see anyone, um,
back to Senator Padilla.
Anything you wish to add? Thank
you, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate all the comments that
were just made. I will say that
on the component related to
insurance, that was a big
concern of ours. It's it's a
small paragraph on the very last
page. So I did seek um an
opinion from the Office of the
Superintendent of Insurance to
take a look at this, and
essentially what we received
back was that currently there is
no scene factor in the
legislation that would initiate
a cancellation or non-renewal
for being a foster parent with
an additional child or child in
the household.
Essentially, when you're going
through the fostering
certification program, you are
advised, Madam Chair, to
immediately call your insurance
agent and say, this is what
we're contemplating doing in our
home. What does that mean to our
policy? Is our policy
permissible? What is in our
policy? And then you can make a
decision at that point. That's
on the insurance piece on the uh
FIA and IA, uh, we did do some,
uh, work on the, the legislation
as we were swimming through the
Senate. We do on page 6, on line
13, we do define um, you know,
what
is and
Uh, we, we, we, we did want to
ask the secretaries to respond
to the IFA piece, but then we
further went and made sure that
we had proper definitions on
online pages really at the
really page 7 on um Native
American for related to Native
American children, so I'll ask
the secretaries to comment on
that here in just a moment. But
then on CAPTA, we had an
internal review by CYFD and the
Attorney General's office and a
few other areas on CAPTA, which
was also mentioned in the
comments that were just made in
the legislation is 1.
% cap to complain. We, we would
never want to do anything to
ourselves. It would cause an
issue for the obviously the
children, but also the funding
that comes to New Mexico from
Title IVE and the ChaP Act.
So I don't know if the
secretaries want to comment on
the ICA.
I'm sorry.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Teresa Casados,
Cabinet secretary at CYFD. So
New Mexico has already passed
legislation with respect to, um,
If I
wait now I'm confused. Let me
put my glasses back on if uh,
which is, um,
stronger law than what ICA is.
So we already abide by that at
children, Youth and Families
department they're requirements
that we are required to do and
working with tribes and publics
when it comes to uh native
children which would continue
through the work that we're
doing through this legislation.
Thank you, Secretary. Um, let's
go.
Go to the committee, um,
Representative Sapansky.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator and secretaries,
um.
Uh, I was able to see this
legislation in the previous
committee, um, and, you know, I
appreciate the changes uh to the
confidentiality. I think that's
a really important step for
transparency, um, but as I, as I
noted in that previous
committee, have a lot of
questions about how we are
dealing with infants um who are
exposed to substances in this
legislation, um, and so, uh, I'd
like to do, I'd like to ask you
some questions about
Those sections in particular.
Um
One of the
Observations I made and I will
repeat here, is that I think one
of the reasons that the CAA
program has not been working as
it was intended, um, is because
there is confusion over who is
to do what. And it's not
necessarily confusion at the
agency level, I think it could
be confusion at the local level
as well between the different
handoffs and obviously there's a
lot of different staff on the
ground.
Um, and so,
One of the concerns I have in
the car section of this bill is
that we have um
3 different agencies.
Two different kinds of staff.
Uh, dealing with caring for uh
the, the plan of safe care for
these infants as well as dealing
with the family, um, and so I'm
wondering, I did not see a
definition of care coordinator
in the legislation. It did I
miss that or is that in here?
Madam Chair and Madam Leader,
yes, if you'll go to page 12,
line 18.
care coordinator is defined
there. I was just as confused as
you were when we were so I
apologize, I was confused also.
I don't know how, uh, but yeah,
so from lines 18 to 21, care
coordinators person signed to a
substance exposed newborn and
the newborn's parents relatives
guardians so take or caretakers.
I'm a little tired. I apologize.
By a managed care organizations,
the MCO manages and has the
headcount or the person related
to the air coordinator, the car
navigator actually works for the
Department of Health. And so you
can look at it from a
A service delivery, uh, service
coordination is the the
navigator and the actual service
delivery would be the care
coordinator, and I'll ask uh the
secretary here.
to give a little more.
Sure.
Uh, Madam Chair, Madam Leader,
the um care navigator at the
Department of Health would
really be the intensive case
manager, um, for the newborn and
for the family would be working
collaborative, collaboratively
with the care coordinator that's
assigned by the managed care
organization.
The uh care coordinators are
written into the turquoise care
contracts, uh, for Medicaid, um,
so the MCOs would be making
those care coordinators
available at each of the
birthing facil.
facilities and the care
navigator within coordinate with
them, and the family and the
complete home visits, uh,
shortly after the uh newborn in
the family, um, go home to
ensure that the plan of safe
care is in place, the
environment looks safe and that
um services are in place for the
family.
OK, thank you.
And the leader the the plan of
safe care can be seen on page 14
starting on line 20, that's
section 4, clearly out outlines
what that plan of safe care
could look like. They're gonna
be different for every situation
because.
Thank you. Um,
So, so just to continue on that
point on the difference between
the care coordinator in the Kara
Navigator. Um, so we're gonna
have a care coordinator in this
plan at every hospital, um, but
there's no requirement to have a
car navigator at every hospital.
Um, and so you're dealing with
One set of individuals at a
hospital.
Uh, and then you're gonna have
another set of individuals that
assigned to the family and, you
know, I sort of tracked the two
terms through this whole
section, um, and we have um a
care coordinator assigned to
each newborn, that there's one
at each facility, um, but then
we are only informing the care
coordinator of the plan of safe
care were not informing the car
navigator. Um, we are informing
CYFD.
And DOH immediately upon the
filing of the plan of safe care,
but we're not informing the
healthcare authority.
Um, and so I think
The idea would be that you're
informing the Department of
Health about this plan of safe
care so that the Department of
Health can inform the care
navigator to do their work, but
we're informing the care
coordinators directly. So again,
I just feel like that's a very
confusing process to sort of
execute, um, and then,
We go into
That requirements for the plan
of safe care.
Which
You know, Madam Charon, and I'm
now looking at page 19, um,
The one of the issues I have
with the drafting of this, and
I, I don't mean any negativity
towards, you know, whatever
individual drafted this, but
just the way that this is
structured is that there is no
direction to the care
coordinator to actually make a
referral, the way that it's
written is that there needs to
be information.
It includes a referral. And is
there a reason that we are not
requiring both the early
intervention family infant
toddler program and a home
visiting program. In this piece,
it is, it is or and in my
opinion, I feel like if uh if
you have a child that is has a
parent that has a substance
abuse, uh, issue, uh, to the
point where this child has been
identified at the time of birth
or at the time of admission
to the hospital that
There's this issue, um, I would
think we would want both the
home visiting and the family
infant toddler program, at least
to ascertain whether the child
is eligible for the FIT program.
Could it, would you, could you
elaborate on that?
Um, Madam Chairman, House
Leader, um, Spinski. So the fit
program is a very specific
program that is not available,
um, in every single community
and so we wanted to ensure that
there would be a some type of
home visiting program for every
child that is needing that, and
that was why we used or so that
it could be the fit program or a
home visiting program that is
established in the community.
And it, I, Madam Chair, um,
Senators and secretaries,
Senator and secretaries, I, I
understand. I for for me, I
would prefer that the referral
go to both and then the
eligibility or availability of
service being determined after.
Um
And additionally,
Um
I, I just make a couple more
points, um,
On this, um, one is that we have
Removed, um, and I, I mentioned
this in the previous committee
as well.
Um, removed evidence-based
screening tools from this. Um,
so we have removed the, the
phrase evidence based and um
Madam Chad and Senator, we've
also removed the requirement to
perform what is an actual
evidence-based practice, which
is screening brief intervention,
referral treatment, um,
assessment. There's a
requirement for training on that
tool, but there is
actually no requirement to
actually do the assessment and I
don't know if that was something
that was missed as this was put
together or um
Or whether we want to not use
that because Madam Chair,
representative, that is a
technique that has been
Researched for over 20 years to
be an incredibly effective and,
and again brief way to assess
whether someone has a substance
abuse issue.
center. I don't know if you can
speak to the evidence-based and
the removal of the aspert.
Not a tool, Madam Chair and
Madam Leader, yes, I mean that
that's uh a very important
factor that we agree that that
might be a future iteration and
a future change to this process
certainly doesn't uh uh preclude
the the department from making
that something in rule and, and,
and in consultation here with
the secretary. She tends to
agree with you there and, and we
do too. So that's something that
could be done there. But in the
plan of safe care development
and all throughout the document,
there is all throughout the the
legislation, the word may has
been removed in a lot of places,
replaced with the word shall.
If you just look at page 19, the
the line one paragraph or
section 6 there, uh, you know,
everything gets triggered
essentially when the child's
being born and it's discovered
that they are sub substance, um.
Addicted of substance.
Substance exposed, excuse me,
and so it, so that triggers a
lot of what you're describing
that has to be done. A lot of
the birthing centers already
have documented processes
around, um, uh, what they expect
to have happened before the
child leaves and who gets
notified, but then we also have
a definite definition here in
here for what is uh a family
assessment, and that will
trigger also a number of the
things that you're just
describing.
Thank you, thank you, uh,
senator.
And secretaries, I think um
I, I really preferred for the
expert to be named because it is
a well-known tool to many
hospitals. Um, it is, has been
used widely in research for over
20 years. It coincides with the
deletion of evidence-based from
this, which I really think when
we are dealing with infants who
are incredibly vulnerable
families who are incredibly
vulnerable. We have to rely on
evidence-based programs to the
extent that they're available.
um, rather than standards of
professional practice because we
know that those lag, um, and the
final comment I will make that I
was really confused by is that
um,
substance exposed newborn is
defined as an infant under the
age of one.
Um, and that is on page 11.
Um, however, which when I first
looked through this, I
appreciated that because I
appreciated that we were, you
know, including, um,
Uh
Children, you know, after birth
as well.
Um, however, there's no, uh,
process laid out in this
legislation or how a plan of
safe care would be developed for
anyone other than a newborn,
because the entire process is
predicated on the birth and the
discharge, and that's what
triggers the plan of safe care.
And so, um, I, I just, it, it
just feels, um,
and
I really appreciate and value
the fact that we all care so
much about this program that
we're all putting in hours and
hours of work into getting it
right, um, but, um, Madam Chair,
and Senator, I, I am troubled by
that because I don't know what
that means if you have, um, if
you have it, uh, a childcare
worker or another individual
who, who feels that there should
be a plan of safe care written,
um, for some, for
a baby that's 6 months old.
But there's no process in here
for that because all of the
requirements are about discharge
from the hospital.
Um, and so, so Madam Chair, uh,
senator, I do have an amendment.
Um, that I would like to propose
to the committee on these
topics.
Do we have that? can we handed
out.
Or discussion. So 2.
Let's uh get it handed out and
then we can have a conversation
about it and make sure, of
course, that the sponsor gets a
copy.
And Madam Chair, well, that's
being handed out, might I
address just what was just
mentioned. Oh absolutely, thank
you, Madam Chair and that
leader. So one of the things
that um you're right, this
legislation does affect.
The birth. Uh, but if you're in
a in a six months, say,
pediatric appointment or what
have you, um, and you are, you
observe behavior or you notice
something through a lab test or
whatever, there is a requirement
to report and then that triggers
a whole set of other.
Things that would happen beyond
the birth. So I just want to
make that mention, so.
All right.
We're working on copies, but um
Oh, we have an extra one extra,
so.
Bring it down here.
So how many do we have?
How many are we short? I see
people juggling papers. On this
one.
OK. OK, so one short, but let's
um let's ask uh Representative
Sapanski to
Disgus her proposed amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
And Senator, um, so, you know,
that.
Uh, this amendment is not really
coming out of the blue, um,
because many of us, um, in this
chamber have worked on
legislation for a number of
years related to child welfare,
um, dating back to even some
members that are no longer
served, but the car program, I
remember when it was first
implemented, uh, adopted in this
chamber, and we knew that it was
gonna require work.
So, um, Madam Chair and members,
with this amendment includes
is uh focus on um evidence-based
practices to support the
families that are involved in
Kara.
Um, and we're also, um,
addressing the use of state
devices for CYD business, and
that's, I believe, the first
part that appears in the
amendments, so it is um
Addressing records retention,
uh, for at devices uh used by
employees of CYFD. So it's
basically stating that
CYFD employees must use only
department-issued devices for
communication related to their
duties.
Um
It is uh ensuring that software
and applications allowed are
compliant with all of the
relevant, uh, data retention and
protection laws, including those
of the tribes.
Um, we are requiring in, in
this, uh, and this is very
similar to or identical to House
Bill 203, um, requiring system
to be improved by do it to back
up all electronic records to be
saved for at least 7 years to
ensure records retention
policies, um, and that those
records are backed up.
Uh, on a daily basis.
And then related to the Kara
program, um,
Uh, items that I mentioned.
Um, this is
Uh,
Making sure that we have a
streamlined administration of
the CAR program, um, because,
uh, Madam Chair and members, uh,
one of the concerns that I
flagged earlier is that I think
the quickest way for a program
to fail is to assign it to two
different sets of staff and two
different agencies with unclear
roles delineated, um, and so
this is streamlining it to the
healthcare authority. Um, that
was also an LFC recommendation
from 2020.
3.
We want to make sure that uh
these families that are in the
care program are in the closest
proximity to the services, um,
that they're trying to access.
Including substance abuse
treatment, behavioral health
treatment, uh, the medical
providers access to Medicaid
care coordination, um, and that
they can get access to economic
support programs as well, all of
which are administered at the
healthcare authority.
Uh, and it also ensures that we
can leverage Medicaid for
program sustainability.
Secondly, it's just clarifying
who does what and when. It
specifies very clearly what the
uh, uh, the care program is to
provide in the plan of safe
care.
And
What it also does, Madam Chair
members, is ensures that CYFD
only becomes involved in a
family fully disengages from
this program and ensures that
it's very clear when someone is
not complying with the program,
what happens? Um, I, one of the
things I didn't mention when I
was discussing the original
legislation is that um the uh
while there's been a lot of
discussion of that consequences
being mandatory, the actual
section regarding what
happens if a uh family does not
comply with the plan of care is
actually extremely confusing,
and I think would be very
difficult to follow. Um, so this
makes that very clear.
And um it also reduces the
stigma of CYFD involvement
because when CYFD involvement is
not involved, CYFD is not
involved from the first moment,
the healthcare authority is. And
so families are accessing and
being um approached from a place
of we need to get you help. We
need to get you medical care.
Let's get the right referrals in
place and the right system
around you, and then if there is
not compliance, that is the
appropriate time for CYFD to get
involved.
Um, and Madam, I'm sorry, this
is a long amendment. It's taken
me a while to explain. Um,
So we're also adding on the
referral issue that a referral
must happen to substance use
treatment and a referral to
family infant toddler program or
home visiting, um, because there
is no mention of substance use
treatment, um, in the current
legislation, there is mention of
counseling, etc. but, but not
actually a referral for that.
Um, and then finally, Madam
Chair, um, the, we got a lot of
feedback and I understand the
um
Uh, intention around uh uh
stating that foster children are
not residents of foster homes
for the purposes of homeowner's
insurance.
It's an extremely technical
issue, but we did get a lot of
feedback from foster families,
um, that
Uh, they are working very hard
to ensure that these foster
children
do think of themselves as
members of the family, even if
it is only for a temporary
basis, um, and that putting
something like this into the
statute makes them um extremely
uncomfortable and uh I, Madam
Chair members, I did clarify
that that is actually case law
right now. So whether we address
this in statute or not, that is
actually gonna be taken care of,
um, within the courts, and so
putting into the statute, I feel
is painful for the foster
families.
Um, and their intention, so, um,
that is my explanation of the
amendment.
You, so we are on discussion of
the amendment. Speaker, are you
like at one point you signaled,
oh, I'm sorry. Is it a friendly
amendment?
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Leader. I mean there's a lot
here. I mean, I think you're
striking the insurance piece
altogether. I, I, I understood
you correctly, this takes
Department of Health out of
this, uh, and places it all in
the healthcare authorities, um.
Purview and lap. I, I don't know
if I agree with everything that,
you know, things were missing or
that they're in there. It's just
a matter of how do we want it to
be managed and how we want it
to, how, how do you want the
trains to line up and I did ask
my uh
sponsors here at the moment. We
want to hear more, because I
think this is a pretty hefty
amendment. I haven't seen one
like this in a long time. It
really does change this
legislation quite a bit. We'd
love to hear the committee's
opinion on kind of.
How they take it as well before
we, let's say we're neutral at
the moment.
OK, thank you Saner. Um,
speaker, thank
you. Sure, yeah, I, I have a
question I'm sorry, apologize.
We're very open minded, hold on,
hold on a second. Hold on a
second.
Um, so Madam Chair had questions
on the amendment and on the
bill, but I'll speak to the
amendment right now.
So, um, Madam Chair and um Madam
Leader, it looks like in your
amendment, you are.
Bringing in portions of um some
of the other bills that we've
discussed.
In this chamber and in the other
chamber, which I appreciate, uh,
Madam Chair, I think that we
have a crisis in CFD we've had a
crisis for a long time.
Um, and quite frankly, as I read
through Senate Bill 42, it looks
like this is a
A very small band-aid.
For a big
wound
Um, as it stands.
And I appreciate the leaders.
Um
Leadership.
In trying to get us back to a
point where we are being more
proactive.
Um, I, I'll start, I'll start
from the back, I think, section
17.
To me it doesn't make a whole
lot of sense to have in this
bill.
I think what we want to do is
encourage.
Um, families to, to foster
children, not discourage them
and I think that that's exactly
and we heard in public comment
that's exactly.
The impact it's gonna have.
Um
Madam Chair, I think.
That
The fixes.
Uh, for
The Kara program are are
critically important.
Um, and I think that what the
leader stated earlier,
You know, having too many.
Too many agencies in charge
having too many cooks in the
kitchen could lead.
To, um, a watering down.
Of the services and the impact
that we want to have.
Uh, in support of these
children.
And in support of the family's
caring for children.
I think that
Um
The
Intent of the bill while I.
I can respect it, Senator. I
think that
Um
What y'all are trying to do is
Um, a step in the right
direction. I'm, I'm glad we
agree.
That see why needs to be fixed.
Um, that's why we send House
Bill 5 up.
Her signature a couple of years
ago. Thank you, of a beta. Um,
I'm glad we agree that we need
fixes.
Um, I'm just not sure that's
Senate Bill 42 as it stands is
the.
Um, again, I think it's, it's,
um,
It, it takes
Parts of what we've already
passed or discussed in the
interim.
Um, and in my opinion severely
waters.
For whatever reason
Um, so I, I appreciate the
amendment and I, I appreciate
the intent. I think that it puts
teeth back.
Into a addressing the crisis in
child wellbeing that we have.
You know, we can't go to the
news.
and complain about juvenile
crime.
We have an 11 year old boy.
Who committed a horrible act.
And my first question was, where
are the parents?
I don't know that I've had a
straight answer.
Second question is, where is the
state?
I still don't have a right
But you know what I've been
told?
We need to lock the kids up.
That's the solution.
Um
I'm not sure that's
The solution. I think that
There's a lot that remains to
be.
Um, addressed within this
particular agency, um, and I
fully support the proposed
amendments to Sele 42. Thank
you, man. Thank you, leader.
Thank you. Any other members
wishing to speak were on the
amendment. So anyone wishing to
speak to the amendment questions
or comments.
OK. So we have a motion to adopt
the amendment made by Speaker
Martinez, seconded by
Representative Hall, is there
any opposition to adopting the
amendment unless you want to go
back and see if it's friendly.
Yeah. Is it friendly now?
What I was gonna say before the
speaker spoke was uh Mr. Madam
Chair and Speaker, is that we're
absolutely open to your feedback
and your, your thoughts. That's
all I was gonna say.
Uh, so I really appreciate that.
Um, there is a lot of surgery
that would be done with this
bill if this is adopted, and at
the moment, I can't quite get
agreement, you know, from the
folks to my right and my left, I
completely agree with the
speaker that something has to be
done in a really big way. Um, I
don't know that that I would
characterize 42 as a small
band-aid to a very large
problem. Um, it is a, but it,
but something does need to be
done and I, so from that
standpoint, I'm, my name is at
the top of this bill on 42, and
I'm gonna.
torture man. OK, great. Thank
you, Senator. So good to know,
but I still will take the vote.
It's obvious that it appears to
me that there's no opposition.
Is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment and we
know there's no opposition from
the original sponsor.
OK, so it looks like we have an
amended bill.
Thank you, Summer. Um, now
discussion of the amended bill,
um, members questions, comments,
uh, speaker.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I've got
a few questions on, um, on the
bill, and, and I think
generally, with regard to to the
issue that we're dealing with
here.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, um,
When, when we talk about, um,
The fit program, is it, is it
available or is it not available
in every community, Madam Chair
and senator.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, so
yes, the fit program I misspoke
earlier, the FIT program is
available in every county, um,
but oftentimes it is not the
program that is preferred or
oftentimes scares off families.
We want to make sure that we
have support for families to be
able to do a program of their
choosing so that they can be
successful in the outcome of the
treatment that they're
selecting.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
secretary, and to date, how many
care coordinators have uh have
been hired by the department.
Oh
and speaker of the care
coordinators work for the MCOs,
they don't work for the for the
state of the department. Uh, so
it would be a MCO to MCO, um.
Number that I don't have. Got
it. Thank you, Madam Chair and,
and Senator, um,
You know, one of the one of the
most frustrating things about
state government in general, um,
And I would assume it's the same
issue here. But are there, are
there warm handoffs made?
for families, uh, for, for
support, Madam Chair and and
senator and experts and and if
not, how can we ensure that that
happens going.
Um, madam chair,
Mr. Speaker, that was the intent
of creating the navigator
position. So previously the um
program was at the Healthcare
authority, they are, they do not
directly provide services and so
it was left to the care
coordinators with referrals to
CYFD. So as we were creating
this program, we created the
navigator position, which
previously was being hired at
SewayFD to be able to do those
warm handoffs to work.
With the care coordinators of
the MCO to do that warm handoff
with the families. Um, it was
determined at some point that
that should be at the health at
the Department of Health
navigators that we had hired at
CYFD have been transferred to
the Department of Health, um,
but if we're amending to move it
back to healthcare authority,
um, they don't provide direct
service, so it would have to be
a different model with the care
coordinators providing that warm
handoff to families. Got it.
And, and I think that that's uh.
I'm, I'm glad you all are
thinking about that. I think
that that's uh a gap that we
see, like I said, too often in
in healthcare, I think it's
probably a bigger example I have
irs are in the education, and
I'm sure.
With the child welfare system as
well.
Um
In terms of, of, of Kara, how
many, how many families have
been served by the department,
um, families who need this
specialized service, Madam
Chair.
We're just gonna look for that
right now. We have that data.
It's very possible we have that
data.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, so
completed plans of care since um
from April 22 through December
24 or 2,959, accepted plans of
care 2,633 and plans of care
where they have accepted a
specific service is 2078.
Secretary, how do you measure
the success of those class of
care.
Um
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, I
believe that the plan of care is
measured in success if the child
is able to remain in that
family, that union is able to
get the services that they need
and they don't enter into um the
system.
And Madam Chair, Senator,
Secretary How, what is your
success rate?
Madam Chair, Mister Speaker,
according to this information,
we have um been involved out of
those 2959. We have been
involved with um 1098 cases. So
it's about 1/3.
So
About 1/3 of the time.
You have to get involved again,
Madam Chair, secretary.
Madam Chaser, yes.
And to what extent, um, you get
involved that third of the time.
What are we talking about?
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker,
can you
Yeah, so, so that there of the
time you've got to be involved
again, like at what level are
you checking in on the kid with
the
caregiver or you taking the kid
out of the home? Is there abuse?
Is there neglect, um.
I'm just wondering if if about a
third of the time we can
consider these plans of care is
not having succeeded.
What is the extent of the
failure, Madam Chair, Secretary,
Senator.
Um, Madam Chair, and Speaker,
we're looking through the
specifics there, but the data
that I've seen or meetings I've
been in, you know, the various
legislative, I mean, it's all
over the place. There's a number
of reasons why, um, some of them
are the substance abuse, some of
them are its actual physical
abuses. Some are not showing up
in school, some are not, not
moving into the next stage of
the child's life there's a
number of reasons why, but maybe
there's some more specifics.
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, I
don't have more specifics on the
outcomes of those, but I can get
that to you. Thank you, ma'am,
Senator. I think that's
Part of the problem here, right,
that
Um
That is exactly.
What we are trying to address.
Um, and I get it. It's, it's a
lot of information, a lot of
data, and I, you know, I've,
I've certainly been on that side
of the table and sometimes we
don't have it on us. I, I get
that.
But it seems to me that that's
When that's the issue.
When that's one of our
strategies to deal with the
issue.
We've, we, we've got to have a
very direct.
Responds to that.
I mean, I think that that's part
of some of the frustration that
you hear.
Uh, Madam, uh, Madam Chair,
Senator.
Um, experts, uh,
you know, this, this child who
was just in the news, um, I, I
know firsthand that this child
wasn't really going to school.
should have been
Um
And I do wonder
Now that
This has been made public. I do
wonder.
Where that trail is going to
lead us. Clearly there's a
criminal investigation or
criminal charges and and
whatnot.
potentially
Uh, but I do wonder.
Why that child wasn't regularly
attending school.
I do wonder what the
responsibility of the school is.
I do wonder what the
responsibility of the
department.
Madam Chair and, and, and
senator.
Um, and I do wonder if
Maybe that child was part of one
of these.
That
Maybe he's part of the 3rd.
That did not succeed Madam
Chair.
Um, senator and secretary.
And
That's the crux of the problem.
That's why I think
You've seen this house.
And I'll say
You've seen my house.
With my colleagues.
From every corner of the state.
From both political parties.
God knows we disagree 90% of the
time, more than that.
98% of the time. We had a long
lengthy.
session today.
But this is one of those areas
where this house, my house has
stood.
united.
And it's because
We
no longer tolerate.
The system
That
I believe we believe.
has failed the most vulnerable
children and
And I'll also add to that that
this is not, Madam Chair.
Senator
Experts
Anyone's fault.
Because I think what, what's
going to come tomorrow is we're
asking blame or we're punishing
people or being punitive. No,
I've got.
Many acquaintances at work.
Amazing people, amazing public
servants. I could not do the
work they do.
This is a systemic issue.
That has been.
Breaking down for many years,
madam chair and, you know this.
You said it yourself, 13 years
you've been in this building
working on this.
Question is, madam chair.
What are we doing?
To make it better. And I think
that one of my, one of the
reasons why I supported the
leader's amendment was because I
do think that Senate Bill 42 as
it came to us.
Really just lacked.
The teeth that he needs.
To hold
Keep
Our children safe to hold.
Those caregivers accountable and
to support.
The foster families.
That God knows are in short
supply.
And yet they are the first line
of defense when it comes to
child's wellbeing. So roughly
1/3 of these plans of care.
Are a failure at some level.
We don't know exactly the degree
of the failures.
That is
I mean, 11 failed plan is one
too many, and I know you agree
with that, Madam Chair, Senator,
secondaries.
Question is, how do we get to a
point?
were no longer failing.
Um, and I think
A big part of that equation is
Ensuring we build a system.
Ensuring that we have the
humility.
To understand what we're
filming.
Bad chair.
Um
I co-sponsored the cannabis
Regulation Act with your vice
chair.
5 years ago, 4 years ago.
He was very proud of that
privilege.
And you know what, it needs to
be fixed.
And we have a fix that is making
its way through this
legislature, a big fix.
And not just this session, the
last two sessions we've had
several fixes, and you know
what, we are we are humble about
it.
There's no way we're gonna get
it right, Madam Chair.
Center.
We're not going to get it right.
We don't take pride in something
that's not working, so we want
to fix it.
This is a system that is not
working.
And every time it doesn't work,
There's another child in harm's
way.
And I hate to put it in such
blunt terms, but if that child
is lucky.
They survive
Generally to a life of crime,
but then this legislature is
having to address.
And if they're unlucky,
That child
Never gets
to be a grown-up.
And what a shame, Mainer.
What a shame
If we can do better.
By those children in all of our
communities because I know they
live in all of our.
When this system
is the last
Line of defense.
We have to be humble. We have to
approach this with the utmost
humility.
We have to be open.
To the changes to the fixes.
That have been proposed now for
several years that keep hitting
these walls.
I'm hopeful
Because you've accepted this as
friendly, that one is most
through the process that the
Senate will concur with these
changes.
I'm hopeful
Because
I've been in that chair before.
You know, I know how it is.
I was in that chair probably a
week ago.
30% of a beta.
These amendments have been
deemed friendly by the sponsor,
I fully expect these changes to
be to be accepted and concurred
with once in this low crosses
back.
the majority whip's chamber.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much.
Oh, thank you, speaker. Anyone
else?
I don't see any anyone else
with, um, yes, representative, I
would like to make a motion. OK.
like to move a dupe house on
Senate bill is it.
Make sure I get this right and
committee substitute for
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 42 is amended.
We have a do pass motion, do we
have 2?
Um, we have a motion made by
representative.
Romero
Uh, do pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Rules Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 42 as now amended,
made by Representative Romero,
seconded by Representative Hall.
What you call the roll. Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Abita? Yes.
Representative Chavez. Yes.
Representative Hall, yes,
Representative Hog Country Hill.
Representative Martinez, yes.
Speaker Martinez, yes,
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reap
Yes.
Leader Sapanski,
Madam Vice Chair, yes, madam
chair, yes, Madame Cheva do pass
on to the judiciary Committee
substitute for
Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 42 as
amended.
OK. You do have a few members of
the committee. Thank you, son.
Thank you, secretaries.
OK. So just let's reorient to
the agenda. We're going down the
agenda now in order. I don't see
Senator Cervantes on his um
Senate Bill 507.
Um
I don't know if there's a sender
who might want to try texting
him or we can try texting him.
I'll, let's go to the next bill,
HB 594 and I'll try texting
Senator Cervantes.
All right, so, um, is there
Either uh Representative
Armstrong or Representative
Sanchez here.
I
I thought I had seen
Representative Sanchez also.
You.
Madam chair, he might be in
appropriations of there's that,
isn't there? OK. He's not here.
We'll, you know, we can come
back. 00, here he is. Very good.
Hello, Representative.
Uh, we are on house Bill 594.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. We
have a
Committee substitute, uh.
Oh yes, you do. That's right.
Let's um
Get it handed out.
get
Give us a minute.
OK.
We're about there, um.
I'm looking at a sub that has a
202 number 25.3 as the last
three digits. Does that look
right to you, Representative?
Not sure, the one I have is
25.2. 0.
OK.
We have, we have a 0.3.
So
You know.
Sorry, representative.
Yeah, we're happy to give it to
you and you can take a look at
it. Sorry about that, but
since
He follows 2.
One might think that was the
one, but
Madam Chall give us uh
Yeah, absolutely.
Um
One of our analysts is saying
there's an appropriation was
stripped, was that intentional?
In the 3 that that right time.
OK.
Chair, I have a question. Yes,
sure, uh, just procedurally, I
downloaded a version of this
bill earlier today, the 0.2.
Look at the time, but I did not
see a 0.3 online and do we have
a procedural rule about how
When that needs to be uploaded
for review. Yeah, but it's um
It's not quite uh as that
prescriptive. It says you have
to upload an amendment to the
website as soon as practicable,
but it doesn't have a
consequence like we have to roll
the bill or anything like that.
Yes, sir. Uh, speaking to my
expert we'd like to move uh.2
version. Uh, we're not aware of
1.3. OK. The only problem is, do
we have copies of the point too.
We don't.
Last
It's the one that's
Madam's point of order, why
would we consider a 0.2 when
there's a point.3.
Because um the person presenting
the amendment, which who I
believe is the representative,
gets to tell us what amendment
he's presenting.
Yes, Madam Chair, uh, we're not
aware of a quick 3,
I think even what's uploaded
like the representative of
Amension is a point to.
So, um, let's do this.
Um, it's gonna take us, maybe,
do we have a copy that we could
run down and get copied?
OK, so our assistant's going to
look.
I don't know what the genesis of
the confusion is suddenly um.
Like an organic change that has
arrived as a 0.3. I don't know
how that could happen.
OK.
OK.
2 was in the book.
So
OK. Oh, no, it's not.
My book is empty.
the main sponsor.
This here. Give me one second.
I'm sorry.
so
Mature uh speaking to my
co-sponsor, the, the main
difference between the two is
that the appropriation is
struck, and that's the
difference between 0.2 and 0.3.
I apologize. Uh, if we can, uh,
move, uh, 0.3. I apologize. OK,
that's, that's helpful.
Makes our lives a little easier.
If someone could go find Melanie
and let her know not to make
copies of 0.2. We've burned a
lot of paper this evening. I can
tell you if you were on the
house floor, you saw it. OK, so,
um, representative the floor and
Senator welcome, the floor is
yours. Thank you, Madam Chair of
the committee, uh,
I'll speak to the amendment, uh,
the, the big issue with uh
PBS is that um
With the bill, if you guys are
familiar with the baby boxville,
uh, this talks about
surrendering a bakery to a fire
station or whatever where
there's a baby box. In the past,
there was a concern with
liability to the parents
surrendering the baby.
I think
And um also the main difference
is we strike the appropriation.
I hear that now, and I know that
there was concerns with uh with
some of the pueblo members about
uh
Babies that are from Pueblo
origin, we've also added
language about uh.
Genetic testing to DNA text to
you.
To figure out whether or not
they're tribal members about it
too.
OK.
Anything else you wish to add?
Um, not right now. OK. Um, let's
go to the audience.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition.
To house Bill 594.
substitute that we have before
us, um, please, um, approach the
gentleman with the microphone.
OK.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill.
Please raise your hand.
And I do see, um,
to
34 hands raised, I'll take all
of them.
But um could you limit your
comments to about a minute,
please.
Um
Uh, Miss Cadena.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Denniia Cadena. Um, I am
one of the authors of the Indian
Family Protection Act, along
with many brilliant indigenous
women and communities, um,
genetic testing is not how type
of membership is determined, and
we have um many members of the
community feel that there's
significant issues with this
bill. Um, we already have safe
haven laws in New Mexico, and
families are able to surrender
when they need to. Um, so I ask
you to oppose this bill. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you. Um, let's see
who's next.
00,
Alex
Alex, please.
Good evening, Chairwoman and
committee members. My name is
Alex Kinsella, and I'm the
community response coordinator
with the coalition to Stop
Violence Against Native Women.
While our coalition recognizes
that HB 594 amendments attempt
to come into compliance with the
Indian Child Welfare Act and the
Indian Family Protection Act
relying on genetic testing to
determine if a child is a member
of an Indian nation, Triber
Pueblo is a problematic way to
do this.
Specifically section 24225B,
which requires genetic testing
for infants, um, does not meet
the standard of active efforts,
and it also fails to consider
how tribes themselves determine
membership, as was already
spoken to genetic testing as a
violent history for native
communities and tribes do not
use blood testing to determine
tribal affiliation, because DNA
tests cannot confirm specific
tribal identity, only general um
indigenous and ancestry and
tribal.
Roman is a sovereign decision
emphasizing cultural and
community ties over genetics.
Tripes also reject DNA tests
because they do not reflect
tribal diversity and can be
misleading, and they also do not
align with traditional or legal
criteria for membership. So
instead, the department, thank
you, thank you.
You're welcome.
Is there anyone else, um, um,
Misha.
Hello chair members of the
committee, Mikea Betzini with
both Futures, and we oppose HB
4594, despite the implementation
of these devices across the
states, there's a significant
lack of comprehensive research
on their long-term impact,
safety and effectiveness in
reducing infant abandonment,
while anecdotal evidence
suggests they provide a secure
option for surrender, empirical
studies evaluating their
outcomes such as infant health,
adoption, success rates, and
broader social implications are
limited. Additionally, there is
little data comparing baby boxes
to other safe haven.
alternatives, such as direct
handoffs to medical personnel.
Without rigorous research, it
remains unclear whether these
boxes address the root causes of
unsafe abandonment, or
alternative interventions could
be more effective. Furthermore,
baby boxes are not a public
health initiative, leaving
little room to consider the full
spectrum of reproductive health
care or provide real
comprehensive support for
parents in crisis. Research does
show that many parents who
initially seek to surrender
their infant ultimately decide
to parent when given support.
Please oppose this bill.
Nathan.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Nathan
Sara and I'm the program manager
at Equality New Mexico. Here to
speak in opposition to HB 594.
Baby boxes and unattended
devices as described in this
bill do not require FDA
approval, which could put
infants at risk due to
unregulated safety standards.
Moreover, these safety sites may
encourage professionally
unattended births, which are
dangerous and can cost the lives
of the parent and the baby.
While we recognize the intent
behind the bill as safer safer
alternative would be a.
Program for confidential births
in a safe location with trained
staff. Such a program with
trained staff could then provide
resources for parenting or
giving up the child. The lack of
information provided by these
baby boxes is not a service to
the community, and we need to
support parents better. We are
hoping that rather than passing
this legislation, we instead
choose choose to look into
alternatives that can better
support parents and infants.
Please oppose. Thank you.
That concludes our public
comment, representative.
Thank you, madam I'm sure, uh, I
haven't been the, the main
sponsor of this, but what's the,
the main issue we're trying to
fix, uh.
Either a parents
Leaving their babies in a
dumpster or leaving them in a
baby box. That's, that's what
we're trying to fix, right?
Right now we have a lot in the
books that, uh, talks about baby
boxes, but the concern is, uh,
The liability, I guess the way
it was worded, CYFD would have
to, from what I understand, I'm
please correct me if I'm wrong,
CYFD would have to go after the
parents to figure out why they
abandoned that baby and we're
trying to correct that, so
that's no longer the case.
So
I guess what I don't understand
is the people online.
What's your alternative like you
have a baby in a dumpster or
leave him in a baby box, so not
sure. I'll leave it to the, the
main sponsor who runs out to
that, but that's what we're
trying to fix.
And term representatives, I just
want to give you a little bit of
history. The secretary is right
here, back in July, we met with
public safety, the governor's
office, secretary, uh, a lot of
the people on the outside, even
uh Monica Kelsey from Saing box,
we all came together this bill
gives us everything we ask for
to protect the mother and the
child. The only thing that
changed in there's two things
changed, uh, when we were
questioned in the Senate.
uh how we're gonna address the
ICA issue, uh, it's already in
it, but we went ahead and added
that DNA testing to try to find
out, we had a um.
A senator was questioning how we
would know if that child is
Native American.
The DNA testing will tell us if
they are Native American. We'll
not tell us which tribal nation,
but if it's found in Gallup or
Farmington, that child would be
handed off to the heaven Navo
nation in Shiprock, Arizona, all
the other tribes and pueblos
will be given to uh BIA to be
able to try to facilitate our
native tribe.
Family will take custody of that
child, they're having a little
bit of a hard time that we would
take that child out of this
native environment and put it
elsewhere in the state. The
other thing
Maer representatives is in the
0.3 version of Wheats truck, not
exactly sure why $100,000 in
appropriation that we're gonna
send to uh Department of Health
and Department of Public.
Pumpkin, and that was to educate
the public, uh, the young lady
that dropped her baby in the in
the dumpster in Hobbs. Uh, I
went to her family and asked to
stand in court for her.
Because in 2013, when we changed
the safe haven law to allow fire
stations to be the handoff point
originally as hospitals, then it
went to fire stations. We did
not educate the public. So is
this young lady had a crisis on
her hands, she did not know
she'd go to fire station or a
hospital.
What we're wanting to do with
that 100,000 to start doing a
promotion to educate people
because once our children
understand.
That they have options, I think
they'll choose the right thing.
I've got a letter right here,
Madam Chair and Senator, if you
don't mind me reading this came
from one of the mothers that so
as you open the safe haven box,
there's a packet of material to
fall at your feet, and it's got
resources from the safe hidden
box organization, plus it gives
information on CYFD and things
that we'll do for the state for
the mother. It asked information
on at that point in time if the
baby is tri uh.
What tribe nation is from, uh,
family DNA family heritage,
family illnesses, possibly even
the child's name.
The mother does not have to
respond.
This is a response, and if you
don't mind me, is it OK to read
this?
Very, oh, I can keep it free.
We have, it's um 11:30. Um, we
have other items on the agenda.
I think we understand your
point. Um, so I, unless anyone
else has something on that you,
any other comments I'd like to
hear from the committee. Any
questions? Yeah, questions or
comments.
Um, Representative Hoffman v.
Hill.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much,
sponsors for the bill. Um, well,
I, I understand the intent. I
understand the problem that
you're trying to fix. Um, I
still have very serious issues
with this bill. I have very
serious issues with the with
baby boxes in general,
man, senators representative,
um, so the first thing I want to
start with is whether or not the
safety of baby boxes has even
been proven versus just the safe
havens that we've already
created.
By dropping the child off at a
fire station or a hospital, so I
mean, do we have or do we know
of any recorded deaths or
serious incidents that are
related to baby boxes at this
time.
This is Madam Chair, vice chair,
representative. So these are
well thought out, designed,
equipped devices, um, they have
3 different alarms, their
temperature regulated, um,
there's 300 currently over 300
currently in the nation. Um,
there's 10 now in the state of
New Mexico with 3 safe, uh, 3
babies that were safely
surrendered inside of those
devices here in New Mexico. The
temperature regulated.
They have 3 different alarms.
Once you open the, the, the
door, an alarm goes off and go
straight to dispatch.
The 2nd alarm goes off and you
place the object inside the box,
and it breaks the beam.
Once the door is closed, it
locks, so you can't retrieve the
baby if you want to or anybody
else can't come behind her and
get the baby from the inside of
the box, the fire station,
people can see it from the the
inside of the fire station.
And so they're really thought
out well designed pieces of
equipment. These aren't just a
box at the station. These are,
these are really well designed.
pieces of equipment. Some of
them have cameras. Ours in
Espanola has a camera so we can
see inside the box at all times
so we can see if that baby, how
that baby was left. We can't see
the parents or who left the
baby, but we can see inside that
box and we see if that baby is
alive. It was, you know, um,
How do you kind of
Anything else was wrong with it.
So these are, these are really
well thought out designed
equipment, devices. Thank you.
And, but going back to this,
this concept in the box locks
itself, um, that's, it's a good
caveat into my issues with ICA.
I think you still have very
serious issues with the Indian
Child Welfare Act and um baby
boxes in general, we are very,
it's prescriptive and what
requirements are under ICWA and
um what the
What has to be determined for
each one of these children,
especially since reunification
is the number one intent under
the law. So, uh, Madam chair,
Senator, Representative, um, you
know, this added requirement of
genetic testing first of all,
Madam chair, senator, uh,
representative, there's over 574
federally recognized tribes.
In the United States and uh
Madam Chair, Senator
Representative, I'm pretty sure
he's not a single genetic
testing in existence that can
tell you exactly what tribe, um,
this child may be from and to
simply say, oh, we're just gonna
leave them with nonation or oh,
we're just gonna call uh the
Bureau of Indian Affairs. I
mean, again, I think that's
further alienating the child
from its origin, Madam chair,
Senator Representative, I think
that's further traumatizing um
the child and its family, uh,
In addition to everything else.
Another issue I have, Madam
Chair, um, it's just
historically, um, the issue of
genetic testing and blood
testing as it relates to Native
American tribes. It is fraught
with generational trauma. I
think it's a re-traumatization,
um, as it relates to this
specific issue and uh also
location means nothing, Madam
Chair, and Senator
Representative, I mean, I, I,
um, I
I know of someone who's very
close to me who works for me and
the fact to as a member of one
tribe, she was born in one place
and then she traveled as a
foster child throughout many
other places and so location
again is not gonna tell us much
about where these children are
from, and then lastly, Madam
Chair, Senator Representative,
um, I, I mean, under ICWA, we
have to know there has to be an
option for parents to either
reveal themselves, especially as
it has to.
Deal with um the paternity of
the child, and if you put them
in a box and it locks itself and
then you're kind of sealing this
decision for these parents who
again, uh you're putting, you're
putting CYFD in a very uh
precarious situation as well
because you're breaking the law
just in that situation alone,
man Senators representative, and
not like we, the state and per
federal law, we have a
requirement to understand the
origins of these.
children, their community of
origins and we have to
prioritize placement with their
kin, family or tribal community.
A baby box is not going to do
that.
and senator, and again, I
understand what you're doing. I,
I understand that you're trying
to, to save these children and
help, um, you know,
Prevent a child from what could
be a, a much worse outcome, but
Madam Chair, um, Senator and
Representative, you said it
yourself. We already have safe
haven.
Um, so the rules we already have
safe haven laws, um, I think
birth at a hospital with the,
the ability to maintain um
anonymity, but at the same time
providing services would give uh
the state and these kids a
chance, but at the same time, we
wouldn't be breaking the law and
at the same time we would be
systemically and generationally
traumatizing, um, our, our
Native American, uh, populations
and children.
And all over again. So, um, with
that man, Senator, uh,
Representative, I appreciate the
intent of the bill, but I cannot
be supporting it. Thank you.
A briefly represented. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Again, what's
the alternative dumping it in a
dumpster or worse, like a baby
box or a dumpster. That's what I
asked, uh, Madam Chair
Representative.
There's an option A or option B.
What's better or worse? Uh, I
don't know if anybody has to add
to that, but.
We're, we're trying to provide a
pathway to figure out where they
come from.
I don't know how much more we
can do. It's either a dumpster
or a baby box.
Which one do you choose? Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you,
um, representative Vermi.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
So I love seeing my chief here
from Espanola. Thank you for
being here so late.
Um
I don't think the, the
discrepancy right now, Madam
Chair, representatives and
senator and uh is, is the idea
we we legalize baby boxes back
in 2019 or 2020, I believe.
Um, in, in the practice, we
haven't seen a lot of data about
how that's gone. I know I've
seen new news articles about
babies being fostered or
adopted, um, but again, as a
practice and understanding, and
I think um many folks that an
advocacy that there's an
opportunity to look at on
balance, what is the support
parents in a crisis may need
that are giving birth um in this
sort of situation where they are
giving up a baby and anonymous.
um, in those situations, and we
haven't heard back based on that
data and any sort of cohesive
way about what is happening, um,
as a follow up to that. So, uh,
in your presentation, we haven't
heard, you know,
There's been 10 a year or 15 a
year or 30, we don't know
anything about how baby boxes
work.
And what you're asking us to do
through this bill, madam Chair,
um,
Representative senators that
Not only, which is not at all a
practice, and, and this is where
I think the offense comes in for
the words that I represent in
our district is that there's no
practice of genetic testing, and
when you read, um,
When you read page 9,
starting with if the department
determines at an infant left
pursuant to the Safe Haven
Infants Act is not a member of
an Indian nation, tribe or
pueblo, the department shall.
You're just eliminating
potentially.
You know, 12% of our population,
um, in statue without any sort
of oversight and subject to all
of this genetic testing that
again,
Not part of our, our, um, any of
our tradition in in New Mexico
in creating that relationship
with sovereignty in our nations
and tribes, and I know again,
you've been such an incredible
advocate here for this practice
and understanding that our
indigenous nations, um,
are in our vibrant community,
the, the way this is worded
today just does not at all work
with the way that we live in
community, um, and, and what,
what it is that we're asking of
this bill, um, and so I just, I
wanna to level with the language
that's being used on, on what
we're trying to put into place
with
What um is suggested here with a
population that is that that is
our community.
Um, so, it's just not at all
ready for, I think, prime time
for, for how we work with um
what the population is that
we're dealing with today and,
and, and what we can learn about
what the practice has been over
the last now 5 years, um, 6
years, um, and certainly how it
is that we want to, you know,
get in, in any sort of alignment
with
Uh, ensuring that we are
sensitive to cultural practices,
um, and, and how to be able to
to deal with a situation where
clearly the folks that are
Um, utilizing these baby boxes
are in a crisis, um, so that's,
I mean, I think the feedback for
now, I'd be happy to um
Sort of think through what the
future looks like because I know
that they have been successful
in some certain stories, but,
um, Madam Chair, um,
representative, Senator, this
bill is, is certainly not at all
in alignment with, with, um,
what we do in New Mexico.
Um, with our native communities.
I don't know if you're not gonna
be doing a lot of back and forth
in terms of conversation. So
Representative Hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I am
more of a statement than a
question if that's OK, ma'am.
Um,
I've been the one who's picked
the babies up.
Both dead and alive.
I've sat with him in the ERs.
I waited for hours as tribal
authorities did not respond.
I will tell you one thing.
If we can save one child.
We can work through maybe some
of the legal languages later.
till you held a dead child.
And you've tried to figure out.
How the dead child got there?
Our concern should be more for
just a child regardless of the
child's race.
So
I'm a big proponent of this.
We have had traditionally
For many years, children left.
Uh, in a marriage place,
including toilets.
been there done that.
So until you've seen it in real
life, it's one thing to talk
about what we do and what we
don't do.
But I appreciate the bill.
Maybe it needs some kind of
legal work. I'm not a lawyer.
But I have picked them up.
And nothing will break your
heart more than to hold a dead
child.
And then when you sit there in
the ER.
And it appears that nobody
cares.
It's ridiculous.
We're too good of a state to
allow this to happen.
of that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yes, uh, representative Aveta.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and thank
you, Senator for bringing this
to us. Um, I appreciate it. I
really do, and I had such a good
discussion, the chief and also
my chief from France as well
about the success of this, uh,
the baby boxes. Um, however, I
do have a few questions. I
noticed that this was very
similar to SB 360, so I started
comparing the language to see
what has changed and
Like going back to
representative um Sanchez's
statement, what is our
alternative? What are we trying
to do? What's the fix? So the
first one I noticed was that
there's a change in language
from relinquished to left. Can
you explain why that changed?
Madam Chair Representative of
ATA, um, there was concern in
the last hearing that we had
over the word relinquish and
what that meant, um, especially
with Native American children
and then relinquishing the
rights of that, they said it had
very specific meaning, um, and
so there was a decision that was
made to change that word from
relinquishment to left.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Um, that helps because my
next question then is, is this
feels gold.
Overall goal to terminate
parental rights and because if
so, why is there so much of this
other stuff, it the whole goal
is to terminate the rights, so
you have the ability to do
something you want to do at CY.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Abita, um,
I think the answer to that
question is yes, when these
parents make that decision, um,
I believe they're making that
decision to relinquish that
child. We, as we said earlier,
there's been 3,
Infants left in baby boxes since
this law was implemented. So
we're not looking to implement a
new law to create baby boxes.
That law already exists. What
we're looking to do is really,
you know, clean up that language
so that we can make sure that
we're.
Dealing with Ian and Ipa in a
manner that, you know, is under
the current law, right now, the
way this is written, it requires
CYFD to do an investigation on
every child that's left there
regardless of whether there's a
signs of abuse or neglect, and
we have to do that, which is
incredibly difficult to
investigate a case when a baby
is left and you don't know who
the parents are or who dropped
that baby off in order to
determine whether or not um if
or ifA applies.
And so I think that was part of
the reason for the genetic
testing. We're happy to have
conversation if there's other
alternatives on a better way to
do that, but doing an
investigation and searching out
and, you know, as we heard last
year looking at cameras from
across the street to try to
determine who the parents are so
that we can conduct that
investigation to find out. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you, uh
representative and senator and
experts. All right, so in my
conversations, I did talk about.
the uh confidentiality aspect on
the privacy, and that's why they
trust these boxes to remain
confidential because this is
their choice. So I don't know if
I completely agree with the
genetic testing because I feel
like it's also uh an invasion of
privacy if they've made this
choice to do this. I feel like
the fix needs to be different,
not, not so much this. Um, my
other concern is, and, and I
will agree with Representative
um Parkman B. Hill that when you
do
a DNA test, you're not gonna be
able to find the uh
The exact tribe or nation or
Pueblo that the child belongs to
and that just unpacks a whole
different set of problems and so
talking about practicability
with the chiefs, we did talk
about the type of information
that comes out when you open the
box because I've only seen one
on video, not seen one in
person. And I think you, you
have a less invasive way over
DNA testing to have
The quick information sheet that
says is this child?
Native American, pull that tab
that goes in there with them,
um, and that's a different
alternative than doing genetic
testing, but if you're looking
at just terminating rights so
that you're in a better position
to do something. I think there's
a different way to do that. Um,
I don't think this bill will
help with that, um, and lastly
I'll end with this one if you
could help me understand um
about the waiver that you put
in.
Or the immunity that's on page.
Um, 11. Let's see if it's still
11 on 0.3.
It is OK. Uh, page 11, line 2,
there's immunity there. There's
some new language. Can you help
me understand why that's
included. Thank you.
Um
Unturned center I'll try to to
work on that. One of the things
that they're talking about, um,
earlier in different version,
um, as we're going through with
it is they had some questions on
who had liabilities on the
actual site.
So they've got all the bells and
whistles to make sure that
there's no one,
that there's continuous testing.
There's a really active, um,
Updates for alarms and
everything else. So what we're
trying to do here is to give
everybody a sense of some
Uh, not just ownership, but so
they wouldn't have the
liabilities because everything's
already built into the proposed
box and so that answers that
piece, uh, I also wanted to
bring up really quickly on the
IPA and, and, um.
The uh Iqua is when all this was
brought up uh by Senator
Charley. I reached out to
Senator Representative Lenthe.
Ask him if we're trying to get
those children, the Native
American site.
for them to find out who the
parent is and where that child
belonged. He's the one that told
me from the Navajo Nation, they
have to go to.
White Rock, Arizona, and the
others, if they worked in those
locations, would have to go to.
The uh
Yeah, I just lost it, uh, BIA.
Uh, so we've done everything we
can to fill other people's
questions in this and, and
actually when Senator Charlie
brought up, she thought we were
going to take native children.
Out to the non-native public.
And distribute them for
adoption.
We're trying to do everything we
can.
Make sure that those that are in
need get a home in their tribal
nation of the Pueblo, wherever
it is, but also that the
liability doesn't end with the
department because they're just
housing.
The safe in box and everything
else should be followed through
their protocols on the equipment
and upgrades and uh all the
information that comes with
that. One final thing that as
you're talking about the packet,
it'd be really nice if they
could fill out and put that it
is Navajo.
That's in that packet. They can
fill it out and drop it in. The
lady from here that I have, uh,
she's one of very few that have
filled that information and send
it back in. So it's available.
They do not, even if uh right
now at a hospital or a fire
department, if they come in,
they have to ask.
You give us any information on
the child, it is not long.
that they respond.
So they can drop the child off.
Absolutely not say a thing and
walk away. We don't know any
history. We don't know if it's
Native American. They were right
there in in person.
And they're not obligated.
give any information.
Thank you so much, Madam Cherry.
Thank you, uh, Senator and
Representative, I just
remembered my last question. Um,
I did not see an analysis of
with this, but did you have any
conversations with the Secretary
of Indian Affairs Department
about this or just the policy or
what this looks like, was there
any input from that department?
And in turn in center, uh, this
is so new.
Uh, to give you a little bit of
history, so 360 was rolled.
By its sponsor.
I had 499. It got immediately
tabled without debate.
So it was just
Which was not done uh.
Right, they tabled it, so I was
actually at dinner.
The governor asked me what
happened.
I told her I didn't understand.
She says we still have time.
to get emergency bill so we can
try to resolve this, going back,
the money that we have.
from the governor's castle, I'm
not intending to be rude, but
the question was, did you talk
to the secretary of India, OK,
that's the answer.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and senator.
I also did not get a clear
answer on the immunity question,
unfortunately, but I'll go ahead
and uh conclude my questions.
Thank you.
So, I think um the feedback that
I'm hearing is
We get the intent.
Yeah, but it's, it's my
impression here is that it needs
work in terms of coordinating on
the Indian, you know, what to do
with an Indian child, how do we
address that issue? How do we
establish that the person is the
child is actually Native
American, etc. um.
But I do want to reiterate for
um Representative Hall.
There are baby boxes now in
place.
They are available to, to, um,
individuals who wish to utilize
them for whatever reason, though
there is a safe place to leave
babies, so I didn't want the
impression to be out there that
this bill was somehow
A new thing and it's, it's new
in that it's trying to address
some issues that have been
arising as a result of having
baby boxes in place, but they
are in place. They are being
utilized if they could be
utilized more that I that I,
that's a takeaway. I get that
from the senator and others, but
my sense from the members here
is um the bill needs some
additional work and and thought,
so my recommendation is we we
roll the bill, um.
Unless I see a motion.
And not just lips move.
All people do pass.
I would like to move to table,
Madam Chair.
We have a motion at the table,
um, would you call the roll,
please? Yes. Yes, thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta? Yes.
Representative Chavis? No.
Representative Hall, no.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Yes, table.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martina, yes.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reed? No.
Leader Sapansy, yes.
Madam vice chair? Yes.
Madam Chair.
Yes.
Thank you,
Mason,
representatives, thank you for
your time. We look forward to
coming back. We'd love to have
it out.
All the Native American stuff
and put it back where it was,
but thank you for your time.
Thank you. Thank you for your
effort. we understand what
you're trying to achieve. Um,
OK.
Next on the agenda.
Senate Bill 16 non-major party
voters and primary elections.
And it is my hope and
expectation to complete the
agenda tonight if anyone is
wondering.
Tonight and this morning. OK.
Um, senator, um, dear friend,
um, Figueroa, the floor is
yours.
Madame Terran committee is
awesome to see my former
colleagues upholding a
reputation for stamina and
endurance in the.
Um, I, I bring you son of Bell
16. I'll introduce my expert
witnesses, Lindsey Bach, Bachman
from the Secretary of State's
office.
So the Abel from um and um.
Voters first and one of the
co-sponsors, Senator Wirth.
Um, it's not here, but
representative Cates is here,
Cardaho is here, and Rubio sends
her greetings from somewhere
nice.
somewhere probably, yeah, maybe
in pajamas, um, Madam Chair, it
is sometimes said that democracy
dies in darkness, but here we
sit in the middle of the night
with the chance to shine the
light of democracy and open the
opportunity to vote for
3,030,000.
unaffiliated voters in New
Mexico. This bill builds on
steps we took a couple of years
ago to establish same day
registration to allow
unaffiliated voters to vote in
primary elections. Right now in
the state of New Mexico, they
can go in on primary election
day, changed their voter
registration and choose a ballot
and vote. This bill removes the
administrative burden on our
clerks that seems to be
unnecessary.
And would allow these voters to
walk in on primary election day,
choose the ballot and vote.
It simplifies the process,
particularly for the county
clerks that that face that
burden in this last election.
This is a step we're taking
because we recognize that the
electorate in New Mexico has
changed. The electorate across
the country has changed. 40% of
voters registering between the
ages of 18 and 34 are
registering as declined estate.
They don't wish to join a party,
but they are registering to
vote, they want to vote.
49% of the veterans in our
country are registered to vote
as declined to state.
They saw their service is
nonpartisan, and they wish to
vote in a nonpartisan manner,
but they want to vote.
I will say that this bill would
take New Mexico out of the 10
remaining states that have
closed primaries.
And take us forward into
semi-open. What that means is if
folks affiliated with the party
would both in that party's
valley.
This would only change the
situation for a declined to
state unaffiliated voters.
And with that, I think we'll let
you go to questions.
OK, let's go to the audience,
those wishing to speak in
opposition.
police approached the gentleman
with the microphone.
Right?
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition.
Please raise your hand.
Don't see any hands. Those in
the audience wishing to speak in
support, please approach the
mic. We're gonna limit it to 5
people.
About a minute each.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Molly
Swank and I'm the executive
director for Common Cause New
Mexico. Common cause supports SB
16 and semi-open primaries
because we understand voting is
a right and not a privilege and
believe everyone should be able
to participate in primary
elections, not just the folks
from major parties.
For too long, hundreds of
thousands of New Mexicans have
been denied the dignity of
voting in primary elections, and
we know that this number will
only continue to climb as more
individuals register to vote.
Please support SB 16 today and
allow all voters who want to
participate in our elections to
do so. Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee
members, I'm Asa Chavez, ED for
Nava and and a native vote, we
are in deep support of SB 16,
both organizations have been
working on electoral and voter
access since the 1990s. We hear
very often from young voters in
our communities who want to
participate and engage, but are
not 100% aligned with any
particular party. DeS voters are
increasing amongst youth.
And native voters in every
election. 41% of young
indigenous voters are under 35,
um, are registered as
independents or DTS. 28% of all
native voters are registered
ETS. This bill will invite them
to participate in the primaries
without added barriers, allowing
for more of our voters to be
represented in these crucial
elections, 347,000 of these
registered voters, allowing them
to
ability to vote for their
preferred candidate. We passed
the New Mexico VRA and NAVA.
This is a common sense step to
ensure participation in a
healthy democracy, please vote
yes. Thank you. Thank you. Um,
Katherine. Hi, I'm madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Catherine Clark, the Santa Fe
County clerk, um SB 16 would
alleviate some of the
administrative burdens of making
DTS voters use same day
registration during the primary
election, which creates
administrative burden on the
clerks, meaning we have to have
same day voter registration
agents at each of the polling
sites and then hire extra people
in our office to process those
registrations. And one of the
things that we're very proud of
in New Mexico is that we are
number one rated by MIT Election
and Data Science lab as number
one for election administration
in the country, because uh the
county clerks, the secretary of
state, and this body have moved
towards being pro-voter to
ensure that voting is as easy as
possible. So we
You do pass to ensure that we
continue that legacy of being
pro-voter in New Mexico. Thank
you very much.
Uh good morning, uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Uh, my name is John Martinez,
and I'm here representing the
members of Conservation Voters
in New Mexico.
We stand in support of this bill
for several reasons, some of
which you have heard already. Uh
one is simple fairness. Uh,
there are new Mexicans who are
funding primary elections with
their tax dollars, yet who
cannot participate in those
primaries because of the
registration status. Uh, the
other reason, and we think this
is a critical reason, uh, is to
combat the cynicism and
disconnect from the political
process that has led us to this
moment.
When people don't believe that
the system is meant for them,
they're less likely to stand up
and fight to preserve it,
looking at DC, we see what's
happening.
can see the results of this. Uh,
let's make sure that every New
Mexican the voter knows that the
systems for them and that their
participation is eagerly
welcomed. We urge you to pass SB
16. Thank you. Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. Good evening. Good
morning. Um, my name is Kelly
Davis, and I'm representing the
League of Women Voters in New
Mexico and also representing
NAACP. The league and NAACP and
and strong support for SB 16
based on their support for a
system of voting that allows
voters who are registered has
declined to state or independent
to vote on one ballot per
primary election without having.
to enroll in one of the major
parties.
As of December 2024. There were
over 330,000 or 24.4% of
registered voters in New Mexico
registered as declined to stay
or independent.
These approximately 330,000
voters are currently not
eligible to vote in a primary
election.
New Mexico's 2024 primary
election, turnout was 23%.
SB 16 would increase the voter
turnout and allow these New
Mexican taxpayers. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, those online and
I'm going to limit it to 3,
So Gabriel.
Uh hello, actually, uh, my name
is Jocelyn Gabaldon. That's my
husband's name. Uh, I'm
representing young Democrats of
New Mexico, and we are in favor
of this bill because this will
increase access to all young
people, and they need to have
their voices heard. Thank you so
much.
Thank you. um.
We have Nathan Savitra.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Nathan
Savara. I am the program manager
at Equality New Mexico, and we
stand in strong support of SB
16, as it will increase access
to
Historically underrepresented
LGBTQ members in New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you. And one more, um,
James Hernandez.
of the committee, James
Hernandez and I'm a student at
the University of New Mexico,
and also with the UNM College
Democrats speaking in support of
SB 16, our organization supports
SB 16 as this is a strong step
forward in creating a stronger
democracy for all voters across
New Mexico, allowing independent
voters the ability to vote in
our state primary process would
empower our democracy, expand
our political voice, and give
greater access for independence
and young voters.
In our primary elections. Our
democracy should represent all
New Mexicans, not just those
aligned with either particular
party. We strongly support this
bill, and we encourage your
support for this legislation.
Thank you.
Thank you, um, back.
the sponsors. Anything else you
wish to add?
No, Madam Chair, I was hoping
Frank or Claudia Reisner would
be on there to speak for the
veterans Family Caucus, um, but
don't think they wanted to stay
up till midnight with that, um,
let's go with questions. OK.
I agree with you. Um,
Let's see, I have represented
McQueen.
Thinker.
Ma'am, senor,
um, you know how I feel about
this bill?
Um
Uh, and I haven't changed my
opinion, despite
Uh, some efforts, uh, to the
country, which I appreciate.
I, I will go through this as
quickly as I can.
Um
I
Just like this bill intensely.
Um, and I think
It stems from what I view as
A false arguments and personal
attacks.
The backed this bill for years.
Um, and starting with the idea
that
Hooters are locked out of the
system.
Uh, any eligible voter can vote
in the primary.
Uh, all they have to do is
register.
And that they don't want to
register.
They can already
Show up on primary day and vote.
By temporarily registering.
So at this point,
All we're talking about is
people.
The DTS voters already have the
right or the ability to vote in
Uh, primaries. So I think all of
the arguments about
disenfranchising voters.
Or false.
Um
This is a piece from 2 years
ago.
Uh, attacking, uh, our chair.
For not hearing uh SBE 73.
And, you know, it talks about
voter suppression.
Um, and what's really remarkable
about this piece is
It feels to mention that we'd
already heard the house version
of the bill.
So it attacks the chair for not
hearing the same bill the
sender.
Duplicate bill.
Uh, here's a piece.
From a couple of years ago, uh,
asking why McQueen would vote
against the bill.
That would correct the improper
disenfranchisement.
of tens of thousands of New
Mexicans.
And the answer they offer
interestingly is.
Gerrymandering
Not really sure how that
follows.
Um, here's a post from 2 years
ago.
That shows our leadership.
And says these are the New
Mexico Democratic House leaders
who denied.
25,000 independent voters their
right to vote.
This is what voter suppression
looks like.
The.
So, um, madam chair, Senator.
I don't believe this is voter
suppression.
Um, let me tell you what I think
will happen if your bill passes.
There will be massive swings.
In the primary electorate.
And it will be driven, I think,
by the top of the ticket.
So every 2 years we have a major
race. We have a presidential
race or gubernatorial race.
And the way it seems to work out
is
You know, some years there might
be an interesting race on the
Republican side.
And some years there might be an
interesting race on the
Democratic side.
So for example, right now on the
Democratic side,
Uh, for the next human race, we
have, we have one candidate.
Um
She might be the only candidate.
Um, if that happens,
Your bill passes.
A large percentage of those GPS
voters are going to go vote in
the Republican primary, assuming
they're smarter one.
Um, in 2018,
On the statewide election, that
was the year that um
Our current governor got
elected.
Uh, there was a three-way race,
I believe on the Democrat side.
The Republican side
Not a single statewide race was
contested.
Not one.
Not the governor, lieutenant
governor.
A Lang Mr Otter treasure.
I'd be leaving one out,
Secretary of State.
Not one race was contested.
So all those voters,
would have gone over and voted
in the Democratic primary.
Because why would you bother
voting in the Republican pri.
And the result of this is you
will have a large number of
voters.
Voting in the primary.
Of which they have no intention
of voting for the ultimate
winner of that primary.
They're just gonna vote and
they're gonna vote
strategically.
And, and I think this is a
I think this is bad for
democracy. I don't think people
should vote.
Strategically, I think they
should vote for someone they
want to win.
And I think it's a fundamental
misunderstanding of the role of
primers.
I think in primaries.
Democrats should be able to pick
Democrats.
And Republicans should be able
to pick Republicans and
libertarians to be able to pick
liberty.
And your bill and does it.
And one final point I'd like to
make is
As I've heard this bill over the
years.
So the fallback position that I
hear, I heard it here tonight.
Was that
If you don't open these
primaries, and I think they're
already open, but if you don't
open these primaries.
Then the public shouldn't pay
for them.
And having the Secretary of
State's office, having publicly
run primaries, was a really
important
Democratic reform, small d
democratic reform.
And to me,
That position is a tell.
And the tell is
We want to get our way more than
we want to support democracy.
So I will not support this.
Thank you, man.
OK, um, Representative Popman V.
Hill.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and thank you, sponsors, um, I
have, um, in the past been a
co-sponsor of this bill and um I
wanna thank you once again for
bringing it this year. I think
that um chairman McQueen,
um, I'm sure bring also brings a
very interesting perspective on
this. I do agree with him that I
think with our new latest
reforms, it's not that the
primaries are.
You know, quote unquote closed
or as closed as they were
before, but I do think I'm sure
and sponsors, we still have a
perception problem and that many
people do not know what the new
rules are and do not know that
they could show up to their um
polling place and register and
pick a primary. Um, but what I
wanna do, Madam Chair and
sponsors, is actually take an
opportunity to just kind of to
talk about the system, um, from
a, a, a higher point of view.
of 30,000.
Beat up point of view, man and
that, um, I do think that this
takes us a step closer to really
examining the status of our
democracy in general.
I think, um, Madam Cha and
sponsors that um we found
ourselves in this country
lately, um, being stuck in this
um kind of self-perpetuating
loop in that the primaries are,
um,
Creating a bigger and bigger
void and a more and more
partisan divide between the two
ideologies in the two parties,
Madam Chair and sponsors, and
so, um, I don't know if open
primaries in this particular
instance is the answer to it,
but I do think a more open
system is an answer, uh, Madam
Chair Representatives, I'm
really crazy. I would love to
see range rank choice voting.
Per
Um, because Madam chair and
sponsors, I think that the
primary system right now, um, is
creating candidates that um are
designed to win a primary, which
you now draws out the most
democratic of the Democrats and
Republican of the Republicans,
but it's leaving out a lot of
folks in the middle who now we
see these categories decline to
state out growing more and more
every year. I too I'm sure I
have 2 kids who hate both
parties and do not.
want to pick, I think that we've
seen historically low popularity
rates for both Democrats and
Republicans today, um, more than
we ever have. So, um, it's just
a long winded way of saying,
Madam Chair, um, sponsors, I
appreciate the incremental steps
towards change, I do think we
have to do something. I do think
that our democracy, uh, lays in
the balance and um I think that
there are arguments on both
sides, but
Um,
my insurance sponsors, I, I do
think that um
Even if you wanna argue if it's
closed or not closed, um, maybe
public awareness, if this bill
were to pass, could be a big
part.
Of, um, this campaign as well.
Everyone is welcome. Voting,
Everyone is welcome. Please come
do it. Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, um, and senator.
I'm curious you stated.
The veteran 40% of veterans are
are not choosing a party. Where,
where did you get that number?
Madam chair and representative,
thank you for asking me. I will
try and find it, but I got it
from the Veterans Caucus, um,
49% is the actual number, and
that's national, that's not New
Mexico, it's not measured by
states, but 49% of all veterans
in the US, self-identify as
independent or unaffiliated
voters, and it's Veterans Caucus
what?
The
Mhm.
I'm trying to read the tiny
print.
Better veterans and military
families caucus.
Veterans and military family.
Madam Chair, Claudia Reisner
often speaks.
OK.
Yeah, I mean, I've don't, I
believe that's a democratically
affiliated caucuses, it is
because I've I've,
I'm.
I'm curious only because um
Those aren't the numbers that.
Be out for me in the in the
veterans that I've dealt with.
And I think I'm fairly plugged
into the
veterans community.
Uh, I was just curious about
that. There was another comment
made that um
Veterans also
Of a served
As nonpartisans in the military
and they want to vote.
nonpartisan.
The problem is in the primary,
it's very partisan.
You're voting for a Republican
candidate, you're voting for a
Democratic candidate, so I'm not
I, I don't understand what that.
really meant
Madam Chair and Representative,
that comes from the conversation
I had with a veteran that
started me down this path.
And he spoke about his service
as being service to his entire
country. So when he registered
to vote, he didn't want to
register for a party, but he
thought it was his obligation to
vote always, and he wanted to
vote for candidates, not.
My party
So even though it primaries are
in this state partisan, um, he
wanted to be able to vote in one
or the other and have a chance
to make his voice heard.
Uh, in this particular veteran
said to me,
Something that stuck with me
forever because I absolutely
agree, Madam Chair, with
Representative McQueen's
statement that we are halfway
there.
We've almost solved the problem
with same day registration,
people can go in that day,
register and vote, and that is
this close.
But this veteran said to me, why
do you make me lie?
Why do you make me sign and say
I'm a Democrat when I'm not. I
just want to vote.
And that just
Stuck with me. I cannot let that
go. I want them to be able to
vote, and now we're hearing from
county clerks.
That's just extra paperwork. Why
do we put this burden on them?
Uh, madam chair, there you go.
When I tell people that I
support this bill.
The response I get is,
We want Republicans.
Electing a Republican candidate.
We want Democrats electing a
Democratic candidate.
So the comment about the
nonpartisan really kind of
Maybe it's the time of morning,
but it really
Kind of confused me. If they
don't want to be partisan, they
shouldn't be worried about
voting in the primary.
Because you're voting for a
Republican candidate, you're
voting for Democratic candidate.
Um
I just, I, I
I wanted to see if I could get
clarification on that, but
I'm still as confused. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, madam chair, um,
senator, good to see you,
Representative Gates, good to
see you, experts, good to see
you.
Um, so just a lot has been said
and it's early in the morning,
um.
This would your bill would
allow.
declines the state voter.
go to the primary election,
election day, let's say.
And they
And the and and they declare at
that time.
That they want either
participate in the Republican.
For the democratic
Or whatever other
Minor party.
primary
Election. Is that accurate,
Madam Chair, Senator?
Uh, Madame Chair and Speaker,
no, it would be they would
choose either major party
primary ballot. OK, so, so, so I
was right except for the minor
party trying to pass a bill.
Not doing very well.
Taking aho.
Got a poster.
Um, so, so, OK, so, so.
We're not gonna have a situation
where
Or goes in.
I mean, I guess you could have a
situation where you have some
major organized effort, you
know, I show up with.
500 of my best DTS friends.
Because all of those DTS's hang
out together.
And show up to um
My Tokayos primary influence
that primary. That's that's
highly unlikely, probably. Is
that accurate by the chair,
Senator?
Madame Chair and Speaker, it is
highly unlikely we have 11
states with this form of
primary, and they have tried to
measure strategic voting, and
they get a 1.2%, which is within
the realm of error. That's all
they can measure and that's in
semi-open states.
So that was my next question. So
11 in other states have
something like what you're
proposing, madam chair, Senator,
experts.
Yes, madam Chair.
OK, um, seems to me like our
problem is not.
Voting too much or participating
too much or problem is quite the
opposite, and I think that
that's part of what you're
trying to do.
Now, what percentage of voters
in New Mexico are not.
Affiliated with either major
party.
24.4%, basically 1 out of 4.
Yeah.
And roughly
Are you able to
Are you able to dissect that
data and tell us what percentage
of those voters are, say, under
30.
chair, Senator.
It generally works the other
way. I can tell you 40% of the
registered voters under 30 are
DTFs.
But the expert witness could put
a number on that if that's what
you're 40%, madam, 40% of voters
under 30 in New Mexico are
declined to stay.
18 to 34.
Ages 18 to 34.
OK.
Um
I, I think that that's probably,
uh, I mean, clearly I was not
supported with this once upon a
time.
Um
This is great. I've got, I've
got a lot to say about.
I'm gonna, I'm gonna put this on
the floor tomorrow on the big
screen. Um, so I, I think that,
you know, I was not supportive
of this concept for a long time.
Um,
You know, I'm, I'm maybe I'm old
school, maybe I'm old. I, well,
I am old.
And I think part of the
part of my reservation, Madam
Chair, was.
Like, just pick a team.
Not that hard.
Espanner Cowboys and Dodgers fan
or a Yankees fans. Pick a team.
Um
Which is how I'm raising my kid,
you know, I don't want him to be
switching baseball hats every,
you know, it's like stick to the
team, win or lose, you got to be
loyal to the team.
Uh, but when 40% of these young
voters are, are not wanting to
pick a team.
Because they want to listen.
The debate we've got a lot of
questions, uh, with regard to
the position of uh
positions of these candidates,
Madam Chair, Senator.
Oh, that's actually a good
thing.
I think.
Um, and I think that democracy
can benefit from
That type of
Engagement in the civic process,
uh, heck, um, I think, um,
You know, some of the best
debates on our floor.
are when, and I think we saw one
just yesterday with uh about
100% blocked.
When they were just going at it
in the most respectful,
thoughtful.
quasi-academic way.
Without falling into the trap of
a political ideology, and I
thought that was really cool,
not, not, I don't mean to.
pull you up, but I thought that
was really cool. So I will be
supporting this.
Um, now with regards to the
poster, I actually think
Um, uh,
I, I, I get my colleague's
point, um.
You know,
It's it's tough.
But
I do see it as part of the
process.
In fact, uh, I was on Instagram
earlier today and there are ads
about me like raising energy
prices or whatever like.
You know, that's democracy,
right? That is democracy and the
folks on the other side of
whatever issue there.
Not happy with me about, have
every right.
To express that opposition in
whatever they in whatever way
they want and um, you know,
these folks have every right to
express their displeasure at.
Um, however I voted once upon a
time.
Uh, but, um,
Notwithstanding, I think that
this is a good idea, a good
concept.
Um
I'm convinced. I became
convinced, I don't know, maybe a
little over a year ago in
conversations.
sponsored the experts.
Um, and I look forward to voting
for this, Madam Chair.
Notwithstanding some of the
concerns raised, I think they
are, um, at the.
Like,
uh, not, not, not,
notwithstanding.
Notwithstanding some of the
concerns raised, I think they're
fair. I think, uh, and McQueen
raises some really good points,
but I will be supporting this
and and I'll be quiet now. Thank
you much.
Um, emotion, anyone I I'll make
a few comments before I take a
moment. So, um, from day one, I
have said, my dear friend,
I can't quite get my head around
the idea that someone who's not
part of the party.
picking party candidates to
represent the party at his.
Always been something I struggle
with, and I haven't yet to get
an explanation as to why that
works.
Um
Uh, you know, and I, I really
appreciate representative
McQueen bringing up all the
And of misinformation.
attack ads.
Kind of nasty stuff.
Some of which I do think comes
from the fairer elections or
whatever that group is that
sends out a lot of emails.
Certainly that letter was um
directed at me. Obviously, it
didn't affect my um
Approached, it was before that
awful letter came out after
misleading, I guess I should say
misleading, um, the
representative McQueen correctly
points out, it never mentioned
that we did have a hearing on an
identical bill.
Um, it just was a Senate bill,
not the House bill. Never
mention that, never.
Uh, you know, but that's OK, and
it is a little disappointing,
but maybe it's unfair for us to
think that the open government,
good government folks are gonna
have different tactics than what
happens across the country in so
many campaigns that's happening
more and more across the country
and apparently that is now
happening with the good
government people as well.
Disappointing, but I guess we
shouldn't be surprised cause it
seems like that's where we're
going in this country.
And it sack.
But that has no effect on my
vote because it was before all
that nonsense started, it's
gonna be the same boat that it
was cause I've never got an
answer to that question that
makes sense to me, um, and with
that, I'll
Entertain emotion.
I'm sure I move with you pass
some
of 16 is my
OK, we have a dupe.
We have a due pass motion on
Senate Bill 16 as twice a
amended made by Representative
Hoffman v. Hill and Speaker
Martinez, would you call the
roll? Yes, thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative Abeta.
Yes, and I want to explain.
Representative Chavis.
Yes.
Representative Hull
No.
Representative of Hochmanville?
Yes. Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Represented McQueen.
No.
Representative Ree? Yeah.
Peter Sapansky
Yes
Man of vice chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair. No.
Representative a beta to explain
her book.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for bringing this. Um, I
just wanted to comment that I
vote in two different elections
I vote in tribal elections as
well, and we don't have party
affiliations, so it's the top
two who make it out of the
primary and then it's the
general of those top two, and
it's been
been that way since the time we
started voting. And so on the
state side, it is different and
I do respect uh my colleagues
position here and I have asked
for lots of information and data
which you all have provided,
which have helped guide my
decision and hearing the debate
helped as well. Um, I still have
a few concerns and reservations,
but I hope to work those out
with you before and if it gets
to the floor. Thank you.
Oh, I'm sorry Madam Che I do
pass on Senate Bill 16.
has twice amended. Very good.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee. You're welcome.
All right.
Next, on our list is, uh, let,
let's go to travel insurance
because I'm gonna be presenting
for Senator Wirth and, you know,
I'm gonna be here till the end
of the world, so
Along with all of you guys, so
Senator, um, uh, share.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So this
is Senate Bill 168, it's travel
insurance bill, travel insurance
is, uh,
More and more important, but
this is trying to bring us in
line with what are the 37 states
have done because when you
travel, you cross multiple
jurisdictions, and this is just
trying to make that line up.
This is my expert witness,
Elizabeth Johnson from uh OSI.
Oh, Ms. Johnson, do you wanna
add anything?
No.
Oh, OK.
Yeah, well, I love a sponsor who
owns his bill. I'll, I'll give
you, um, a kudos for that
senator. Anyone in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone.
I don't see anyone, anyone
online wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in support, please
approach the gentleman with the
microphone.
Yeah. Anyone wishing to speak in
sport online, please raise your
hand.
I don't see anyone. Um, we'll go
to the committee.
Uh, I just heard from
Representative Romero, you have
some questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
So just trying to get my head
just wrapped around this. Do we
currently have a, is this all
seems to be new material. Do we
have a travel insurance act
that's currently on the books,
Madam Chair expert.
Matthew chair and
representative, we do not have a
travel insurance act. We have
one statute that covers travel
insurance the last time the uh
model.
Travel insurance Act was looked
at by the legislature was in
2018, and so that's the reason
for a lot of the new material.
Thank you Madam Cha. So as far
as just a couple of things that
I don't really understand about
travel insurance generally and
maybe is that it's so much more
affordable than um actual health
insurance. Um, so we're looking
at trying to be uniform with
other states.
Um, how does that sort of engage
with our current insurance
holder holdings.
If I'm insured in New Mexico and
I purchased travel insurance do
what I purchased this travel
insurance, to travel to other
states, or would this be for
folks coming into New Mexico.
Madam Chair Representative, it
could actually be both as long
as the insurer is licensed
through New Mexico.
So like a Madam Chair, um.
Senators uh
Expert with this would be like a
Blue Cross, but nothing that
would be only like national
providers, nothing that was just
local to New Mexico. Is that
correct?
Madam Chan represented, it could
be a smaller operation, but a
common one that comes to mind is
like AAA.
OK, so, Madam Chair, um,
representative expert, is this
um
So if I'm purchasing it, it's
whether I'm, if I'm going to go
out of state now.
But this allows for is for me if
I'm taking a little trip across
the border to Texas. I can
purchase travel insurance under
my current provider.
Or under a AAA type provider.
And that's what this is about.
Madam Chair and Representative,
that's actually already allowed
by statute what this adds is a
lot of consumer protections that
are recommended by the NAIC so
it adds a little bit more meat
to the bones in terms of what
are allowable practices and what
are not when when you're
purchasing uh travel insurance.
And so Madam Chair, um, just one
last question on the fees, um,
associated with this. So when
we're assessing the fee cost for
That temporary sort of um travel
um insurance need while you're
actually traveling.
Um, how did, how are those, um,
prices promulgated and who like
what oversight does the state
have over the cost of that
insurance?
Madam Chan and representative,
the state has the same oversight
over travel insurance as it has
over all other types of
insurance producers and the, the
rates for the actual insurance
are just calculated based on the
sharing of risk, um,
But as you mentioned, it is
typically less than regular
insurance because you're not
traveling all the time, so yeah.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you, anyone else with
questions.
Um
Representative, OK.
Representative Martinez. Just
very briefly from you, explain
what travel insurance is.
Well, Madam Chair and Mr. Whip,
if you would have done your
homework, I would ask you oh
no, no, no. So travel insurance,
and this is actually a a key
facet of the bill is that there
are portions of travel plans
that are insurance, meaning that
the fee based on it is assessed
on risk and sharing of risk.
There are also products that are
sold in travel plans like
cancellation fees or.
Excursions, you can go to AAA
and buy a ticket to Disneyland.
That's not insurance, so a lot
of what the model A does is make
it clear to consumers what is
based on a risk of a fee based
on a risk and what is not.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Happy to entertain emotion.
OK, we're getting close to the
end guys. Uh, we have a motion
for a do pass on Senate bill,
oh, OK, Senate taxuss and
transportation substitute
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 168.
made by
I think it was Representative
Hall in second him by
Representative Hoffman Vito.
OK.
Would you call the role. Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abita, yes,
Representative Chavis.
Yes. Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hochman Vigan.
Yes. Representative Martinez?
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Sorry.
Um, Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative reap.
Spansky. Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Did you really? No, I, I messed
up. I heard Martinez and I said
yes, but so did he,
so he got lost
both Martinez's are yes,
OK.
Madam Chair, yes, madam chair,
you do pass on Senate tax,
business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 168.
Thank you. OK.
All right. Thank you, Senator.
So let's do um Senate Bill 66
because I think there are some
people in the audience and I can
do clean up with Senator Wurs
bill,
which.
I have not. I texted Senator,
um, Cervantes. I texted Philip,
his assistant. I
I don't know what's going on,
truthfully, Madam, does that
mean he's abandoned his bill.
Hello. Oh, there you are. Oh.
Hello, Representative Homany
Hill, you're a stand-in. I am
madam chair.
Um,
We're here to talk about Senate
Bill 66, uh, criminal offender
employment exemptions. Uh, my
expert to my right is Shelly
Strong. She's the general
counsel for ECECD.
Uh, Senate Bill 66 protects
children and vulnerable adults
by allowing ECECD aging and
long-term services department,
Healthcare Authority, Children,
Youth and Family Department and
the Public Education department
to consider certain misdemeanor
convictions, such as enticement
of a child, stalking, and
battery of a household member
when conducting background
clearances and licenses for for
caregivers.
With that we stand for
questions.
Is there any public in the
audience right now. OK. Anyone
wishing to speak in opposition,
please approach the gentleman
with the um microphone. OK.
Anyone in the audience online
wishing to speak in opposition,
please raise your.
Anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in support, please keep
your um ome to about a minute.
Good morning, Madam Charo, and
members of the committee. My
name is Anastasia Martin, and
I'm general counsel at AGM
Services Department and we stand
in support of this. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone online wishing
to speak and support, please
raise your hand.
Right.
back to substitute sponsor.
Anything else? No, Madam Charity
stand for questions. OK, uh,
questions or comments?
represent a representative.
I feel like we saw this before
as a house bill is, is this a
mirror bill from something we've
already reviewed it.
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, uh, this is a
complimentary bill, but it is
not a marrying bill that um bill
deals with the caregiver
screening Act, um, this is uh
Separate but related act.
Um, that would impact the other
one,
But it, it doesn't, it's, it's a
stand on.
Thank you. So is this more so,
um,
Employment and just, can you
just clarify for me like which
aggencies
This wood encumbers at all early
childhood and more or just early
childhood.
Um, so this would affect early
childhood only as it pertains to
background clearances for
childcare providers, and we
would also affect the public
education department as far as
it pertains to anyone that's
required to obtain a license,
um, under the PED laws, um, it
would pertain to the um HCA and
ALTSD as far as um anyone that's
covered under the caregiver
screening, um, at and all of C
White.
50.
Thank you. Thanks for
clarifying. Thank you. Thank
you, Representative Ree.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I just had a
question on that.
last part of the bill, see um.
An agency exempted pursuant to
Section A of the section of
promulgate rules related to
criminal history screening for
the purpose of determining
eligibility, and then I was just
kind of looking at one of the
analysis and I, I mean, I guess
my first question is, I only
have a few questions.
Could you explain, Madam Chair
and Representative and expert,
kind of that process really
quick for me, so I understand
how that works.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Reed, thank you for that
question. Um, the, uh, rules
processes, um.
I, ECCD, um, and I believe all
of the other agencies implicated
already have regulations that
cover the background screening
process and lays out the appeals
process if it's an unfavorable
result, uh, it says what can be
considered, what will be
considered, how it would be
looked at, um, so those
regulations, at least for ECECD
already exist, and they would
for, and I believe they do for
all the other agencies um that
I've looked at, um, as well.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair. And
so I was just looking at the
analysis that was from, I guess
the CYFD analysis.
It is SB 66 would enable the
agency to disqualify applicants
based on certain criminal
offenses based on CYMD
discretion and promulgated and
ruled this legislation would
provide CYMD with greater
flexibility and control in its
hiring decisions. Could you just
explain kind of what they're
trying to say here about a chair
an expert.
Yes, madam Chair, Representative
Reeb, um, uh, my understanding
of what they're trying to say is
that currently we are prohibited
at these agencies any um agency
looking at public employment is
prohibited from considering
misdemeanors, you can look at
felonies, um, but we cannot look
at misdemeanors when determining
things like background checks,
um, and clearance for background
checks, and so, um, what this
would do would open it up to
allowing us to consider
significant misdemeanors like
icement of a child, not in a
house.
member, that sort of thing. It
wouldn't require us to
disqualify someone, um, based on
any misdemeanor convictions or
any criminal history would just
allow us to look at that whole
picture of a person and when
we're determining whether or not
we should be granting these back
background clearances. OK, thank
you, Madam Sha expert because I
remember hearing something about
this bill that it kind of
started with you wanting to get
out the misdemeanor offenses,
um, so you could see kind of
what they were like for Tyson a
child, so that explains that to
me. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Motion, Madam, I'd like to move
it to pass on Senate Bill 66
with the emergency.
OK.
We have a motion?
Excuse me, do we have a second?
Made by Representative Romero,
seconded by Representative Hall,
would you call the roll? Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abita. Yes,
Representative Chavez.
Representative Hall, yes,
Representative Hochman v. Hi,
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reed.
Peter Sapansky.
Madam Vice chair.
Madam Chair.
Yes, ma'am I'm sure you do pass
on Senate Bill 66.
We have one more, and it is,
let's see, um, Senate Bill 274.
Um, board of finance approval
for land sales and centeror
asked me to.
Mhm
I'm an expert. I have no idea. I
thought I was gonna have to wing
it. Um,
oh, I, oh, OK, so a friend of
the speaker is a friend of mine.
Um, I'm certain of that. So, um,
my very rudimentary, is that a
word, um, understanding of what
this bill is about is.
Um, local governments have to
get permission and I think
schools do too when they have
to, they need to dispose of
property and there's a threshold
number that's been in statute,
apparently for most of these
things for decades, and this
bill basically wants to raise
the threshold, so they're not
running down to the state to get
permission for $5000 and
apparently that's in the
statute. I did read it enough to
know that, that, you know, so
that we're raising the
threshold.
holds to be more in line with
the reality of the world, and
we're not in, and so that's the
basic basics of it, and I'm sure
my expert can help if you guys
have questions.
Excuse me, madam chair and
members, if you all have
questions, I'm happy to assist,
and I know my expert is as well.
OK, so, uh, we'll go to the
audience.
Is there anyone thinking
anything about anything right
now.
Um, anyone online raising their
hands one way or the other. Is
there anyone even online?
Oh, there are 2 people still
watching.
No, they're not interested in
this bill. OK, great. So back to
the sponsor.
Um
Do you have anything else to say
about. I know better than that,
madam chair. Great.
Um, anybody, go ahead.
Representative Hall.
Motion for you.
OK, can I just ask one quick
question.
Oh yeah,
I'm the chair, so I do have a
question about the threshold
we're going from 5000 to 30,000
because I think about some of
the school equipment that is
purchased for student purposes,
who is in charge of just the
oversight of, of this because
we're talking about potentially
a $29,000 machine.
Um, Madam Chair, members
actually director of the Board
of Finance, um, so for 5 to
30,000, so, um, typically what
you will see is the uh school
boards that would approve those
level of dispositions and
higher. So at the board of
Finance, which is what I'm most
familiar with, but I know that
this is the case for the state
agency approvals, which are
those lower level approvals, um,
they go to their local, uh,
governing body. So in the case
of a school district and this
districts are the ones that have
to come forward for those
dispositions.
would be their school boards
typically and then uh sometimes
their school boards will uh uh
delegate to their
superintendent.
I just learned something about
school boards and also so glad
you stayed this late to be an
expert on this bill for that
matter. I really appreciate you.
I will second the motion, um,
from Representative Hall. Is
there any opposition to the
motion?
You have a dupe pass on Senate
bill 66, and thank you for not
adjourned. Our Senate bill 1
committee substitute.
Senate Bill 274 as amended.
So you all, um, we had set our
agenda for 9 o'clock tomorrow
morning.
I know that's why I'm bringing
up, would it be preferable for
us to start at 10. I'm just
asking, no, no speaker.
What's the for?
Are you good with that or 9:30?
OK, let's do 9:30 as a
compromise. Is that OK? All
right.
Well, the speaker tells us we're
supposed to be on the floor at
10:30. Well, I'm aware but there
have been people who have been
known to be excused to finish up
their agendas on committees.
So
let's do 9:30. 0, thank you.
We are adjourned until we are
adjourned.
