The.
Representative of green here
representative here
representative rain
representatives the fancy
matter which chair here
here.
I just like to review what we're
going to be doing today we're
going to be hearing to
arm fire and safety bills one is
house bill twenty seven one as
house bill twenty nine my vice
chair representative of ramiro
will share the meeting relating
to house bill twenty seven i've
asked her to
proceed in the following way we
are going to take public comment
on both guns safety bills at the
same time so and you can address
your remarks to one bill or the
other bill or both bills but I
would like you to do so for them
for both bills at the same time
so that we can then move to the
next bill expeditiously so
representative or vice chair
remarrial will be handling that
peace and then we will be
hearing house bill eight elected
officials and government conduct
charge changes and the oil and
gas act changes are going to be
rolled I mean anticipating a
committee sub or some amendments
on that and
my hope and expectation as that
bill will help be heard on
wednesday if we get the changes
on time
I should also note although on
friday we talked about doing all
four gun bills with some of us
like that might be a little bit
too much in one day so we will
know it's hard to believe but so
we will hear the
the bill that I refer is to as
the goal safe bill and that's a
limitation on a sold weapons
build will be on wednesday
almost some something unusual
happens and we have one more
bill it's the age limit bill for
fireharms purchase a firearms
and so on that will be heard on
wednesday as well so just kind
of heads up things are moving
target in the oops I shouldn't
say that things change in the
legislature.
And so it may be that there
might be a slight variation on
what I just said in terms of
wednesday boat I just wanted to
give folks some a heads up for
general planning purposes as to
how I expect
we will be proceeding so I will
i'm now go down and and work my
colleague on house bill twenty
seven
I hand over the gavel to my able
colleague representative
remarried
thinking madam chair
so we're going to start with
introduction of the bill and
then we'll go to public comment
and
for those on zoom will start
with those and opposition if you
want to raise your hand already
to kill up but that said go
ahead manager no that's that's
fair
but the question that I didn't
answer was should I press
present on our bill first and
then take public comment I guess
I would suggest that on our bill
first and then
yeah I just wanted to folks just
while we're waiting thank you.
Go ahead house twenty seven good
afternoon madame sharon
committee members cher women
christine challenge myself are
here to present the house
judiciary committee sub for
house bill twenty seven extreme
risk by her arm protection order
act or both changes were just
addressed seen amendments here
as our expert witness today we
have chief depending on turning
general james grayson commander
met deed soft from the other
kirkey police department crisis
intervention division and police
chief steve heavy from the farm
to police department
to remind you the purple act was
passed into law four years ago
in twenty twenty and then nearly
four years that it's been and
statute this law has allowed
immediate family members and
others close to individuals to
see can urba petition when they
fear that an individual post a
significant danger of costing
imminent injury to sell for
others with the fire arm as of
january twenty second this has
been used seventy five times
since it's an inception the
change was put forth in house
built twenty seven come from
requests of law enforcement
officers judges district
attorneys health professionals
and family members who have
actually used the stab shoot or
trying to use that and for one
reason other we're unable to
because of different
interpretations this bill
presents amendments needed to
clarify it it's a civil
proceeding it's been passed in
other states by both republican
and democratic legislatures with
that i'll turn over for some
brief comments but my co sponsor
a chair woman chamber.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you co sponsor representative
really the bill the substitute
that we're presenting today and
there is a common house
judiciary committee sub so i'm
wondering if that should be
considered at some point you
know we should we should mention
that and we should probably move
it for discussion purposes
somebody want to move the
committee several discussion and
move the committee said for
discussion ticket hope we have a
queen moving the county server
safe handscue with a second i'm
going to introduce the sub okay
thank you madame chair the serb
is
held some small changes from the
previous committee so I I will
talk about that a little bit but
they're really relatively minor
changes from what what happened
in and see pack madam chair do
you want to let us know what
those are
could I first give an
introduction and then talk.
Does everyone have the sub in
front of them.
Can you read the two o two
number cause we do have a couple
of them.
Yes I certainly can the last few
digits are six three two point
one
okay we're just running for a
second I think the members need
the copy.
The.
The.
Does everyone have a copy of the
sub
ok.
So first let me talk about what
changes the bill the larger bill
addressed you know in a very
succinct way and then I can
identify that changes between
sea pack this up that's okay
please do so the original
impetus for this bill word
conversations with certain
members of one enforcement
certain sectors of the long
forcement community and there is
also something called task force
in which they were looking at
how well but was working what
presented problems if you want
to call it that you know where
some impediments efficiency
might say and and notice and so
on so working together with them
this this there was a there was
a consensus amongst us that
those working on it that the the
bill although it was really a
transformational thing a few
years ago could be improved upon
and that's what the intent of
this bill is in so the of the
three main areas that we were
looking at were um who is
authorized to be a reporting
party there was some
disagreement and confusion among
those relying on the on the on
the law as to whether or not a
long force meant official could
be a reporting party and in fact
there's there's conflicting
district court opinions on that
as well so we wanted to clarify
that a polite all enforcement
official could be a reporting
party um
we feel that in in law
enforcement supports that at
least the individuals here do
also we wanted there is a forty
eight hour rule giving the
respondent the individual who
might be subject to the order
forty eight hours to relinquish
his firearms his or her firearms
of course the issue there is.
That could present a safety rise
to the officers who are arrived
at the home or wherever the
premises to obtain the guns from
the individual it also gives
that individual forty eight
hours to engage in conduct that
could be that could be unawful
or problematic obviously hurt
themselves or other so there's a
concern about getting the guns
more quickly than forty eight
hours and lastly
i'm trying to remember what the
last issue was we added
license health care
professionals as well that
wasn't clear although license
healthcare professionals have
are the ability now to
raise concerns there's an issue
of risk to the person or others
they were all steimmed as to
whether they could use it report
through this law so we are
clarifying that so I just that's
the the main dry the main
drivers and what we were doing
originally and then there were
some what you know I hate to use
the word because I think the
original bill was good but what
you might call clean up
tightening of processes and
clarity adding some clarity so
without that was where we are
going that was in the original
unbill that power sea pack and
what subsequent does madam chair
and committee members is it was
pointed out to us it was an
appropriate to include in the
definition of law enforcement
days in the attorney general so
that's been moved and added
to the language that he might be
a petitioner in they might be a
petitioner when the subject of
the irpo order is and I hope you
don't want if I just use that
phrase or both otherwise we'll
be here all night and i'll
mangle it i'm sure
after a while
if the subject of the respondent
is a police officer obviously we
need someone else involved some
other entity involved
potentially.
Let's see we are as I said law
enforcement was out in
one thing that we did also was
and it was this was suggested by
I think the state police but it
it could have been the courts
i'm not sure which.
It's the petition can be filed
in the.
Where is the
the respondent is residing where
the threats and we added where
the threats or you know conduct
that gave rise to the the
concern may have occurred or
where the firms may be stored so
we've changed the venue
provisions a bit.
And.
I think that pretty much covers
it a madam chair and at this
point we're open to questions
after public comment.
Do you want to introduce your
actual mr grace and is with the
the new mexico
justice department
i'm still getting used to.
Madame chair members of the
committee good afternoon thank
you for
allowing me to testify this
afternoon the department of
justices and support of this
bill we have had some difficulty
and enforcing the orpo as madame
chair mentioned when when part
of that is the definition of
reporting party and there is
currently a pending case in the
new mexico court of appeals on
the issue of whether a law
enforcement officer can be ar.
This bill would clarify that and
and.
Make it clear that law
enforcement can be uh author
reporting party and the
petition.
Thank you madame chairman
thank you
very much.
Madame chair members of the
committee i'm bad deep so ever
on the crisis intervention
division for the other police
department we aren't support
this bill and we've used it
about thirty times in
albuquerque I would like to call
on one change that's very
important in these in this
amendment in that's the ability
to have a judge on call twenty
four seven three sixty five
we've had situations where we
tried to file over a weekend and
that court still not accept the
petition so having this full
coverage is probably going to be
helpful to to keep people safe
thank you
i'm in just for mr grace and if
you could speak into the
microphone we're having trouble
hearing you
i'm alright let's go to
one more guest go ahead
and steve heavy and from
farmington but I also represent
the new mexico police choose
association and we stand in
support of this for many of the
reasons that you've heard our
chiefs and and I was talking
with them last week about this
bill I have had experiences
where they have gone out and
they have they have struggled to
find someone who would stand up
and say and we we are going to
sign the papers that was it's a
no brainer it should be a police
officer we make a rest we
certainly can make
determinations whether
somebody's dangerous at that
moment or not and then take it
to a judge so we stand and
support the bill thank you chief
or it will go to public comment
now we'll start with hands in
opposition.
Arm in hands in support.
Right we will start with
opposition for public comments
well i'll just reiterate your
twenty minutes total on both
house bill twenty seven and
house but one twenty nine if you
would like to speak on either of
those bills or both you'll will
have that twenty minutes to do
both and we'll try to save at
least five minutes for folks
online as well and but we will
start with opposition
please stand in place if you
would like to give testimony
just give your name and will
give you a minute on the clock
to to give full testimony
who's up first.
We'll start in the front row.
The.
I stay in a strong and strong
opposition.
The.
Being a medical professional for
over thirty years.
The.
But I am truly confirmed this
build target.
Since this is the propulation.
Yes target.
It targets.
Yeah.
This would further road the
trust between this demographic
and the medical profession.
Medical professionals already
have processes.
The.
Twenty seven appears to grant
brought a forty to lot
ma'am if you could report beer
comments if you could just
conclude your comments okay
thank
you.
Next.
Go ahead.
Good sorry
but after no ladies and
gentlemen.
My name is letters larry on i'm
with foreign lifestyle.
Yeah.
I am an opposition of all the
bills especially house bill one.
Impacts the buyers and.
The greatest of a hundred miles
of the country that might that
up to four hundred miles of
travel purchase to purchase a
part fill up for background
processes
after fourteen days even if you
were clear for two weeks.
It's just it's a hardship you
know people in this community in
the state
just don't understand it you
know we have a ranch in a rule
area.
All my neighbors people like
spoken to
are are upset because we're
doing this
sir if you could conclude your
comments i'm sorry
your comments what what
we're doing
will it.
Okay we're gonna have to move on
thank you
thank you.
Next go ahead.
I'm tired I identify as an
american in new mexico.
And.
You guys description is to
strengthen the constitution.
And the enabling cause of each
bill is implied with that.
And this is not what these bills
are doing they're violating not
just the second minute they're
violating people right under the
largest process right to liberty
the right to privacy and go on
and on and i'm not surprised
because governor even got even
brand about it when she said
that the right some writes are
not absolute
very simply normal
confers no right and impose.
If it is not in operative as
well it has never been passed.
A statute is not
learning first national bank
report and I can go on and on.
You are violating the
constitution.
And it's also violating your
over and you're also a breach of
contract
all these professionals who are
the employed the government
right we are in mexicans article
two section two says we are the
case there were going to have to
thank you so much.
I'm next row.
Opposition twenty seven and
house.
We are personal house build
twenty seven expanding the list
of reporting parties
including law enforcement
officers as reporting parties
removes oversight and
impartiality from the process
and potentially increases the
risk for overreach or abuse back
the apple curtain journal
editorialized against such a
concept last month
saying this is the kind of move
that concerns a lot about in
going the editorial words
stance firmly against expanding
parties work for first writing
hospital one twenty nine it's
not going to expand or improve
background checks whatever check
is done at the beginning of the
fourteen days is the cheque for
the fourteen days that the end
of fourteen days bi doesn't go
back and do a background check
ninety percent of sales are
cleared when the person wrote
your court firearm and there's
no point having those people
involved
in a waiting period I just want
to go on record and saying
cramming two worth of testimony
into one minute when you haven't
even heard on twenty is not
right next in
the nancy bennett and i'm
wondering why people are
supporting one twenty nine it
accomplished there's nothing
more than the current background
checks do those are
accomplishable ninety percent of
the time in three days.
Actually mostly in a few
minutes.
Once that background check is
complete war time won't at even
given to any more investigation
there is no cooling off record
about anybody actually doing a
cool off and.
Any killing your will tell you
fourteen business days actually
at least eighteen days.
As a conceal curry license I was
background checked and
fingerprinted
fifteen hours of required
training.
In the supreme court ruled in
twenty twenty two that states
may not prov.
E right individuals in under the
second amendment
if you could think thinking
ma'am next in the second row
anybody else third row
good.
Thank you
hi i'm stephane lord still
representative twenty two
for the fourteen day
as I brought it before there's
no checking so the atm does not
check at all three days fourteen
days thirty days they're not
checking so extending it is
absolutely nothing for cool
enough for you nobody's checking
if the feds are not checking it
nothing is happening at all when
that feel as soon as i'm with
that application in there plus
you cannot redo an application
when it's still an open status
so after fourteen days good luck
trying to forget what you're
going to do with that bill you
can't have to come back and pay
the thirty five dollars so the
goal of this is nothing there's
no data for it there's nothing
the feds are doing nobody to do
anything on it there's no extra
check three days fourteen days
thirty days nothing matters in
this thank you.
For eight third row who's next
go ahead yeah I want to college
in this from a.
Meaning that government
government can not.
Does.
Say well it's only.
With no limitations on how
frequently it can be.
So the only silver lining i.
Want to take away from.
Thank you sir for throw anybody
in the fourth room speaking and
suff it are speaking in
opposition
to you everybody
raising the aids limit for fire
arms from eighteen to twenty one
more about public safety that it
is catches sir work speaking
about and waiting periods today
so if you have comment on those
two that's what we're discussing
is not hearing on twenty nine
one twenty no when twenty seven
I think it's what you're
house build twenty seven and
house will one twenty nine today
so still the fourteen day rating
period
should never come into existing
because sometimes based on their
circumstances
themselves right now and that's
not just anyone in particular
group that could be somebody
choose to make the market
domestic violence maybe they
haven't gotten the restraining
order put through yet really
that is for everybody the right
to be able to go and protect.
In your name sir for the record
just the mortgages thank you for
throw anybody else.
I'm sure many thank you I am tom
k.
On the background check is
performed in its delay yours
prohibited transferring file for
three days what's those three
days the past you can go ahead
and transfer.
If later on.
The five determined
person should not have a fire on
the notified and they notify the
epf yeah goes out they have to
retrieve this.
In twenty twenty one week zero
one four percent firearms
transferred under that provision
for found to be given.
The.
Also this bill will not provide
a cooling off period
two thirds of dollars already
half fire arm there's no cooling
off there for those folks
eighty five traces fire arms
found it crime seems include
some sites.
And from two thousand seventeen
to two thousand twenty one only
nine percent of the fire arms
that were
can conclude
three months or less so just
thank you sir
roford go ahead.
How many specific president.
Um represent approximately.
Four thousand.
Issues with this bill the built
as it states now.
Until the transfer of the fire
to the fire there is no mention
of the fell in the middle of
that so that in itself is a.
And the other thing that it
doesn't address is items from
the national fire object
suppressor short rifles whatever
that case may be and
if you're asking.
A fourteen day
wait till the transfer you're
again violating rules
one of which is you're not you
cannot do a background check on
something that's already been
proce.
And secondly you're to
expedition we get rid of that
or if you could conclude your
remark to the customer
and you can't delay that process
waiting for the fourteen day
waiting thank you technically no
more
owner possession
thank you.
You have to do that and chair
members of the mealman.
Usually retired trial thirty.
Our number of calvers
this.
Flight.
Your experience is.
He's going the wrong direction
is this law tramples civil
liberties and lacks out of it
and process it should be real
provision and therefore shop so
cause hearing adequate show
cause hearing
there's no process in the bill.
Therefore I uh strongly
to this bill.
Zero for the near twenty
seconds.
Good sir my name is jersey
In this room there are many
different opinions.
This bill has many plaza
not only would you desire people
constitutional guys but it will
even force fire.
And the.
Thank you sir five.
Yeah.
So I stand.
Yeah.
Justification.
You'll probably hear the op.
All lives were saving but a
fourteen day p.
Thank you sir.
Manager the committee i'm during
the source of national shooting
sports foundation we are the.
They got home with the gentleman
comma we do have customers in
this state that have to travel a
hundred and fifty miles one way
to get to a gun thing that's
happened over the last many
years is gone dealers have been
riving out business so that's a
hundred miles one way three
hundred mile round trip.
Soon that comes in six hundred
mile trip just to exercise
constitutional right that truly
is a hardship the one thing we
can control is good people who
are worried about their
protection being able to chance
this legislation does delay that
and that really is a right
denied so we are the people who
have to stand across the counter
and tell a stocking victim no
i'm sorry but no you're going to
be defenseless for another
fourteen or fifteen days before
the state allows you to exercise
your rights that's a very tough
position
please.
Others in opposition go ahead.
The.
The way every party there in it
transaction of a gun transaction
there's three partners it's a
seller there's the fire and
there's the individual that has
to perform the background check.
If here's that it's contemplated
in this bill that the seller and
the performer of the background
check of the same individual as
it's written it doesn't allow it
she.
Wait period under federal last
way that the fills work once
they perform that.
So that then they transfer that
to the seller so what we're
doing is we're exposing by the
way this is written we're
exposing those who put in place
under the universal package on
check in order to make sure that
there's a check now we're saying
yes we did that to you but now
we're going to expose you
because they don't have ever
have position of that
and monthly so so I would hope
that we would actually take a
look at that technical issue.
Thank you anyone else in
opposition go ahead we have
three minutes remaining my name
is
great town of education mexico
in the corner.
It's our constitutional right.
My grandfather's my parents are
talk to british party
work for every major american
war.
The.
You never had to answer somebody
trying to break.
I mean the ability to get my gun
within fourteen days is not
right they got I have my done
also the fact that now when I go
to my provider i'm not going to
tell my provider if i'm stressed
off.
The.
The government putting their
guns at me
to say about that everyone else
here much smarter than i.
The.
Thank you sir.
Anyone else in opposition in
place we have one minute
remaining in which case I don't
know if we're gonna be able to
get to soon so so michael i'm
sorry so we're still over here
on an opposition go ahead
afternoon.
Yeah.
Anything out of those
unconstitutional and you are
breaking.
Yeah.
Thank you ma'am go ahead next to
my position
I just like to see that every
time that we have legislation
really affecting law
because criminals are not going
to be the law they're going to
be the ones it'll have the
automatic fire
people have access to the fire
purpose and they want to.
Yeah you're just affecting my
right so why don't we go after
the the criminals.
Why don't we put criminals
behind bars but then be afraid.
Yeah no let's prosecute the laws
that where you have on the box
every one of these laws.
Thank you sir we have two
minutes for those online I just
want to know that we have
thirteen hounds raised on zoom
so we have that amount of time
remaining the less usaver or
will be able to get through so I
will start with gary kilberra.
Go ahead geary.
The.
Gerry I think you can go had and
speak if you're a sear muted you
want to go ahead.
Our rate will move we'll go to
elaine.
The.
I summer help
the build twenty nine.
Fourteen days now more like
eighteen thousand next starters
the protection forever this
built but to people at risk of
stereo
aren't
the ability to get it on a need
itself defense purposes domestic
violent file inspector dot away
being stopped you got away then
threatening to
tell you got away eighteen days
they don't you in the meantime.
Law enforcement has no duty to
protect this ship okay we're
going to go ahead and get a neat
asking right ahead
so we all thank you chair
members of the committee may ask
you on behalf of over seventeen
hundred members of zero rifling
per club here in the outcome
here on hb twenty seven our
reservations are regarded for
main points distance to list
reporting parties removal
discretion from courts are the
issue and search warrants to
enforce proposed and the
portions of the bill that would
create a sort of civil effort
for future law in contradiction
to new mexico laws on simple
asset for future representative
garden isn't receipt of an email
detailing the concerns that she
could some of them very
legitimate but we haven't seen
anything appear in language and
amendments to address any of
them
on
hb one twenty nine of the bill
interfere who conduct that's
present building protected by
the constitution as far as
historical analogues the second
step of the burn test and the
first waiting period law was
enacted in california in
nineteen twenty three far too
late to offer insight under the
bruin standard I don't think
there's any way the state can
defend that in court and I don't
think there's any way it should
pass this comma today especially
given conversations in the
interim regarding bring thank
you
sorry that concludes our public
comment will now for it for
opposition.
So apologies for the the time
limitation we were trying to be
fair on both sides so we're
going to start with twenty
minutes for those in support I
will start with the front row on
this side
anyone who would like to speak
and support guard ahead.
We support this.
Yeah.
Thinking about next in the front
room and support speaking second
row.
Go ahead sorry good
my apologies my name is.
Anyone else in support speaking
second row.
I haven't chairmen of the
committee brand of the school
president of the next speech
which spent the past two years
doing trains for a bottle I was
law enforcement little health
professionals and d.
Where is where the fast it's now
yes it's like the coffee car and
it's going to get you from.
And i'll be a safe.
Very dangerous and informington
when the exploit.
In terms of what twenty nine we
are also and support that we
know that violence is a problem
that demands a multiprone
approach and that is exactly
what this.
Kinds of passions would close
the charleston and also in terms
of domestic violence it gives
law enforcement.
Go head sir.
Madame many chris marvin
represent every time.
Are the officers.
So many veterans personal
connection to suicide.
Six thousand veterans
seventy two percent of those
issues attempt a gun
time all the legal means
combined please to death.
Waiting period
time and space and they say
their life.
But not put yourself in the
shoes of the spouse the suicidal
veteran owns guns refuses
at the home.
Without the philly to get health
in the authorities effectively
what options is the stock
thankfully in the mexico's
extremist protection orders are
detained that love ones can do
to go suicide all
it's imperative new mexico
strength and state that suicide
by veterans and civilians
thank you sir.
Others and support nat row right
next row doesn't speak and
support god.
Yeah.
My name is cathy.
Professor.
Very str.
The average.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Realize.
Next in support.
The.
This.
Yeah.
You have responsibility to.
Think you mount next in support.
Yeah.
Good.
Thank you ma'am
go ahead.
And support.
You know we have to.
A lot of work.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
With very.
The.
Next in support go ahead.
The.
Thank you ma'am.
Next in support.
Good afternoon madame chairman
members of the committee
subgather on a stand for the
house bill twenty seventh i'm a
great mother in at six hundred
and thirty one days ago I may
eighth mother's day my world was
shattered that day my seventeen
year old daughter lexier rail in
my sixteen year old nephew money
or so god that were victims of a
horrified murder suicide in
albuquerque party city parking
lot it all happened while they
were
before that tragic incident I
obtained a restraining order and
informed the authorities of my
ex boyfriend who was accused of
actually assaulting and
threatening my daughter.
Was armed and present.
As a threat and not only to
himself but to me and my family.
He had.
I had law enforcement been
familiar with the red flag law
and acted accordingly to the law
my daughter my nephew m.
And no their jobs are not easy
for families to be protected
including the lives of law
enforcement training and
enforcement difference between
that it is a collective
responsibility that requires all
of us to come together and
advocate for the changes in the
lot.
We the legislation the
legislation that allows
individuals like me to stick the
protection and deserve from
those who pose a threat man I
have tag apologize
for that my daughter never think
thank you.
Next in support go ahead.
Today.
I represent five hundred members
the american association of
university women in our fair
state and the line forgotten
solutions.
I think representati.
For some
of changing proving the
important legislation.
Yeah.
Waiting.
Next in support go ahead.
The state about what is most
affecting their lives and I hear
time and again the domestic
violence and sexual assault.
We trust and support law
enforcement and the request for
changes to these bills thank you
thinking ma'am.
Next in support.
Alright I think i'll go ahead my
name is calling
support of hospital twenty seven
as a long force over a dozen of
these I believe the requested
changes in amendments in house
will twenty seven greatly
increase the effect in this and
and the potential.
Thank you sir anyone else in
person in support.
Rate will go online if you want
to raise your hand and support
or give you a minute to outgoing
on speaker and we'll start with
bill jordan.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee of bill
jordan with mexico voices for
children and we stand in support
of this legislation and really
appreciate the effort to strange
the number the existing law and
make it more effective and what
really want to thank the
sponsors for bringing that
forward thank you.
Thank you bill anyone else in
support online.
Ok great that concludes public
comments will go back to the
bill sponsors did you want to
address anything that was sudden
public comment.
No manager
all right to the committee I
representative a leader chase.
Take your man of chair and thank
you representatives and chamber
and garage I I wanted to.
I guess what I wanted to give
you a chance to emphasize is the
support of law enforcement.
In this measure because I think
we first passed the bill it was
a little unclear how the the law
would be internet so would you
like to speak to that.
Thank you thank you madame chair
thank you representative
basically for the last two years
we've been meeting with apd
represented by commander deed
saw and others who have really
asked at the chief heal the
former chief in as tech said law
enforcement are often called
frequently to the same houses
with the same serious issues and
sometimes they feel like it's a
tragedy waiting to happen so
they really asked as people on
the front line of this kind of
situation to be able to
be a reporting party and amazer
maybe cheap happy would like to
add something I know that
he's been a witness before this
party before and appreciate
hearing his views always.
Not thank you ma'am.
You know one of the frustrations
that we've experienced and
speaking with other chiefs in
the association is is going to
replace where and and some of
the folks have alluded to it
where family members are scared
but now they're they're being
asked to be the one to sign to
say yes I I want to take those
guns even though that person is
either going to continue living
with them or at the end of
whatever process they're going
to they're going to come back to
and it's known to the to the
person signing that the other
guy he's going to know that you
signed to take his guns so you
know what we want is tools for a
law enforcement that when we
arrive on scene and it in our
estimation somebody using crisis
and we don't need the family
member to to take an additional
risk that we actually have the
ability to take it to a judge do
a judicial review let the judge
make a ruling on it but but have
it coming from law enforcement
makes it safer for family
members we believe on top of it
the forty eight hours if it's a
crisis forty eight hours as a
long time to wait so you know it
that the forty eight hours
almost are use against it being
a crisis if it is necessary deal
it could wait forty eight hours
and it's not the bigger crisis
as a week we do think if if we
have a crisis and law
enforcement thinks that an
immediate need is is here then
we should have the ability to
act on that thank you think
amount of chair and
representatives I I actually had
a client it was a civil matter
because it was then they have
his neglect system but as she
was filing for an order of
protection because her partner
had
an automatic rifle and she was
intimidated by it
and in fact they lived with two
other generations in the same
family all of whom were afraid
of it.
The the trouble is when the
hearing officer she was just
finally for northern protection
because this was not.
This bill was in process when
this was this incident was
occurring but there was not even
any way for the court to see
where the guns were and they
responded said well they're now
with my cousin so.
Nobody ever checked.
And it didn't seem that it was
particularly safe for my client
or the rest of her family under
the circumstances
you agree with that.
I do I I also I mean the other
side of this argument has been
was really in play the last time
when this bill was up was was
that you would have ex
girlfriends x wives that were
making specious arguments
alleging that somebody is is
in a mentally disturbed and and
then using that as justification
to take the guns again that's
where i'm for all enforcement
you know our car officers are
going to go out there we're
gonna listen to both sides we're
going to see the evidence if we
don't see it then then it's not
going to go forward if we agree
that they're that the rise of
crisis then then it'll be unlong
forcement to take those steps so
I I think really that's what we
have the police for right we're
going to go over we're going to
investigate crimes we're going
to make decisions on those in
this case we're going to decide
is it really a crisis does it
really require this kind of
intervention right now given the
sensitivities that we all feel
towards the second amendment i'm
a gun owner too but if if we do
think that then we're gonna have
the tools and the ability to go
forward thank you
they came out of sure I don't
know if you're aware there was a
lot of publicity in the burn on
account is sound involved county
area when there was a.
Um
a national murder of a
vulnerable individual for whom
the caregiver killed and the
police were in the home and.
The
vulnerable the victim actually
she became a murder victim was
same the police please don't
leave me and and they I think
that the fact that the law
wasn't clear was enough that
it did not afford this
individual.
The opportunity for safety and
she lost her life within a
couple of hours after the police
were there so
I I just think there has been a
lot of confusion
according to my quick research
because I knew that florida had
passed a law
like this madam chair and
representatives after parkland.
And so florida so
not in liberal state and
presumably the second amendment
applies in florida as well and
there are twenty one states now
that have passed
these extreme risk laws did you
want to cover any of them are
the success of them or they are
you know difficulties with them.
Madame chair and representative
certainly their has been how do
I say this a review of what's
been going on in other states in
actually there is we had an
expert at john's hopkins
university that is very
knowledgeable of other state
laws and so on and we were
consulting with her as well in
terms of some of the changes in
what's been done other places
and so on so you know we are
working on two improve and
implement I hate this word but
i'm gonna use it words you know
best practices in terms of how
urbau has been working across
the country and so we
we laid out a large net and we
took in a lot of input from many
different state colders madam
chair and represent it.
Thank you very much.
And i'm wondering if at this
point madame chair and
representatives if the centers
for disease control are allowed
to collect data on the success
of these laws at this point for
a long time the
there was no ability of the cdc
to collect any data on gun
violence.
Uh madam chair and
representative I haven't
researched a recently but
certainly in the past um it was
my understanding that based on
um at the influence of
significant special interest
groups that represent the gun
industry there has been an
effort to deny access to data to
the cdc I don't know if that's
changed recently but I believe
that has been an issue and as a
result
and I find it ironic when they
arguement has been made there's
no proof that any of these
measures will have a fact well
the problem is when you're not
allowed to collect data about
things that are happening it's
um hard to establish that and
frankly the cynical part of me
suggests to me that that's
really why these these kinds of
data collection activities are a
post madam chair and
representative.
And representative there have
been a number of academic
studies such as the university
of california davis
and several the university
studies that show effectiveness
thank you very much madame chair
that i'll pass the past the
floor.
Thank you leader cheesy will go
to representative on.
Thank you manager i'm not just
looking at one checks in the
bill i'm not going everything
else I don't have any problems
yet.
I don't know somebody might
bring up something that might
cost me to think that i'm going
to the last speeds being
spending on.
The.
And I want to know what do you
other than why strength where
the firearm.
Er madame chair representatives
I believe that's in place so
that if an individual let's say
you've had a gun
seized vienna for it sadden not
saying evidence locker for a
year and that individual decides
they no longer wish to have that
firearm the other wise is meant
to cover that ffl transfer from
the person who was restrained
but it's not restrained now to
someone else.
But
okay so that means that would be
someone else can prove that they
that the the garden the weapon
is there's then they can accept
the transcript but otherwise
they can't
matter where representatives
they're going to have so when
law enforcement seizes a weapon
under our vote.
Report in this case they're
going to talk about things in
the replace report like who they
see isn't it from there's going
to be a district court number on
other papers they have.
The question of who's gone it is
is it really going to be an
issue once it goes in the
evidence because technically
it's to all the person's firearm
there's restraint from having it
for that year so the the whole
identity issue.
Has it come up at least that
we've seen a burial county in
terms of giving someone in their
fire and back when we expired
more confused
i'm having a problem okay
actually where I really have
with the problems with the word
sale.
Okay is I just don't believe
that if you can't give this
weapons right back to the owner
or somebody that claims to be
the owner
live should not be able to take
that weapon.
And put it out in the market I
think the
material destroyed is that we
would like to if if I could met
him tear I would like to suggest
or a bland that we get rid of
the word south and page two and
the words sell on page five.
And this way there is no
question as to what happened to
the fire it got destroyed and
that's all that happened.
If I may I believe the language
that referring to here on page
twenty one is is a mirror image
of the domestic violence
um statute and I would be
reluctant i'm we really made an
effort to try to
unifier harmonise the domestic
violence
done retrieval provisions and
and such a man would would be
contrary to that approach.
And manager I know that I just
can't remember to be a little
getting to all to remember
everything
but I know that in my other
piece of legislation that was
almost similar to this we did
the same thing
we've just made it to where the
therefore the judge is going to
stay in this is it to this
goodness.
The longer
really bullets just couldn't be
destroyed and there were there's
no question there's no youth
answer back to nobody's having
to answer questions
it is just god and I know we've
done it before but I would
really like to continue doing
that but that I would be if it's
not a refurbal by someone that
supposed to have it
doesn't need to go back on on
the street.
Madam chair and representative I
believe the original prolo had
this or sell language in a
so I just would make that point
as well representative but
I we would not consider such an
amendment unfriendly if.
We would consider it unfriendly
I think deviating from general
practices are the police
department could create some
issues.
The.
In terms of consistency and so
on.
Mentioned I don't see that
because they go we've got it
before and so therefore I am
going to offer that amendment to
remove the word telled those two
places and
so
that is remote all right madam
chair so we have a emotion to
amend the bill on page twenty
one line to
well as.
Is there another place yes
on the same page buying favorite
same page of it and from the
sponsors that's a friendly
amendment madame chaired is not
for the reasons that I stated I
think having different rules
apply to different
fire arms that are in the
possession of of the police I
think it's problematic
okay so what we're going to do
is discuss the amendment does
anyone have quotes
so we're all I don't know if
it's on the flies so we don't
need a seco.
Anyone want to discuss the
amendment as proposed
ring up representative room and
then representative hembry go
head representative yes managed
here
I think one of the things you
need to realize that the
petitioner I mean they have
responded has a property right
value without weapon and if he
decides to sell it or otherwise
dispose of it you're denying of
his property right and I that
has been the standard practice
in one for spend if it's not
going to be returned you can
sell it to an f f you could give
it to a person who can watch it
thank you manager.
We're what will put your left
next after representative
thank you madame chair and and
madame representative I think
there would be a takings issue
with that and and would expose
the state for to liability for a
taking.
Thank you for that input and I
appreciate it madam chairman
representative
okay and representative chasing
the moment thanks mountain and I
just want to ask representative
room because of the deputy share
of
here has probably encountered
this so any it addresses the
taking as well what you're
saying is that
because the the respondent
mailer female has a property
right in the firearm if the law
enforcement sells it then the
money goes to the person.
What happens now madam chair no
in the past they have it but the
person has a property right
interest in that firearm and if
they say this assumed that it
can't be returned to them okay
now what do you do with it well
I want to sell it or give it to
another person who can walk
it's my property I want to
transfer it somewhere else or
sell it that's.
Mountain that's not making sense
to me because
you're you're putting the person
in charge of the weapon from
whom the weapons been taken I
don't I don't get it who gets
money who gets the money would
be the end of their let's back
up when you took the weapons who
own them
it was and was the respondent
the response and still wondered
when they're sitting in the
evidence room
now
we're in the process of
returning a man for whatever
reason we can't give it back to
the respondent they still own
that weapon.
I'm sure I I guess I feel like
we're going to circularly
because I don't understand
how you sure that thank you I I
have a question as well did you
want to respond to.
To any of the comments made thus
far on this amendment I think
just to clarify we are talking
about an unclaimed item after a
year right through sixty five
correct after a year on the
question of the selling I do
just have a what is current
practice and we've seen certain
um.
Departments and I know this
isn't to the substance of the
bill it's on how selling by the
um enforcement agency works
we've seen certain practices
sort of go in the opposite
direction of lawfulness as far
as how that um
enforcement agency sells those
items can you just talk about
how these types of sales work.
Military and ask one of our law
enforcement officials to dress
it madam chairman that could be
very helpful but we don't sell
firearms from our evidence
locker they would be destroyed
so I don't really have a good
answer so madam chair if i'm
hearing correctly and also to
represent all cons point we
don't do that anyways we're not
supposed to be selling firearms
out of law enforcement agencies.
Madame chair and representative
my understanding and is it
varies from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction
interesting okay
for a second time on the
amendment representative hembry
I I appreciate I just want to
make sure I understand what is
happening in that section so.
The agency they're long
enforcement agency has to give
the responded notice that they
can come pick it up if they want
or that it will be destroyed or
otherwise disposed of they have
one year three hundred and sixty
five days to claim that firearm
and then the agency can do with
with it what it wants is that am
I making a madam chair and
representative given the number
of knots i'm seeing at our table
I think that's a fair statement
madam chairman representative so
we'll go back to the amendment
and we didn't move it for
discussion officially so
do you want to move your
amendment for adoption
representative suburb better do
we have a second.
I will second it based on the
inconsistency of the various.
Good I let me just that I I
think madam chair and another
one I mean if you don't want to
do it that's fine with me but I
remember that we did it on the
floor with the building a
senator I saw the carried on and
a good bill just like this and
we got the word we got rid of
the word cell.
In that you can remember this is
unclaim nobody at nobody
escapement this weapon anymore
therefore that is therefore more
than three hundred and sixty
five days that after must do
something with it or that lot
enforcement agency must do
something with it they could not
keep it okay.
So therefore they take it and
you go to another some suburb
departments could sell it in but
their money in their coffee cat
or whatever it is but that's not
the purpose of this thing if we
have a non claim the weapon
where going out to days world
and we're steading at the state
for their gave it out the couple
of things for a while march to
buy a guns from people and now
we want to sell guns that nobody
claims and put it back out in
the world this is an unplaying
gun nobody almost is good
anymore is we're not you there's
people did not claim it they
don't want it we don't want it
back until the street that's all
out the same
think you representative so this
is an unfriendly amendment
proposed yes manager okay
will go ahead and is there any
more comments on this amount
proposed amendment
okay I will go ahead and do a
roll call on the amendment.
Yes
representative.
No.
Representative lane
no
representative.
No.
No ma'am.
Yes.
The.
The.
Venture.
Right we have a six to your
amendment fails representative
all kind
do you have any additional
comments on the village I have
nothing else so we will move on
to representative read
thank you matton chair
and representatives just just so
it that I am understanding
because I just got to read the
substitute you took out the part
that's a twenty four hour oral
request to the judge or is that
still part of the skill
I didn't see it in their but I
just wanted to double check
where the place officer could go
my understanding of the process
and I think
deputy attorney general could
public supplement or one of the
others is that police officers
currently have the ability to
obtain a warrant via telephone
to a judge on a short notice so
we remove this discussion about
you know that you have they can
because they can already and
then they have I think is it
forty eight hours to provide a
written
request is is outright twenty
four hours to provide the
written follow up to does that
make sense figure manager
represent if so you can still
under the spill.
Call at the judge and just as a
as a police officer and just
verbally ask them explain the
situation and he can verbally
order a search warrant how would
that process
let me ask mister deed so but
it's a sworn they're sworn in
before they
they provide the evidence
madam sure representative so for
this kind of an instance that
safe in middle of the night the
officer would call the on call
judge provided by district
court.
The just record judge would
swear the officer in the officer
would relay the fact that the
case in this case due to the
entry into the next system.
It's probably gonna have to be
either be hand delivered taken
to the judge or email to the
judge for signature and in
jurisdictions that allow that
and then return back to the
officer this would allow
instantaneous next entry which
for prevent future purchases
within the time framework that
temporary order okay and thank
you managers folk that it's not
just but get something has to be
in writing and then eventually
filed okay that's I wasn't clear
from the original fell that that
was the case and so that makes
me feel a lot better but I
wanted to talk a little bit
about the
reporting parties madame chair
representatives.
And.
I want to talk more kind of
about adding of the health care
professional
in the different things that are
listed under their medical
practice act nursing practice
act physician and assistant act
pretty much any licensed.
Type of doctor or their pist and
it's a social work practice act
so social worker could actually
do this also.
Madam sure
madam turn and represent it yes
that's correct and you know are
thinking as
many social workers interact
with individuals about their
mental health concerns and
probably more social workers
than actual psychologist or
psychiatrists in the state as
you know we're.
We're limited in terms of
availability of some
professional so I do manager
think it's appropriate to have
such a such a person involved
potentially I write a madam
chair representatives I guess
it's concerning in some sense
that it seems like.
Any type of doctor
dermatologists under this
this type of language could be
reporting party
and it seems really broadening I
worry because I mean i'm looking
I see looking down the road
first of all with hipper you
know you have your issues with
hipper and have you thought
about that in this is going to
be sealed or is this going to be
available for everybody to see
that you weren't talk to your
therapist you could address that
manager.
Man chair representative
I my understanding of hipper is
that there is an exception for
healthcare professionals when
there is an imminent risk of
harm to another
and as as we know from from law
school there is the terrace off
case that imposes a duty on
health care professionals to
report when there is an imminent
threat and so I believe her part
does have that exception on that
and that uh not certain of that
but I believe some.
Have you madame chairman
represent thought about possibly
ceiling this type of
information.
And I guess when we explain for
other matter chair I i'm looking
at a situation where
this this is what I see
happening I see someone going to
their doctor their therapist
whoever might be
as you know people in their
lives go through ups and downs
destined the family things like
that where they get depressed
and they'll go see their
therapist maybe they're going to
put him on any anti depression
they're going to ask them if you
got fires in the home people are
going to lie just like I think
one gentleman said I think I
talked to another person
that went to see a doctor and
that person actually did not
disclose advires either because
of a concern like this they're
gonna ask you if you feel like
you know you're going to hurt
yourself or anything like that
and you see this all the time
and when you go back in actually
I looked at what you can use
anti depressions for it was
quite a long list I mean
actually you can use them for
chronic pain
anxiety obviously depression
panic disorders and some near my
grains things like that and I
fear that down the road and this
could be abused possibly by
somebody in that capacity when
someone's just like literally
going through a time and maybe
saying well you know the some
days I don't know if I really
want to be here doesn't
necessarily mean they're going
to go you know commit suicide
and so i'm concerned that this
is going to allow almost any
health care professional
especially someone maybe that
they prescribe an anti
depressant to which I I kind of
believe probably third of
americans might be on some type
of and hanti depression I don't
know
that there should be earlier
makes it nicer I don't know but
you have any concerns about that
and where this could end up
going down the road madam chair
and committee
madame chair and representative
I think um mrperiod grace and
alluded to something and that
is.
These individuals are already
under a duty to report
whether if someone is a is the
risk to themselves or to others
I believe so we added this to
the statute because there were
some confusion on their part as
to whether or not that should
apply in the context of
the second of all madam chair
and representative the type of
concerns and that you're raising
and i'm not a little in them
were raised when the original
bill was passed that this was
going to open the flood gates
the people were going to use
this as irresponsibly or as a
retaliatory two rule earliest
you know kinds of things and in
fact that has not been the case
we've only seen seventy nine or
seventy five seventy five of
these petitions
since the bill was passed so I I
respect the concern but the duty
already exists okay and
appreciate that and madam chair
and
yet manager and and represent
this and and I don't know if
that number being passes because
they're following their duty or
they're just not following this
law you know because
I noticed there were zero filed
in my county seems like only
burned lio is the one that's
actually seems to be using this
statute so but going back to
reporting parties and now now
we've changed it and added a
person with whom a respondent
has a continuing personal
relationship with and I I know
random chairman and
representative i've seen that in
the domestic violent statute but
how
that seems like that could just
be about anybody depending on
how you articulate it and so I
wondered if you wanted to
comment on.
How you're going to define a
continuing personal relationship
is going to be if I have a good
friend them as at representative
ram and our friends were office
mates is that a continuing
personal relationship
would I be able to be reporting
party
madam chair and represent if
that's not new language that's
not part of our proposals
this is it's in the original
statute who is not part okay so
it's not not a proposed ma-
amendment but added the response
employer and then that respond
its health care professional and
then the lot of forcement
officer
yes managed here and actually we
just clarified that one we said
we're referring to employer who
meant to respond its employer as
to post chip anyone
yeah that's just clarifying
thing okay so another question I
had so if the and I think this
has been brought up in a lot of
the analysis of the law
enforcement officer is a
reporting party is he also the
petitioner can he be the
petitioner.
The.
Madame chair and representative
yes and this bill was intended
to clarify that point manager
so.
The.
So let's say the judge enters
the the warrant at the search
the home with a twenty four hour
warrant or whatever it is and
they search home and and the
person won't relinquish their
firearms
I think it says it's a mystery
or maybe their fires aren't even
in that in the home or they just
and I they have firearms and and
they're just not in the home
were so what happens next
manager i'll ask one of our law
enforcement officials to answer
that madame share
representative.
So the ability to charge on
this.
I believe it's only happened
once or twice in the entire
state to this point in that case
the individual actually had a
fire on his person when the
officers in california so that
how I was charged that way as
far as how I see this charged at
least
kind of as written would be
there been there need to be some
kind of additional information
to push it to that charge level
let's say someone's restraint
we're having a fire room with an
orpo and they're on facebook
posting pictures of themselves
with a firearm in their hand I
think that could get you there
pretty quickly let's see you are
restrained person and you could
enter a car accident and the
vehicle is towed and there's
some kind of weapon tying back
to the vehicle that can maybe
get you charged as well but
there's gonna need to be some
additional fact beyond we think
he has guns there needs to be
something that up a lot officer
would need to be able to point
to you to say okay based on
everything that I have here
let's go ahead and charge that
mister minner.
Okay and so madam chair and
representatives if
the temporary order let's say
it's terminated or
their petitions like timely
filed I guess or whatever might
happen how
what happens with the fires that
say you've
gotten these firms how do they
get their firearms back.
So they would just come to the
station with the quarter order
we'd have the court order as
well and we'd turn the fire on
back over to it just easily go
right back to that yes okay and
so then when we talked about the
four future part of it just I
had a follow up question on that
matter of chair so that was
disgusted I think by
representment representative
himbury that
there would be a notice that
you're going to
have this long to come get your
firearms and you're talking
about I think a year three or
sixty five days or something is
that from when the order is over
like it's over the one year is
over then you'll have one year
to come and get your fires yes
okay and then if they don't
that's when this other thing
correct capitals okay.
So then when you do the appeal
welcome to appeal the manager
and represent it's if you don't
agree with the judge's order can
they respond and appeal it
madam chair and represent yes
and can they have an attorney if
they
like a public defender manager
no okay so I obviously there's
going to be madame chair and and
respond errand rips and is going
be responded to a ford and
attorney in respondents that
can't afford an attorney.
When yet we're having this
criminal penalty and they're
kind of crossing over civil and
criminal little bit
well madame chair
even under current law I don't
believe you're in total to a
public defender unless there's
some possibility you might be
jailed that you're liberty
interest might be
in a infringed upon so
I think normal rules would apply
madam chairwell and I guess my
point is manager and represents
a pretty big thing we're doing
here and it seems like this is
something that I responded
should have the right to an
attorney to defend them if
you're going to take your way
their second amendment right
and they don't even have an
attorney and so I understand
what you're saying but it seems
like this is just a little bit
bigger of a deal because or or
maybe it it should be if it's
this big of a deal why is it
just a mismater.
So
you you're making good points
for representative
you know I don't care what the
penalties honestly that that
isn't the point of it to me is
is now we're going to bring new
charges against a person the
issue is weak we think that
there's a crisis we think that
that this gunness is a risk and
and we just want to take the
weapon until that crisis is
medical which is which leads
back to your so if a judge tells
us to that he believes based on
the medical records of medical
provider whoever the crisis is
over and we can return the fire
that that's fine with me so I
i'm less invested in in trying
to document I think the same
thing for the captain trying to
document a new criminal charge
we don't really want that it
really at the end of the day
what I want to get is that is
the weapon into a safe place
until such time that the judge
decides it's good to go your
your point on and representation
is interesting I don't know all
of I don't know all of these use
in an arcase we used to offer
times and and all of those
involved criminal charges at a
certain point so he actually had
an attorney that could then also
give him counsel in this being
although I don't know that he
was necessarily representing him
at the hearings and but
but he had council already
assigned i'm i'm not really sure
I don't I don't disagree with
you I wouldn't want it set up as
a poor versus rich the the
justice is different I I don't
love that either
and and I agree with you we're
we're alleging something that
is going to result in him losing
a second amendment rights for a
period of time
so i'm not really sure how to
resolve that
that's those are all better
questions for the process are
concerned it the chiefs level is
just the immediacy of the crisis
do we agree that it's a crisis
and if there's firearms can we
get or safely our their hands
quickly and to to merely rate
any potential problem.
Okay and madam chairman
representative so if a
respondent who's had a spirals
taken away once to before that
year's up you know petition the
court that I mean whose
following this are you as long
enforcement following the fact
that there is this crisis is
over or is the solely on the
respond it to bring it to the
court's attention and and file
up I don't know a petition or
whatever they need to file
medium share representative the
respondent can go back to the
court at any time during that
three hundred and sixty five day
period
and request that the
order be lifted as can the
reporting party
okay so the reporting party can
too but law enforcement isn't
following this at all as far as
you know what what's going on.
In this year it would be you
mean tracking the account like
the individual to see what our
business mental health is
improved and I mean I hizer her
mental health I think that's
unrealistic chair and
representative I don't know
about him chair and represent if
it's unrealistic to have a
review hearing or something to
check in on these people that
you're going to take their guns
away maybe ever you you know six
months or every thirty days
there's a review here in set to
see if the status has changed
averse somebody who may be
representing themselves and may
not really know the process and
that I guess that's just my my
questions whose whose followed
understanding mainly unrealistic
but i'm trying to turn to flip
it to the other side men on
chair represents and be like it
is an unrealistic thing at
unrepresented person might not
know to do that or what to do in
that situation madam chair
representative we have had cases
where the court has recognized
this is a very temporary thing
so rather than granting a full
year order they do exactly what
you say which is runner a six
month or folk during that time
and detectives do know that
person they followed up with the
multiple times and maybe they're
doing better and in that case we
go to court and we say exactly
that they've been driven doing
well they're taking their
medication and making their
appointments missus no longer
needed it which point the earth
post a smashed now for full year
orders about a month or so plus
before the order expires are to
check just we'll go ahead and
look and see how that person is
down over there if we haven't
contacted them for that time
period things like our
legitoring police report sunny
calling cost for service at
their house and if those things
are all no we are going to allow
that or to expire okay thank you
madame chair and represent so
you're actually at the end well
we'll know that is about to
expire so that's how you know to
do the gun you know notice that
you could come and get your fire
or some things like that.
Alright okay i'd really don't
have any
more questions more comment I
have not I didn't like the law
originally when it was put out
eight I just have a problem with
a person who hasn't committed a
crime just based on the belief
that someone thinks they may
perhaps commit a crime going in
and just taking their firearms I
just I can see it being abused
and I
did a like it then and I I have
a seriously still have a problem
with it now but I understand the
process a lot more through this
conversation so I appreciate you
answer my questions and thank
you madame chair just to clarify
manager this applies to someone
who may be a harm to themselves
or others thank you yes thank
you we'll go to representative
ring.
Thank you man of chair and
manager and adam chair and want
to start off that i'm not trying
not to be redundant on page two
and all the medical providers
but more my question is to want
forcement you have at your
access in youth spoken bad going
into the home where there's some
type of crisis you have the
involvementary mental health
place seventy two hour hold on
individual likewise you can get
the um
district attorney to go ahead
and file and if he commits that
person now they are precluded
from everything
have you been using that.
Uh madam chair representatives
we do not use that in berlio
county at least at this time the
reason being as we
involuntarily transport four
thousand people a year under
that law that you reference.
We don't file four thousand
earth pose a year those are only
reserved for individuals who are
clearly a threat to others are
talking about acquiring a
firearm already have multiples
that are making a plan that
would be when we had to file
under this law
thank you madame chair I think
that's one of the things that
you are rehello available to you
madame chair let me move on to
madame chair let's go to payg
and you know we're wines one
through nine you know we're
talking about all the stuff.
Madam chair have you ever
thought about what if the
respondent says you know what.
I don't like new mexico really
more in fact I will move out of
the state
can you have you thought about
putting in a paragraph he can
obtain its firearms you'll
escorting to the border and
you're gone we don't even want
to see a.
And we know madam chair that
person won't come back into over
the state line the bearing a
second madame chair and
representative and madam chair I
think that that's where you put
a penalty clause right below it
madam chair in representative I
I think my question particularly
the problem with such an
approach
madame chair and madame chair
let's go to page nine and wines
nine through a level.
So madam chair you our law
enforcement you show up at
at his home
what if he owns a few homes.
You're at his home and he he
were linkwishes what's there but
there may be firearms at the
other homes
a representative the suburb of
those times where we would need
to consult some property tax
records and get an idea of what
homes this person owns I can
save for at least my team we're
gonna go to his many houses as
they have to get an idea of what
they are willing to are linkish.
I think also sir um.
In a week if we want if we want
to somebody who was increases
generally we got a call from
somebody so there's a complaint
often times that somebody close
to that person if if.
If they're telling us that the
they believe all the weapons are
in this location then then
that's what we're going to go
with it is absolutely possible
that that someone could have a
weapon in a different place and
we're not going to run around to
be able to get it all
and we wouldn't even have the
right to get into some locations
because person does never write
to privacy so we would be taking
it with the information we're
getting from whoever's close on
and where the weapons are if if
I could i'd also like to go back
to your first point about the
seventy two hour old I I wish
that we had the seventy two I
wish it was seventy two hours
sometimes it's closer to seventy
two minutes
we will take people to the
hospital they are making
suicidal comments to our
officers we take him to the
house below it's not a criminal
problem we take last and
honestly they are up before the
end of the ship
so yes I I wish we had a better
option.
And managed chair
I also saying that your
discussion with the mental
health hospital
about what are the reasons
you're there rather than someone
just acting out on the middle of
the street
could it result in the hole I
think that if you take the time
to go and explain we're here
because of this and this is
going on in or by the way we can
give you a tape recording of it
or whatever you know to do that
I think that that would be good
but well move on madame chair
and man of chair was going to
page ten and lying twenty so the
case is dismissed without
prejudice we're talking about a
constitutional right it should
be dismissed with prejudiced and
that it can't be refiled unless
there's new information
and what are your thoughts on
that.
Madame chair and representative
I think
I have an issue without because
there'll then be a big fate
about what is new information
and and as a result someone who
is a threat to themselves or
other may have an issue
sometimes an order is dismissed
on a technical reason madam
chair and can be it needs to be
correct and i'm sure you've seen
that in your career as a law
enforcement officer and that
under this under your suggestion
madam chair and representative
could preclude refilling
madame chairman manager I think
that
what you could do is end up with
judge shopping on that
issue just refined it tell me
find the friendly judge anyway
let's move on madam chair
listening page eleven line nine.
And clearly we're talking about
hipper information.
And my problem is in a I would
get to it in a minute because on
another page.
This can be upgrade this this
extreme order can be epred and
now that information about that
individual can be on facebook
and that's why I think these
need to be sealed here
and your thoughts on that.
Madam chair in representative I
believe this implement this this
this is not new language as I
understand that this is part of
the original law it's not part
of our
our bill.
Madam chair managed here I agree
with you that it's part of the
original but since were
revisiting the entire statute I
think we are to look at
the entire statute of some of
the problems that are are
arising you're trying to correct
some hears another one that I
think needs to be corrected
anyway we'll move on down to
page eleven wine twenty two
cruelty to animals I could see
that being used against hunters
I I would like to see something
and there about you know this
doesn't pertain to hunting.
A madam chair representative
again this is not part of our
bill this is part of the
original legislation
and madam chair and madame chair
again this is current on page
twelve one seven and we're doing
perfonderance of the evidence
well when I look at your
your bill you've got page six
payg and page fifteen where
we're using probably cause and
purponders of the evidence is
just fifty one percent.
Whereas what we ought to be
using is beyond a reasonable
doubt we're taking someone
second amendment rights away and
I really think that this should
be a higher standard than
purponderance of the evidence.
And your thoughts.
Madam chair which page again
because I was flipping on your
different h twelve page twelve
wind seven again that's the old
legislation this was all debated
and discussed in a couple in
twenty twenty manager.
Yeah again I would say madame
chairman of chair we're looking
at the hole statute and trying
to correct it and get it right
so.
But we can move on.
I think.
They give and leave the other
question oh
other questions for the floor
thank you.
Ah right we have representative
lane
thank you madame chair a little
bit of a spence for us wait
until the floor I know what
those questions
i'm so pleased manimate share
that represent once to make our
lives interesting
chair makes you bring a popcorn
to that for debate.
So many sure I think most of my
questions have been asset but I
do kind of want to
just highlight where I think is
my major concern with this bill.
And i.
And not unsympathetic to what I
heard today and public testimony
particularly the stories that
are shared
I understand or a since they
understand at least I appreciate
hearing those things.
And I also have.
What I would argue is one of the
the deepest respects for law
enforcement of any member in the
building.
So forgive me from my comments
there about to follow
but we have an interesting
system.
In it in our country when it
comes to the criminal justice
system and it's really it's
built on balancing in my
opinion.
So we balance sort of personal
liberty
versus
public safety.
And this is one of those issues
where I can honestly see okay we
have someone who is.
Immediate
in the city of a merely
committing self armor harm to
somebody else so I can
understand that peace of it.
But for me that.
The personal liberty I think
weighs out.
Because you have an individual
who hasn't actually committed to
crime yet.
Um.
And I think that's sort of the
winchester for me is you have
this individual who hasn't
actually committed a crime they
don't receive notice
and now their firms are going to
be immediately confident skated
and now we don't even allow for
forty hours and all of that is
say here's really where I have
the rub with the changes to the
existing law.
Is previously we had a buffer
between law enforcement.
Where there had to be
essentially a complainant to law
enforcement and the law
enforcement files the petition.
Now we're allowing long
forcement to be both the
complainant and the petitioner
and again I have that most
respect for law enforcement when
you but one you have a system
that allows for that kind of
authority to be housed in one
person.
It there is a potential for
abuse there.
And that's okay I think that
risk is okay when you have
someone who has committed a
crime.
But when you have someone who is
not yet committed an actual
crime I think it goes too far
for a balance of standpoint from
me and so that's the main reason
why I I couldn't support these
these changes is I don't think
we should have a system where
you have a judge jury and
executioner are fulfilled by the
same person in here I think
we're although I admire law
enforcement appreciate what they
do
I think the risk is is too great
so thank you manager.
Is that all representative
representative
thank you madame chair madam
chair
I think many of my questions
have been previously addressed I
appreciate that but I did want
to follow up just briefly
on the health care professional
provisions and the interplay
between this and hither
and I think that is a a real
concern now that I I do realize
there is an exception to hipper
and when they're serious threat
to health or safety.
My concern is that even though
there is that exception it is
based on the minimum necessary
information.
They still have to respect the
patience privacy and can only
provide the minimum necessary.
Uh
information
and that's all that can be
related to continue to protect
the patience privacy but yet
this law says that they must set
fourth specific facts and enough
information to make a
determination of probable cause
both first by the law
enforcement officer to whom they
were laiding information and
then to the law enforcement
officer as the petitioning party
and so I see a conflict there
between what is the minimum
necessary information and this
specific facts.
That that are sufficient enough
to determine probable cause can
you address that conflict
please.
Madame chair and representative
I guess I don't see the conflict
the health care provider would
provide the minimum facts
necessary to the petitioning
person and that would be the law
enforcement officer the law
enforcement officers then
responsible for establishing the
problem books cause which could
be that include information
beyond what the health care
professional provided the health
care professional is is in
flagging the concern and then
it's on the the line enforcement
officer to then follow up as
appropriate to you to perhaps
develop additional facts which
he may personally observe madame
chair and representative so I
don't think we're saying they
have to go beyond their duties
but the law enforcement officer
the petitioner would be
responsible for establishing the
problem caused manager
representative.
Okay and thank you madame chair
madame chair madam chair
I I would say.
Let me.
Okay
that that is what I needed
cleared up a little bit.
So.
I guess.
The.
My concern is then what steps
are taken by the law enforcement
officer to if those if the
minimum necessary information is
insufficient to de make probable
cause determination what follow
up steps that you mentioned
would be taken by the officer
yes i'll do the law school thing
and then open the for to my
friend here it depends.
Madam chair representative
there's always gonna meet be so
additional investigation
especially so let's say you get
the absolute minimum this person
is a threat to someone and
that's all you get from the
provider that officer would they
need to do some level
investigation whether it's as
simple as you know looking
through the records management
system what they have access to
some previous police reports
rest history and imports
if I were to file one of these
based on that minimum
information i'd probably want to
go talk to that person in person
or at least on the phone get an
idea where they're at and how
they're doing maybe talk to
their family members this isn't
the first time this is probably
come up and there might be some
collateral information we could
harvest there as well.
Thank you that that was all I
had on those followups thank you
madame chair right what's the
world the committee many other
speakers rate okay well.
Madame charlie movie do not pass
on house consumer in public
affairs many substitute for
house spill twenty seven to pass
on house judiciary community
substitute for a hospital
twenty seven second right we
have a motion
for do pass arm on the table and
second and uh by leader chasey
and seconded by representatives
of you and if you'll go ahead
and call.
Yes
representative
representative no.
Yes
yes.
No
done it no.
Yes.
Yes
yes.
The.
Thank you committee and we will
go now to house bill one twenty
nine.
The.
While we're waiting for folks to
get set up I just wanted to
remind people that I I have
arranged to bring some dinner in
so we're we'll all be wealth.
Okay all right.
Okay so we are now on house bill
one twenty nine we have lead
sponsor representative remiral
the floor is yours think you
meant thank you madame chair
thank you members in front of
you as hospital one twenty nine
it's a fire waiting period bill
which was due to important
things
one in which when a person goes
in purchases of firearm they
essentially already have to
undergo a background check
today under our current laws
after three days and you end up
fire themselves seller has not
received that background check
in formation.
We have not closed the loop on
the fact that that firearm
dealer could actually just hand
over the fire arm if that
information has not going back
gone back to the seller to
verify whether or not this
person should be able to obtain
so we close the loop on a three
day waiting period on the three
day background check period i'm
going to interrupt you and I
apologize we have a committee
sub is that now that's correct
of that first year sorry about
that so members you have house
judiciary committee substitute
for house bill one twenty nine
it like to move that for a
discussion.
Man chairman for discussion
second.
Two two seven seven zero one
point two.
Madame chair.
Thank you representing feel free
to proceed would you like me
madam chair to go through the
changes first or would you like
me to continue on the bill
well I think you should give
enough background on the bill so
that the changes make sense if
you know what I mean so you
gathered perfect so that so i'll
continue so we close it critical
loophole on the fact that these
firms could be
essentially sold after three
days in a background check has
not been returned and in
addition to that give our lawn
forcement and folks a fourteen
day calendar day waiting period
which is part of this committee
sub calendar day waiting period
to
essentially ensure that both
background trucks have been done
and the person who is purchasing
the firearm has lawful ability
to obtain that firearm
so this is what this bill does
on the effort for this bill
overall is to
do a couple things one of course
give law enforcement time to do
their jobs should any flags you
resend in a background check
that requires somebody to go and
and look at a person whose
purchasing that firearm we had
discussed the over ninety
percent of these are quick
however it's some of that
additional nuance with the ten
percent that we may need to look
into additional time where the
most rural state and america we
talk about that a lot so
ensuring that we have sufficient
time to look into some of these
when it comes to connectivity
information sharing etc that
were clear secondly we have one
of the highest suicide rates in
the nation
and the sporting day where
waiting period is critical for
those who are deciding to do
harm against themselves and
those who have unfortunately
chosen to do harm against others
we have a list of those who have
committed now shootings within a
fourteen day period.
Or their purchasing firehooms
and committing these mass
shootings as well within that
critical period cooling off so
that's what we have today madam
chair proposed I can speak to
the few changes that we did make
in the committee sub
one is that we changed a
business day which was confusing
to many
to calendar day which fall of
his federal rules of civil
procedure and we added two
definitions to
the last section which is
consistent with our other state
laws why we clarify what a
firearm is and who and immediate
family member is which is
exempted from needing to wait
fourteen days if you transfer
over to a family member.
And finally we just clarify that
you can't hand over a fire if
you are sales percent
essentially for any sort of
temporary period it's it has to
be the transaction itself we
just cleaned up a little bit of
that language and with that mid
man chair my experts here are
benjamin baker with the
governor's office he he's the
governor's public safety advisor
and elizabeth johnson general
council for department of public
safety
welcome would you like to add
anything mister baker or mist.
Madame chairman was the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to be here to
provide test money that helps
this committee and it's
deliberation of this important
legislation supported by the
office of the governor and I
think the sponsor who I think
for her sponsorship summed it up
very well thank you thank you we
have already
completed a public comment on
this bill so i'm ready to enter
entertaining questions from
committee members.
Okay represent of reeband then
represent him.
And think you made him chair
representative
so the bill
is the same kind of issues that
i've had previously on this bill
and I can remember something I
think you said last time we like
if I can say we can say one life
it's worth it I can have flipped
this around and think madam
chair and and represent the
experts that if we prevent
somebody from protecting
themselves and they die that's
one life too and I still go back
to I don't know if you remember
the speakers last year i'm on
this bill and and the a lot of
comment that we got about
people having to wait this forty
days now normally it's not that
long but if they're you know a
victim of being a start being
stocked or domestic violence
victim we are stories of of how
they weren't able to protect
themselves and that just that
really bothers me that you know
we're we're basically with the
stats that that I am aware of
and what i've seen is that and
manager you guys can correct me
from rome bet the research I
think that I received for the
california fourteen day waiting
period maybe you said you have
stats to that could maybe tommy
how many people from the forty
day waiting period maybe did not
commit suicider did not commit a
mass crime do you have any stats
on that from new mexico
madame chair representative so
we don't have any new mexico
specific stats however when we
will get the department of
health there in favor of this on
the on the life saving ability
for that manning mandatory
waiting period to take place we
know that as well
that about thirty eight hundred
eligible and eligible
individuals nationwide shouldn't
be obtaining a firearm so that
couples with the fact that we
both understand that those who
are in crisis when it comes to
suicide or typically in about a
twenty four hour period of
crisis.
The longer period of time that
they have to sort of sus out
what's really happening and and
perhaps make a different
decision gives them that cooling
off
amount of time and again this
could be repeated so the
fourteen days starts as soon as
somebody would come in and and
of course try to obtain a
firearm
every single time and so when we
look at both that with coupled
with those who aren't receiving
adequate
time to ensure that the
background check comes back this
checks and balances both and
madam chair and representative
so it's kind of a two bold lots
your you're trying to prevent
people from maybe taken their
own life or going out and
committing some type of horrible
crime is that correct that's
correct venture and so the study
that that I was provided from
california and on that let's
start with the suicides and the
study that they did on the
available waiting period and it
said yeah for some individuals
waiting periods may serve only
to delay suicides whether then
to prevent them and it actually
showed that the most elevated
relative risk of firearms
suicide occurred in the first
week after the receipt of the
weapon and remained highly
elevated during the first month
of purchase
and that more than half of all
suicides with firearms occurred
more than a year after the
purchase and most occurred by
the people who already owned a
firearm so there has been a
study and I leave it with the
rand corporations gun policy
research review study that
showed that
most of you know it may prevent
a suits about just wondering if
you had any numbers for new
mexico and what possibly you've
been able to show I don't know
by any surveys are research that
doing this would help prevent
someone from community side a
new mexico because madam chair
and representative when you
compare it to other states that
have done actual studies.
Uhm it it isn't really driving
with that
go ahead madame chair
representative I think that's
part of the challenge when it
comes to suicide were not taking
in that data and it's also very
new once as to how these types
of situations occur whose
firearm was it was that there's
at what time those are very
individual decisions and what we
do know about the cooling off
period based on the department
of health and the data instead
of sick that we have about those
that choose to do harm to
themselves within that time
frame
number one is we know that with
the firearm it's the most lease
weather or form of suicide so so
we're we're seeing that or
attempt to see commits you aside
in which case we already know
that in those situations if the
firms involved we we have a
really difficult situation so
what we're trying to do with
that waiting period is insurer
of course that there's more time
to sort of think that through
as far as specific data those
that's extremely difficult to
to obtain and so we don't have
anything specific to other than
what we've learned from the
department of health
rate and madam chair and
representative.
So let's kind of move to
preventing like some type of
crime
I I think you'd have to agree
that more than two thirds of god
owners
they I mean they already have a
fire you know most of the time
somebody who is purchasing a
fire i'm two thirds of of
citizens already on another fire
would you agree with that madam
chair madam chair representative
yesterday we've we've seen the
statistics as well I think what
we're trying to do is have a lot
in place for not just this
generation but future
generations making those
decisions as well
and isn't it true that most of
these gun crimes actually are
occurred by guns that are gotten
illegally.
Can you can you repeat the
question and i'll charge it
isn't it true that most of these
like the different types of gun
crimes that occur
or fellows and people are
criminals are not getting guns
the right way they're not going
to go in and and go buy it from
a gun store and wait to fourteen
day waiting period so I guess
i'm trying to see how that
correlates with what you think
it will do for somebody who
wants to commit a shooting for
example as as you all know I
would prosecuted the library
shooter and he got the guns from
his parents safe that were
locked up and he knew the
combination and he went and just
did it and sell it you know I
not really seen how that would
have prevented that situation
from a mass union that occurred
you know in new mexico so i'm
trying to see how why are you
believed the cooling off period
would affect I guess somebody
who's going to be to crime or is
a criminal basically madame
chair representative so we do
have data on the fact that I
believe in the last ten mash
shootings several of those were
within the fourteen day period
including in a twenty four hour
period where they went in
purchase a lawful bought fully
purchased uh weapons and then
they were able to use that
within that that critical time
all the way up to believe ten
days that we from the data that
we have and that they went in
they purchased and then they
committed a mouse shooting so
and I think I believe and I I
would love a fact checker for to
be sure I believe that was also
the farming tin shooter as well
was with then well within
fourteen days that he purchased
the weapon and then committed a
mouse shooting to the the day
that that we have
so it's not just one sort of
unlawful act and certainly not
one person like you said most
lot most folks are law biting we
want them to go and we're trying
to save lives in the category of
both suicide and those seeking
to do harm to others and madame
chair and represent of so can
you tell us a little bit more
about that doubt it that you
have in the mexico on.
How many people use to
department and mash shooting and
specifically to mexico as we
haven't had a ton of mashed into
your new mexico so I know about
the library shooting the
farmington shooting at what
other shootings and mexico that
were or examples could you maybe
provided would be good data for
us to consider
madam chair representative we
don't have a specific study but
we do have data again on suicide
and on the performing ten
shooters specifically
as far as again taking in that
data we don't have a standard
database for the collection of
that information we've
desperately collected these
stories and understanding you
know the questions that your
proposing today so that we can
have that those concrete
examples and information but we
don't have a database of a
firearm shooting deaths and new
mexico currently and and I guess
when i'm chering representative
that's my concern is it is we
don't have the data so to
actually do something like this
and do a forty day waiting
period which could actually hurt
somebody who needs to get a fire
to protect themselves.
Just because you know maybe this
could happen and when we don't
have the data that shows that it
is happening sure there's going
to be a circumstance here in
there and as you say if it saves
one light that's great but you
can flip that around to be like
if it saves you know if the
domestic violence victim gets
murdered because she has to wait
fourteen days for somebody to
you know to get her firearm or
his firearm then it's just the
same it's it's the same argument
and so I just without the data
and I I just again still believe
that this is something that's
premature to be doing without
more studies and data and it's
it's a big position for it and
even the rule people who have to
drive you know if i'm sure
you've been hearing the
arguments you know hundred miles
one way and back in the hundred
another hundred and back to get
their firearm that's a huge
inconvenience for people and and
most of these people are law
about in citizens right it just
and i'm not supported that this
bill I wasn't last year and
those are kind of my reasons and
so there's a little more data
driven maybe i'd consider it but
I I just wanted to see if you
had any good solid numbers about
you know really what's happening
with this fourteen day waiting
period in it it just doesn't
sound like we have that in
mexico or or the data we do have
is showing the opposite so i'm
with that thank you manipure
thank you i'm represented
thank you madam chair
representative romero.
Sorry mrperiod baker and miss
johnson thank you offer being
here I appreciate it i.
I heard a little bit of this
went when we heard from the
public and I would just be
curious as how on page two on
page two lines six and seven.
Subsection be the firearm shall
remain in the custody of the
seller during the entirety of
the waiting period.
I believe that conflicts with
federal law and that the firearm
has to go to the f f l
is that not correct.
Adam chairman representative.
I may need you to drill down a
little bit on your question but
I do have the atform here and
there are a list of you know a
approximately thirty five
questions that the ffl has to go
through to determine whether or
not they can actually relinquish
the firearm so I may be able to
get to your answer but i'm not
sure i'm fully understanding the
question just yet.
Okay
thank you madame chair
representative romero and and
miss johnson it is my
understanding that when the
the transaction happens.
The seller transfers the weapon
to a
someone with an fl
they are giving some sort of
receipt
than.
The during the weighting period
whatever period that is.
Then the assessment is made that
the transfer or the buyer is may
have it the fl transfers it to
the buyer and there is a receipt
exchange there but this seems to
be cutting out the f f l.
Madam chairman representative
you're certainly correct that
federal law governments went in
ffl can relinquish a firearm to
a buyer state law does refer to
it as a seller
and madam chair on point it's
some thirty dash seven dash
seven point one eight two a
discusses that
the ffl is
what the difference between a
cellar is and what an flows and
what they're essentially
what they can do so basically
the the seller is say.
It
has to I can read you the statue
but I prefer
understanding that go between
that the fulfillers essentially
the federal firehomes licensie
shall not refuse to perform a
background check rate but the
firearm seller
if they don't have a current
ffel
license than they essentially
count sell.
Anyways
cause they have to perform a
background check so the way in
which we identify seller in
statue is is sort of a both and
they have to have the fell in
order to be a seller
thank you representative
madam chair representative could
you repeat the statutory
citation please so this is an
our background checks law thirty
dash seven dash seven point
eight while seven point one
eight two and i'm trying to we
were looking quickly to try to
figure out where the seller
language is as well that couples
with that and madame chair
representative him but you to
clarify state law allows a
background check via and as fl
but federal law governments went
in ffl can religious of firearm
that's just the way that our
statutes and replay with federal
law and it is a bit confusing
um.
Okay I I just have a concern
about.
And concern about that and I
will I will take it that and
look at that statute just that a
seller is complying with
new mexico law but violating
federal are or vice versa and so
I I just wanna make sure and and
because it is kind of confusing
I think that something we we
need to make sure that we're not
making.
Transactions that would be legal
in new mexico illegal federally
and i'll look further into that
thank you for for pointing that
out
so madam chair
representative romaro.
What
so.
Is it possible or have you given
any consideration
to have a lesser waiting period
or nope waiting period for
someone who already has a
concealed carry permit.
Madame chair representative we
had thought about that but it
doesn't get to the potentially
harmful to self question part of
the waiting period is that even
if you had
your conceal carry license that
you could still do harm to
yourself and want to have that
quick opportunity to do so with
a specific choice to purchase
the different firearm in which
case that's why we didn't
example anyone okay
thank you madame chair
representative romero.
Do you can you give me an
estimate on how many
put in in cases of purchases how
many times a background check
does not come back within three
days.
Madame chair representative
believe it's even in the fire
the on page three the fbi has
talked about extending the three
day period generally to improve
the thoronest of the background
check to prevent sales to
potentially disqualified buyers
in twenty twenty two there were
a hundred and thirty one
thousand eight hundred and sixty
five denial decisions nationally
and when we look at new mexico
specifically they're about
twenty five hundred denial
decisions made we don't know if
in that denial decision whether
or not a federal firearm stealer
with was giving those firearms
to the purchaser even though if
it was outside of the three day
period so of those twenty five
hundred potential sales votes
firehomes could have been
lawfully sold to somebody who
was denied.
Thank you representative.
Sorry
I had some things written down
in my phone keeps her
got to read my face you know I
know okay.
I think that was I appreciate
you clarifying that I think
representative repeat on a
couple other things that I
wanted to address so
madam chair thank you thank you
very much thank you
representative lane.
Thank you manager.
Um so you know the whole
discussion about mass shooters
i.
It's a obviously returned about
my home
you know farmers and anastic
suffered those um
and so obviously an interest in
trying to figure out how we
could prevent that from ever
happening.
But I don't think that.
Or or when you say that.
You know many of the more recent
nations have taken place that
then ten days it doesn't
therefore follow that if you had
a fourteen day waiting period
those students will not have
happened
and I think we need to be
careful about.
Connections.
When when in my opinion when you
get to that lower would provide
as a human being.
Um waiting fourteen days is not
going to change the mindset now
I can understand from the
standpoint of suicide I think
that there is an argument to be
had there.
But I don't think we should
extend that to to.
Now i'm i'm curious
matter when it comes to the con-
constitutionality of of these
types of laws.
Are there any either state or
federal courts that are reviewed
the constitutionality of of
these and if so what have they
found
yes madam chair representative
so twenty two states have closed
the sloophole that we're
discussing
as well as
it all.
I'll have to get you the number
on the number of states but
there are number of states that
have waiting periods it believe
it's california hawaii minnesota
it's off the top of my head
there's a longer list I just
don't have it in front of me
that said
yes so a number of states have
this and then on point we'll
talk about where they've been
challenged so madame chairman
representative one of the most
famous cases describing a a ten
day waiting period is now the
night circuit and california are
this came this case came about
and twenty sixteen and at that
time it was held to be
constitutional where now seeing
it to be somewhat called into
question by two
recent cases one and twenty
twenty two and one and twenty
twenty three but those cases
aren't actually dealing with
waiting periods they're just
dealing with similar
restrictions
so so we kind of have things all
over the map on the federal site
and madam chair so the twenty
two and twenty three cases are
these.
Dish recorder these circuit
court what level of these these
are both night circuit cases as
well different
different uhm.
Judge by same circuit and madam
chair representative so it's
california florida hawaii
minnesota illinois wrote islands
and the district of columbia all
have waiting periods different
ranges of time
and the night circuit did
recently stay the california
waiting period at ten days thank
you.
Not exactly a launch of this
states I would like.
Discussion for another day
um what in medicare about the
tents are good we have any cases
that deal with this issue in the
country madam chair and
representative
we do not have a tenth circuit
case on point on the specific
issue we are seeing more cases
come up regarding firearms
restrictions in general
especially in light of the brew
in ruling of if it prohibits a
person's ability to defend
themselves immediately where we
do not have one for a waiting
period.
Manager so is it fair to say
that we we don't have if I
understand the expert we don't
have ten circuit case law or
your spring court case law
either affirming or or striking
down this t.
That's correct madame chair the
supreme court did not choose to
take up the night circuit case
that was heard and
twenty eighteen so we haven't
had a supreme court test on
um waiting period specifically.
Okay.
And mountain.
I guess this this bill also
calls for a balancing really so
I
as I understood sort of the
reason for the fourteen days you
have somebody who has passed a
background check
so
under current law they're
legally entitled to purchase the
fireman possesses.
But we are going to add an
additional care that you have to
wait two weeks before taking
possession of it.
The thought process there is as
I understand what i'm hearing
managers.
That hopefully within those
fourteen days someone who would
desire to do self harm.
Would change their mind is that
correct.
I think that's correct manager
and so many sure I guess.
This were the balance he comes
in so why my fourteen I mean
we're talking about human life
why not thirty days or.
A year or like how do we settle
on fourteen it just feels very
arbitrary to me
madame chair representatives so
again we talk about new mexico
being the most rural state in
the country and when we talk
about connectivity and some of
the other challenges with
getting information sharing
information
and ensuring that the fbi check
comes back and certainly for the
twenty five hundred um denials
that came through
we want to be sure that bond
forcement has that information
and that someone's trying to
obtain a firearm and this just
gives us a little bit more time
we're not saying that fourteen
as a magic number we're not
saying that you know thirty is
the magic number with which is
in minnesota currently
you know these are the things
that we as legislators are
debeting and trying to find the
right balance but we do know you
know that when we look at all
the data together that giving us
more time could potentially save
a lot of lives and that's what
we're trying to do.
The man insurance
I appreciate the sentiment I
guess I again I fall on the
solar.
Person liberty where if you've
passed the background check.
I don't know that us and sanity
should set a set number of days.
Um if your legal entitled to on
the gun.
Um.
I don't know why we pick an
arbitrary number.
With good intentions that really
are just going to make things
more difficult for those in the
role area to obtain firearms.
Um I think we heard some
testimony about people having to
travel you know several miles.
And you know.
Understand the sentiment but I
just think we're we're
addressing the underlying
problem.
In a way that's just going to
restrict the rights of lawful
gun owner.
The.
Thank you represent
representative ream.
Thank you madame chair and
representative I wanted to clear
up something that you said
earlier when we were talking
about concealed carey
you're you're saying you want to
prevent this person from
committing suicide
detentions he'll carry person
have to qualify with the pistol
with the background check
manager yes.
Mentally and representative did
the concealed carry person
complete a class and qualify
with a fire that they owned
cause they have to have it in
their possession.
So therefore they already have
at least one pistol madame chair
representative we can't
speculate what mind set their
end at the time that and what
time has passed in all of the
above I mean I could have got my
conceal carry yours and yours
and years ago and then go in to
get a new fire years later still
have my permit what we're trying
to capture is those that are in
that buying period
making those decisions right
then in there
madam chair and representative
how long is the conceal carry
permit valid
madam chairman representative
you may not know this but I am
the supervising attorney for the
concealed carrier unit now I
believe a permit without my
statutes and front of me is
valid for two year old four
years but at the two year mark
they must recertify.
Are re taken what's called a
refresh your class to make sure
they're still meeting the
educational and practical
benchmarks required for a c.
Men chair and expert you are
correct on the dates but to go
out ahead and and obtain your
conceal carry you have to
qualify with a form that you
already had and that's my point
on that but what's moving
madam chair and representative
what about one force and I don't
see a waiver in here for lawn
forcement to purchase a fire in
and wondering why madam chair
representative of the question
goes back why would we need an
exemption for that okay and
madam chair and representative
not all agency issue a firearm
to an officer some agencies they
have to purchase server so if
they have a mouth functioning
fire they can't purchase one.
Okay do you have a question
manager
well that's met him chair that's
more of a statement you know
you're ignoring that not
everyone purchase ever not every
agency issues a fire on to an
officer manager
anyone else.
So I I just would like to
address a few things
one is I actually know someone
who got a conceal career who
does
and he thinks it's very funny
because any can go to cocktail
parties and stuff and say i've
got a conceal curry and he
doesn't have a gun so I think
you know you can you can qualify
with a gun that you don't know
and and it's done so that's
that's point one
point two
is on the conceal carriers you
don't know if they still have
the firearm when at the time
that they they they qualified
and.
So second of all it seems like
it's yet another thing that
whoever is selling the gun is
going to have to track to
determine do they have a conceal
carry is it a valid conceal
carry and you know it's just one
more administrative thing that
those who are transferring the
gun will have to jump through to
to have to deal with so it seems
reasonable to me to have the
same rule for
all individuals
on the constitutionality we are
in a really
unfortunate place because yet
again that you are supreme court
has overturned established
precedent and issued a decision
and bruin that has thrown a lot
of uncertainty into the mix in
terms of what is it might isn't
constitutional and prior to the
session I did some surveys you
know surveying meaning did some
reading to determine what's
going on after that in in the
case law is all over the place
in terms of waiting period
service a sensitive locations
age limits and the like and so I
came into this session having
thought about a lot of that in
having red bruin having re read
hello having read some of the
other cases that have have
eminated since ruin and
concluded that you know we need
to be careful but there is
certainly print plenty of
authority out there in other
jurisdictions of course that
that still uphold the
constitutionality of some of
these measures so we're in a I
think you know area flux but we
as legislators need to do make
the right call decisions based
on our values and we'll we have
to address it in that way given
the fact that we have very
unclear guidance at this point.
Certainly prior to ruin I think
that things were much more
settled but now on the court has
interjected this very unusual
test tests that frankly I think
they're going to learn is really
unworkable and they they already
have a case right now on the
domestic violence front where
they're going to have to try to
tip towards the fact that they
know it's wrong for someone with
a domestic tile it's history to
have cons and they're going to
have to figure out a way to fit
that within the pyradime and we
will get some more guidance
after that ruling is issued but
it's unfortunate that the super
us supreme court has put all of
us policy makers in this
position but I think we are
unsolid having read a much of
the case laugher at least
reviewed a lot of the findings
across the country to say we are
in a position to say that this
is is within the bounds of the
constitution until we're told
otherwise so I just wanted to
let people know I get a lot of
email that says this is clearly
unconstitutional and you are
infringing on my second
amendment right well sorry it is
not that black and white and I
would suggest to you more
research is done before these
emails are sent to me and I have
have it's unfortunate that those
talking points and I was told I
need to go look at certain
talking points to educate myself
or I wrote back and said I
educate myself through the case
law and I feel comfortable
supporting a measure like this
that is when within reasonable
interpretations of a second
amendment at least as of now so
anyone else wished to weigh in
on this point we're we are
outside of public comment i'm
happy to talk with you sure
madame chairman would do
is there a second.
The.
Represent about two second
now madam chair would that be a
do not pass on how yes twenty
nine and do passion house
judiciary yes that I i'm
certainly speaking to say that
every I read everything the
whips yes okay so it is a do not
pass on
house bill one twenty nine and
they do pass on house judiciary
committee substitute for house
bill one twenty nine
and it was moved by speaker
martinez and secondary by
representative of alcohol which
you call the role please
correct
representative chase
representative
no
representative lane no
representative yes
representative.
No
presentative no matter
yes
that involves chairs yes
madam chair yes
viable of six.
Thank you
we're now on
house bill eight elected
officials and government conduct
act changes.
Only one.
I don't know but i'm having food
brought in so you can take it
thank you madame chair and
representatives of
representative kathleen cates
and you have a sub remember that
please help me madam chair I
will
so i'm respectfully asking the
committee to accept the south
that was presented okay so we
the sub is being handed out
madam chair i'd move the
substitute for discussion.
Thank you
we'll give it a minute to get
this the sub handed out and.
The.
Okay would you share with us the
two o two number representative
thank you man chair
representatives it's a point two
two seven four seven four point
eight thank you everybody has
that
we have a motion by
representative sapansky and who
was a second one moving subtract
discussion
okay so we have a motion and a
second by representative of read
your field your your free to
discuss the sub
representative.
Thank you very much madame chair
and representatives i'd like to
introduce my expert witness
jeremy whose the secure director
for the ethics commission and I
would like him to present the
sub thank you
thank you madame chair committee
members the buildings before you
it essentially represents worth
the state ethics commission and
the attorney journal's office
has learned about the
governmental conduct act over
the last four years
and seeks to address them of the
gaps and shortcomings that we've
learned
this bill basically does three
thinks it is.
It very clearly creates an
articulates what is an abuse of
office in the state of new
mexico in response to the
supreme court's decision as
diverse and good tires.
The second thing it does is it
defines what is political
activity and brings in to new
mexico law some of the familiar
provisions from the federal
attract regarding what public
employees may in may not do with
respect to putting activity
while they are on duty.
I made him share the third thing
that this bill mainly does is.
Brings the the several penalties
for violations of the
governmental conduct act in into
twenty twenty four the current
civil penalty is two hundred and
fifty dollars per violation that
that doesn't work for a few
reasons first it's it's almost
as low as to be a transaction
transactions cost and two
hundred fifty dollars per
violation is it responsive to
the fact that not all violations
of the governmental conduct act
or equally severe equally
corrupt and so the the the bill
also uhm.
Updates the civil penalties to a
maximum of five thousand dollars
per violation but removes the
the per violation amount
allowing a judge or a hearing
officer to
to award an appropriate penalty
thank you manager
thank you mister farason thank
you represent a did you wish to
add anything before I go to the
public.
No thank you
okay so those in the audience
who wished to speak and
opposition to the bill please
raise your hands.
The.
Anyone online wishing to speak
an opposition to the pill please
raise your hand online.
I don't see any hands raised
those in the audience wishing to
speak and support the bill pre
please raise your hand limit
your.
Testimony to ninety seconds if
you will
hannah.
Good afternoon madame chair
members of the committee i'm
having a burling code president
of the league of women voters of
new mexico.
We stand in strong support.
The league believes that systems
of justice should be equitable
effective transparent and faster
public trust at all stages.
We asked did you give the bill
do pass thank you thank you.
Mr grayson manager remembers the
committee my.
Part of the justice.
The department adjusted supports
this bill.
Yeah.
Thank you anyone else yes.
And.
What's your last name did you
give your
patrick thank you
and anyone online wishing to
speak and support I see there is
molly swank.
Molly.
The.
Ccn.
Okay we can't hear you money so
I don't see anyone else online
wishing to speak.
Okay so we'll go back to you mad
insure representative I
did not realize my co sponsor
here was represented her veil
and just to the cheese sitting
back as well I don't know make a
statement okay thank you nice to
see a represent
okay
anything else before we go to
committee member.
Very good those wishing to a
representative read thank you
madame chair
and thank you representative
mister I gave mister person
called earlier about a concern I
had this one to kind of hammer
this out a little bit well we're
in committee and it goes back to
the page or the engagement and
political activity.
And section
four while using a vehicle owned
or lease by a state agency or
local government agency provided
however that the subsection does
not apply to the governor of the
attorney general or any other
elected state or local
government official for whom law
enforcement officers provide
security and what I kind of
explain to mister person and I
know he he discussed that he
thought maybe the same
substitution would eh contact
care of the issue but.
What I recall when I was a
district attorney I had a and
and i'm thinking of elected
sheriffs to and elected district
attorneys and we had
a state vehicle that just had a
state license plate you know it
wasn't like a cop car anything
like that but we were allowed to
drive those cars pretty much
twenty four seven as long as we
were working in because we could
be called out on home aside
scenes or anything like that and
have the same time you know I
was a district attorney and I
would actually be
doing like having to show up to
things and I was also running
for office at the same time but
I have to shop to like mad and
and you know different rotary
presentations and I guess that
could be considered political
activity because I was running
for attitudes but it was also
part of my job is a district
attorney and I noticed the
sheriff he's elected also he has
to do that in the same former
fashion and I guess I was
wondering.
I want to make sure that we're
not and I know the case that you
guys are trying to address with
the district attorney who is
driving you know on a saturday
and and you know not an official
business
and so when you say bond
forcement officers who provide
security I could say that the
district attorneys have
certified law enforcement
officers that are are
investigators that I guess our
security and I guess a sheriff
is automatically probably his
own security but I want to make
sure that it's very clear that I
don't really understand why the
attorney generals and there to
see how his own detailed
security okay so
i'm trying to make sure that
we're not going to be getting
elected days who are running for
office who are also attending to
business and share apps who run
for office and have your duties
on the community that could be
considered political but they
could all speak consider just
part of your job and I want to
make sure that language is very
clear that we're not going to be
getting those type of people in
trouble or do we get thrown
investigator in our car when we
go to a lunch
you know that's going to be
you know like a roadry
presentation on drinking and
driving or something so that
that's kind of my concern I
explained it to you and I I
think you understood where I was
going to that madame chair but I
just I don't know if say in us
provide security
is I don't know if that's going
to protect those two entities so
thank you madam chair and think
you representative and this was
one of the changes for the sun
to be able to brighten this a
little more I won't say that if
you were going to murder seen
none similar forcement will be
there and if you're doing it DWI
training and a road that that
would be part of your official
duties as well but I will also
defer to my expert witness to
talk specifically about
ins the other incident in which
you example you provide it which
would be campaigning my you're
in the e
state vehicle.
And in just before you do manage
her and just so we can address
this at the same time like for
example I know da bragman he has
a investigator with them at all
times and might be different for
someone like me if I get caught
let's say I go I have to go to a
lunch thing that's maybe a
republican women's lunch thing
you know and I guess I could be
considered more political
and you know it but it's up by
lunch time works at five o'clock
and and in trying to make sure I
have time to go home and switch
vehicles so that I don't get any
trouble or
dabragman obviously lives in
alba kirky and so that's a huge
place for him to you know have
to stop in and do a lunch thing
and then go switch vehicles so
if you could kind of address
that to at the same time that
think you manage her and think
you represent I will let my
expert witness
speak but I am familiar with
days and other counties and in
fact the the day and sand of aus
for a large large territory and
they do have to switch their
vehicle
deferred to my expert witness.
Thank you madame share
representative reap the the
proviso here is.
Is trying to recognize the fact
that there are some elected
state positions and local
government positions that are
frankly full time
county sheriffs are full time by
statute they're always on duty
the governor of the attorney
general's office there's the
attorney general those are just
there's our jobs that are our
categorically different than
than my job or other other state
executive jobs and um.
So the question is help how do
we draw that mine and the the
provisor attempts to draw the
line by by security detail the
governor of the a
sheriff's days have security
detail and that distinguishes
them from for example cannot
secretary who also always has
access to a state car but in no
way should be used.
So mentioned in mr fair so
da's are full time you know like
to me we get called two in the
morning and three in the morning
when I was day yet to get up and
go out to crime seen whatever
that is so it is very similar to
the web probably the eight month
age you probably doesn't really
even have to cries as they
probably are actually days are
more active than the age on
actually participating in their
especially in rural communities
and where you have to drive a
long ways and so is the goal of
this just to make sure that
you're not campaigning from I
mean campaigning like.
From your
I mean if so I couldn't come if
I was selected district attorney
and I was coming home from work
and I had to go to an event that
was considered political I would
need to go switch cars or could
be in violation of this if I was
a distr.
Chaircoher
madam chair representative
rebuild if if uh state election
official for him law enforcement
of.
You followed in this proviso and
an exception to this section
okay and so.
Security
is the officers provides
security so that's just going to
be the ordinary
I mean understanding of what
that means so if it's
articulated that you know you
haven't you have investigators
that provide security to the
district attorneys that's going
to fall under this and they're
going to be protected under this
as long as you're not
campaigning obviously you know.
Thank you madame chair think you
representative I different my
expert witness yes thank you
thank you I just wanted to make
sure that was clear and reco.
They don't have anything else
manager
anyone else.
Oh representative ring.
Yes madame chair
representatives I really think
that paid five and wine three
just go after government
official and put a period in
which say that is for law
enforcement officers provide
security that means you're
providing security for another.
And in the case of the sheriff
unless he's got the undersheriff
with him or some other officer
you know it might be confusing
but I think you are revisit that
look at it I think that you know
those positions have vehicles in
the use of you know I have to
say it.
Whether your two year for term
or four year you're always
running for office so I think
that but I want to go to a
different area man of chair and.
And mister expert was going to
page four and line twenty two
while wearing a uniform
identifying the office sort of
position.
Well the sheriff is wearing his
uniform so are you saying when
these campaigning he's got to
change into a suit
I think I think we may want to
revisit that and.
Does that also include the ag
whose using is DO j emblem
that's on his shirt.
Or on his jacket
then thank you manager thank you
representative range I I will
say I am i'm not a a d a sheriff
but I am license realities and I
do not where my legislative pin
when I am talking about housing
I am very careful about that but
I will defer to my extra witness
on the specific question
literature representative this
question that the
the attorney general's office
also wait and on and the the
proviso
on the next page that accepts
certain state elected officials
and local government elected
officials it's an exception from
this subsection which would be
subsection c so deputies
shouldn't be wearing their
uniform in a campaign commercial
if they really like their
sheriff for all kinds of reasons
but if the sheriff falls within
that proviso um although I don't
love it it's not the application
of the best principle that
public resources shouldn't be
used for election airing.
Under this text sheriffs would
be accepted.
Yeah madam chair and and expert
I think we ought to try to clear
it up and wait say that as we
don't want to invite ethics
complaints that just take up
your time but that's all my
questions thank you madame chair
thank you represent any
representative himbry
yes thank you madame chair and
thank you representative and and
err mrperiod person was accurate
sorry
I I just wanted it to make sure
it
did the proviso that begins on
page for.
The.
Line twenty five applies to all
of section c and not just
or subsection c
not just
would I be subsub section for
paragraph yeah okay so it's to
the entire section see is thank
you madam chair and thank you
represent it yes thank you
madame chair I just wanted to
for my own atification.
Anyone else else with questions
on the bill
see any happier entertained
emotion noting that we have a
sub
since I just
motion
when I am gonna have a chairman
i'll go on help me there just in
case
mover do not pass on house bill
eat but he do pass on how you do
sure you can substitute house.
Very good idea okay mister
chairman
perfect speaker so we have a do
pass mode do not pass on house
bill eight and a do pass on
house judiciary committee
substitute for house bill eight
made by a speaker martinez and
second
by representative of all condo
partners in crime parent
now we have long forcement in
the room okay won't read you out
right now okay so emotion front
of us we call the role please.
Yes
yes
representative mcqueen.
Representative read yes
representative ring yes
representatives of yes.
Madame chair yes.
Madam chair yes payable of mind
is zero we ever do not pass on
house bill eight and they do
pass on the judiciary committee
substitute very good thank you
it's gonna snow
doesn't look like it
sounds all right so we are
adjourned I do want to note that
we have our committee to dinner
tomorrow today at six so be
there please be nice to
socialize tomorrow night if the
