This is to match the federal
recommendation.
Um.
I an introduced my experience
has your tease
I think what this is going to do
is
do not talk about it a little
more
thank you madame chair members
of the committee representative
yes but this builders
essentially is it simply reduces
the level of damage to a vehicle
as the result of a crash from
five hundred to a thousand we
will still get the uniform crash
reports or get the data but it
just means that we don't have to
process the full amount of data
or the number of reports it
limited it reduces it by
approximately fourteen percent
for the purposes of reporting
and meeting federal requirements
it falls in line with some
national centers
and creates efficiencies.
For the department madame to
require car just a very minor
bump on your bumper and is over
five hundred dollars so this is
part of the reason to left that
threshold and we now staff
requestions
thank you.
Um before we go to questions and
the panel in the committee let's
go to the audience.
Those wishing to speak an
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
The.
Those online wishing to speak an
opposition to the bill please
raise her hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
Secretary.
Thank you madame chair
reconcerned a secretary of the
message department of
transportation
thank you for your support
we've actually through the
process of getting this bill out
this year because last year
regard all the way to center
floor.
Just ran out of time is we
realize that we've got to create
an administrative process for
self reporting and we've got to
spend some time and energy to
notify the general public that
this is an expectation
requirement and statute for them
to make these reports so we're
hoping that as a result we can
reduce the work load on police
officers who are going to take a
report for the purposes of
complying with this statutory
requirement but two is is
informed the general public this
is a responsibility and we just
need the information the top of
for us to provide that to our
partners and assess where we
need to do work on eliminating
crashes thank you thank you
secretary anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak and
support the bill.
The.
Anyone online wishing to speak
and support the b.
The.
Okay back to the sponsor and
comments before we go to
committee no battle true thank
you okay
members.
We're waiting for gale a
representative chasing so do you
have any questions on the.
Question.
The.
Representative of them to I just
we're just going to thousand
dollars don't take much to get
to without a lot of bill and we
like tell everybody a dog ran
into my drug almost like
thousand dollars into them
connected a dog ready to because
you gradual front of my drug
matter damage to my truck with
way up there.
I made him terror repair corner
I think we looked at reason it
to fifteen hundred dollars and
statistically that didn't
really help much so we're just
gonna stick to a federal
guideline.
Um
basically what you tell me about
representative with that we just
follow in the federal guideline
that's it that in chair are
called coin yes but a like I
mentioned we did look at going
that fifteen hundred dollars and
analysis
didn't really seem to say it
would help and efficiency or
anything so that's what we're
imagining with the federal
and guidelines are thinking
manager
thank you anyone else with any
questions.
So before we can enter past
emotion when you need to wait
for one member who just step
down to her office so it's
wondering if her assistant can
figure out where we were out
with that.
This.
The.
So i've been told the webcast is
down is that right.
The.
Nope it's working maybe it was
down a little bit ago and okay
very good.
The.
All right i'm happy to hear a
motion representative man of
chair I move it do pass on house
bill one eight.
We have a motion for a do pass
on house bill one eighty six
made by representative reading
second invite representatives
pansky would you call the role.
Representative on
representative chassis.
The.
Representative henry.
Representative lane.
Speaker martinez representative
mcqueen.
Representative read yes.
Representative ream
representative sapansky yes
made a vice chair madam chair
yes six to zero
we have a duty your you have a
due pass with a firm in a vote
of six to zero thank you madame
jerk committee.
Okay so the next item on our
agenda we're gonna listen we're
going to do house memorial forty
five.
Prison rate legislation task
force representativ.
The.
Representative chasing.
Think you I have alexander
taylor here with me today and
she is with the.
Manager the new mexico coalition
sexual stop program
last year said a room senator
pope has senate memorial and I
had a house memorial to
create a task force on the
person rape elimination act and
its enforcement in the mexico
presence and jails
we got started really really in
the hair and we really just
wanted to have the legitimacy of
other memorial to continue our
work because we weren't able to
bring results to the courts
corrections in justice committee
this year and just per by way of
for the public school it's back
when george w bush was president
there was a huge bipartisan
commission on prison rape
elimination and it included both
elected and officials and
members of the public and they
passed the prison rate
elimination act of that time and
so we're just checking on how
it's going and i'm i'd like this
tailored to add just briefly.
Madame chair members of the
committee thank you
so as leader cheesy stated our
intention with this memorial is
to continue the work and have a
longer time period the task
force has some outstanding
things that we started
disgusting that we want to
follow up on including exploring
the county level needs of our
local county gels which do not
have like enemies d d as a state
agency and can oversee the
entire state of its facilities
looking at the county level
needs I reviewing policies and
what needs to change regarding
that and conducting a statewide
evaluation of barriers around
pre infacilities across the
state so we've already
identified some of the ongoing
work we have i'm in the entity
parent identifying other
questions to be answered thank
you thank you
strange title prison rape
legislation task force I don't
know we're not
it's the prison rape elimination
act.
Okay
before we go to the committee
let's go to the audience those
wishing to speak and opposition
to house memorial forty five
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak
and opposition to house but
memorial forty five please raise
your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of house
memorial forty plus five please
raise your hand.
Support okay those online
wishing to speak and support of
house memorial forty five please
raise your hand.
I don't see anyone
represent a chassis any further
words before we go to committee
committee members.
Any questions.
Madame chair I move a due pass
on house memorial forty five.
We have emotion for due paris do
we have a second second we have
emotion for a due pass on house
memorial forty five made by
representative reading seconded
by representative sapansky would
you call the role.
Representative of con.
Representative chasey.
Representative of hambury
representative lane
speaker martinez
representing it representative
mcqueen
representative reap
yes representative reading
representative you yes.
Management chair.
Madam chair yes.
Seventy seven you have a dupa
thank you have a good evening
so the next item that I would
propose is house bill to thirty
six public safety retirees
returning to work
and
we lost a quarter but I believe
the speakers just out on taking
a phone call so we'll we'll have
a core minimum
so if we could have oh
represented chassis again okay
okay.
So if we could get that amended
hand amendment handed out well
we're.
No.
Two thirty six.
It was it was a sure.
He's coming back but super his
brief cases there so I think
he's okay.
Okay we're check it we're
checking to see where the
amendment is
we are checking to find the
amendment.
The.
Yeah.
Oh yes.
Yeah.
As they have choose.
Thank you.
All right
so
representive chase you have the
bill and your mending you have
to propose
what look like relatively small
amendments is that
okay so how would you like to
handle this you want to talk
about the amendments we can move
them for discussion or you want
to talk just about the bill
first let let us talk about the
bill real quickly and
then we can do the amendments
hospital two thirty six is which
is co sponsored by
i'm the coasponsor setter
stewart in representative lane
are co sponsors
and it is a very limited narrow
return to work bill in the area
of public safety and we have a
grace philips from new mexico
county and carter bandy with the
unions and they will explain
very briefly how it works what
we're doing with the two
amendments is we're adding to
more categories of individuals
who
fit into the the need
their vacancies that can't be
can't be filled right now so
that's what's happening and
there is a senate bill moving
and over here with there is a
mirror of this now
so would you like to confirm.
Thank you madame chairman
members of the committee carter
bundy with afternoon so some of
you have been familiar with this
for a long time or probably
surprised to see that asks me
and also the old cricket please
auto association in the new
mexico federation of labor all
standing and support of a double
dipping bill we so called double
dipping because we still have
general concerns
but you know for fourteen years
we have been talking about some
of the flaws with this policy
generally.
And for the first time in
fourteen years we've actually
been able to get all the
protections that we thought were
important to make sure that
workers still had the ability to
advance that workers pay wasn't
unnecessarily suppressed
and that this was a very time
limited and position limited to
really life in death places
where we had significant
vacancies so very quickly the
eight different types of
protections that we have in the
bill is it is limited to
frontline public safety
including with the amendments
these are people who literally
are in positions where they
could be
attacked sharp stamped killed
any given day these are life and
death positions are they
certainly handled
issues that relate to the life
and death of our children
of our citizens incredibly
important positions where we
have significant vacancies the
second thing is that you have to
already have been a retired
member which means that we don't
create an incentive for people
to leave
which which some bills over the
years have done we don't want to
make the problem worse the
thirties that there is a three
year son said but it will be a
phased out sunset after the
three years if you want to take
advantage of this you have to be
already retired you can only the
latest state you can step in is
the end of june twenty twenty
seven
but you still have thirty six
months to finish your service
said there will be a staggered
phase out of this as it goes
forward
the job position the specific
job position in that employer
has to have a vacancy rate of
above ten percent we didn't want
to create a situation where we
filled up all of the vacancies
with return to work employees
leaving no path for people who
want to become long term members
of the work force to come into
these positions.
We also don't want to become
sort of a regular thing it has
to be a place in places where
there is significant vacancy
rates there protections against
layoffs again a similar idea we
don't want to see are people who
are going to be in the work
force for the next ten twenty
thirty years laid off in the
event that there is a collapse
in the economy and people let go
the people who are returning to
work should be at the front of
that I we also pretty
protections for shift bidding so
they for example in a
correctional facility you don't
have people coming back
and counting their seniority to
start with were there than
taking people who have earned
that seniority for that shift
bidding and taking them and
putting them to grave yard
schling shifts are the last two
were that there is a good
tracking mechanism in this so
that the employers will have to
track vacancy rates and who
they're bringing back with their
former positions were and the
like in the final piece of truly
important for parasolvency.
Is that
the parapayment step word the
otherwise paid by any full time
employee must be paid on both
the employer and employee side
without the accrue of new
benefits and we think that's
important for a couple of
reasons
first if that position had been
filled by someone who was not a
return to work employee there
would have been in the second
tier of period and that tends to
be something where they are
paying both for their pension
and helping take care of the
unfunded accrued liability and
the second is we didn't want to
give any incentives for
employers to prefer return to
work employees over people who
were going to be part of the
work force for the next ten
twenty years we see this as a
bridge were hopeful and we've
seen real improvement by the
county hopefully by the state.
Um in increasing compensation in
actively recruiting are we see
this as a bridge to go from our
very severe vacancy rates that
we have right now in these life
for death positions are to get
us to a point where three four
five years from now we have much
better staffing and frankly we
would not have been doing this
had we not seen the county's
start to make a series effort we
want to think leader chasing for
bringing this and of course the
counties have been great partner
and we think this is a good bill
thank you.
And one of our co sponsors his
joined us.
Representative northern leader.
But thank you a madame chair
members of the committee i'm
great philips general council
for new mexico counties and this
is a priority for us principally
because of the very serious
staff they can sees in our
detention facilities and you
some of you have heard me speak
about it before so I won't dwell
on it except to say that we have
been an experiencing persistent
vacancies since we started
tracking a year and a half ago
with more than half of the
facilities that over twenty
percent
four facilities over thirty
percent five facilities over
forty percent the juvenile
detention facility and bernalio
county has a sixty eight percent
vacancy rate in there detention
staff and what we heard from our
administrators was we need help
at the at the floor level the
people who are working in the
housing units and.
I appreciate what carter said
about the the work counties have
done to increase
wages which is true I mean we've
we have as an example sammy gel
county was ten dollars an hour
and now they're sixteen forty
six and that's in two years leak
annie went from fifteen dollars
an hour to twenty six dollars an
hour a link in county thirteen
eighty to twenty and I could go
on and on with it with very
significantly i'm not going to
okay
but because of that we know that
it isn't enough to just increase
wages we really need the bridge
and we really appreciate the
sponsors leadership in and
helping us get to this point.
The.
So that's the bill and the the
two additions tonight would like
me to go ahead and discussion
purposes
protective services investigator
is added that is an employee of
the protective services division
of cyfd
because they frankly have.
There very very understaffed in
this area and the other one is
the apis officer.
I pointed by the attorney
general or district attorney and
who is certified line for spent
officer who investigates an
enforcer state lines so that's
it.
M.
Um
so those in the audience wishing
to support this piece of
legislation of it opposed this
piece of legislation please
raise your hand.
The.
Those online wishing to oppose
this piece of legislation please
raise your hand this is
opposition daniel web.
Yeah.
Are you a supporter mister webb.
Well we'll go to the audience
because like I have a clue that
he is a supporter those in the
audience wishing to support the
bill please raise your hand.
Okay over will start over here.
Chris response
for the
association you want to think
both sponsors for bringing
reference it brings up
legislation we have been.
Working against this beautiful
over fifteen years I believe
even before they were tended as
the obvious finally
inconclusion that this be some
legislation is focused on it and
what we need is offers industry
that's what our community needs
right now and this will make
sure that that happens normally
that it also collects data that
we can analyze later on and
making sure that this
legislation actually was working
for what they can is designed
for so we think the again we
appreciate the the
modern.
Thank you john
thank you madame chair members
the committee jan liberts with
the new mexico federation of
labor afl cil
to echo the comments for
baltimore we think the sponsors
for bringing this forward
you know as as an organization
that's all purposes to fight for
the right and and benefits of
our workers safety is probably
one of the most
basic of rights that we want to
fight for and when we get to a
crisis situation with our our
public seat defront line workers
where there's just not enough of
them it big the entire system
that much more unsafe.
And so anything we could do to
bring workers into a critical
situation like this to increase
safety for all of them is a top
priority for us I
certainly we take the lead of
our public sector employees as
me way to understand the real
needs here by as with stated by
mr body this is a bridge and one
back hopefully is not needed for
all that long in hopefully we
will see more workers come into
the system through better pay
through better benefits which I
know we're all working on but
for an urgency reason that is
why I think we're all here today
thank you hopefully for your
support.
Thank you anyone else on the
side of the room wishing to
speak and support.
Okay we'll move to the other
side of the room those wishing
to speak and support there were
hands in the back when we start
back there
not a chair members of the.
Thank you.
The administrative loss of the
court although this bill is not
part of unified budget with your
strong sport.
One day one week one section
i'll skip the the stories and
just say we've been trying to
hire security for years
we can do it only people are
interested in our part security
position our retirement
unfortunately up to this point
we've been gary
that no parking.
And they're still passing all
our some.
Thank you anyone else back yes
sir
members committee on my claim I
work for the americ.
Yeah.
Thank you anyone else on the
side of the room we should speak
and support.
Okay those online wishing to
speak in support.
Terry call.
Yes good evening manager and
committee members i'm terry cold
presidency all for the greater
albert her key chamber of
commerce we've already heard
mines of how hard it is for our
long force or an agencies and
jails to higher and retain
officers house bill two thirty
six offers a concrete financial
incentive to help encourage
trained officers to return to
work for three years giving
department staff what they need
while shoring up their hiring
and retention practices by
allowing some per a retirees to
return to work and keep their
pension benefit this program has
a real chance of increasing the
number of experience law
enforcement and correction
officers and our state and smart
guard rails will ensure the
pension fund is not at burstly
affected while eliminating any
chance of abuse by early retiree
simply looking to double there
hb two thirty six is line too
quickly deliver more off search
to help keep our state safe
that's why we're here to
encourage you to support it
thank you
thank you terry.
Anyone else wishing online to
speak and support please raise
your hand
I don't see what there's another
person date mr web where are
you.
Your hand was up.
And now you've disappeared oh
mister webble you on mute
yourself please.
I don't see any mr web can you
unmute yourself
sorry I guess we'll move on we
have some amendments that we
probably you've discussed them
do I have emotion
to adopt the amendments to move
manager
yes please solicits look at
house
to two eight zero zero four
point one happy to accept
emotion to adopt that amendment.
Moved in second and but moved by
representative of speaker martin
a second by representative reab
any opposition to adopting the
amendment with the last four
digits as zero zero four point
one.
I see no opposition we've
adopted that amendment the
amendment is the last four
digits are nine seven eight
point one.
Happy to entertain emotion
emotion by representative
reseconded by speaker martinez
to adopt
the two o two number nine seven
eight point one any opposition
I see no opposition that
amendment has been adopted as
well
okay any remarks before we go to
committee
chasing I think we've explained
everything thank you thank you
anyone
okay
well.
Okay anyone wish to discuss
because I do
okay
so.
Yeah.
When we first I first heard
about this bill we had
corrections officers and police
and then like last week I spoke
with some of the advocates in we
heard about cyfd.
Narrow it's really needed all
these guard rails and then
I heard just tonight we have
another group added peace
officers I guess it's the piece
officers that's going to help
the courts that right.
The.
No.
No chair at the
it's defined as a person who has
appointed by the ag rda whose
certified line force man officer
who investigates and enforces
state lives.
I mean what it who their courts
were already included madam
chair okay so what what pressing
need is this one intended to
address I get cyfd that was
explained we had the two
previous already in the bill
what what's the peace officer
that's so pressing the
actually the major duty that is
really missing right now as the
execution of warrants.
And so that's the peace officer
does that so it's in the day
certified law enforcement who
executes words.
Okay all right
you know.
But you don't want
representative i'll call me want
to say something but your omeral
concern how started with two and
now we have four and then we'll
have should we expect something
else between now on the floor
that that could be a few days we
might be able to find some more
I this was a concern I expressed
when the bill came forward to
you know when it was raised and
the ink is not dry and we have
two new outhones.
I'm just very concerned by that
I was assured this was very
narrow these are very needed and
now we have two more mountain
chair I think arguably these are
both related to line for a spit
in public safety and the the
narrowness of this bill is not
just about the categories it's
about how it works that one can
only participate for three years
while receiving a pension.
And after that that one goes the
idea here is to and and does not
the person who returns to work
doesn't get a real advantage
over current employees so it
gives these agencies an
opportunity to build their work
force with the younger people
and not have them be at a
disadvantage of the whole time
but enable their upward mobility
so that's part of the near on
this is not just the nearerness
except that the public safety
factor is pretty big right now
madam cha.
Thank you
I also seen like phase outs not
really be phase out but that's
another thing that we can talk
about probably in three years.
So is there anyone else who wish
it yes represent.
I guess
nobody knows everybody knows
that I am that a lot of higher
word would just be
so when I had to be honest about
it.
I am always said that that come
in and ask for.
The way I describe with the best
place that I can say is when
asked book or book it on.
And we're not going to weep
there three years next year
we're going to come back and
natural book it to mass
and left the way the street
works but here's a big question
is my big big question and I had
death this before.
Going there going to rich it to
administration we opened it up
and renewed it it was wide open
everybody could come back to
work
over come back to work and get
the retirement
right everybody could do it I
did matter what what department
you worked for.
Then it's out of the problem
tell me how it solved the
problem then.
Madam chair represented about
**** I think it didn't precisely
because it didn't have these
safeguards so one of the things
that we saw happened over and
over again I certainly know that
a point in the pd had this
problem is that people came in
to management positions so I
think it did fell some
management positions but we
weren't filling the front line
public safety positions and in
fact it probably made those
positions worse because people
saw no path to improvement and
we started to lose people to out
of state and to just other lines
of work so I think i'm that
that's precisely the kind of
floor that his lettuce to oppose
this for years and more
incredibly grateful to the
counties into other people
including the governor in diego
are supporting this much more
unlimited bill that we think
really just addresses the front
line issue without creating all
the unintended consequences of
the wide open building in the
two thousand and
cheers in the and ask for given
this but the
I think is that what happened
was it in higher than people
all these people that they
didn't have to train
any new people although people
figurely
they did away speak for lack of
a better word
in the meantime these
departments that were heard in
today and have been heard in
full of black past few years
having had anybody to replace
all those people that they had
sitting there I remember side
who set there to correct this
officer he was working there
when I was working there which
was a long line I would go and
he was still there because they
have anything better to do
thirty five years thirty six
years he sat there.
And.
I think it's there was the
department of corrections see
why they didn't have to go
searching to drain the new
people they just get these
people there until like I said
and not on all these old people
if they did a way
we we there do we close the door
and those.
People that were there and were
brought back and came back that
have gotten to the point where
they can no longer work
now we're really paying because
what happened
we didn't train anybody why did
we put anybody because.
The state the mulicipalities the
counties.
They don't want to spend money
in new people then rather just
keep the old people there their
budget a great you go to the
county managers you go to city
managers where does the bonus
come from their bonus has come
from saving money how do they
say money.
Don't drain new people that's
not you don't know people at the
bottom you don't
you'll have to spend no money
training so now we're going to
do this and we're going to
openly off he thought.
Are we going to keep undoing
this and i'm saying that I would
be honest with you because I
know and it's not there be three
years from now next year I
expect to see
where representatives will come
back the way it has been every
year
and and we can expect and we're
gonna say when you did that much
before last year you did that
much now you can let us do this
much more and we're going to
keep on doing this and what
happens to our younger
generation that are growing up
understood a new mexico
there's no jobs with them
because we don't need them we
don't need to hire people at the
bottom because we got people
that are there for the rest of
their lives so I don't have much
more to add to this i'd be they
have from day one and I don't
think that we care how narrow
you make this there is no search
thing that makes it narrow
enough where the government
would not drain new people to
come into the work for
the use of generation cannot be
trained that they will not spend
the money to drink new people to
come into the work force
nothing's going to happen are we
going to do is keep all
repeating the same thing over
and over again and that's what
we did we did it doing to the
demonstration we went ahead I
mean it was might open I
remember what that was the
registrators
rent similar community schools
all the clerical step the
superintendent staff they all
retired and it came back he
could never hide her young
person i'm sorry better getting
a little bit of
your point
thank you anyone else before we
take a vote on the yes yet
absolutely representative
sapan's thank you madame chair
and
madame leader I just wanted to
say I I too was skeptical I too
was concerned um about.
How we incourage new members of
the work force
how we frankly ask our public
entities to compete with the
private sector and with other
entities that they're competing
with to.
Have employees fulfilled these
you know very important public
safety positions but I I do want
to say that I I believe that
given the nature of these
positions.
All of which have had incredible
vacancy rates have had
incredible.
Rolls in keeping our communities
safe.
Um knowing that we have
been really wanting to support
it see why fd and keeping our
kids save then
keeping our communities safe I
am really pleased to see that so
much at its obvious from the
level of detail in your bill
it's it's very obvious the level
of work and negotiation and I
know that those kinds of
negotiations are not easy so I
just wanted to um.
Offer that because they know
that for all of the parties to
come together in the way that
they they needed to to get this
bill to a place where there is
this level of detail and
spacificity took a lot of time
and effort and also.
You were really working to find
that middle ground
and so a I respect the
chairman's.
Concerns and and I too I worked
in state government when I was
in my twenties during the time
when the your previous doubled
it being was enacted and I too
worked with a bunch of retirees
that came back
one of the benefits though was
that they taught me a lot they
taught me how to write contracts
they taught me how to do rfps
they target me how to work with
providers in the community and
sell it
there were some benefits there
as well so I I just wanted her
to offer without it and thank
you for putting in the amount of
time and i've heard it took to
get the spell to this place.
Representative of fun no and I
don't have to explain my room
representative chasing
representative henry.
Representative lane yes
speaker martinez yes
representative mcqueen.
Representative reap yes
representative ream
representatives to pansky yes
manifest chair madam chair yes I
mean no no.
Vote of 5-2.
So.
We have magically lost our
chorum right before we were
about to talk about the electors
fall selectors.
Speaker madam chair I believe
that there's at least one
committee on the senate said
where we have a member.
I don't know if we would be okay
with you we could just stand in
place for a little bit see if
those folks come back sure that
would be great
so why don't we take a little
break and will be waiting to see
if some of our members come back
thank you speaker.
