Madam chair here madam chair
here.
We have a couple right.
Representative Nibert you are
first up with house bill one
sixty five uniform unclaimed
property act thank you madam
chair house bill one sixty five
is not a simple bill.
I will introduce my experts here
to my right is Mr Jack Burton
partner with the roadie law firm
and in Albuquerque and Santa Fe
to his ride is Mr Chris Mario
with the independent community
bankers association and behind
me to my left is Mr John
Anderson.
Also with the independent
community yeah.
Thank you Mexico bankers
association.
And Madam chair on I will
apologize for giving you a very
late amendment it only changed a
few words I don't think there
was much substance to it but
there was some cleanup from the
other amendment so we do have an
amendment before you and I don't
know if you want to introduce a
bill and then talk about the
amendment or if you want us to
do do the amendment first and
then just talk about the bill I
think it would help if we knew
something about the bill okay
talk about the amendment.
The
Revise your foreman claim
property act is a revision and
it's a complete revision to our
existing uniform unclaimed
property act that has been
In existence for for some time
the the latest rendition
nineteen ninety five and before
that we we had a similar act in
nineteen eighty one that was
superseded in nineteen ninety
five.
This revision unlike the
of UCC bill that are brought
before you last week or so which
just added some things
throughout the the uniform
commercial code this is this is
a complete.
I wanna say rewrite but it's
it's a complete new
Act is not just changing words
but it does rewrite it
reorganize the the Act itself
for the most part it follows
it's very similar to our
existing law that's in place the
reason that this bill is
important is because technology
has outstripped the former act
there are types of property that
are not we're not contemplated
when the current statutes was
was enacted in you might think
of some things that you may may
have.
May have invested in our mail
yourself virtual currency B. one
of them.
Raul cards stored value cards
much like a credit card accepted
has actual dollars on it
municipal bonds health savings
accounts did not exist the in
nineteen ninety five
employee Rick reimbursement in
you accounts custodial accounts
for minors health savings
accounts would be another
example those types of of
instruments or those types of
accounts
need to be subject to unclaimed
property because after they've
been gone some time without to
at two thirty that money needs
to find its way back to the
rightful owner and this is the
mechanism by which those monies
and accounts get back to their
rightful owner and if they're
not claimed ultimately just need
to the state of New Mexico.
So
this covers those types of
things this law unlike the the
current law it provides more
specific
More specific guidance as to
dormancy periods that are
applicables and it has different
dormancy period so if it's an
employer holding account for an
employee there's a one year
period because generally
employers and employees have a
relationship and I know where
they went and employers need to
get that money back to their
employee quickly other things
are are we have longer periods
such as a securities it's not
uncommon for people to hold
securities and I felt for a long
time that after a certain time
that accounts dormant and there
needs be a mechanism to try to
catch up with folks
There's also expanded remedies
for for for holders over and
above what the current law
provides in the holders of
person that's holding that money
for the benefit of a of another
and how they interact with the
administrator which in our cases
the taxation and revenue
department
and then that's it it has
provisions in this law that are
not exist in the current law
regarding confidential
information and as we all know
there's been a big push to deal
with confidentiality in
information that should not be
disclosed to the public and and
so there are provisions in this
law to do that.
madam chair
Plus my experts have some
general overview to add
market get to the amendment
Jack do you have anything.
Thank you covered.
Madam chair and discussing this
issue with the our local bankers
they have requested that we find
a slight amendment and that is
before you this two oh two
numbers point two two five two
four five point four and this.
An of the moment for discussion.
And so this amendment will has
its genesis with.
The the bankers in the state
having reviewed this a massive
piece of legislation of but felt
like we needed to provide
previous sentiment to deal with
that I'll turn it over to
Mr Burton and Mr Mario to
tell us a little bit about the
amendment.
Yes.
Okay the madam chair members of
the committee of one state of
three four things about this
movie.
Well first of all it does come
from the local bankers
executable it comes from other
states within draft this thing
out of whole cloth.
and it's a compromise they
didn't get everything they
wanted.
in the third it is has been
cleared with the uniform law
commission to make sure that
there's no unintended
consequences.
The subsection a.
Of this amendment it's a new
section.
One or two point one subsection
Hey recognizes that the
financial institution divisions
of regulations and licensing
department is the primary
regulator of state banks.
Of in if they have examined a
State Bank for compliance with
the.
On claim property act within the
last five years the of
administrator.
Normally it cannot we examine
them again it would be
superfluous instead the FIP
terms over there compliance of
X. ray of the papers so there's
no duplication of exams six
subsection we provides for the
exception for that that is if
the administrator has reason to
believe that the bank is not in
compliance will then you can
examine the fact so that's
that's the big the amendment.
That this that this does so the
the rest of the amendment sort
of.
Provides I would say technical
amendment carry that forth that
through
the bill.
Hello.
I don't have anything else to
say Mr Moyer you want to add
anything madam chair members the
committee out not covered it.
Sufficient.
Session so once or any questions
that you may have with respect
to the amendment.
Questions on the amendment.
I
would like to move the.
Madam move adoption for.
Second any objections to
adopting the amendment.
I don't see any.
So
You have an amended bill thank
you madam chair and just couple
things before we go to questions
on the on the bill itself I will
point out that on page forty
nine this bill similar to a bill
that you've introduced
Does provide for the names of
the parties.
Who are having their funds
Subject to this process to be
published in.
I proper newspaper.
And has a provisions for for
that to occur which is different
than what we did a couple years
ago where we basically just
provided for publication of
notice of their available online
and we've discussed that in
connection with the the other
bill with the uniform at does
provide for actual publication
of the names in the newspaper
And with that the will stand for
questions as to the substance of
the bill madam chair.
Did you under the committee
first amended the public purse.
That anybody would be so
interested within the U. S. like
no bills off.
We have empty seats what's that
you.
those would be in opposition in
the audience to this bill please
raise your hand.
Okay
those wishing to speak in
opposition online please raise
your online hand.
those wishing to speak in favor
of the bill and the audience
please raise your hand.
Okay those wishing to speak in
favor online please raise your
hand.
No hands.
You've great disappointment
Representative so X..
Thank you okay so let's go to
the committee Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair is a
neighbor appreciate all your
work on the issue you're from
bills better you than me
You know of I do not read this
word for word I did look however
at the newspaper since we've
heard talk about that.
Representative mentors and never
what happens if there is an
newspapers the county.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen the the I believe the
publication statutes recognize
newspapers around the state and
if the county doesn't have a a
newspaper then there's generally
a newspapers that affects that
clutter in our area of the state
that is recognized as as
providing legal notices those
wouldn't just affect this act it
provides it's the same act that
would deal with publications
generally legal notices and
Harding County I don't know
whether there's a newspaper and
Harding County but but there's a
mechanism by which you have to
publish legal notices and this
would be the same methodology.
Madam chair representative
Nibert
It you know I I don't see that
in the bill just scrolling
through it
Newspaper published in the
county was the holder the
property.
Representative are a.
At least once a week for two
consecutive weeks.
I mean there's there's a
newspaper that serves these
mountain area
I mean they might also get the
the Mexican the journal because
they're not that far out that
that newspapers published
monthly
you know that there are
There are fewer and fewer
newspapers.
I genuinely don't think this is
the best approach.
in that I also look at it and it
says name and last known and
address.
And and then chairs and I've
heard a I thought we
specifically got rid of the
address provision.
Because it was problematic.
Madam chair and and the
representative of the the last
known address here the name and
address is to tie the people
together these are unclaimed
properties because nobody has
responded to prior efforts to.
Get that money to the prideful
owner and so that address is not
their current address or they
should have responded to the
attempts of better prior to the
publication this is the last
ditch effort so if you're John
Smith.
And your from Travis county that
that need to do a whole lot but
if you're John Smith president
grant and you see that in the
notice
Sure the alert you that you're
the far from a party to it's
being addressed we have a last
name like mine it's not not that
price because of a problem but
there are some names where you
need more than just a name to
associate or to provide notice
to that individual.
Image chair representative I
work I I I understand that and I
understand that
Makes it easier to find people
but I guess my concern is there
are people that don't want to be
found.
In publishing any address for
them could be.
Problematic.
And again.
They would have had to fail to
respond to several efforts to.
Advise them that this money is
available.
Steps required to retrieve their
money and the publication is
really the last gasp effort to
get them and frankly I'm.
The.
What my bigger complaint is not
the address my bigger point is
that that
I live in the same house that
I've lived in for twenty years
I've only had two houses and
Russell and yet I'm on the list.
I never got the got the mail
notice and and I'm on the list
currently
So I I don't know
I don't know how else to to
provide notice to people who
have property that belongs to
them.
And alert them to that fact
without trying to give some
information that this is a
person and and this is the right
person you don't want to publish
social security numbers you
can't
but you have to do something
more than just a Greg Nibert
from Travis county
when you have some very common
names.
Madam chair representative
Nibert.
I am.
We remain.
Unhappy with that provision
thank you.
Madam chair representative I'm
happy to amend it but
you know eight years and never I
I I believe we restricted
information and and this bill
should conform to that bill.
Right I mean why why are we
will return in two different
directions.
Because I believe that that
there's some recognition that we
made a mistake a couple years
ago and not.
Not having publication of names.
In the newspaper and obviously
there's been some effort this is
an additional effort to try to
get back to the situation where
we actually are publishing names
in the newspaper as opposed to.
By the way taxation revenue
department has its own claim
property list go on the website
which is our current statutes
but Madam chair representative
Nibert I don't want to belabor
the point but.
I believe this language is
inconsistent with the language
of the other bill passed out of
this committee to restore shaped
the newspapers.
Representative.
Madam chair it is house bill
twenty six I.
And you'll recall Representative
we had a conversation about
concerns about safety and those
sorts of things and we moved it
to I think the word
municipality and that comported
with what the tax secretary
suggested is the how their
system works
Representative so I you still
have the four I just wanted to
ensure that I I just I think
madam chair is in there I think
you do understand that the point
so thank you madam chair and
representative of I'd be happy
to chains were last known
address to municipality you if
that's what you like to do
Yes you can.
And so let's be clear on page
forty nine line seven line
seven.
Right the words last known
address if any winter thank for
us to address if any and insert
the in lieu thereof the.
Word municipality.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I wonder if it we should
retain their words last known
address in municipality you are
correct okay that's that's right
just strike address comma if in
a comma.
And and certainly there of
municipality okay so we have a
motion from Representative
Romero seconded by
Representative Sapan skate to
just to be clear
amend line seven to delete.
address.
And if any will address COVID if
any comma and add municipality
is that I get that correct you
do.
Sure.
What about folks that live
outside the agency called your
rural area do we what about
something like a zip code I
don't know if yes yes pally
confusing some well I I hear you
and that came up Representative
when we have this conversation
but the tax department has a
electronic system that tracks
people by municipality and they
attach them I think the closest
miscibility in where they live
if that I and I see my experts
in the audience nodding Mr ran
so I think I said that correctly
Representative.
Okay so we have a motion on the
floor and it's friendly it's
friendly so is there any
opposition to the motion.
No opposition to the motion to
amend this I just stated.
Okay anyone else have questions
or comments to make about the
bill.
Well I have
and I gave you a heads up a
little bit about this
Representative I've read the.
FY are on this
well.
Areas inputs on this so the F.
FIR mentions a lot of issues
that licensing and.
Whatever that you know maybe
it's our committee it's maybe
our Canadian gamma Fund and
Alice's in our book that hawks
about about a lot of issues in
terms of what R. L. D. raises
its concerns about methodology
used in compliance examinations
including due process issues
and they provided a suggested
amendment
If there are other kinds of
things throughout this FY this
input that we've got our
analysis from the committee
that's referencing analyses that
the other agencies did and I'm
concerned.
It raises concerns on my part on
me to say that.
Madam chair I went through.
Most if not all of their
concerns and I made notes on the
on the
Your money
The draft and I'm happy to go
through some of those I hi
certainly did not see some of
the problems that that were
raised at that based on like on
page sixty seven million
educated that the the two
sections are in conflict with
one another when in actuality
when you read it they're not in
conflict.
The first one says three years I
can't sell it within three years
and then the next the the
section down below says that
their with a cell up.
After six years and somebody
files a claim then it's limited
it's apples and oranges so so
the two provisions are not in
conflict they just can't sell
the security within the first
three years.
If they sell it.
Between the third year in the
six year than the rightful owner
of the security can can come
back in and claim the value of
that security.
So the agency should not be
selling securities until that
six year goes by so I I see
those two things in fact in
concert with one another not in
conflict with one.
Issue specific question so on
page I think three of our
committee analysis use of an
estimation experts
extrapolation method may not
survive challenges of due
process and taking Clause of
Fifth Amendment for instance and
then there's a you know there's
a a lengthy description as to
why did we attempt to address
that or.
At.
Yeah I just really not we can
meet we get a copy to the
Representative I'm sorry to be.
Ask you questions that you know
how to materials for I can speak
to that.
Okay helpful Mr Burton.
Our.
I am.
madam chair members of the
committee that of.
That came from a of trade
association made up of holders
of
on claim property.
and there.
Their allegations about
constitutional questions.
Use of unfounded because.
This provision that they're
talking about is not new to
unclaimed property laws it has
been in our statute.
Chair members of the committee
these provisions in our statute
and in the statute of twenty
other states.
Since the nineteen ninety five's
unclaimed property law and no
court has ever ruled that to be
invalid or unconstitutional.
Thank you for the.
So Representative Nibert were
you able to eat you see what I'm
talking about one and continue
going through
where I made notes
The there was a concern on page
seven the.
Line eight.
Or.
They were raised some issue and
and I would just say that the.
One seven eight I think
Clarifies that the administrator
shall retain and played property
fund of at least a hundred
thousand dollars a year it is
just a number it's not.
It has no association with with
the values of the properties
that are subject to the
unclaimed property act I think
they just want to have some
method to pay these claims as a
as a are validly verified and
and comments
and hopefully the administrator
would have a lot more money than
that because I know on the oil
and gas from.
There's often times very large
sums of money that are that are
subject to your claim property
act
on page seventy one there was a
question about the directing the
charges
and they the administrator gets
to direct these charges before
the money goes into the general
fund I I I think that's how it's
done now.
I I didn't see the the concern
was was the building advance
their
On the page eighty nine
There was a concern.
I think it was in about line
seven or eight
Regarding.
Two years and.
Frankly I don't know what the
government conduct act provides
but there was some issue they
raised about whether complies
with the government contact.
Conduct that if this is not in
line with the government conduct
act that's one year then I'm
happy to make it one year I
frankly I don't care
but that.
They think that there should be
some period of time between when
they leave this post and thank.
Or that the contractor C. may
not be employed by a contractor
with
for for two years if that needs
to be changed and then I'm happy
to changes but I don't know what
the government conduct act
limitation is if it's one here
let's put one here.
That's one month one month
that's probably not going to be
an issue that.
That
Thanks to manage but if that's a
concern of the agencies and then
I'm amenable to thirty whatever
time.
They want to put in.
All right Representative area so
you're essentially saying you
disagree with any of the the the
comments that TRD put in that's
what I think I sent.
Overall I I saw their comments
you know it is R. LD or whatever
it is going to require them to
to.
Make sure that their current
system can be updated to comply
with with any new requirements
that are here and remember
that's all purpose of this is
to.
Have these different types of
accounts and property.
And to.
Make sure that we're doing
everything we can to get the
money to the rightful owner I
mean that that's what this whole
act is about is trying to get
the money to the people who are
entitled to that money and so if
it takes some additional steps
to accomplish that them I mean
that's that's what we have to do
they do get a charge an
administrative fee to to handle
that and.
I think that's something that we
we have to be doing
if there's any specific
you know.
Local problems that we need to
change like to comply with the
government's conduct that.
I'm I'm happy to do it and I
don't think two years is.
To long but but I mean if it's
something different we can do
that I think most of things that
that they've addressed very
they're not an issue for it's
kinda I don't want to do it.
Okay any other questions from
members.
When was the motion Madam moved
to pass of health to one to five
in twice as men amended now.
We have a motion is our second.
Secretary of the.
Motion by Representative yeah
we're a little short here.
You might want to vote on this
bill.
You yeah we don't we gonna have
to sit sit tight three twenty
seven two or we do support for
okay just needs one two three
four five.
Yes we need service six six yes
we got six all right.
But we consider it leave and
walk.
Yeah.
So we have a motion by
Representative lane and second
by Representative Alcon is it to
pass to call the roll
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen no and
believe it or not I'd like to
explain more of a.
Representative night yes.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Stansky yes.
Chair.
Madam chair no.
Do you wish to explain your
phone just center so I
I voted no because of the the
newspaper issue because I voted
against that the prior bills I
just want to say I genuinely.
Respected presheaf them our work
because into the thing so thank
you for that.
For.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you committee.
Well let me see.
I had indicated to
Representative Romero that right
colors because she has another
you know thing coming up and she
has gone missing so let me see
if I can find.
Under the.
Yes and you're gonna be for the
rest of the day I think so.
For your bill for.
So before you start I just wanna
update everybody on the agenda
we are not going to be doing the
last two bills on the agenda
three ten tax increments
Development district changes or
House Bill twenty seven just so
you're you're everybody's up to
date and I thought I'd just let
everyone know
the floor is now yours
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair this is a house bill
one seventy two which
essentially clarifies
conflicting civil law we're
unfortunately sexual assault
victims today for those there
perpetrators who pass on right
now there's a conflict of law
that allows for judges to decide
whether or not that case carries
on.
In which case this
clarifies that those cases
should continue and revises the
conflict with that I just like
to introduce my experts when the
Hemphill
and she can clarify further with
this build us.
Thank you madam chair
representative I am an attorney
in private practice in Santa Fe
and a member of the New Mexico
trial lawyers association this
issue came to my attention and
the attention of my colleagues
because we learn to that a
federal judge had looked at the
two I thank them statutes one
specifically says that if there
is a personal injury case and
the defendant dies the case does
not get this mess to the second
one makes an exception for
assault and battery and at least
one federal judge relied on the
second one in construing a
statute of limitations in New
Mexico as precluding the
continuation of a lawsuit
involving sexual assault so we
who represent on childhood
victims of sexual assault in
against school administrators
are very concerned about that
language and so we've brought
this issue forward to try to
have a correction to remove that
exception for sexual assault and
I can tell you that we represent
these please we've
Representative primarily girls
but they're also boy victims and
it takes a tremendous amount of
courage for these young people
to come forward and file a
lawsuit and nothing could be
more devastating than bringing a
lawsuit and then having the
accident of the death of the
perpetrator because your case to
be dismissed so that's what
we're trying to address here and
because perpetrators of sexual
assault can be in person killed
in prison or in the case of one
perpetrator we had this this
past two years be airlifted to
Albuquerque for comment a
seventy two year old.
school administrator who is
assaulted two girls we were
terrified that that that that
man would pass away and then our
case would go away after these
girls had invested so much in
and bring the case forward and
fortunately he didn't die but
you're in that situation we're
having to to pray for the
perpetrator to stay alive so
that your case stays alive so
we're asking for correction.
Thank you before.
We go to the committee I will
ask go to the audience to see if
there's anyone wishing to speak
in opposition to this bill.
I don't see anyone online is
there anyone online who would
like to speak in opposition to
the bill please raise your hand.
No one anyone wishing to speak
in favor of the bill please
raise your hand.
June madam chair members of the
committee The New Mexico trial
Association supports this bill
I'm sorry Julie unapproved
Representative The New Mexico
trailers Association we support
this bill and I believe
Alexandria is on the line from
the coalition of sexual assault
programs and.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
favor of the bill raise your
hand okay so now go online and I
see two hands first there's
Janet Williams.
You're speaking in favor of
house bill one seventy two.
Janet yes okay yes thank you.
R. madam chair members the
committee I represent our net.
Thank you man we strongly
support this bill thank you.
Thank you and Alexandria Taylor.
Thank you good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Alexandria Taylor and
executive director with the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs and we support
this bill it takes a public
health approach to responding to
sexual violence civil remedies
promote access to the single
system designed to provide
victims with the monetary
resources to engage in healing
forms of justice the John
Hopkins university estimates
each incidents of sexual thought
cost of survivors on average
over two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars and this bill
emphasizes access is access to
care and supports a diverse
group of survivors for whom
other systems of justice may not
be accessible and so we think
the sponsor agency Hemphill for
bringing this issue forward
thank you thank you.
Anyone else online I don't see
anyone else online we'll go back
You have anything you wish to
say to conclude okay thanks.
First.
Thank you madam chair.
I'd I'd just just a comment real
I think very interesting
actually for us to have a
dialogue about why any of these
things should be.
Unlimited upon the death of the
defendant but I think why it's
important certainly we talk
about assault and battery is.
You experience actual injuries
in those cases.
at least in most of them and so
the fact that the defendant is
deceased doesn't remove the fact
that you've actually experienced
real injury and and under our
system you're entitled to
compensation for that and so
this this change I think makes
complete sense thank you madam
chair.
I just.
Representative Alcon.
Madam chair I just have a.
I guess my thank you Mr why are
we this settling for just the
magistrate for misconduct in
office might not just the judge.
The a request that could be
District Court judges could be
we need to look at it could be.
On to the Supreme.
please just the the magistrate.
Up targeted here.
And because this madam chair
representative my understanding
is that this is where the
conflict is only and in regards
to these courts.
Madam chair representative the
rest of the statue is clear that
these would carry on these types
of cases would carry on it's
only in relationship to the
magistrates with
a big basically that that that
that that is state language that
was there said that we could
from the JP to the magistrate.
With that the metro court judges
who replaced JP also.
But the okay.
Leave it at that.
The injured and anyone else in
question.
Representative Nibert do you
have a question.
I guess it feels like a
Saturday.
The pass rate reduces saying no.
Yeah exactly.
Anyone else with a question or
comment on this bill.
Does anyone wish to make a
motion.
To pass on house bill one
seventy two made by
Representative semansky and
seconded by speaker Martinez.
To call the roll please
Representative.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read.
Representative rain.
Yes.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
You.
We are now on House Bill three
fifty three south campus tax
increments Development.
And Representative Hochman Vigil
or or speaker but Martinez I'm
here we are.
I didn't see you.
Where is.
madam chair members of judiciary
we're here talking about three
three fifty three
which authorizes the south
campus tax increment development
district or to to issue bonds
not to exceed two hundred sixty
seven million dollars and net
proceeds as adjusted for
inflation for public
improvements that will be owned
by the city county state and
other local local government
entities and one in the in the
city that's the City of
Albuquerque the county is
Bernalillo county the state is
of course our beautiful state of
New Mexico with me I've got to
experts I'd like to introduce
first Leri program many of you
know already and Theresa
constant and I'd issues from you
and as well and with that we
stand for questions.
Thank you
go to the audience.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in favor of the bill
please raise your hand happy to
hear from you and you can keep
your comments two minutes I'd
appreciate it
Mr had a meal.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee David economy on
registered lobbyists for the
City of Albuquerque in the city
of thanks to sponsor the experts
for working with us to build our
concerns to stand strong
supporter of the bill this
provides important economic
driver for community in an area
of the city is in the and is
ready for development and ready
for the infrastructure to fuel
up involvement similar to the
committee to two passed much
thank you Sir.
The madam chair EMR systems all
effect on development director
for County.
County has contributed to
support the campus to the G. R.
T. in property tax increment
provided support.
Thank you anyone else yes ma'am.
Chair of many incentives rail
and I am by chair of the board
of regents of the university of
New Mexico has been on the board
for four years and this is
actually one of the first
project in the phones of happy
that I had the opportunity to
work on I strongly support.
this project I also live in the
number of the primary account
community and when I see this
piece of our campus and what it
is today and what it can
transform into.
Not only for the university but
also for the broader community
of Albuquerque Bernalillo county
in the state for sports venues
for of public infrastructure for
economic developments bringing
jobs for the retail to a.
Really seven out of I think that
this mechanism gives us an
opportunity to transforming
otherwise very difficult to
develop piece of land into
something transformation but
community so I'm here to support
strongly us.
Thank you.
Anyone else.
In the audience.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in favor of the bill.
I don't see any hands so we've
concluded with the public
comment alright before we go to
the committee could get one of
you to explain the actual
financial relationship I I love
privative but I think that's
kind of key to understanding
what this projects all about in
terms of what the the the
structure for the state would be
in terms of how they would have
to contribute to this project.
Madam chair members the
committee I'll also begin with
the thirty thousand foot view
and then I'll defer to the
experts to make sure we give you
a comprehensive explanation but
the ten uses a portion of the
new gross receipts tax generated
as a result of the development
of the ten is no no no new gross
receipts taxes districts for the
city county and state and it
does not provide any tax revenue
to issue the bonds all risks
carried by the developer for the
construction of the
infrastructure and the case of
the south campus to it this is a
UNM development corporation
project and also pledges gross
receipts tax increments to pay
principal and interest on the
bonds and with that I will which
one of you can be it's going to
be Larry.
And madam chair members members
of the committee of for this kid
at the at the city level the
city dedicated seventy five
percent of the new growth in
gross receipts tax to the to
District the county also has a
dedication of seventy five
percent of both gross receipts
tax and property tax which they
can do under the statute the
state's portion is is it's fifty
six point I believe two three
and the state board of finances
who sits that recommendation and
that's what this bill is based
on so the the bill itself is
actually allowing for issuance
of the bond which is bond total
of two hundred and sixty seven
million dollars and I don't know
if others for would like to add
anything to that.
I think that's fine.
Any other questions do we have
Representative of speaker
Martinez.
That question but I do
I am the second Sanchez billing
with chairwoman Hochman Vigil.
Supportive of the concept but I
do want to offer some
constructive criticism and it's
not against any of the UNM folks
you today this predates all of
you.
this is clearly a priority for
the university.
I think.
The university has worked really
hard to bring the county the
city.
Different players into the.
To the table how to the table to
execute what will be and as you
can see from the head out.
A very much needed.
And very well received
development.
This is not the first time madam
chair that this legislature has
authorized bonds or.
Really created space for the
university to undertake major
projects twenty years ago or so
The late speaker behind I think
and and others really led the
effort to help.
rebuild north campus health
sciences in particular community
center as an example.
And.
My understanding is that
promises were made at that time
to also bring up.
The not so sexy part of the UNM
right
a lot of centers that serve
underserved students.
A lot of the.
spaces that work to retain New
Mexico's nontraditional students
in higher education.
And for the last nine years that
I've been a member of the
legislature.
I seen those groups constantly
get cut out of the UNM
government relations UNM.
Financial legislative ask
process.
With their and and you know I
don't I don't want to call them
out by name
but I I trust that you all will
not.
Pushback against them right but
they're they're groups like the
community engagement center
which I was part of when I was
in college.
Who have to go outside you and
M. to get private funding to run
incredible programming that
helps retain students for
because the university has not
prioritized.
Not only that.
But many of those.
Groups.
Are not even allowed to talk to
us because they're not going
through the proper channels.
According to university so my
constructive criticism is.
Please.
You don't have to make a promise
to me and then twenty years
later somebody's gonna say the
problem is a second.
But as long as I am in this
legislature and as long as my
colleagues.
Put their trust in me to lead
this chamber I'm gonna be
watching like a dog.
I can not have ethnic centers
come here asking for a hundred
thousand dollars just to keep a
staff person.
The university failed to
incorporate them into their
annual multi million dollar ask
of the legislature.
So on the record in this open
committee process please.
Do not forget.
All of those different spaces
that exist within the
university.
I understand it's a lot of them
I understand you all have to
organize your own selves.
And prioritize the asks and the
needs.
But for twenty years it's felt
like those folks are not even at
the table.
I think your PSP process is very
complex I would argue it's
broken I would urge you to
rethink how you do that.
because otherwise.
We're failing an entire.
Secretary.
Of.
Both to support and help fund is
University for their tax
dollars.
so madam chair super proud of
this project.
That areas blighted it's been
underdeveloped for thirty years
here's an opportunity to do
something exciting and great for
that community.
But please don't forget that
there's other incredibly
important work happening at your
university
Sure that I've seen you all put
into this over the last probably
couple years.
And the forty supporting this
madam chair
and thank you for for your
indulgence.
Thank you speaker
Representative McQueen.
I.
Thank you madam chair
resentful vote yes
Q. explain me why we need to do
this.
madam chair Representative
McQueen
again I'll give you the thirty
thousand foot view but this
area's been difficult one for
the City of Albuquerque for a
long time and
getting encouraging economic
development private economic
developments in any other way it
has been challenging and this
model basically was presented as
as of a method or an ability for
our U. N. M. the City of
Albuquerque in the county
Bernalillo to move forward
in in doing something that has
needed to have been done for for
many years of not that that not
not decades so
Mr Harmon's discounts and the
notice thank you I could madam
chair and Representative McQueen
theoretically we wouldn't have
to do this but it would take
decades and we wouldn't achieve
the vision that we have right
now for investments in space
that can promote economic
development and benefits to the
people the citizens in the area
theoretically we could wait and
see if we could find private
developers who will develop in
places that don't have plumbing
the don't have lights that don't
have sidewalks theoretically we
could get state funding for U.
N. M. properties to
to do the kind of economic
development and research and
development activities they're
listed in here but the money
that would be available to that
I would have to be honest we
would focus on our teaching
mission before we would go to
this this activity so by using
this mechanism of it'd we can do
a great public policy public
promotion activity that benefits
the city the state university
New Mexico in the county and so
it it's a it's an exciting
opportunity of using it to
structure.
For this public purpose the
cement here Representative
experts
Appreciate those answers not
really what I was trying to get
out with my question
I you know I understand.
The state element I get it like.
Create economic activity a nice
place to live you know all that
stuff it's great
why hasn't that happened before.
Why do we have to do this to
make that happen why hasn't that
happened on its own.
Madam chair representative
maclean
I have to defer to someone who
has a longer have a longer
history in memory of this
project
to to give an answer I know that
it's probably it's been.
In.
It's been a process probably
longer than I've been alive so.
Committee who's gonna defer to
miss Kim Murphy Mr Timothy
who'll give me that.
Chair.
Madam chair yes we're bringing
people out audiences at okay.
Is there some special expertise
is this a bond person or.
Have years to experience why it
hasn't happened in the past I'm
sure we're asking Mr Murphy to
speak on the history of this
project and why we have been
unable to do anything in the
past with another tied with
another method other than attend
sure go ahead.
Madam chair
Representative McQueen my name
is Kimberly the former real
estate director at the
university of New Mexico I was
held that position for twenty
five years until my retirement
since my retirement a few years
ago I have had the pleasure to
be a designated point person on
this on this to project in the
in the short answer to your
question Representative McQueen
is that there are two things
that have held us back from
being able to develop this area
on south campus one is a
financing mechanism for
infrastructure which the which
the ten directly addresses
that's the purpose of the ten.
Into is to have a comprehensive
master plan view of the overall
development of of that parcel
and that's what the ticket
that's the other benefit that
the ticket has it forces the
applicant the landowner the
developer to look at the
entirety of the area within the
district and master plan that in
in very great detail so the two
things funding of the
infrastructure and and they met
the master planning of the
overall development we have
tried believe me we have tried
over the years to develop
of and bring.
Businesses to the south campus
it has we have unfortunately
because of the the two
impediments that I just
mentioned it has been piecemeal.
But for every every bit
development that has come
through Albuquerque whether it
was an employer or a retailer
like Bella's we we've tried to
get them to come to south campus
and and they were very intrigued
by that location they liked the
relationship with the city
But we couldn't guarantee them
that we had if we had a solution
to providing the infrastructure
or looking at it in a
comprehensive development like.
So madam chair Jalan
A master plans are COVID as
developments and is part of a
development and certainly there
are many master plans that
aren't connected to to to why
why would you need the to to do
the master plans.
Madam chair Representative
McQueen the message that I'm
talking about is a much more
detail than just a simple land
use kind of plan or what they
call a bubble diagram showing
with the various uses are the
the ticket process.
Requires us to look in very much
detail as to how that land is
developed with specific kinds of
users are going to be there
and to provide an infrastructure
master plan to show where the
infrastructure is to Lopez
located and what the cost of
that infrastructure is and those
two additional things are
crucial to providing this what I
call comprehensive view of the
over the overall development.
Okay
Thank you for that I I.
Madam chair.
Percent expedite.
The theme master plans for not
connected with at the end of the
bill will unfair on that
connection let me ask you this.
Of his handout.
Who who owns all this property
is owned by the university.
Madam chair representative in
Canada defer to agency constant
constant and I just thank you
madam chair representative queen
the bulk of the land there
belongs to the university of New
Mexico however there are
questions that belong to the
City of Albuquerque also.
And miss madam chair answered I
I guess
The I'm talking about like the
parcels not none assert
certainly the the roots and
things like that like this is
that is your answer so accurate
for that.
Adam chair representative claim
yes that is still accurate.
Madam chair representative
experts
we are told I I hear over and
over again.
Both in New Mexico and and from
elsewhere that.
We should use public funds to
fund athletic facilities because
it promotes development around
those athletic facilities.
In here we have an area that's.
In the heart of the athletic
area.
Why why with why would
businesses want to be located
near the pit and isotopes park.
Madam chair representative of
Burgundy misconduct Constance
minus thank you and madam chair
Representative McQueen this for
the reasons that.
prescribe to buy a former real
estate director Kim Murphy we've
tried it's an expensive thing to
put in a.
An activity that in place that
has no infrastructure and so
that has been the big obstacle
for us for developing this land.
Mmhm mmhm.
Okay Mister chair that
seven experts that the
infrastructure talking about
our.
I mean there's there's roads are
you talking about water sewer
electric you know your general
utility type infrastructure Here
Representative McQueen if I can
answer that directly yes so of
the two hundred sixty seven
million dollars to six seven
point four nineteen million of
it will be used for what we call
subdivision infrastructure that
streets utilities drainage those
types of activities fourteen and
a half million will be for what
are called amenity land
improvements such as pedestrian
walkways parks plazas bike paths
we have also in that total nine
point eight million for transit
and public safety improvements
that will include the
construction of a
police station or police annex
in that area and then fourteen
point two million for recreation
solar energy facilities that are
in this set in essence
infrastructure so those are the
things that I would call
infrastructure out of the two
hundred sixty seven point four
million that we are asking for
from the state the county the
city.
For these purposes inventor Sir
I I wasn't I didn't jot this
down but that didn't sound like
it added up to two hundred sixty
seven million it does not stop
sorry and chair.
And Representative queen in
addition we have forty five
million dollars for parking
structures ninety one point five
million for the development of
research and development labs
and offices that will allow us
to expand the south campus
technology park research that's
direct research of the
university New Mexico and also
collaboration with national labs
and seventy three point four
million of that is for
interchanges on interstate I
twenty five so improvements
there so I believe all of that
it will lead up to the two
hundred sixty seven point four
million.
In addition to that we expect
this will generate possibly
three hundred plus million
dollars of private developer
funding to actually build
buildings like the grocery
stores and the restaurants and
the other activities in that
some.
So this is just the public
funding so the public funding
will leverage private
development in Madam chair the
expert
The get the grocery stores would
those be built on the it would
would you self had to do with
the families with.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen it would be a a both of
those things so in some for the
most part we would.
Lease where we could lease but
if we needed to sell up have in
order to attract a service
provider that was important for
the district we would consider
the sale we're very careful of
the university New Mexico about
not selling public land unless
we absolutely have to in this
case we may need to.
And madam chair
expert that this might be my
last question
it's those is those uses that
generate the the gross receipts
taxes that are used to pay back
the bonds is that correct that
is correct sorry yes madam chair
and representative claim that's
correct.
It.
In in madam chair
thanks for the I think you
mentioned the.
Research
Facility this the secretary
press receipts access.
Madam chair members of the claim
that could depending what the
activity is in that building and
whether or not it's private it's
leases in the building or public
activities right now roughly
nine percent of the south campus
technology park science and
technology park excuse me S. T.
P. we first with us is private
so there are some possibility
for possibility for gross
receipts tax from activities but
we expect that the bulk of it of
that portion will be research
and development activities
related to the university.
And then chairman expert how are
the the gross receipts taxes
capture so I for example I I yes
Representative eighteen fairly
new Miss Vigil the of the we
felt they weren't getting their
share of their gross receipts
taxes they didn't have a
separate zip code in that how
are those accounted for.
So that they're separated out
from.
Payments that we go to the city
or the state.
Madam chair representative with
queen there's actually of
reporting code on the gross
receipts tax form for two
district and then.
What how you figure out the
income is you have a date set
date that's start your your
baseline zero and then they can
implement based on growth from
that standpoint.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
What I look at.
Districts or.
You know I get my head around.
What we're trying to do and we
talk about you know upgrading
this area of
And I look at your maps.
I'm a little bit surprised that
it's not larger.
What is this.
Because you've excluded a lot of
areas that I think need to be.
For lack of a better word
upgraded or enhance.
And for example.
For a long time since I've been
over there but there was a
vacant lot north of the.
Circle K. used to be a circle K.
on the corner of
Yell and and the state is our
jobs
And.
Or just south of there that
intersection the stuff over by
quarters.
Saves me a lot of that needs
some help.
And yet it's not in the district
as a Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative no I
don't believe it is but but also
like I don't believe that the
university.
It owns those parcels of
property and so if we were going
to expand it to district or do a
second to those are the kind of
areas where it is right for
because that's it's a good
brownfield and infill but the
other thing we've seen with
other tips Madam chair
representative I've been
involved with all of the mixed
with the exception of Sunoco is
that the area around as you
start to develop it and you
start bring businesses and you
start to see improvements that
surround the districts as well.
Well I'm looking at the map
madam chair.
Representative.
We have a long.
Rectangular.
Brown.
Extensions I assume that's a
street.
Why would the street the.
What would you corporation just
a street into this district
that's not generating any tax
revenues.
In requests thank you madam
chair representative Nibert that
is actually a
an area that this important to
the City of Albuquerque to
produce park land and support
space for recreation relates to
some schools that are in that
yes that strip so that is
actually closer and closer in
nature to our desire to work on
space that is
A benefit to the people who live
in the houses around that area
thank you.
To my understanding is that the
sorry madam chair and
Representative night but my
understanding is that is going
to be and not take commercial
although it is part of the brown
town center but is actually
gonna be more park land
recreational space.
So madam chair representative
are you adding it just so you
can spend money there because
it's not going to raise any
money.
So you want to be able to.
Of use the tax revenue generated
from elsewhere to this little
strip that really isn't
associated with any of the other
lands madam chair and
representative Nibert so as we
Matt this out we were looking at
areas that could be of benefit
to the city as well as the
University of New Mexico so in
addition to that brown strip
where we plan to put in so
Recreational space and
improvements related to the
school that is there there also
are at the base below the
baseball fields in the softball
field you'll see suggested
sports facilities possibly
soccer fields and other spaces
the ideas to invest in this area
make it of benefit to the people
who live in the community but.
I should point out the two money
made can only be used for
investment in infrastructure it
can not be used for ongoing
operations are ongoing
activities so as we think about
what actually goes there we will
need to make sure that they can
be maintained over time and that
will definitely be something the
City of Albuquerque will be
concerned with.
Madam chair representative then
we look at the brown colored
block in the.
So.
Was cornered we we have a wide
area that looks like an island
that's land that's excluded from
the to.
Madam chair representative
that's exactly right and it's
not owned by the city for UNM.
And there's already development
there there are hotels there say
I believe a
Restaurant restaurant gas
station is there to.
Well.
The I mean.
If you're creating a.
Tax district don't you want
hotels and existing restaurants
in the district.
Why would you exclude them.
Madam chair representative
Nibert.
Because those are already those
those pieces of the property
surrounded to district do not
have the need for that public
infrastructure those are
existing businesses they're
already generating gross
receipts tax revenue that the
state benefit from from the city
in the county so they will help
supplement the activity within
the to but they've already
received the infrastructure to
it's just it's important to
remember Madam chair
representative ten dollars can
only go for public
infrastructure so all the rest
has to be private development
money so since they're already
there an existing they don't
have any need for that
additional infrastructure
because they already have it.
And madam chair and
representative Nibert we want to
be careful not to cannibalize
existing tax revenues that are
already there and are being used
to benefit the public so our
goal is to create new gross
receipts tax new construction
tax and then use that to build
the infrastructure for this
area.
Madam chair representative you
are.
The the pit University arena
All your buildings down there
are currently generating some
tax revenue to the state are
they not.
To have that Madam chair
representative yes.
So that argument doesn't make
any sense to me.
We're already doing that.
And so why wouldn't you want to
incorporate those other areas in
two years taxing district to to
help raise revenue for what you
want to do the whole area I
always thought these things were
were supposed to enhance an area
and what you what you have here
is you want to New Hampshire
years but not anything around
and the very things around it in
my opinion need more help than
the university lands Madam chair
representative Nibert but
remember when you when we look
at Ted you're talking about
incremental growth in gross
receipts so those yes we already
have revenue generated in those
existing businesses that's in
the base already.
So we don't anticipate any
growth in that existing base in
the modeling of the ticket has
to be new gross receipts tax
revenue to get new gross
receipts tax revenue you have to
create economic based jobs which
is what which is part of our
application process to the board
of finance so they look at the
types of jobs are going to
create the types of buildings
and services that are going to
be new to the district that's
going to create that growth.
So when you're looking at those
existing businesses that doesn't
get to count towards the two
because it's designed to
encourage growth in gross
receipts tax not take advantage
of existing gross receipts tax
revenue.
Well again that makes sense to
me but it also makes sense to me
that you got some vacant land
around here that's not included
within your district and.
Most of the area that I see here
our buildings.
And parking lots specifically
buildings and parking lots for
the athletic program at the
university of New Mexico
dormitories and and then your
science and technology center
that's that's just south of C.
N. M..
Am I missing something there.
Gets one more factor so madam
chair and representative Nibert
could you explain the reason for
one owner please special expert
review.
Madam chair Representative
Nibert.
The ticket the ticket Act really
requires a single developer a
single property owners to be
responsible through a
development agreement with with
the city in our case that's
that's responsible for
implementing
in advancing funds for
infrastructure
within that within the district.
The the mechanism that I think
perhaps maybe you're searching
for for redeveloping these other
areas where there's multiple
property owners is called is in
the city called the metropolitan
redevelopment authority and in
fact that area that you talked
about on the Gail where the
where the quarters is located
some of the other businesses on
yelp is in fact in over in a an
established Representative
metropolitan redevelopment area.
This
chair representative thank you
I'm I'm gonna supported the it
just.
The the maps just.
What what very odd and something
that I would not associate with.
Complications some of the things
that you're wanting to
accomplish their but.
It's interesting concept thank
you madam chair.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative I just had a
couple questions I I think that
you actually in adverse the
answer to one of them
I.
The
state.
which is that which I which is I
thought that the intention of
this was to be totally publicly
owned but I I but I believe in
your responses to
Representative McQueen you
indicated that maybe some of
this property would be sold
can you just talk more about
that and why why we would
invested in in property that we
would no longer than.
Hold it how that how does that
interact with the economic
development requirements of the
district.
Madam chair representative the
infrastructure that is the
ticket money is you use for must
be publicly owned so if ten
dollars that are spent that are
subject to the bonding or used
to build either building or
public infrastructure that
cannot be sold it cannot be
transferred privately at all
that must be owned by a
governmental entity does that
help answer your question so if
we're talking about sale of
property if in the development
if is a piece of property put in
say a grocery store that would
not be that would not qualify
for ten dollars but if you're
gonna run the street from the
grocery store or you can
actually utilities that is
public infrastructure that is
owned by a public body and that
cannot be transferred.
I see so so SO is that the
reason for section three because
that.
it was the sort of start of my
questions with
When I was reading the bill.
Because basically there will be
buildings.
In this district that will be
privately owned as well and
you're making it clear they're
not eligible for capital outlay
is that Madam chair
representative of yes and also
in the state statute that that
states with the formation
criteria is there's a list of
projects or or or infrastructure
that is eligible for tech fund
if it does not meet the criteria
than it does not qualify.
Okay.
And that's in in where Mr then
the enabling statute madam chair
representative for the to the
creation of a to a separate
section of statute and so madam
chair representative when the
board of finance on the finance
authority reviews which they
both did this ticket application
and and and I know we have
Representative from the finest
for import finance yourself part
of what they are supposed to do
is make sure that the project is
that it that the numbers add up
and that we're also meeting all
of the requirements that are set
forth in the to statute and
that's a divided between the two
and I look to just make sure I'm
saying it right I've seen at
least one not.
Okay I think that thank you
madam chair and representative
and then it section three B..
allows for.
Other expenditures for economic
development projects can just.
Briefly discussed what kind of
mechanisms might be as I are you
talking about lead up projects
or
you know what what future do you
see for other economic
development tools and the
district manager and in
represented by also could get
to are the expert but yes J. tip
leader it does not necessarily
mean you are excluded from
applying for those other
economic development dollars
that are available that's K..
Okay thank you madam.
Thank you Representative anyone
else would have any questions
Representative Alcon.
The.
We have a motion for do pass
made by Representative of a cone
and seconded by speaker mark
Janus
I have some questions on.
So just to clarify.
the who is going to be selling
the bonds.
The the they will be sold on
behalf of the local development
corporation Lobo Development.
Great I'm sorry Madam chair yes
and is
Lobo Development is a private
corporation.
Madam chair local development
corporation is a university
research park and Economic
Development Act corporation a
separate five oh one C. threes
corporation that serves to do
development work on behalf of
the university of New Mexico.
Okay.
So it's a because Paul is that
the one same one that is right
under which the hospital in
Santa is organized is that the
same act Madam chair is the same
act I might have been corrected
here so we better get the
clarification chair if I may and
I appreciate that the assist the
actuals up south campus did
which is a political subdivision
once it is formed will be
issuing the bonds so the bonds
we issued by the ticket itself
okay thank you and that is
viewed as a governmental entity
madam chair yes it has to be so
when when the when the the in
that to stature we refer to
before the ticket itself as a
political subdivision and has a
governing a governing body and
is subject to the requirements
in statute okay so bonds are
sold in the security for those
bonds is the new tax revenue
that's projected.
Okay and what happens if there
isn't enough tax revenue to meet
the obligations on the bonds.
Madam chair for lack of better
terms of global development
takes about they take the loss
or any anyone who's invested in
that infrastructure if it does
not generate revenue all the
risk is on the developer.
huh so
Lobo Development is kind of a
clause a governmental thing it
has I remember because I looked
at that law very carefully
and it has it's protected from
the tort claims act if I
remember correctly
there are some other protections
that owns a development under
that act receive I think they're
not subject to a pro or the
public records act
So how is of somebody wishing
divide bonds that are issued on
behalf of this company going to
feel like they're a good
investment.
I'm trying to understand I'm I'm
sorry I'm really find this very
interesting this how this works
technically so help me
understand that thank you for.
Yeah madam chair
local development is going to
act as which is eight research
park at corporation just as you
explain is is going to act as
the co developer of the property
the bonds are going to be issued
by the district.
And but local development has to
actually in the early years has
to advance money for the
infrastructure.
And it only can can when the
district receives enough revenue
so that it can pay local
development reimburses for that
infrastructure then lower
development will be will be made
all if the district does not
have enough money to repay or
refund re uh reimbursed local
corporation for the
infrastructure then that cost
still stays with local
development corporation and who
funds local development come up
Corporation I sure hope it's not
the public.
Level development corporation is
has acted in a variety of
commercial development
activities on behalf on behalf
of the university and there's an
ammo you between the regions and
local development corporation
that sets out what what kinds of
projects those are a good
example is the local development
excuse me the local village
housing project that generated
some ground rent in the region's
agreed that that ground rent
would go to local development
corporation so that they have
some seed money to to develop
some of these projects okay so
we know Lobo Development has
some private but because of the
private money.
But if there is insufficient
money to address some issue that
might come up should we expect
that Lobo Development would be
looking for public funds through
the state.
Where would you get the money
and chair local development
corporation when the board of
regents says you may then
develop that site and it will
mark out of sight and see this
is one to go do so for example
the region's just said go forth
at the corner of central and
university and build affordable
housing.
Local development and takes the
lease signing into its coffers
and it will have that source of
funding that it then can use for
these types of things and with
as
which is private money but it's
coming on on behalf of an assets
this public asset.
Okay so let's assume global
developing their you're
receiving money from these
leases for that these businesses
are going to be in this did and
all of that what if it's not
areas successful as you think.
What happens when you're a
private company.
You go bankrupt I suppose.
What happens
if you can not meet your F.
economic agenda objectives and
pay your debts I guess that's.
Madam chair thank your question
that's a very good question is
when the state board of finance
was very interested in before
they approved it and have asked
us to provide regular reports on
how it's going.
The answer the question is over
the course of the twenty year
period or twenty five year
period that this ticket will be
in existence if we are not
generating the gross receipts
tax to make the next investment
on the list we will be able to
do it so we don't go out and
borrow two hundred sixty seven
million on day one.
We start generating the gross
receipts tax we start making the
investments in the facilities
and see how it goes and the
ticket board will be managing
that and making sure that it
works and this really is
dependent upon interest on the
part of the private community to
do the development of things
like a retail grocery store or a
restaurant those types of
activities in madam chair if I
may add just a little bit that's
why it's not just in the master
plan it's very detailed plan
that has to go to board of
finance and they've that all of
these types of questions to make
sure that that agreement and the
plan is viable for the stated
purposes and for the revenues
that we are asking for so that's
why it goes to that process and
they do that because it's public
money that that risk.
Madam chair.
Sort of because it's not public
money that's at risk because the
dollars don't go out until the
revenues generated the public
dollars do not get paid in less
you see the growth in gross
receipts tax and property tax.
Okay so I I appreciate what
you're saying yeah I have
concerns about this as a
structure for a public entity be
using I understand that it is an
idea the the ticket Act whatever
we call it allows for public
public developments but that it
was contemplated I believe that
it was supposed to be a public
private.
Sort of arrangement and to me
this is and this is not intended
to sound I come from accusing
you of anything credit now
the various it's not a very
transparent way to fund a
project that to public entities
are engaged in and had had an
appropriation been asked asked
for which is then I imagine how
the university gets some of its
money
there would have been a very
clear vetting through our
appropriation process probably a
vetting through our LESC process
in the summer and.
Would know that the public
monies are out there and they'll
be showing up on a budget and
this to me is not nearly as
transparent as that.
And at a concerns me that that
that the ticket Act is being
used in the way that I don't
think what it was intended in
reality so I'm likely to vote
against the bill but appreciate
your creativity.
so we anyone else wishing to
speak on the bill before we call
the roll.
All right what to call the roll
Senator Representative Alcon.
Representative Jake.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen no.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read.
Representative green.
Representative supplants K. yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair no.
By a vote.
Thank you madam chair.
We're on house bill thirty three
although there it's there is it
was subbed out at some point.
With the mentors the rural
development land grants and
cultural fairs Committee
substitute for house bill thirty
three.
The floor is yours
Representative.
Madam chair members of the
committee house bill thirty
three deals with governance of
our lingering communities
In the two thousand four.
The state started recognizing
land grants as political
subdivisions
capable of a degree of local
governance and also eligible for
public funding.
we have in the land grants
statutes there's what we call
article one.
Which is sort of
All the the rules and
regulations that
land grants operate by.
And then we have we have in some
cases other articles the deal
with specific land grants.
To article one of forty nine
this one this one recognizes
land grants as political
subdivisions of the state
someone requests have their own
chapter where they're also
recognizes political
subdivisions of the state and
over time we've been sort of
migrating those to article one
and what I'd like in this to
before was like an operating
system article one is the latest
iteration updated operating
system not an older system that
maybe doesn't have all the
functionality that are are the
ones.
What this bill does this bill
actually started off as an in
the crystal Phillis turned a
land grant to article one.
And we've been having
discussions about how we've been
doing this we didn't on a couple
years ago and before that there
were there been other land grant
in we we thought will instead of
doing this one at a time or two
the time why don't we take all
the existing.
land grants the or political
subdivisions.
And let's tumult list Liz the
mall once so what this bill does
and and all it does is add
seventeen land grants to the
list in article one of recognize
political subdivisions all
seventeen of these land grants
are already political
subdivisions and I'm joined
today by our our tour or to let
it is executive director of the
land council he can explain more
but basically part of the reason
we're doing this is to make it
clear that their political
subdivisions because there have
been circumstances where they
have gone for funding
whether it's capital outlay or
federal disaster relief for
things like that and they're
been questions about will need
you're not a political
subdivision are you and the
funding to the extent they've
been able to get it and they
haven't always been able to ends
up getting routed through the
county or you know some other
agency rather than directly to
the Land Grant.
Which is capable of receiving
this funding.
so that that's what this bill
does
what this bill doesn't do.
is that any of the partition
land grants to us there are four
five land grants the ring once
part of a larger Land Grant they
have a level self governance
there's some controversy around
there around those so we left
those off those you still Sir
working on those issues there
are a couple of land grants that
they have their own article that
aren't included one is chiefly
the which I think was the first
land grants to have its its own
chapter they're still sort of
thinking about how they will
handle that one is the Las Vegas
grant which has a strange quirk
that their leadership is
appointed by the District Court
up there which not really sure
why that is but you know maybe
at some point they would move in
article one but it's a more
complicated process so it
doesn't add doesn't add any of
those it at seventeen that our
land our political subdivisions
and to the best of my knowledge
all seventeen or on board with
being at it.
another thing it doesn't do is
violate the constitution or the
treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
there's some concern that this
bill is similar to other bills
that have not passed.
in the similarities stems from
the fact that we're amending the
same area law so there's a bunch
of language in the bill that is
of course existing statutes and
you know it I'd I'd made this
mistake a couple days ago I said
I thought language and bill and
you might have a source going
through on my laptop the why is
this in here and some point
that's because we're adding to
the existing statutes you know
so.
You can see beginning on page
three the list of land grants
that are being added you know
there's some other cleanup as
it's in the statute but we were
not making changes other than
that.
The last thing I just want to
mention that I would like Mr or
to let have a chance to say a
few words all of these land
grants as I said repeatedly our
political subdivisions they're
also recognized by the federal
government either by Congress or
the according funds so they all
have their original patent
confirmed in one way or another
and you can if you sort of flip
through you see some of that
history about when and where
that action took place.
So that's the truth this bill
generate some controversy and I
think it's mostly based on the
misunderstanding of what it
actually does
love to defer to my experts Mr
archer archer archer.
Madam chair members of the
committee again my name is our
production of time with the New
Mexico land grant council I
think of Representative McQueen
did a great job of summarizing
what the intention and what the
bill actually does the one thing
I will add is that another
reason why it's important as
last year this body a past the
New Mexico land or the land
grammar said assistance fund
which provides a guaranteed
revenue stream for land grants
that are operate as political
subdivisions of the state and in
order to check which those land
grants are there's a whole
process that the state auditor's
office has to.
Chairman that they're actually
up to date and compliance and
then it goes to the New Mexico
and got council we check to
ensure that they comply with all
the other areas of the statute
of of forty nine one and this
just helps clarify which land
grants are actually eligible for
those funding they come from the
land immersive assistance fund
and so this is just in our
opinion a sort of a clean up she
just clarify those land grants
that are in existence the reason
that currently are listed is
this was known as the general
provisions it as Representative
queen stated this was the last
of act that was passed during
the church will period to
recognize land grants I'm and so
there's never been a master list
of which land grants are
governed under there and so this
would help just to determine
exactly which land grants are
covered by that act.
Thank you Mr so we'll go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition please raise your
hand.
yes Sir in be aware we time
people and we have Ural
allocated to equipment.
Yes Sir please introduce
yourself Representative.
My name is Ralph due to all of
the vice president of the
measure that that more up for
more land grants.
And also school food for the
thunder crystal and.
For eight years.
Been battling.
The.
Council leader of the land grant
council they have been trying to
show this legislation down the
years battling and battling and
battling.
Shares of the land grants are
projected by the Supreme miss
Claus that is chat others
article six section two of the
United States closer to should.
In the August fourteenth of two
thousand and eight.
Your journey General for the
state of New Mexico very keen.
Put out the seventy one page.
Answer to study.
All the people.
We came back.
And told legislature the state.
The land grants hello.
Disapproves a clause has been
challenged in the United States
Supreme Court but K. to Norman's
attending bar.
Tending bar resulted in the
United States Supreme for coming
back.
The decrease.
And this would include this
body.
No one may go behind Congress to
converge.
Change or alter.
The nature origin for Valerie's
of a land grant.
These bills these folks keep
trying the best year or
violation.
that should prove to close.
We come to you to ask you to
stand by the constitution and
other states and
during funding.
No on this thank you Sir
gentleman did you wish to speak.
Madam chairman committee members
Mr Lujan and I represent a state
that's Land Grant and the
president of the bank with.
First and most you know it
appears to me that this deal.
Is nothing more than life the
budget this.
If you understand what budget
decisions.
Senator the.
I see it this way.
Okay and I agree with everything
that Mr Lombok you gave you some
information.
I I ask a question to you are
you very familiar with all the
history of the land grants in
New Mexico and I want us.
The governed by.
I hope so because you need to
have an understanding of what's
going on over here I want to
make sure.
That although land grants to
include Las Vegas language.
Somewhere there he's written a
written statement that.
Allow.
That we're effective nope.
Alterations to be made into it
and that was.
You know what
you.
Some of the stuff is going to
be.
Not including.
They're taking it with and you
know what who has done any.
Any investigations if it's only
going to be involved the land
grants that lan because right
now morning consideration and
we're thinking about water
rights especially water rights
from the just a guess.
And a CD Committee that the
county government in the state
taking away all these by I don't
know if you saw this position
what eighties.
So.
For that main reason I oppose
these you.
Or any these issues are
additions to it and it needs to
be scrutinized.
That we might have some kind of
it thank you thank you
appreciate your comments anyone
else wishing to speak in
opposition the audience.
Is there anyone online wishing
to speak in opposition to the
bill.
All right
I see the Nancy can Tana.
Nancy.
There.
Thank you for the.
We're having trouble hearing you
need to speak up.
There.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is not seeking
Donna.
All of the current he was two
thousand sixteen.
Thank from Columbia I am the
that order by profession.
And as you see these things I
know that.
The Supreme you all.
I opposed house bill thirty
three because the.
You will be on constitution for
the following reasons.
The New Mexico is that it is
meant for the the ability to
create or to change the credit
of longer.
That
is that productivity.
Thank you it's going.
This bill mentioned twenty tool
Landon.
But only nine.
Our confidence by Congress
thirteen are not.
I wonder in is the portal for
those of you.
Present to makes the configure
Landon's with the no confidence
to be able to.
A.
To have the.
Assistant eight loans.
In the site.
So please.
They memorandum that for more
Attorney General Eric guarding.
Send to the New Mexico state
legislator.
In our fourteen thousand eight.
This bill similar to be
oppressed by us.
As a representative I sample
could be to go over.
The Republican and the Democrat.
So please really and investigate
because that that is something
wrong in these are all.
The bank is not clear.
Thank you so much thank you miss
cantante any I don't see anyone
else's hand raised online.
So
I guess oh wait.
Gilbert can Tana.
Did you.
Okay will go to the audience now
for those wishing to speak in
favor of this legislation
yes Sir will start in the I
guess the fourth flow and then
the fifth row okay that's what I
was saying.
I'm glad we agree.
Chair.
My name is twenty for us to us
because I am the president for
the Santa Barbara then grant and
we are here today to support
this bill we feel that the house
bill thirty three very very
important for land grants first
always be my reading of the
constitution the staff to the
New Mexico this wording on it
this not change the status of
any land grants.
The most important part of what
it is that this bill will help
us continue to tap into the
resources that are but badly
needed by the land grants that
are not available in the state.
We at the some of our land
grants to be taken advantage of
some of those resources that are
available there have been
extremely useful to our
communities and we therefore
again support and requested to
support this also for the thank
you madam chair thank you and
now the service gentleman behind
you.
Good afternoon my name is a
case of the president of seven
months all I am also the
president.
Thank you Association.
I am here to support this bill
because as mentioned by the
Representative McQueen earlier
we
since nineteen oh seven points
on the body politic
which basically means political
subdivisions just the words.
Very old that gives it
approached the attorney
general's office in I think it
was two thousand seventeen.
Of the two thousand twenty the
one I think it was
we were told yes that's what we
need to work because of division
luckily we have gone through the
process we had changed over to
forty nine one it does not
change.
Thousand dollars.
Oversee us Representative our
board still overseas what it has
done is basically given support
to work the state recognizes us
as a political subdivision which
allows us to be able to
approach for money switched our
communities desperately need we
have been able to
get funding to help our
communities and it is also
teaching us how to.
Use those.
Change the the board our boards
and members of our of land
grants how to come together and
help to apply hello to.
Use these weapons correctly so
it's basically allowing us to be
a government entity like it was
designed in the eighteen
hundreds so thank you very much
thank you.
anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak to speak in
support of the bill.
I don't see anyone anyone online
wishing to speak in support of
the bill have a Gilbert
cantante.
Gilbert.
All right I don't see Gilbert
and the longer I see someone
with V. Anton Chico land grants
does.
Anton Chico land grants.
Designation yeah there you are
madam chair members of the
committee this is Tony item now
chair of the on the vehicle and
then we also in support for a H.
B. thirty three
I think to be greatly needed for
the support on not just but to
be recognized as a government
entity so we are in support of
H. B. thirty three thank you
very much thank you Leonard
Martinez.
Good afternoon madam chair my
name is Leonard Martinez present
us all can do to a child tribal
land grant percent a gated
community online and
Representative are we started
extended strong support of our
hospital thirty three are we
have not been able to be able to
access the quick money because
since we are not in article
forty nine dash one
it kind of these are kind of
fake and is no clarity to what
that we are our unity government
to the federal government so we
will strong we stand strongly
behind high school thirty three
in thank you madam chair thank
you Daniel Mays I just.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee my name's Daniel
my us and the president of the
east of us and our land grants
in Taos
we stand in support of house
bill thirty three
we currently operate as a
political subdivisions of the
state
the state with we comply with
DFA and the on state auditor
requirements on.
The most recent issue we run
into as far as
This thing of being considered a
political subdivision of the
state is with our bank and
The we have to pay the.
Bank fees or whatever
and then now hearing other
testimonies I hear it.
I.
We're even more in support
because I'm thankfully we have
had no fires on our land grants
and if on that was to happen we
would like access to
finds an emergency like the my
stuff in.
Whatever's available on.
That's all I have for staying on
my grandpa.
Thank you
Augustine Lou Cerro.
Augustine the Cerro.
You need to underuse yourself
Augustine.
All right let's go to the next
person.
Hokkien.
Hawking please.
Yes loan it's not just
individuals walking Aguayo.
I'm the.
Into the real and I do a
community land grant the tell
Syria.
I just wanted to briefly
expressed my support for this
bill and especially for this
land grants.
I make this on behalf of our
board and our our community and
our members.
and I also want to point out
briefly at the status is
something vital.
Not just for a piece of
Geographic land with two entire
community and and I want to
compare it to some of the.
I said yes all throughout our
state will also receive similar
status which is really allow
them to be recognized in a lot
of these owning a lot of the
developmental and even a lot of
the environmental protection
processes that have happened in
their local communities or even
upstream and downstream.
And so for us we see the status
for land grants equal to that of
importance for those of our
secular which are likely to our
communities we get but it also
throws no I wasn't yet I see you
know I. T. addressing on one
minute I.
secondly I also wanted to point
out that the the issue of
accessing funds is very
important for example we had a
Senator natural forest thinning
project and we did a wonderful
job through pilot years and and
make beyond getting three or
four hundred acres however we
had to discontinue the program
because we don't have the status
either to receive funding to
keep programs are going to
continue fire mitigation and
fire prevention and so I just
ask the committees and and madam
chair for you all to consider
the importance of this type of
legislation for many land grants
and for many communities just to
have their own local ability to
practice democratic control of
what was rightfully and legally
we still upon us some of us
hundreds of years ago with that
I yield back the right remainder
of my time thank you very much.
Thank you
Let's see Andrea.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes my name is on behalf of the
and I am the president of the
New Mexico land grant reception
cycle.
And also the president of
Solomon land grants and I speak
for the twenty nine land grants
to fall under the umbrella of
the conceptual and we are in one
hundred percent support of this
bill house bill thirty three of
because as we have said it does
not create any new subdivision
it's just listing all the
current subdivisions so that
when we try to get something
like if we want to go to work
with the county they can see
that yes we are political
subdivisions of the state of New
Mexico we are local government
and they need to respect us and
that important it I'd like to
say it also allows us to get a
hold of capital outlay or grant
money to further our services
that we are providing for our
communities so we are strong
supporters of this bill and we
humbly ask that to vote to pass
this and move it on thank you
very much.
You yeah we're concerned.
Yeah we're.
You with.
Please leave yourself please
madam chair and members of the
committee I I speak in
opposition to this bill was cut
off awhile ago when I am
Gilbertine Donald the president
of the multilateral Center
subject residential tomato.
We look at the substitute bill
HB thirty three implied numerous
problems with that in terms of
the application a and B. because
it doesn't.
Focus in on both the terms
confirm did Pat by the US
Congress that's critical we also
look at the listing of the
members noticed it in the in the
renewable aged thirty three most
of us do not need this bill
they're already confirmed that
patented there are some of the
others there at door confirmed
in there trying to do a Trojan
horse approach to that grants to
get no then we propose that
significantly if you have heard
from the other members talking
about the members like former
governor on former sister.
Attorney General Gary king he
states with further litigation
options effectively foreclosed
by a prank or president I
believe that the most effective
available remedies appear to lie
in the legislation from the
United States Congress Congress
has the sole authority to do the
path and the confirmation we
have measured the economy issues
around the US constitution the
New Mexico state constitution
article two bill of rights act I
stopped about these rights and
privileges and immunities of
political of guarantees by the
state we feel that this all
passes are going to be violating
our rights we have numerous
other aspects that we like to
resemble one have two minutes to
it but I would highly encourage
this committee to also look at
the physical impact of this bill
I think it's very misleading us
is what they say the cost will
be I thank you for your time
madam chair and members of the
committee.
J. J. a.
Hello can you hear me.
This is in favor we are on in
favor of the bill please.
Yes ma'am hello madam chair and
all members of the committee on
my name is Juan JJ have and I am
the president of the kind you on
the cover and then grant
we are also in favor of house
bill thirty three being that
we're of land Representative
that is really close to
Albuquerque the closest impact
we feel that will give us the
tools that we need to sustain
our land grant and so that being
said we are we are completely
for house bill thirty three
thank you so much.
Lastly
on their own.
I understand it's okay hello hi
this.
Thank you madam chair members
members of the committee my name
is this thing Senator
I am the president of the meadow
Center this on Antonio the last
what about what he does
And we are completely and
entirely in favor of house bill
thirty three I'd like to you
know speak a little bit to the
opposition opposition is the
scene did it is a violation of
constitutionality and and the
the try to site that we have not
been confirmed but it is within
the document that shows that
we've been confirmed either by.
Congress or in our case by the
private land claims.
and the other thing is you know
there.
Arguement.
That.
This bill will impose the will
of of.
Everyone else that has is
adopted into this upon them.
The willingness of all seventeen
of the land grants to be added
has been stated clearly you know
we're we're not we're not
looking for a brand new deal.
What we're looking for is to be
confirmed for this this bill to
be confirmed on merit.
and on and on the merit of
precedent.
this is not like we're we're
starting a new work we just want
to be part of
What what was and what will be
and to be recognized as
The prior for land grants thank
you once again of madam chair
and
Board.
In the committee thank you very
much.
This is our last person
The state and just for real so
please.
Good afternoon thank you I
represent the one that to stuff
that does land grants and we we
are in support of this bill we
believe that our organizations
can operate more effectively we
we believe that a little
oversight for compliance is
necessary.
Are we are allowed to receive
eligible funding and lastly it
allows us to incorporate our
community and really gives us a
strong voice and this place
table in presenting are cases
that are necessary for
organizations thank you thank
you that concludes our public.
Going back to the
English to say before.
Madam chair thank you just two
quick points one is it is as
people that alluded to in their
comments being a political
subdivision of the state is an
opportunity to be recognized as
such a receive funding but it's
also an obligation you know we
carries with it the you have to
comply with audit act which is a
big deal you have to comply with
the press you have to comply
with open meetings act you have
to comply with all the things
that we think are part of the
building good government and we
will encourage land grants due
to do those things that's a good
thing the second thing I just
want to note that all the
support you heard came from land
grants are affected by the bill
and all the opposition you heard
came from land grants that
aren't affected by the bill.
Thank you Madam.
Thank you back to committee I
have speaker Martinez.
Thank you madam chair and
representative a clean and Mr
chair that the thank you for
being here.
just just to be clear the air I
want to understand the
The constitutional issues that
were raised in public comment
and madam chair if
in the interest of time just
maybe
do it
six six E. as he can
understanding that there's a
very long history here but then
chair representative an expert
if you could address some of the
consultations are rates madam
chair the speaker Martinez I I'm
gonna defer to my experts I will
warn you he is well versed in
this topic and keep making him
be six six thing is a can be a
challenge.
Number to Saturday.
Madam chair representative so
Mister speaker I basically think
as possible so I think the was
much about position was the
supremacy clause of the United
States constitution in the
supremacy because there is
mention of the fact that
treaties of the United States
are the supreme law of the land
along with with those acts of
Congress and so that is kind of
the the where we have to look so
if we look at the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo on which is
the treaty that affects most
land grants to New Mexico as
well as the Gadsden purchase
treaty which pull some of the
land grants were so The New
Mexico in the obligations under
the treaty as it relates to land
grants are strictly related to
the recognition of their
property ownership so it's it's
really the property recognition
portions of that treaty there is
nothing in the in either of
those treaties that speaks to
the governance of land grants or
to the governance of those of
these property owners with the
treaty requires is that the
United States and determine who
were the private owners of land
within this territory ceded and
what was part of the public
domain so the United States went
through a process for that
education the treaty was not
self executing so required
Congress to establish the
process for how that was done it
was to processes that were
established the first was the
quarter private land claimed I
mean sorry the observational
process by which the surveyor
general New Mexico how to
evaluate claims and then make a
recommendation to Congress for
Congress to actually confirm a
grant to receive a payment for
private property owner wasn't
just land grants it played to
anyone who on property in this
territory that was seated.
That process officially keep was
was wrought with
Eruption and land speculators
were able to take advantage of
that process so in eighteen
ninety one the the US Congress
passed an act to create the
quarter private land claims the
quarter private land claims was
a tribunal that was to review
land canes in the ceded
territory and with that ability
Congress gave the C. L. P. C.
the authority to confirm
requests on its own so it no
longer required a specific act
of Congress for every single
Land Grant it required that the
C. L. P. C. just confirm the
grant and then you can receive a
path and that is why madam chair
Mister speaker you see in the
bill some of the land grants are
listed as having been concert
from by Congress because the
they went through that process
prior to eighteen ninety one and
then any Land Grant after
eighteen ninety one that went to
the court private land claims
the federal government recognize
their land claim through the C.
L. P. C. and so that's the
distinction between those two
recognitions once the United
States government issued a
patent for those lands which was
essentially a quit claim deed on
the United States essentially
saying we quit L. any claim that
we have an interest of the land
but did did not prevent adverse
claims by third parties through
the proper court of jurisdiction
that is essentially the end of
the United States government's
treaty obligation as it related
to the property clauses of those
treaties that left of the
question madam chair Mister
speaker of how are these
entities that were communities
to govern the lands that they
owned and were recognized by the
United States government and
that was a question that was
left to the local up to the at
the time the territory so in as
early as eighteen seventy four
The New Mexico territorial
legislature begin passing
legislation for specifically for
each Land Grant on how it would
govern itself and and then that
is essentially what is now today
all the articles under chapter
forty nine which the state
adopted all of those acts of the
territorial legislature and it
is the square jurist.
Action of the state of New
Mexico to determine from a
political subdivisions level who
are units of government local
units of government that is not
something to the jurisdiction of
United States is left of the
summer in the state of New
Mexico further madam chair
Mister speaker the New Mexico
Supreme Court has weighed in on
this and has through three
different cases as far back as
they can believe the first one
was in nineteen twenty one they
actually confirm a from the fact
that the land grants in terms of
the governance structure are
creatures of the legislature hi
there subject to the rules that
are created for their governance
by this body.
Madam chair representative in
and the message that the thank
you I think that really clears a
lot of the historical context
and and.
And the why we're here.
Up now tell me how.
How does.
Passing this bill.
How does it negatively impact.
The people of the state other
land grants other communities
I'm I'm not really understanding
what the.
The opposition I heard was
constitutional issue I I don't
agree with that to try to figure
out what impact this has on
those folks.
Madam chair has become Martinez
I don't think it has a negative
impact the happy for Mr chiller
to elaborate.
Madam chair supporting this I
agree that there isn't it so to
be clear for the for the Las
Vegas Land Grant they are
actually just a specific statute
Land Grant there statute is
covered in article six of
chapter forty nine on the have a
board of trustees was actually
appointed by the District Court
in New Mexico had a meeting last
night your honor with the for
judicial district on some land
grants in that area it is on
clear from the court's
perspective who exactly is
currently on the board they have
a what they were able to
determine is that in two
thousand nineteen they do make
appointments of two individuals
one our state on a going and
Andrés are going to serve on
were sworn in as the board of
trustees is on clear that Mr lu
Han today who present itself as
a president if he was actually
appointed by the board under the
statute the required to be
appointed every two years and so
it's unclear exactly who that is
regardless of who the current
board members are madam chair
Mister speaker this bill does
not pooled Las Vegas Land Grant
into chapter forty nine so it
has no impact at all as to the
governance capacity of that body
that is appointed by the court
as it relates to the motor Land
Grant madam chair Mr speaker the
motor Land Grant theoretically
should be under article one
chapter forty nine because they
are not listed anywhere else in
the statute however madam chair
Mister speaker the modeling
grant has not complied with any
of the requirements under that
statute in terms of reporting to
the auditor's office reporting
to the official language
registry so they are a land
grant that is would essentially
be out of compliance with that
statute and therefore not an
actual of political subdivisions
that's our understanding your
honor that the want to land
grant does not feel that they
are fall under state statute
that they fall under federal
statute and as I mentioned madam
chair Mister speaker there is no
federal statute that deals with
the governance of land grants
the only laws that deal with
that are the state of New Mexico
laws and so the
the.
Not an adverse effect madam
chair but Mr speaker on a
positive effect for those
migrants that are operating this
land grants under the statutes
is this listing would make sure
that they are recognized firmly
with having been compliant with
the statutes and having six
order that recognition and
everything they need to do in
terms of their obligations to
act within the statutes thank
you madam chair and thank you
for some a queen and Mr to that
that I I think that that really
clears it up for me
and I've been able to travel to
many of these land grants in the
last couple years under the
leadership the leadership of
Representative McQueen
Representative Ortez and so many
others that represent those
communities and even my
predecessor speaker Egolf who
didn't represent a specific land
grant but I think really took an
interest in
finally beginning to shake up
the process through which we as
a legislature honor and
recognize these historic
traditional land grant
communities which we should be
very proud of madam chair
because I don't know if I don't
know that they exist anywhere in
the nation.
That is that is like pure New
Mexico right there
and you know and and.
For somebody like me who is not
born and raised in Mexican I'm
an immigrant who came here and
had a real hard time
understanding the land grant
concept
but.
Throughout my college of my time
in college and and meeting and
getting to know
people from the north
particularly and getting to know
their struggle and getting to
know their family history within
this context of of the land
grants
our system it is nothing short
of impressive and the fact that
we can still sit here in twenty
twenty three.
And address some of these issues
is a real blessing and so I
really applaud your efforts
report madam chair
Representative McQueen for for
taking this on these are long
historical
issues and I feel like over the
last couple years are finally
making some progress so thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative for supporting
your bill.
Thank you speaker Representative
Lane.
Thank you madam chair.
The manager can you confirm just
maybe I should just this week
Can you informing geographically
where the these land grants
located on the specific list.
madam chairs of lane I'm gonna
let Mr Chula.
Mr chair.
May not be any.
When requests that currently
have two million acres but their
The.
Is probably not even
Close to what the maximum grant
was but in any event if you know
what the current size of the
Kerry Maria grant is or what is
being claimed by the by that
particular land grants then
chair representative Nibert well
it Mr Taylor into answer that
sure.
Madam chair representative
Nibert just to to for
clarification for your first
question that Timothy a land
grant as patented was
approximately five hundred
ninety thousand acres the
largest land grant was probably
the next one gonna dimensions
which is about a million acres
most land grants are much
smaller in size today that to no
money Land Grant currently as
part of its common lands owns
and manages approximately two
hundred and fifteen plus or
minus acres of COVID land that
they own
did they recently received back
through the challenge that they
had on that common land and the
in addition the
The Mexico game and fish has
been low in negotiation with
them to return well it's only
been approved they're just
working through the the language
to return the lagoon of the
cumple the game officials
looking to sort of quit that
property in and so since the
land grant is actually a
political subdivision they're
looking to take that property on
to be able to keep it open for
the public for fishing so that
it's not closed out the game and
fish was intended to actually
close entering the later on in
the community
came out against that and and
they were able to work out a
deal with they're going to take
the the the lake on it continue
to have it open for all the
public.
Madam chairman and members of
our I appreciate the that was
two hundred and fifteen two one
five they're both Madam chair
representative got currently
that's approximately what they
own
that there that the I know
they're in the process of
acquiring some additional
property but that's currently
what they'll okay and Madam
chair representative
Reason why and.
Particularly interested in that
is because a lot of the original
a previous that was in the tier
Emory of Graham is now owned by
private individuals for by the
history Apache tribe and in
other entities and and so I
just.
I know in the report that the
GAO did it show that as a
community land grants but the
tortured history of that Graham.
Maybe that issue certainly one
that one could argue it's
private graph and therefore you
have all these different owners
of it because the
I believe Mr Martinez and his
errors had had conveyed out
large portions of their grants
to to individuals and and so if
you.
It becomes a real.
Conflict and became an actual
conflict the in the nineteen
sixties
with respect of what what
constituted a land grant whether
it's private or a
Community land grants and what
was the rights of the errors of
the the Mr Martinez founder
current time
So I'm.
I guess Senator recognize
someone turned fifteen acres I
guess a lot of the issues.
Have a beneficial resolved or is
there still some constant
Claims being made to the
remainder that five hundred
ninety thousand acres Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative
Nibert so you're you're correct
there is a long and tortured
history that deals with land
speculation and sort of the
process of house painted
initially it was a community
grant that was us some hundred
families within the patent was
issued to one individual earlier
there was an allusion to the
tech to the timely bar and
that's one of the things that
actually prevented those
community members who had access
to the common lands as part of
their individual plots would
made it difficult for them to
challenge in court and so now
we're in a new era Madam chair
representative in terms of the
the government's capacity of the
land grants and their ability to
to know better manage the
acreage that they do have and
then if there are able to to
acquire new acreage and.
That is part of their common
lands it's clear how the how
they are governed those but in
terms of those parcels I think
that you alluded to that were
privatized with throughout the
course of history those are only
the simple by other owners the
statutes do not provide the land
grants with any jurisdiction in
terms of their management
ability of the common lands over
lands that are in fee simple
private ownership HM Madam chair
representative of.
Granting.
Them and specifically feral
Amarillo land grammar said.
Whites under this bill.
Would that have any effect on.
Pursuing additional claims
against the.
At ridge that is outside of the
two hundred fifty acres plus
whatever acreage and maybe
acquiring from game and fish
mentors and number I I'm gonna
let search all the answer that
but for a do I I just want to.
If the size we're not
recognizing tier and Maria as
opposed subdivisions they
already are.
So this doesn't change that said
this it just makes it really
clear in statute that there are
but to the rest your question Mr
Dillon.
Madam chair representative
that is correct that you know
that the intention is just to
recognize what they're already
doing after two thousand four
when land grants were
recognizable because of
divisions the folks intent on
money
reorganize themselves in that
fashion and have been very
successful at being able to
begin to sort of pick up some of
those pieces and provide access
for their common lands that they
have recuperated for the
community to be able to use so
it's a way to sort of address
some of that process through
being able to acquire those that
went out of the COVID lands and
then there have been able to
obtain fee simple ownership of
but at this the the current
board has not taken any such
action is sort of a claim
anything that is not part of the
comments at the currently own
Representative and nor would I
think they have really
opportunity to that and measures
in the every time a at the a lot
of the land grants or looking to
acquire former common lands in
in these open market
transactions you know they're
not they're not anything other
than that of course plan this
expensive funds are short so
it's it's when Parcells become
available and if funding is is
available then maybe a land
grant here and there can by some
of their land but it's it's
minimal compared to what they
once were that in madam chair
representative in that regard if
that occurs.
The one of consequences of
granting or recognizing the
status would be to take that
property out of the tax base for
the county would that not be
the.
Mentors and divert it's actually
really complicated question
there there are several New
Mexico Supreme Court cases that
see that language lingering come
lands are taxable that with the
old language support body
politic things like that they
were not recognized as
government.
All those cases predate the two
thousand four recognition by the
New Mexico legislature.
Of these land grants as
political subdivisions so
whether or not those the court
decisions are still valid isn't
unclear at this point land
grants are paying taxes at this
point.
Madam chair representative that
that that would be a surprise if
they are a governmental
subdivision of the state they
should not be subject to Avalon
taxes it seems to me and so
that's that's surprised me not
withstanding the older cases
that that would would maybe hold
them accountable for payment
once their recognizes a
political subdivisions of the
state I think the laws pretty
clear they would not be subject
to those types of taxes mentors
and I remember the the circular
would like to add to my answer
Madam chair representative I
think that's it that's a fair
estimation and in terms of of.
The notion of the theory that
they shouldn't pay however land
grants still to this day since
two thousand four to current
continue to play property taxes
the so the chairman yelling that
for example in the two hundred
fifteen acres that they have
they do pay property tax on it
many land grants that the
property taxes they do have an
agricultural uses of the to get
sort of that reduced rate but
every Land Grant in the state of
New Mexico currently does pay
property taxes the only time a
land grant has been granted the
authority to not pay taxes on by
the local county assessors has
been if it's for a communities
center for simple words of a
community purpose the the some
of these commissioners for
example were owned by the county
previously or they were old
schools that were on not on the
tax rolls so these have remained
off of the tax rolls for the
most part for the licensure the
properties they own the land
grants are still currently
paying taxes on those
properties.
Madam chair and representative
of one last just selfish
question of a still running a
lot of sheep on the phone the
lands up in the tier Amarillo
area for the Madam chair
representative the the she
population is dwindling there
are still some folks who per
participate in and that
traditional practice but it has
shrink in recent years I'm sorry
to hear that I thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
Representative Alcon.
The I learned a lot about
technology a but it's not the
only Land Grant this.
Anyway.
If you want to really have an
interest in the summer.
What you have to do is
volunteer to be armed in rural
Land Grant Committee.
Not only will you get to visit a
lot of the state of New Mexico.
But you'll get paid some of the
best food in the state does.
And that's the number one thing.
Okay I remember my dad I was
late to the committee meeting
and I got centered just at lunch
time the chairman said
Representative Alcon called was
late and I said I was not late I
got just time.
Those legislative.
But anyway I madam chair and
members of the committee it is
enjoyable it is awesome to that
and see exactly what these land
grants that are subdivided and
are getting money from the state
of New Mexico are doing for
their communities.
Everywhere you go you can see
the that with what they've done
and how much they want to do.
And that it'll.
That is I am originally from
what I.
And we went to Malaysia to visit
the land with.
Representative McQueen how much
land.
That's the more our land grant
Managers of alcun all offseason
Chillin this answer that.
Madam chair representative of a
corn I'm I'm not sure if they've
reached have been able to recoup
any land in recent years I know
the last time when they were
actually functioning as a land
grant under the statutes they
didn't have they had zero
comments now the modeling grant
in its original size was about a
hundred thousand acres that was
patented how much is that was
partitioned are right after the
path and and then fell into
private hands some land
speculators and some actually
into the communities themselves
but at this time there's Madam
chair representative I I don't
know that they own any common
lands thank you
madam chair we went up to the
would add to and complement and
the one last piece of property
that was leading that community
solar for failure to pay taxes.
That was sold to a private
person who took over not only
did he
By the land he tore down the
what are was there and all the
graves of the gravestones in as
it said situation.
Yes.
What bothers me is I see my
people from what I stand up
here.
A little on any bike to do with
this is that they should be
looking to see how we can help
them become a the.
Eight eight grand definitely to
set.
But anyway I'll just do that at
that madam chair and like I said
if you really want to have some
great food at the great tour of
the state of New Mexico
volunteer to the of the land
that committee I've done it for
fourteen years thank you madam
chair you're welcome we're happy
to entertain a motion.
Okay second.
Leader Martinez moved to to pass
seconded by vice chair.
Speaker.
Yes this is true.
It's because our team is on the
vice chair Romero.
We call the roll.
Thank you madam chair calling
rules Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Do we want.
You have said with six fifty
okay go ahead thank you at six
yes is madam chair for a do pass
on H. B. thirty three committee
said.
Thank you have a do pass thank
you Mr.
Okay I thought we had.
All right we're on our last bill
I just want to let we're on our
last bill I just wanted let
everyone know we're rolling the
two last bills on the agenda so
we'll be hearing house bill two
thirteen.
We're on house bill two thirteen
Representative Garrett and.
Welcome.
The floor is yours
Representative.
Okay I'm good afternoon madam
chair women and committee
Representative brown and we're
really happy to be here today to
present House Bill to thirteen
the public private partnership
act or P. three and and I should
say the bill we're presenting is
actually the
Judiciary Committee.
Substitute for House Bill of the
got that wrong it's the
Judiciary Committee substitute
from last year
that was house bill fifty five
but now it's the same hear me
for a second because we didn't
have a cell in our.
Like holy you know I know and I
I started getting confused
myself
and I just want to pay tribute
this bill built on the efforts
of over ten years and a past
monster include the current
Senator Gonzales.
Past legislators like
representatives Jane Powdrell
Culbert Jim Trujillo senator
Clemente Sanchez representative
Larry Larranaga and even of the
current mayor of of Albuquerque
senator Tim Keller at the time
so we really want to thank all
the work that's gone into this
bill over the last decade.
I believe it's the year to get
it done we have federal
infrastructure money coming in
which specifically states that
they would like to see public
private partnerships involved
and we truly believe this is a
mechanism to really move
especially advancement of
broadband and road construction
and this bill just to be clear
it is as in section two part H.
it does specifically focus on
public projects pertaining to
the construction of or
improvement of public
transportation facilities and
infrastructure and the public
construction for improvement of
broadband in our state which as
you all know it we really need
so we've received a lot of
feedback we're looking forward
to rope us a discussion today I
got interested in public private
partnerships after living in
South Korea for eight years
twenty years ago my middle
school in the middle of rice
fields had hi speed accessible
internet when I came back we
know in New Mexico during the
COVID people were parked by
McDonald's to get broadband I
was shocked when I acquired from
one of the Crean consulates they
explained their mechanism was
public private partnerships
ninety four percent of that
country which has the
mountainous in the valleys is
actually broadband accessible so
with that I want to turn it over
to my co sponsor Representative
Brown mysteries you to being a
senator hahaha of good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee.
Helpful to thirteen is really a
tool that a lot of all of local
governments are asking for
there's a need for a lot of
infrastructure projects and
sometimes it's hard to get the
funding and so what this bill
would do is open up the
possibilities for investment
I believe one of the good things
about the bills are a lot of
safeguards built in
things like I did I could go
down the list that for example
reporting and just so you know
selection of by four and so
forth there's just a lot here
also madam chair members I'd
point out that this bill has a
delayed repeal ten years from
now so it's kind of an effort to
put this into existence and then
kind of see how it goes and then
evaluated at that time and my
guess is madam chair that this
would be a very popular
mechanism for local government
so I I think to stop with that
and I wanted to check at one
point thirty five states already
have this legislation because we
don't have this in our in our
laws we are by passed for
investments in certain
infrastructure projects and with
that we turn it over the madam
chair to the committee for
questions thank you
representatives will go to the
for public comment at this point
so those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill would you
please raise your hand those
wishing to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
I don't see anyone in the
audience those online wishing to
speak in opposition.
That's okay please raise your
hand if you wish to speak in
opposition raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised.
Okay those wishing to speak in
support of the bill in the
audience please raise your hand
okay very good we'll go from
from over here in this way Larry
madam chairman.
Right from this and also general
counsel for the room at the
regional transit District Court.
Real metro runs in the New
Mexico referenced press on
behalf of the state of New
Mexico but is a separate
political subdivisions so every
eight years we have to go out to
bid for the operations and
maintenance contract for the
rail runner and also recently we
completed the what's called
positive train control
requirement that came down from
the federal government about a
fifty five million dollar
requirement to make improvements
to track up install broadband
and we and we have an ongoing
capital problem that's a
challenge for local government
is our revenue comes from from
Feb federal dollars in the state
was set to pay for all that
operations maintenance if we had
a P. three in place we would be
able to use that tool for longer
procurement you could also bring
private dollars to help us make
those improvements and
investment in the transportation
system that we need right now
we're stuck with this this
typical eight years we had about
every eight years and they don't
bring in those dollars for the
maintenance that would be really
beneficial for the railroad
although it's not the most
popular project in the state
it's a really good example we
think P. three could make a
dramatic improvement fit to that
real systems we urge your
support in the legislature thank
you madam chair thank you this
gentleman over here in the blue
shirt.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Cameron
Graham on the voluntary
legislative advocate for A. R.
P. New Mexico and our two
hundred and forty thousand
members A. R. P. New Mexico
supports to thirteen and thanks
functions for bringing the bill
forward.
Expanding the availability of
high speed internet access is
one of A. R. P.'s highest
priorities nationwide.
Unfortunately this essential
service is not available and
large parts of New Mexico
including a lot of A. R. P.'s
rural customers.
This bill supports New Mexico's
efforts to deploy broadband
services across the state by
allowing private public.
These partnerships will bring
more private financing into the
state efforts to deploy hi speed
internet services statewide.
We respectfully ask the
committee voted in favor of this
legislation and thank you very
much thank you chance.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm here on behalf of
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we support H. two
thirteen thank the sponsors for
bringing this forward at all of
the leaders in the New Mexico
chamber of commerce is a
nonpartisan statewide
organization were representing
every type of an industry for
every region of the state our
mission is to leverage New
Mexico's business communities
leadership and vision to drive
positive change M. C. C.
supports public private
partnerships which will allow
long term partnerships with
private sector partners
facilitate public projects
address New Mexico's aging
infrastructure and critical
services like broadband these
are private resources to find
solutions to public problems
should not be restricted when
the benefits of the public could
be demonstrated at a reasonable
cost we agree New Mexico is
often overlooked for private
sector investments in public
infrastructure the majority of
states have laws governing the
use of public private
partnerships The New Mexico does
not in other states PPE threes
P. three.
Thank you for broadband
interpretation as a lot of this
bill also P. three so been used
successfully for water water
wastewater and decent foundation
projects courthouses prisons
university housing and schools
we are encouraged by this first
step in exploring P. threes and
are pleased that FAA as stated
in the FIR things this could be
expanded in the future to
include more types of.
We look forward to working with
members of the legislature to
provide suggestions on who from
the private sector could provide
value to sit on the new P. three
board thank you.
Thank you any one else in the
audience.
Kelly.
Director.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members and thanks to
the sponsors for eighty two
thirteen I am Kelly Slagle the
director brought them out of the
office of broadband access and
expansion appointed in late July
by the governor of this could be
a powerful mechanism for the
office of broadband we have a
heavy lift going forward to do
many projects across New Mexico
to bring internet for all we
have the opportunity of federal
funds flowing to us and we want
to be good stewards of that
those funds flowing to us in
being doing powerful projects.
HB two thirteen allow some best
practices that other states have
followed to allow us to follow
suit and conform these
partnerships to bring something
even more powerful than what we
can do today and that leverages
what's been done before that
brings us into the future and
allows us to step forward for
this big tax thank you.
Anyone else in the audience yes
Sir.
Thank you madam chair and I want
to also congratulate
Representative Representative
Care to brown for bringing this
bill to this committee my name
is John the dell and founder
second wind communications of we
have attempted in the last eight
nine years or so to form
partnerships with the risk of
some of the communities in the
state
the majority of the of the of
rural communities in the state
to not have a future what I
consider future looking for
future proof of broadband the
infrastructure is in place and
as the FCC continually to
increases of the minimum speeds
broadband
the I think even more of of of
our local communities to state I
want to consider funded for.
of the of the three communities
that we have attempted to form
partnerships with for the last
several years have backed away
from discussions when the of the
nation was dark in the room
and now with the the passage of
of the the amendment of the
constitution in the last
election opening the way for
such part.
Wholeheartedly endorses.
I for one my company for one.
Thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in favor of the
bill.
All right let's go online
Sarah fitzgerald you wish to
speak in favor of the bill.
That afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm
sorry it's Gerald's senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we're in support of this bill
and we thank the sponsors for
their work public private
partnerships offer taxpayers the
best of both worlds the readily
available resources of state
government and the speed and
efficiency of the private sector
we know our broadband
infrastructure is lacking and in
a day and age when we depend on
it more than ever we know our
roads and highways are still in
disrepair from all the years we
couldn't afford and prevents
this year's unprecedented state
revenues offer us the perfect
opportunity to make real lasting
investments in these important
areas and structure and we
should do that expeditiously
with the help of our private
businesses through public
private partnerships we're
support thank you thank you.
I don't see anyone else's hands
right so let's go back to
Sanchez you need to say anything
in conclusion I will go to the
committee.
Yeah we're ready for questions
venture great
OK Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative so
I have a I've never questions a
route to the bill last night
start with the the public
private partnership this the
R. M. dealing with an unruly
person.
Representative.
The first question is.
Is this the public partner pick
the private partner.
Or is there a competitive
process.
Three the question and madam
chair I have to say that I've
been in the world of land grants
because atrisk the land grants
in my district so I had to
change my head just repeat the
question more time the manager
isn't here yeah this is a very
different feel
the motion is it's a public
private partnership does the
public partner get to select any
private partner once or is there
a competitive process if there
is more than one.
Potential private partner.
Yes madam chair there would be
competitive process if there's
more than one
C..
If you go to section three.
it talks about prior to entering
and page for B. it tells you
what the public partner has to
do before they enter any
negotiations they have to you
know publicize what they're
doing both electronically and in
print they have to do a cost
benefit analysis they have to
determine application
procurement code conduct public
hearings demonstrate that the
public project serves a purpose
that there's a whole list of
things they have to do and then
as they posted the private
partners have to find all sorts
of things
let's see Madam chair
representative cared if I may
just focus to focus on my
question those are the things
they do right there's nothing in
there that resembles a
procurement process a request
for proposals a submission of
bids anything like that.
The yes go ahead
madam chair and representative
so typically these begin with
Often a private entity coming
forward and saying I would like
to help this working work the
other way as well it just
depends on how it's done but the
language years as a public
partner is authorized to enter
into public private partnership
agreements and that's on page
four of the bill morning one so
that I think is the indication
that it's a public partner
that's really doing the
selecting and there is a cost
benefit analysis done and the
the public entity whatever local
government might be the really
is in the driver's seat I think
on these projects and won't
engage in less it's first of all
public benefit that has to be
proven a public purpose and then
all these other elements would
have to be satisfied so we're
looking at
as Representative Garrett just
went through madam chair under a
number of things that are
involved there and I just
highlight Madam chair
representative that
the public entity shall these
are shells
require performance and payment
bonds of the of the public and
the private entities so
I do believe that the public
entity is truly in the driver's
seat.
madam chair
Representative is.
I agree
but the the list items on page
four good to the merits of the
project.
They don't there's nothing in
here that dress the merits of
the contractor for who will
provide the work there is
there's nothing like we normally
see in large public park
projects.
Where there are competitive bids
there's no
there's none of that so reserve
really the public partner being
in the driver's seat as you say.
Can pick any partner they want.
Madam vice chair and
representative remember there's
a board that has to oversee the
process within the New Mexico
finance authority.
Madam chair representative there
is I believe the board only
kicks in at ten million dollars
is that correct after ten
million dollars madam chair
representative that is correct.
Madam chair representative is
your concern about favoritism
Madam chair representative
Graham yes.
However during his during mail
gentle man
regardless of Representative.
I share that concern.
I don't like sweeter deal.
Some people say that in
government that's already
happening.
In part where we have a
procurement co that we follow
but there are exceptions to the
procurement cord this would be
one of them.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative brown
I appreciate your concern I
appreciate your comment that
that's why we have a procurement
for the code that we follow and
that's one of my concerns with
the bill is it doesn't follow
the procurement.
So let me move on I will come
back to that point
madam chair representative so on
page four line six as you point
out they publish a notice.
that they're interested in this
project.
If you move forward in the third
Friday of things that they do on
page seven line eighteen there's
the execution of a contract.
Is there Madam chair
representative is is there any
public notice or scrutiny of the
terms of the contract prior to
education.
Yes madam chair the board has to
approve it that is the so madam
chair representative here the
board approves it after
education my question is there
any public street through the
prior to education.
Madam chair and representative
it can't be implemented until
the board actually approves it
and I'm just looking for that
section.
Yes section five pages nine ten
of the Board powers
they receive for reporting
purposes the if it's of less
than ten million is reported to
them if it's more than ten
million they have to review and
consider for approval the
proposed public private
partnership agreements and then
they have to determine they've
to certify the revenue bonds
they have to determine the use
of public private partnership
agreement and ensure that the
proposed funding mechanism is a
prudent expenditure of public
funds and then they propagate
the rules establishing the
application process and they
have to make the recommendations
for the approval so that is a
public process by the board
which has eleven members on it
as outlined in the board
section.
Discuss reported.
In Madam chair representative
Not.
A negotiation it's not
addressing terms is not
addressing fees it's approved or
not approve so there's.
In my opinion that public
process to extend people are
paying attention attention is
less robust because the deal has
already been struck at that
point is that accurate chair
representative here.
Mr chair representative remember
that before they even enter the
process the public partner has
to go through about ten steps
which are public.
Madam chair representative here
correct and those ten sets are
focused on the merits of the
project and then they signed a
contract with the contractor and
there isn't that same type of
scrutiny let alone competition.
On that on that contract if it's
over ten million dollars yes it
goes the board for approval or
apparently district.
But there's a there's a lot.
There's a lot in there that is.
Not the way we usually do not
the way we usually spend public
funds.
Madam chair representative the
queen so I think with the space
we're looking at for a lot of
this is in the rule making that
would need to occur this is more
enabling legislation and on page
eleven of the bill would be
take you to madam chair one
fifteen this is take all other
action necessary to implement
the program the private public
private partnership act and I
think that's where a lot of this
detail would be handled.
And if the state agencies madam
chair Representative are
involved and I think that opens
up the assurance of public
scrutiny.
And then finally mentor adjusted
Representative that most.
At least overstate age for as I
know have websites and they post
a lot of information on those so
that might have been in this
case but I think probably during
the negotiation phase of an
agreement that's probably not
something that's going to be
necessarily out in the open and
just taking a guess at that but
what I know of contracts and how
those come together madam chair.
Mentors and brown eyes there's a
couple points
In the in the bill that this
chart rulemaking funding for the
application process but that's
it those are public entities
applying for grants
I if there was a a global
rulemaking process for how this
would be operated I I didn't see
it I don't think the language on
the.
Hello slide please but the the
page you cited all other things
necessary I don't think that
that doesn't to me describe a
rulemaking process.
Thank all other action necessary
to implement that.
Madam chair representative so
that you as you mentioned it
does appear in several places in
the bill.
Other places on page ten at one
three and that's the regarding
the promulgation of rules
establishing the process for
applying in the criteria for
approval so I think that that's
also a place where some of this
will be fleshed out Madam.
And madam chairwoman
representative yes so that would
be Page ten sections
Starting on page nine and
continuing to need HM hi on page
ten.
So you're correctly pointing out
something madam chair that has
to be dealt with in the
rulemaking.
Okay Madam chair representative
Representative on page twelve
one thirteen.
We talk about loans.
can those loans to be forgiven.
Madam chair representative
there are several pages about
that loans and if there's the
faults.
But in the later sections.
Madam chair representative care
that.
Along the fall is one thing I I
my question is whether they can
be forgiven by the public our.
Madam chair representative
McQueen I don't know of any
place in the bill that would
still give that authorization to
to do that.
At the end Madam chair
representative brown I I think
that's that's fair and accurate
I guess the the the the also
doesn't say you can't and and
that and that thus my question.
madam chair and representative
right hi I'm very skeptical that
anybody would forgive these
loans
I think.
Some of the requirements tighten
things up pretty well for
example the provision on call
backs and when we get to the
page numbers and share it said.
Page I can hear it talks about
the public entity could do call
backs to recaptures if in the
event of things are hard to come
to fruition and again the
performance and payment bonds I
think would cover that the issue
as well and those would be
required that's a shell in the
bill chair representative.
madam chair says I I think loan
forgiveness would be likely
would likely violate the
intonation because it's the
something I wonder about so I
thought I'd ask so moving on
Page four section line deals
with revenue bonds can you just
give me a brief explanation
about how those work.
Madam chair representative page
for.
Fourteen fourteen section nine.
The madam chair representative
I'm sorry okay I'm a page
fourteen which one were you
asking about section online for
section nine I see revenue
bonding authority I just a quick
explanation of how.
The revenue bonds work.
Madam chair representative
Cedric here it wants to take
this when I.
Thank you to take a stab at it.
yes Madam chair representative
so there's revenue bonding
authority there has to be
certification the the sortie the
court we're talking about the
New Mexico finance authority
for this purpose they can pledge
revenue it spells out the
revenue in excess is to the
principal the authority may
appoint a commercial bank trust
department to act as their agent
and accept and then it goes in
detail a section at the bottom
of fourteen except as otherwise
provided in the public private
partnership act revenue bonds
and it list all the details of
revenue bonds when we went with
Marquita Russel a chairwoman and
Representative this is standard
language that The New Mexico
finance authority uses in a
number of other.
Projects that they oversee in
our state.
Madam chair representative I but
my.
uninformed belief is that
revenue bonds would be paid back
with revenue and I'm wondering
where that revenue comes from
what is the revenue.
Madam chair and representative
so there is the expectation that
there is revenue on these
projects and that would be one
of the things that would be
looked at and before entering
any kind of an agreement.
So I believe there may be an
expert in the audience that
could help us.
Want to come up for.
Have a seat thank you madam
chair Marquita Russel CEO The
New Mexico finance authority and
in the instance of revenue bonds
it would be backed by user fees
typically charged on the public
project so it could be a I use
of that to get to right some
sort of.
My user fees frankly.
So.
So
Madam chair representative miss
Russell it's nice to see you
worked with you for appreciate
your presence
Would there be revenue bonds on.
Highway projects on road
projects.
Madam chair I don't believe that
this allows for toll roads so
would be unlikely that you would
see a revenue bond for toll road
project four of a road project
but there could be other
transportation projects that
might have a fee associated with
them for instance the one
described by Mr Farrand earlier
in his testimony.
A. N. them.
Madam chair miss Russell so that
definition public project
includes the construction or
improvement of the public
transportation facility.
The transportation
infrastructure other than a toll
road but I I am still
The LHS.
Train tickets I mean.
Madam chair yes in other places
you might see of your feet
placed on a to a train ticket if
there was some sort of
concession that was allowed on
the car by the private partner
that might be available that
there's a range of these
projects that are done across
the nation.
For the.
madam chair mistrustful is is
their pay back period like that
help a longer bonds outstanding.
This doesn't specifically
prescribe it typically those
revenue bonds are would not
exceed the life of the
concessions so they've got a ten
year contract you would have of
revenue bond that would not
exceed ten years it depends on a
number of factors but typically
that would drive the pay back
period.
MetService recite the if there's
just not in my opinion not a lot
of public transportation
projects.
Sure if I may just add a little
bit Representative so revenue
could be income earnings we've
talked about user fees across of
the lease payments and specially
madam chair representative with
broadband infrastructure
projects there will be fees for
sure on something like that so
that that's one of the main
purposes of this bill is to help
out with broadband and chair and
chair representative that the
revenue bonds might be more
appropriate for Bryant broadband
projects which which leads me to
my next question the P. sixteen
section ten what is a refunding
bond.
Madam chair I might that's
basically a refinancing to lower
the rate of a previously issued
bond
so we use the proceeds of a new
bond to
basically re finance the
transaction.
Okay so madam chair mistress I
appreciate that so it.
I guess funds are required it
doesn't seem to me like funds
are gonna be used for the
transportation projects but the
two of the could be used for the
broadband projects.
Madam chair that would be my
expectation Ventura's wrestle or
the bonds tax exempt.
Madam chair of Representative it
doesn't specifically provide for
that so it would be subject to
IRS rules and that might be
possible just to be depend on
the underlying project.
Madam chair representative on
page fourteen sep page twenty.
Excuse me section fourteen.
The the Q. three act is exempt
from the procurement.
I believe there is money in the
budget for this bill is that
correct.
Madam chair representative there
is money that spend based on
legislation thirty million
dollars I believe at the present
time for P. three projects.
In.
I'd heard fifty but you know
thirty fifty
Madam chair representative
Garrett.
Why are we by passing the
procurement.
Madam chairwoman and
Representative the P. three
process is an alternative way of
dealing with procurement and the
board has to look into that and
from the very beginning of
public partner has to
demonstrate that this is a
positive use of taxpayer money
and I'd like to ask
Can you.
On top of it about that the
madam chair could have
procurement code
I I think I can't add much more
than what Representative Garrett
said which is that it just it's
an alternative method for of
procuring Services I I don't
know that I am more to add.
Chair of.
Representative this Russell I
appreciated as an alternative
but I'd it's not really much of
a method there's doesn't really
seem to be.
What oversight on how the money
is spent I suppose you.
For a large contract you sign a
contract.
Yeah I I don't know what level
of detail that contract would
have you send it to the board
they approve it or not
than many sorts flowing and I
think I don't think there's
oversight at that point thank
you if you're buying I have
cable
You are you could buy cable from
your cousins cable company
correct I I mean I just I don't
think there's any scrutiny of
that.
Madam chair representative so
and it's true a lot with
transportation infrastructure
projects that it's not so much
the lowest bidder however those
Qualifications are set out
sometimes are looking for
someone who's really expert in
an area someone has experience
long track record of doing
whatever projects were looking
at so I think some of the the
reason we don't follow the
procurement code exactly is
sometimes we're better off
trying to major on
something unique or special in
the way of experience for the
potential private partner and
right I don't know madam chair
representative that there's not
oversight I think that's up to
the board and whether it's a ten
million dollar project or of a
lesser amount there will be
oversight and this contract
management as well Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representatives I.
I think that's an accurate
answer I'm.
I I skeptically believe there's
a high correlation between
export expert contractors and
contractors to make political
contributions.
And I'm concerned about that.
Madam chair representative is on
page four
one the requirements.
Prior to entering into a
contract is to
lines nineteen determined
whether the applications
procurement code or other
procurement rules apple to the
public partner with delay or
increase the cost the proposed
project project.
Of course the for to make it
does actually apply.
And I think the answer is always
going to be yes so I I I'm I'm
kind of wondering if that's that
section two accomplishes
anything.
Madam chair representative
Representative I think Mr
her and describing the Rio metro
project where they have to go
back every eight years I just
want to mention that many of
these projects are in a multi
year projects and expensive but
they do have to demonstrate the
public partner has to determine
whether the application of the
procurement code or other
procurement rules applicable to
the public partner would delay
eight or increase the cost of
the proposed public project and
one advantage one hope for a
public private partnership is
that the private partner of
involvement speeds up
the delivery of the project
which ends up saving taxpayers
money is received with roads
road costs have increased from
thirty to fifty percent in
construction costs so one plus
point of public private
partnerships is that element.
The manager risen here that
appreciate that
it might be the perfect to make
it that the answer this question
does it speed up and save money
is always going to be S. as in
my view the procurement code
imposes costs on the public
sector dollars.
But it's the process that we've
settled upon to avoid fraud
waste and abuse.
Because there been that
contracts in the past and so
what we did is we we created
this really formal stiff process
of submitting bids in the
valuing them and and that whole
thing which takes time takes
money in is is really difficult.
But we think that the overall in
result is better by taking the
steps and and in this bill.
Goes around the steps of.
So that's going to Madam chair
representative agreed so I I
just site a little town that's
in my district it's desperate
for broadband and the process of
trying to get that has been
languishing.
And the city of the oil city is
done what it could to to raise
funds but it's not nearly enough
and so this is one of those
projects where thanks could be
sped up quite a bit if.
a private party came forward and
said will pair with the the
little city on this and your of
the procurement code is I
believe a very good thing as
well but there are occasions
when
being able to do something a
little different can be most
beneficial and I'm looking at
school children who who need
internet in their homes for
doing your homework things like
that and so it's a desperate
need right now madam chair.
And Madam chair representative I
want to emphasize again that in
the rulemaking this can be an
important section of it how to
deal with the traditional
procurement code but this again
is the structure within the rule
making takes place to determine
and.
That manager would just note
that the procurement code
exemption doesn't occur until
after the agreement is signed so
it's not a valid Public Project
until the the public the P.
three agreement has been in
place so in order to demonstrate
that the P. three treatment is
about is in the best interest
they do have to go through this
analysis so it's it is not
automatic there may be more
times than less than fewer than
than it would obviously be
faster.
But I understand that madam
chair mistrust but.
The the sign the contract
without doing a procurement.
Without doing a bit I mean
that's.
The fact that the exemption
doesn't apply to all afterwards.
Isn't part of it the heart of it
is it's not followed from the
get go that there's no process.
To no public process to
evaluate.
The private partner.
chair representative so I think
the bill does cover this it's on
site you page for.
Starting at line fourteen it
says prior to entering into a
public private partnership
agreement the public partner
shower and then it gives a a
number of things that need to be
done so I I think and maybe miss
Russell can.
Expand on that Madam if she
wishes to let me just go back to
the the board that will be
assigned appointed we'll have to
promulgate rules for what is in
the at what process they go
through for P. three agreement
so this sets out the boundaries
but the rules are also going to
be then put in place by the
board so there will be
additional meat put on the bones
in terms of what a public entity
will have to go through in order
to demonstrate that they've done
the proper diligence and given
proper notice to the public I
can't tell you what that's going
to look like but that is part of
this process.
I am
Madam chair
I am not.
Comforted by that
on the board the me ask you a
couple questions on the board
I've been going on at some
length.
Usually in in these type of
bills we see conflict of
interest language.
I I don't see I didn't find any
of that in this bill.
Madam chair and representative
can you be more specific about
which conflicts of interests you
would be talking about I did I
don't believe there is that
language in here.
But what specifically do you
mean.
Madam chair isn't here to five
members of the public appointed
by the capitalists the council
has experience in any of these
areas.
Might be interested in doing a
project there's there's no way
in which in here that would
prevent them from.
Evaluating a contract that they
may be a beneficiary of.
Madam chair representative if
that's something that we need to
add that something we could at.
Madam chair representative I I I
think I I think it's important I
I don't think it's in here
Something else we we often see
in the point the point is that
there's subject to governmental
conduct act.
I I think that covers some of
that territory about having
competing interests that might
be another approach.
and madam Madam chair
representative it would the
board be subject to if press.
In that the open meetings act I
think that the open meetings act
mentioned without for from Madam
chair representative April is
mentioned with an exception for
propriety proprietary
information except where it's
needed to operate the systems
for example the train or
broadband situation that's on
page.
With.
For for the new page for eight
twenty four twenty five have the
open meetings act.
and approve the.
C..
To a page that is.
Madam chair I can tell you that
for all the other point that we
administer they are subject to
the open meetings act and
Representative I don't
anticipate this would be any
different.
Madam chair
Representative says mistrustful
I I I appreciate that I'd rather
have it spelled out the open
meetings act reference on page
four is in is in reference to
the initial
Setting of the project it
doesn't appear to be connected
to the operation the port
itself.
That's.
State.
Object again I I'm not an
attorney so I can't really speak
to the the issue but I do know
that this is similarly set up
for other of our boards and it's
the same they are all subject to
open meetings and I again I am
turning like that reference.
Madam chair
The reason is this Russell there
there's a provision in here I'm
not finding it right away
so there's a section about other
lawsuits that do apply I
believe.
you might just add to that list.
There was a very short section
applicability of certain other
laws.
And it's the public works
minimum wage act but you could.
Slowed that up.
You know other than the
procurement act currently.
madam chair
Representative thank you for
answering my many questions
I I don't like P. threes.
I.
I think I think it's public
money and private profit and in
does it incentivise private
investment yes.
But it's not out of the goodness
of their heart they're not doing
the money they're not you know
they're not doing public public
worse I mean there there again
that return on investment and
that's why it's peeling to the
and that's what makes me
uncomfortable.
Thank you Madam Madam chair
representative we did since
that.
However I just want to you know
we have lots of broadband
companies eyes peas in the state
who are committed to the state
and I think it's important
number that.
Representative night for.
Thank you madam chair of I just
have a few.
Follow up questions to what the
representative from Santa Fe one
over number one.
Home page.
Page three.
We delete toll roads but with
with this be available to.
Fund bridges or tunnels.
Madam chair representative Madam
chair representative yes.
And I assume parking structures
charging stations and similar
type of transportation
facilities.
Madam chair representative yes
okay.
Then I'm kind of wondering why
we exempted toll roads.
Madam chair and representative
divert that crossed my mind as
well
I think toll road a date they do
in some ways serve a public
purpose and the public need
because they help people get
places faster but they're almost
exclusively for private gain in
terms of the investing in the
building and.
They expect to return on their
investment and you know
everything that's done is at
risk.
But for some reason it was just
thought that that would be
better just to make this up
front in the bill Madam.
My next the question involves
page for.
Line eight we discussed this
earlier in the committee
There's a difference between.
A newspaper.
Of general circulation
accounting in a newspaper of
general circulation published in
the county and.
The language of the prior bill
talks about publication of a
newspaper of general circulation
in the county which would mean
maybe it's the Albuquerque
journal that is the newspaper
for Harding County.
But Harding County may not have
a newspaper.
Published in that county and so
I I would suggest that the work
published.
In line may be deleted so
there's just a newspaper of
general circulation in the
county
One thing over on page thirteen.
paragraph the beginning line
six.
When I do.
Transactions involving.
Indian nations tribes and
pueblos.
There's a couple of hurdles that
you always have to get over and
one is.
A waiver of sovereign immunity
and the second one is consent to
jurisdiction.
And there's nothing in here that
addresses those issues and if
there's public money being
involved it seems to me that one
of the things with respect to
projects on tribal lands is that
we would want to make sure that
those two issues are addressed.
So.
Point that out of then on page
fourteen the.
Arby's of Madam chair
representative.
Many projects higher visa
granted and the company that is
actually.
The subject matter of the
project by their own bonds back.
And so was there any limitations
contemplated therefore is that.
Probably what we would see here
where the industrial revenue
bonds are granted.
Madam chair representative this
does not provide for in the
of relief from property taxes.
And so in those higher bees that
are typically provided for in
New Mexico that's usually the
vehicle to get the property off
the tax rolls what we see here
is truly just a revenue bond
where there's it's a funding
mechanism to get the revenue
to fund the project.
So the a bonding of the project
but would not be an I. R. V.
that we traditionally see.
Act please County and so the
level of.
To exempt the project from
taxation madam chair that's
correct and and Representative
to your other point on court of
jurisdiction and sovereign
immunity of the finance
authority act does require of
the fifty prescribes the court
of jurisdiction so all of our
agreements are subject to that
which is the few first judicial
court.
And do you deal with the
sovereign immunity issue as well
madam chair Madam chair
representative we do fairly
frequently through the water
trust board the public project
revolving fund the local
government planning fund several
of the boards that we minister.
And then of my final question is
what if the revenue stream is
limited for.
I guess possibly nonexistence
would would there be a there may
not be any incentive to have the
private entity involved but if
it's a project like that is that
just one that wouldn't be
considered at all because there
will be no revenue stream for.
There is there is there any
contemplation that there might
be projects that there's limited
revenue stream but we still want
to do and I'm thinking of
broadband in very remote
portions of the state where.
The likelihood of having a
significant revenue stream is
limited.
Madam chair representative again
this is a tool that the public
partner has to decide if it is
the appropriate tool to use.
So would start in that initial
evaluation and madam chair
relative to the loan program and
the revenue bonds if there are
no fees that will be generated
from the project there's nothing
to repay the loan I don't see a
provision in here that allows us
to forgive loans so we would not
be making a loan to an entity
that is not able to repay it.
So we started out Madam chair of
the discussion with may be.
Kids going to get to their
homework at McDonald's well.
Part of my district at the time
they were traveling to a dirt
parking lot across the street
from the school which have a
why I think mounted on a
telephone pole
and so in some of the
communities or many other
communities in the state.
The ability to recover.
Sufficient funds to pay for this
broadband is probably
nonexistent and and so I was I
was hoping to see maybe there be
some incentive to get that built
out in particularly the remote
areas of the state not just
where there's significant
numbers of people to pay for
that infrastructure but in areas
that.
You don't have the traffic that
would justify so.
Madam chair that I'm done asking
more questions thank you thank
you Representative el Cajon then
more Martinez and then Sapanta.
Thank you madam chair it's not
my fault as a little far away.
Okay I would lose.
Of the.
Representative the.
Throughout the day in the
legislature.
This B. B. B. or B. threes
provided this come up over and
over and over again.
So I'm really curious last year
the pair this legislation.
Yes Madam chair representative
this past the house and I think
two people voted against it and
I won't say their names.
So as to why you didn't get a
third one that was one.
But okay so.
So you see I'm looking at the
act of looking on on page seven
of the F. I. R. D. shows that
that started in two ninety two
thousand nineteen and there's
really no over and over and over
again these bills introduced but
I know that it's gone further
than that because I remember
representative that I now that I
remember was the first one to
start working on these entities
bills and they were that
anywhere.
And so I'm kind of curious we're
coming through a year.
The state ma'am indications of
what we're not your I don't know
what your thought that it's
going to happen this year since
that happened.
In the past Madam chair
representative last year it
passed the house and Senate and
Senate Judiciary Committee for
four days and then the session
ended I don't know what other
people's experience S. R. in our
esteemed.
Senate Judiciary Committee but
other priorities of this and so
it was not heard in the
committee.
I do believe this is the year to
do it with the diplomatic three.
So the table I'm looking at that
apparently there was a Madam
chair representative there is to
be as last year to twenty seven
to twenty eight that correct.
Madam chair representative that
I don't know anything about
those Representative Brown and
myself were on house bill fifty
five twenty twenty two and that
is the bill which is identical
to what you're seen before you.
and that did pass the house with
to.
Opposing votes and it did go to
the Senate Judiciary next to.
So.
With your loans Representative
if we go above the initiative my
biggest problem with the forces
the procurement code and I'll.
Of this allows.
Posted will around and not
follow the procurement code of.
What worries me is that.
Make do by not following the
procurement code that allows
people to get in trouble.
And you know and what bothers me
is that reading completed
projects and everything will go
beautifully and up at the end
done perfectly.
But we do one project where
somebody is up.
Going to jail and that's how
we'll hear back.
And by opening the doors to the
people not having to do a
competitive bidding the way that
they should be doing that.
I see ourselves.
Grain to get people to go to
jail.
That scares me.
So I'll just leave it at that
that in chair like I say maybe
is heartburn is to procurement
code in it has been forever and
ever.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative
people going to jail that did
follow
state supposedly the procurement
looks at the.
But again there's a lot of
processes in place even before
any agreement is signed.
Thank you madam chair
Representative home speaker
Martinez.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative is really bill
Ford I know you have been
working on this for a long time
and madam chair percent Garrett
I know that I've heard you talk
about your experience and and
South Korea and and I think you
mentioned today as well and how
that influence this up you know
this is one of those bills that
makes me feel good cover a
little bit uncomfortable
but also we've got to start
thinking outside the box right
and that's exactly what you all
are doing with this piece of
legislation.
I think
Madam chair representative Jim
McCrery some good points you
know some good things that we
could do to time it up
but I certainly commend you for
your tenacity when you have this
bill for a while
can you work really hard on it
can you continue to move it
along the process.
I'm not sure how this.
Bill for this concept can
benefit my community I'm sure
there's some spaces where it
would but I certainly see this
as super beneficial to those
rules parts of the state that
may not have access to.
to the capital to the investment
and you know you've got to think
outside the box I'm glad we pass
that comes from amendment last
year house resolution one and
now this falls on its follows in
its footsteps right so I I
commend you the two of you for
putting in all the work you've
put in and I am very much
looking for supporting this
chair thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I have followed
all of the P. three bills very
closely much to my sometimes
cigarette because it's very
complicated
and I can remember former chair
mccamley hosting a two day
workshop with all kinds of bond
counsel
And experts from different parts
of the the country on the ins
and outs of P. threes so I just
it will first I want to commend
you because I think the bill
that is here as a result of a
lot of the conversations over
the years and it's really
narrowed in scope and it's a
really good I think for staff
for us as a state to look at
using this mechanism it's not
wide open like some of the
previous bills have been in
terms of the types of projects
limited to transportation it's
limited to broadband in those
are obviously areas it really
high need for the state
particularly rural areas so I
really appreciate that because
some of the previous.
Bills I think cop cause some
consternation because they were
so broad that they could have
applied to many many different
projects
And
you know I means that so I I
have a couple questions but at
first I'll just give a few
suggestions I think in line with
some of the issues that
Representative McQueen brought
up by I think you might want to
look at
yeah I think the the scenario
that we want to present is that.
A contractor develops
relationships with this eleven
member board or other
stakeholders convinces.
And entities could convince is
this board that X. Y. Z. project
is a great idea and it's going
to fill this need and
you know even before you get
into anything on toward just
that this project is created but
it's not really needed and if I
the community and so I don't
know if you
one of the ways I think some P.
three legislation gets around
that is it doesn't allow for
unsolicited projects
so that might be something to
think about it and I know you
all have been deep in
consideration so I'm just
putting out some suggestions I'm
not sure which one is the right
one
Another way to go about it might
be when the
When let's see on page five
where you say that the
public partner has to
demonstrate that the projects
serves an important public
purpose in an important public
need that maybe a local
maybe require some
certifications from the local
government or you put some more
specificity that that's I know
we do that and some other types
of projects like leader projects
for example and that might be a
way to address that because then
you really have documented that
these communities are expressing
a need in these are the specific
purposes and they feel like the
project is going to fulfill and
that's all documented so that
you have that some
accountability leader for making
sure that the project addresses
whatever those particular
community needs were
And.
You know or that you were at the
I think that that my third
suggestion for you to consider
would be that the public
partner.
puts out a set of.
criteria or set of design
factors or
answer struggling for the right
to not not quite in our of P.
but just to you know as a list
of specs that the project was
meet
so that then you're you're able
to have a private partner
responds to exactly what the
public partners asking for
And may and and maybe some of
that could be addressed in a
rulemaking but I I think maybe
adding some specificity of
ninety I do agree with you know
making sure it subject to the G.
CA in
and that you know the meetings
are conducted
Think of plants with the open
meetings act
It is so those are just my
suggestions I just had a
question on that that user fees
and the revenue I I think I
don't totally understand of.
So for example if we had it hi
let's just say a train project
is it's kind of simple people
are buying tickets this is a
project where revenue bonds have
been issued do all of it what's
the division of the revenue on
those ticket sales for example
does all of that go to the
funders early containment
schedule or how exactly does
that work madam chair would
typically be a portion of the
fees that are charged because
this operations and maintenance
have to be have to be taken care
of so it would be a portion that
is not needed to maintain
project.
And so if there's.
Excess revenue does that go to
the private partner or does that
repay the bond quicker how does
that work.
Madam chair that would be
covered in the negotiation and
the P. three agreement itself of
the goal of the P. three a
perfect P. three deal if one
exists is one there's equal risk
an equal benefit being shared by
the partners to the public is
getting something from it and
the private entities getting
something from it so it would
really be it would have to come
down to what the risks are the
transaction and you know what
the benefits are but it's about
sharing risk and about sharing
benefit.
Thank you for that madam chair
and representative in miss
Russell and that I think that
just brings me to my final
question which is one of the
biggest takeaways I had was that
because that
P. three agreement negotiation
can be so highly complex as well
as you know bonding at center
that may come I that may follow
do you feel that this bill and
the appropriation that I
understand is in house bill two
gives MFA that the resources it
needs to hire the appropriate.
Council and at it whatever it
staffing that may be needed by
contract or or on staff to make
sure that the state's interest
is protected in these P. three
agreements.
Madam chair I very much
appreciate that question of that
is one of our greatest concerns
in that you could not fund the
P. three the public private
partnership fund and the board
and the finance authority would
still have responsibilities
under this act so we would have
to monitor all agreements we
would have to do to do all the
the rural setting for the help
the board to with its rural
setting which will require as
you mentioned
specialized resources so we will
have to ramp up our staff in
order to meet a level that is
able to then monitor these on a
long term basis and will use
short term contract services as
part of the low the rural
setting process to make sure we
have best practices in place as
part of these rules so that is
the concern the finance
authority is not a budgeted
entity you all don't appropriate
money for our operations we only
pay for our services from of
funds that are allowed forced to
cover operations so that is our
single greatest concern about
this program is that it's not
clear what the activity levels
going to be and so if it's one
or two a year that's not very
much but if there's many and
that's obviously a concern for
us so that that mechanism is our
greatest concern making loans
right now that's what we're set
up to do the revenue bonds do
not concern me that is what we
do I don't need to staff to do
that monitoring these agreements
and doing what's necessary and
what you would expect the
finance authority to do up is
really dependent on the
resources we have.
thank you for that Madam chair
representative so that
The funding that is created.
This.
So it's actually just amending
the public project.
Revolving.
There is a fund created allows
and determines the public
project revolving fund for these
deals to be authorized under the
public project revolving fund.
So Madam chair representative
and and forgive me miss Russell
because I
Can't remember the funding
mechanism for NMFA so would
funds from that from the new
fund in the existing public
project revolving fund to be
authorized for use by NMFA to
hire the kinds of experts that
would be needed or is that does
that that's not a separate
probation and I understand that
correctly Madam chair of the the
fund this law allows for money
to fund to reimburse the finance
authority for cost of
administering the board the
loans and grants and four other
direct costs related to the
program so if the fund received
an appropriation depending on
the size of the appropriation
and the volume of transactions
the finance authority should be
fine if the loans are purchased
into the PPRF then the the costs
associated with that loan are
covered by the PPRF so we
allocate our time based like us
on a consulting basis so we do
activity based costing County so
if it's related to the board we
would expect the fund to cover
those costs directly thank you
madam chair thank you for that
Representative thank you.
Thank you any further discussion
from the numbers.
I don't see any further
discussion I'm happy to
entertain a motion.
I would just thank.
I move a lot I.
Madam chair
We discussed some possible yes
right I was very emotionally
they were.
Thank you very much.
Sessions with you representative
of we had a few suggestions and
areas to look at again
on some of the conflict of
interest type issues I know that
Representative McQueen is has a
lot of experience and sort of
coming up with ideas about
boards and structures and those
kinds of things I'm sure he'd be
more than willing to help you
you know formulate some ideas I
would suggest that you do that
because that wasn't clear
interest of his and
Yes the amendment as soon as you
can we are getting a little
backed up and we do wanna try to
get this out on to the floor
yeah when we can so appreciate
your attention it was a very
good conversation about the bill
so thank you and we'll be seeing
you again I'm sure.
Thank you very much madam chair
committed thank you for all your
thoughtful helpful suggestions
thank you thank you.
So I think we're done with
today's business
we have a full agenda on Monday
and the I think people should be
expecting to be meeting on the
on the weekends henceforth.
