Wheels of legislating.
Moving. So we have a quorum.
And um.
I'd like to call the meeting to
order.
House Judiciary Committee is
called to order. Would you call
the roll, please. Yes, madam.
Representative Abiha here.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Hall.
Here.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill,
here.
Representative Martinez.
He
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Ree.
Leader Sapansky
Vice Chair Romero, here.
Vice chair
Chandler?
Chair Chandler.
Thank you.
All right.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh.
This bill is meant to apply
penalties for 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
offenses, regardless of which
section of the law was broken.
emb e zz le ment of obtaining or
receiving.
Or transporting stolen vehicles.
This would mean that if you were
to steal, embezzle, or obtain a
vehicle unlawfully.
You will receive a 4th degree
felony for a 1st offense, a 3rd
degree felony for a 2nd offense
and a 2nd degree felony.
3rd or subsequent offenses.
you would be guilty of these
charges no matter which offense
was committed, uh, Madam Tread
also like to introduce my uh
My uh expert witnesses, if you
don't mind, if you guys can
introduce yourselves.
I'm Cherry, good morning. My
name is Devin Chapman. I'm the
supervising prosecutor with the
superintendent of insurance and
also the executive director.
in New Mexico Auto theft
Prevention Authority.
Madam Chair, good morning,
members of the committee. Good
morning. My name is Rob Hart. I
am Deputy District attorney from
the 2nd Judicial DA's office,
and I'm also the director of the
Governor's organized Crime
Commission. I believe there is a
sub. Yes, madam chair, we have a
substitute uh that addresses
most of the concerns that were
brought up in the consumer.
Committee, so that's what this
does.
Yes, madam chair.
So movement.
And do you wanna just discuss.
I'm sure.
Is a detail for the amendment or
for the bill itself?
Sorry about the sub, so that
means what is ever in contained
in the document. Um, I just
heard from one of my colleagues
that would be interested to see
what changed from was I don't
have a copy of it in front of
me, my chair.
I, I'm happy to walk through it.
Oh, no problem.
Madam Chair, I apologize.
We're just, we're just seeing
the
Uh, substituted version this
morning and I think the, the two
biggest changes are, uh there
was a, a concern about the
numbering of the new section
that's added at the end.
Currently in this in the
substitution, this is page 5
beginning on line 7.
Uh, the, the original version, I
think had it numbered as section
5.1 instead of 4.1, which would
have put it in a rather awkward
position in the
Or actually, I think the
original one numbered 5.
Which would have caused us to
need to renumber a whole bunch
of additional uh penalties that
follow it that aren't directly
related to the issues that were
here before the committee for
this morning. Uh, so the
renumbering of it to a 4.1, so
that it applies to the 4, the 4
statutes that preceded, uh,
seemed to be the cleaner. It was
one of the concerns. And I think
the only other substantive
change that uh we've been able
to see this morning is the
addition of the emergency clause
at the bottom of that page.
I'm sure no that was the only
substantive changes we've seen.
Why don't we go to the audience
and take public comment. Those
of you in the audience who are
opposition to this bill, please
stand and come up to this
gentleman who has a microphone.
OK, I don't see any opposition.
I'm going to go online.
Anyone online wishing to.
express opposition to the bill.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill,
please raise your hand. All
right, please come up with the
um to the mic here.
Please try to limit your
comments to about a minute. Very
good. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I want
to thank sponsors, our
Representative Sanchez and
Barrego for this important
legislation. My name is Benjamin
Baker and I work for our
governor. We support the
increased accountability
measures for those offenders who
refuse to correct their criminal
behavior after their first
intersection with our criminal
justice system.
We also recognize the
significance and the importance
to every New Mexican, the impact
of the crimes addressed in House
Bill 50 have on their ability to
be insured and afford that
insurability. For those reasons,
and many that will be brought up
during the important debate, um,
we support House Bill 50 and we
are grateful for your
contemplation and your
deliberation as you contemplate
public safety in New Mexico.
Thank you.
Anyone else? I thought I saw
some other if you'd come up,
sir and um speak to the through
the mic, that would be helpful.
Me
Members of the committee, good
afternoon.
I'll say afternoon because it is
3 past.
My name is Anthony Luna and I'm
employed with the New Mexico
State Police.
And have been for the last 12.5
years. I currently supervise the
state police auto theft unit in
Albuquerque.
Uh, in brief, I'd like to let
you know how the name must go
state police does support House
Bill 50 before supervising the
unit, I was an agent with the
auto theft unit for 5 years,
making my tenure approximately
6.5 years uh with the unit
altogether.
Since 2018 to present, I've
dealt with and participated in
hundreds of cases involving auto
theft offenders, the majority of
them being repeat offenders.
I've seen time and time again
people arrested for stealing
vehicles and released and within
hours driving other stolen
vehicles.
Although some will argue that
stealing a vehicle is simply a
property crime, police officers
across the state of New Mexico
and more often than not violent
criminals operating these stolen
vehicles, using them as vessels
to commit violent crimes across
our state.
Majority of the time my unit
makes a physical arrest. The
suspect is usually convicted
felon.
With a lengthy criminal history,
and these individuals are
usually in possession of
firearms and others.
Under the influence of
narcotics, I believe House Bill
50 will be a leap forward to
slowing down repeat auto theft
offenders and thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
community for one time. Thank
you. Anyone else in the
audience? I don't see anyone.
Let's go online.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support, please raise your
hand.
Frankly, I don't really ask so,
so, um, I don't think any of my
staff's gonna raise their hand.
So, um, back to the presenters
representative Sanchez. Madam,
sure, uh, I apologize, uh, I
know last year when we
presented, uh, some of the
statistics were were pretty
astounding, uh.
Albuquerque itself, I think it
was like top 5 in the nation for
stolen vehicles, New Mexico is
in the top two just because of
Albuquerque.
Um
It's pretty crazy, hey.
people from Espanola are afraid
to drive their cars to
Albuquerque, that's.
That's pretty bad.
Not that, not that we have an
issue with stolen cars, but uh I
know we have a reputation which
is not uh.
The greatest, but um we do have
a, a pretty bad problem.
And uh I think we need to do
something about it. This is an
effort to
To hopefully curb that and, and
as you heard by the gentleman
that just spoke, it's not just
uh
The stolen cars themselves is
tied to other crimes that are
being committed in our state and
uh.
Uh, this is a big deal, not just
in our state, but nationally,
so uh hopefully uh we can get
this in place to, to help with
the issue. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative, um.
I'm ready to go to committee
unless.
Hurt.
Madam Chair, just briefly, I'll
also note in my work is that
with the Organized Crime
Commission, we've seen that this
these auto theft rings are a
huge problem in San Juan County,
Donana County, and while it is,
we all know it is a problem in
Albuquerque. It's not just an
Albuquerque problem, so I just
wanted to.
make sure that that was clear.
Will you guys feel picked on
down there, um.
OK, so I'm open to questions
from members.
Um, we've got rap hall, we've
got repachman v. Hills. All
right, Representative Hall.
Madam Chair, panel.
I like the substitute. I might
just comment on that. I think it
clarified quite a bit, um.
The intent of this, I appreciate
the habitual offender statute
being put into there. This is a
problem. It's not just a
property crime problem. Every
time my, my son's a patrolman.
I'm retired law enforcement.
Every time they make a stop on a
stolen vehicle.
They increased their chances of
being in an armed confrontation.
I wanted more than a question to
comment, Madam Chair, that I am
in full support of this
legislation.
Thank you, ma'am.
A representative Hingha V Hill.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and I just got a text
that um there's someone online
who tried to speak or was unable
to get on, so I don't know
what's going on with that. Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair sponsors,
uh, committee members, just for
my own edification, um, they're
in the analysis that talks about
how this is trying to clarify
the habitual offender, um,
portions of the statute. So can
you just kind of talk about the
problem as it was before with
the statute and how this new.
instruction corrects that.
I'm trying to wrap my mind
around it.
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
think there was a question as to
whether we could, if we're using
these prior offenses to enhance
a subsequent offense whether
those prior offenses could also
be used.
Then to uh enhances a habitual
offender, basically using the
same prior twice.
Um, I know there was discussion,
I think, I think the public
defenders review of this, this
bill uh properly pointed out
that there is case law on other
statutes that are self-enhancing
like this. They get worse with
each subsequent offense.
Uh, that the state is only
allowed to use those priors
once. So if we do choose to
enhance the prior.
For purposes of making this a
second or subsequent offense, we
can't then use that same prior.
To then hit them as a habitual
offender.
Um, there, as I mentioned, I
think, and I do think it's the
Lacy case that that the PDs
actually uh cited specifically
in their, their review of this.
Um, but the, the substitution,
and I apologize to, to the
committee and Madam Chair, there
is that section and I think we
both missed it this morning.
And looking at the substitution
that does specifically clarify.
Uh, the relation of, of this
bill to the habitual Offender
Act, it's on page 5 at the
bottom and and I apologize, but
it does.
It does answer that question to
some degree, uh, with, with how
the, the habitual offender act
will be impacted or not by
these.
I hope I've answered your
question,
Madam, I'm an expert, thank you
very much, that was exactly my
concern and my question. Thank
you.
Representative Romero, you're
you're up next. OK.
I, um, thanks to the sponsors,
we did get to hear this in CPAC,
so I don't want to belabor it,
um.
Additional questioning, but I do
want to.
Um, talk about the, uh, and we
haven't.
We've adopted, we have, we've
been discussing the committee
sub, and I know that I had a um.
Amendment prepared.
Or the original bill, so I just
want to get some clarity on some
of the changes in the intent of
the of the section 5 B and C.
Um
So firstly, Madam Chair
Representative, I think we're
actually unfortunately
referencing the wrong statue.
Um, and see on the committee
sub.
Um, I think it should be 30 as
per analysis and the changes
that we have and I, I need to.
verify this, but it should be
31-18, um, penalties, um.
Or um
Section 5A.
Or sorry, Section 5C.
Um
I think we're referencing the
wrong.
you.
Can you just verify that
31-18-18.
It's correct or or am I?
analysts and I'm pulling up the
statute now.
Not I'm sure if uh we do uh get
past this committee, we'll make
sure that's corrected and does.
Identify the correct it
Identify the correct
before we would get there, but
I, I, I understand it wouldn't
be.
brain, so, um, the sub is
incorrect, OK, so we need to to
fix that, but um, Madam Chair, I
agree it should be.
3118-17.
OK.
So that 1-18.
7, OK. 1717, OK.
OK, so that, that change needs
to be made. The other, and I
don't know the exact language,
and I understand there's some.
Iterations that need to be um
discussed for what the proper
language is.
But for um section 5B.
Unfortunately, I think it
creates um.
the ability
So
Um
stack these sentences rather
than look at them independently.
Um
And so when we're looking at the
habitual offender statute, we
want to um
Be able to um
essentially enhance the sentence
for um.
For those that are habitual
offenders, but unfortunately, I
don't think the language here is
for what we're hearing with the
analysis.
Um, allows us to do that in this
unfortunately.
Um, makes this sentencing higher
than what is intended, I think
was 2nd to 3rd or 4th to 3rd to
2nd degree felonies.
I mean I think it's just the
tightening of the language
between the um and see and I.
And I understand there's a back
and forth right now about how to
um.
Enhance that sentencing, and so
again, further tightening of the
language, um, statute that needs
to be corrected as well.
Um
Because I think what's happening
with the language right now is
that the intense um.
Sort of loosely guides.
He, um, how we can stack it
clearly.
And so these
will be applied, uh,
unfortunately, um.
Without that ability to just
delineate correctly when one
offense has happened, then the
next offense increases.
Um, and so
Without being able to to clarify
that in the language currently.
Sure.
Madam Char, can you there was a
case referenced that you a case
name that you had just.
Spoken on the enhancement, can
you?
Give me that case name again.
Madam Chair Representative, it's
state v. Lacy. It's 2002 NMCA.
032.
I'm sorry, 0132 03232. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And Madam Chair, would you like
us to respond to.
OK. Um, so, Madam Chair, Vice
Chair Romero.
So section B.
In Section C. What Section C is
saying is really just codifying.
The case law that was just
cited.
Right, so
Section B is going to say that
it's a what we call a
self-enhancing crime.
As you
violate of these, right? So if
you are guilty of unlawful
taking of a motor vehicle, and
then you commit the crime of
receiving or transferring a
motor vehicle. That's considered
a second offense now.
Which is the intent of this
statute.
The only thing that section C
says is that we can't double
dip, which is already case law,
but this just codifies it. We
can't also say.
Well, because you originally
committed an unlawful taking of
a motor vehicle. We're gonna
charge you with a second offense
and a habitual offender
enhancement.
We can't do that, and the only
thing section C does is codifies
that.
I, I just wanna
make sure that that's actually
is and I think the language
right now, given that we have to
fix the statue anyways, I just
want to confirm that that's.
Um
The same analysis that our
analysts have, um, just cause
I'm unfamiliar about how to
actually approach that, um, in
the legal language, I think is.
Just what we want to make sure
that the intent of um.
What we're trying to pursue is,
is exactly what we're.
Saying in the, in the language
and um.
I think we just like for me, I
just wanna slow that down at the
moment, just cause I don't know.
One way or the other.
Um, and the other side comment,
um, Madam Chair, is that this
the addition of the.
Um, emergency clause, can you
just tell me why? I'm sure, uh,
Vice Chair Romero, uh.
Because we believe that this is
such a prevalent crime and such
a huge issue and
We don't really want to wait to
start prosecuting these crimes,
essentially, and there's no real
good reason to wait.
I'm not sure. I just want to add
this is an epidemic that's
really bad, so, uh, sooner than
later is the preference. Thank
you, madam.
And, and Madam Chair, if I can
chime in as well.
Um, referencing the, the
comments that uh Representative
Hall made, uh.
And, and our, our sponsored.
Representative Sanchez commented
on earlier.
Uh, New Mexico as a whole,
Albuquerque in particular, but
Mexico as a whole has been
ranked in the top 2 or 3 spots
for a number of years as the
worst places for auto theft.
Um, because of
Uh, concerted and diligent
effort, especially by our law
enforcement, but also by
prosecutors and, and defense
counsel across the state. We've
been able to
Reduce those numbers.
Somewhat, the most recent
numbers we have from, from 2023
have uh New Mexico and, and
Albuquerque both ranked as
number 7, which is the lowest
we've been in quite a while.
Uh, but it's still number 7.
Um, and the last numbers we were
able to get for
Uh, Santa Fe and and Las Cruces
especially both had them
climbing into the top 30.
For the first time that these
rankings have been available. So
this has been a, a long-standing
problem as multiple people have
mentioned this morning, it is,
if it was ever.
Uh, an Albuquerque only problem.
It is not anymore.
Uh, and for that reason is.
My, my co-expert had mentioned a
minute ago, this is, this is an
issue that we want to get on top
of as soon as possible. These,
these offenders that would be
targeted by this bill are in the
system now.
Or will be coming in tonight and
we'd like to get on top of them
as soon as we can.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the response, um.
And I, I empathize with those
who suffered through this. It's
just for emergency clauses, we
usually don't do that for
crime-related bills. It's, it
was just an interesting choice.
Um,
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
I just got the language as for
state v. Lacey and State v.
Linham on um ensuring the double
jeopardy peace is not um.
Is more clear from the case law.
Um, which doesn't, unfortunately
mimic what you have in the CS,
so I would love to work with the
sponsors, um.
Um
hearing up the language when we
get the the next committee sub
or amendment to the committee
sub that talks about the prior
conviction situation, so that
double jeopardy doesn't apply.
Um, it does this current
language doesn't actually, I
think tie up that loose end on
the Double Jeopardy piece. So,
um, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, I.
I'd love to continue that.
Station.
Welcome to reply, Madam Vice
Chairmero, and just to be clear,
if that section was completely
stricken today if there was no
section C, we still couldn't.
Do it. It's illegal. It's, it's
already contrary to case law.
Lacey and Lineham have already
established that.
We're doing this as a
precaution. We're just trying to
codify and cover our bases, but
even if that section didn't
exist, we still couldn't.
Use self-enhancing and habitual
offender enhancement.
Madam Cha representative, I
think just the um.
The clarity of just being able
to talk about the defendant, um.
Sentence enhancement under
subsection A.
Um
And the idea of being able to
clearly state what that prior
conviction proceeding, the
commission of the offense would
be.
I think helps just clarify that
the enhancement is because of
the prior conviction and right
now.
Um, it's not clear that that's
um language.
You know
Ensures that that happens. So if
we can talk about it offline.
Yeah
We talk a little bit of, I have
a couple of comments and but
I'll talk about process because
Rep Sanchez, you weren't around
when I was talking to
representativerego, um, this
bill is something we're looking
at for possible inclusion into
our.
Crime package.
And what we've been doing in
that case is we roll the bill
and then we're gonna put them
all together and we'll have a, a
combined vote, so if that
happens, I don't want you to
think we're we're, you know,
messing with you.
That's what's, that's the
process we've been using. So
having said that, nonetheless,
we want to get input so that
when we move forward we'll have
package that everybody can agree
to, and we won't have all these.
Kind of back and forth about
what a paragraph really means
and what's intended and so on
and so forth, so just wanna make
that clear, so we need a full
and vibrant conversation, so I'm
not trying to shut anyone down,
um, representative, um, are you
you through with your OK, so.
Um
My anyone else besides, OK.
So this is what I'm trying to
understand and it it relates to
representative um.
Romero's questions and
So
And this is, I'm reading from
staff assistant, so bear with
me.
If the intent is to allow in
internal enhancing.
And a a habitual.
Offender time.
No, that's not the intent, OK,
so we're hearing from our staff
that that's what it does.
OK, so there's a disagreement,
um, OK, I'm I'm happy to hear
from you guys, sorry.
Madam Chair, the bill simply
eliminates the distinctions
between the four different types
of auto theft.
That's all it does. The, the
sentencing structure for the
self-enhancing on each of these
individual individual offenses.
It is already in effect and has
been since I believe 2013, but
it may have been earlier than
that. And this is, this is what
we've all been working on. It's,
it's a one offense has to be a
conviction before we can use it
for a, a, an enhancement down
the road.
Um, all this is saying that it
is
It shouldn't matter how a
defendant comes into possession
of a stolen vehicle for us to
consider that a subsequent
offense if he if he or she has
been convicted before.
Uh, the, the sentencing issues.
Aren't any different under the
the substitution either the
substitution before the
committee today or the original
bill, then they already are in
the statutes already. The only,
the only difference is changing
the distinction between the
types of offenses that can can
allow these these enhancements.
OK, OK.
Um, Mr. Hart. Madam chair and
just to maybe to think of it
more pragmatically. In the past,
if I had had a defendant who I'd
convicted of unlawful taking.
And then they came in later.
And I had to embezzle.
conviction
only choice would be to impose
habitual offender enhancement.
Now
My only choice will be the
self-enhancing because it is a
shell.
It's just, and the reason why
that's important.
Why we would rather use a
self-enhancing than a habitual
offender enhancement is because
habitual offender enhancement
time is all or nothing. I can
either hold it in abeyance or I
can impose it.
If I have a self-enhancing, that
gives me a greater range. So
what we can work with defendants
and give them caps and agree to.
Whatever, right? It gives
possible when we have to impose
or do nothing.
It's just more rigid.
So it doesn't enhance the
sentences for increasing
subsequent offenses. It also
makes it easier for us. We will
no longer be able.
To charge habitual offender
enhancement.
Within this statue because it'll
be a self-enhancing.
Chart.
Appreciate your perspective,
we're getting um different
analysis from our, our, our
staff, and so what I'm gonna
suggest we do, um.
I, you know, we're gonna roll
the bill anyway cause we're
considering it for the package.
And um we'll ask you to work
with staff just to clarify that
we're absolutely clear and not
to, that's not being
disrespectful to you, but
obviously we wanna make sure
we're absolutely certain on
this. So, um,
That's what I'd suggest any
other comments from.
Members
OK. All right. So, very much
appreciate your work on this and
um.
We should expect to try to get
this bill.
Thank you very much,
Representative Sanchez. Thank
you, Madam.
All right.
Next item we have is.
Um, House Bill 26.
ticket scalping.
And I did see.
Representative Kate's here.
The floor is yours,
representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you committee. Um, I am
Representative Kathleen Cates
here to present House Bill 26,
um, this bill is a simple bill
that um is designed to protect
our local non for profit.
Um, arts programs, what it does
is we currently already have um
on the books, I believe for 27
years, uh, statute that protects
our university athletic
programs.
From um broker sales to be able
to um to purchase tickets and
sell them at a higher rate. We
would like to protect now our
501c3s and um our local arts
programs. So this is for the
presenter of the program, not
for the venue, so these programs
could be um,
us
Upper Southwest, uh, they could
be programs at the at the chemo
or it um the lensic, but not
everything at the chemo or the
lens would apply. It would be
ones that are governmental or
this is a way we can preserve
our cultural arts programs, you
know how it's, it's a key
opponent.
Uh, component of who we are as
New Mexicans is our art program.
It's also um vital for our, our
newest uh creative endeavors uh
division as well. Today I have
my expert witness. I'd like him
to introduce himself, and he'll
make a brief statement. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Cas.
My name is Tony Zananella. I'm
the executive director at Opera
Southwest, uh, down in
Albuquerque, uh, the state has
two opera companies which uh
Like people to know, um, and
I'll make my remarks uh very
brief because uh we have a lot
of arts organizations uh here
for public comment. I, I think
I've never seen quite so many
arts organizations come out to
talk about legislation. Um,
they have this handout or had
this handout, I'll just.
Maybe, so in general, uh, the,
the issue is that nonprofit arts
organizations and public
cultural institutions, uh, right
now and over the past uh
several years I have suddenly
become the target of online uh
ticket resellers, primarily
online ticket resellers, um,
colloquially called scalpers,
um, and this is uh essentially
where
Nowadays, um, Google or uh any
search engine you want becomes
the front page of the internet
when you hear you want to go to
an event whether it's the opera,
the ballet, the flamenco
festival.
Uh
You hit
Internet, you go to Google and
you say,
Tickets, opera, Santa Fe, and
you're gonna get hit nowadays
with an enormous number of um
Receptive ads purchased on
Google from, you know,
non-official resellers who sell
these tickets at an enormous
markup.
Um, the problem.
The largest component of this
problem besides um you know,
it's terrible if the consumer is
deceived into paying 234 times
the value of a ticket. Uh, but
one of the biggest problems of
these um
That this new modality of ticket
reselling or scalping is
The belief that consumers have
from these deceptive websites
that prices for arts and
cultural events are much higher
than they actually are. And so
the
The even bigger part of the
problem is someone thinks to
themselves, I would like to go
see The Nutcracker Ballet. I
would like to go see the
Flamenco Festival. I would like
to go see, uh, an opera. I would
like to go see the symphony.
They
Arrive at a website where
they're presented with a price
that is 50 to 100 or even 200%
higher than the actual price of
the ticket.
And then they conclude that
they're not going to go at all.
They can't afford this and, and
frankly it reinforces the false
perception they may have about
the affordability of the fine
arts.
And again, as Representative
Kate says, uh, we, we've tried
to make this a simple and
straightforward solution by
merely extending an existing
statute that protects your lobo
and Aggie football, uh, to cover
the symphony, the opera,
Flamingo Festival, and so forth.
Thank you and thank you, Madam
Chair. So, um, this would uh be
able to protect um our flamingo
dance company as well as we
protect our Aggies football as
as or now that the speakers here
are lobos football, um, and, um,
and, um, and, and I would like
to say that this is not the
typical ventured capitalistic
program as is these false
websites are not buying.
It's up. They're not buying all
the tickets from the event and
then reselling them at a higher
price. They are moving the
viewer to their false sight and
selling them on.
perspectively. So it's a $40
ticket they can sell for $200
but they're not taking any risk
in the matter as well. And so I
uh I just stand for questions.
Go to the audience and the way
we're gonna do this is we're
gonna allocate 7 minutes to each
side, each person gets one
minute.
will offer 3 minutes for the
online folks, so that's a total
of 10 minutes on each side. We
have a Saturday afternoon, we
got a manage our schedule. So,
um, those wishing to speak in
opposition, um, please stand up
and um approach the gentleman
with them, I guess those
scalpers didn't know about this
bill.
All right, so
Ah
Right. Sorry.
I'm jollier today than I was
yesterday. That's all I can say.
So let's go online and let's see
anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition today, um.
Mr. Singleton, this is wish if
you wish to speak in opposition
to the bill, is that right?
Yes, that's correct. OK.
All right, can you hear me? Yes.
Great, um, good afternoon, Jo
Chandler, members of the
committee on behalf of Chamber
of Progress, a tech industry
association supporting public
policies to build a more
inclusive society in which all
people benefit from
technological advances. I'm here
today in respectful opposition
to HB 26 as presently written.
While we respect and appreciate
the legislative intent to
prevent the malicious upselling
of tickets, particularly those
two events at local venues. We
feel this bill could have the
unintended consequences of
hurting the well regulated and
pro-consumer online resale
platforms, which are oftentimes
the only way for people to
access certain events if they
were not able to get tickets
during the initial offering
period. We feel that price caps
in particular are ineffective
and arbitrary policy-wise and
will drive ticket resales to
underground unregulated
channels. In 2018 report by the
US government.
Of highlights the difficulty in
enforcing these caps, making
them largely unsuccessful.
Further, in 2010, A Cato
Institute study looked at resale
prices across 3 seasons of the
National Hockey League and found
no significant difference in
ticket prices between markets
with price caps and those
without. Thus repealing resale
price caps had zero chains in
prices indicating that such
policies are largely
ineffective.
While we have uh previously
conveyed to the sponsor this
bill will not protect consumers
as Britain and will only serve
to reinforced on unregulated
resell market. So encourage the
author to work with uh the
stakeholders, in particularly
the pro-consumer and the well
regulated online marketplaces.
Thank you.
You're welcome.
All right. Anyone else online
wishing to speak in opposition,
please raise your hands raised.
Um, those in the audience
wishing to speak in.
Support
um
approached the gentleman with
the mic. Actually, you need to
stand up and it it would
probably be wise if you line up,
so there would be more.
More efficient and as I said,
I'm allocating about 7 minutes
each person gets up to one
minute.
Yeah.
OK.
Mr. Scanlon, you're up first.
Thank you, Madam members of the
committee. My name is Scott
Scanlon, registered lobbyist for
the Santa Fe Opera, and we stand
in support of this
legislation, um, just as an
example, the opera um here has
an apprentice scenes program or
or uh uh performance and the
whole idea is to get.
Local people to come out and see
the opera 25 to $15 tickets, 25
are the most expensive. The up
pricing uh just a few days ago,
I think we saw it for $280 and
it was just, you know, just the
opposite of what we were trying
to do to get people to come out
and enjoy the opera, so um for
that reason and for others that
I think might hear behind me,
um, we in uh support the bill. I
lost my pen.
Hello?
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
uh, committee members, my name
is Guy Gronquist. I'm a board
member of the Santa Fe Opera and
resident in District 47, a rise
in support of HB 26. Santa Fe
Opera injects about a quarter of
a billion dollars every year
into the economy of northern New
Mexico. HB 26 will help preserve
and protect that revenue to the
benefit of local businesses, not
out of state resellers whose
decept
tactics leave a very bad taste.
In the mouth of patrons that we
want to return to the Santa Fe
Opera time and time again and
all of our other wonderful
performing arts organizations in
New Mexico, I urged passage of
HB 26. Thank you.
I, I'm Patricia Dickinson with
Festival Ballet, Albuquerque
National Hispanic Cultural
Center is our home. We've been
producing there for well over 20
years. Um, in the past, our
performances have always sold
out, especially the one with
Robert Mirabal from Taos Puebble
to time Grammy Award winner this
year for the first time, we did
not sell out, and we found out I
went online.
There were 14 sites that listed
the scalpers, and one was
actually named National Hispanic
Culture Center.
I support this bill.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
representatives. Uh, it's a
pleasure to be here. My name is
Marian Tino and I represent the
New Mexico Philharmonic. I'm the
CEO and the president, and I'm
here to support this bill. Um,
we are a community supported
organization and we give back to
the community. That means that
we offer a lot of free events to
the public to the youth in the
area and we are impaired to do
so by a lack of revenues,
decreased revenues, and
one of the most important things
that happen is this holiday
season we had several people
come to different concerts with
the printed tickets that did not
exist. The seeds didn't exist,
so this is uh something that's
been escalating and we, uh, we
went from having full halls we
perform usually Pope joy and in
other venues, we went from
having a sold-out houses to
having a barely 60% and
complaints for the high.
the ticket prices that are
purchased uh from those um
scalping or organizations that
sell the tickets online, so I,
we are all on support and uh we
hope this bill will pass. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Good afternoon. Excuse me. Uh,
my, my name is Joel Alberts. I'm
the executive director of the
Lenzic Performing Arts Center,
in addition to the increased
price, uh, challenges that
patrons have when they're.
Uh, coming to the theater. One
of the other issues that we have
is just dealing with customer
service for all of the patrons
who come. We're a nonprofit
organization, microphone seems
to be losing its battery a
little bit. Um, we're a
nonprofit organization. When
patrons purchase tickets for a
show, and we have
Things that change when it comes
to parking, when it comes to
artist changes, cancellations,
other things that go along with
the show. We lose access to
those patrons in order to give
them a proper experience when
they come to our theater. We are
also a nonprofit, which means we
are reaching out to these people
after programs as well to look
for contributed income,
additional supports that we can
provide better service to people
in our community. Uh, it is a
deep problem patrons do arrive
at the theater with tickets that
are not.
Legitimate, uh, we have to turn
people away. It's a, it is not
what we're looking for in the
experiences that we're providing
in our theater. I've been
support of this bill.
We have time for about 2 more.
I, I'll be very quick. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair. My name
is Colin. I serve as the
executive director of the Santa
Fe Playhouse, and I echo
everything that's already been
said, and the one thing I just
want to add is I've been working
in the industry for 20 years and
I have almost been duped by
these sites multiple times when
I'm going to buy tickets, and I
know what ticket platforms look
like, and so it's not like.
It's a very sophisticated thing
that they're doing and it needs
to stop. I'm incredibly in
support of this bill.
So, 2 more since he was so
short. My name is Marisolencias,
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you. I am also
in support. My name is, uh, like
I said, Marisoleninias,
executive director of the
National Institute of Flamenco.
We produce this uh this um acts
have affected almost all of our
performances in the last couple
of years, and so I would just
like to say, you know, as a
nonprofit organization that
produces work, we invest
significant amount of money in
being able to
reduce high quality work and the
uh what is the impact of this is
uh significantly affecting our
bottom line and making it more
difficult for us to be able to
be sustainable.
So you're the last person um.
Good afternoon, Madam Chairman
and committee. My name is Perry
Andrews. I am a eleven-year
resident of.
Um
Santa Fe 46.
Um, real quickly, I don't want
to touch on some of the
generalities that everybody else
has, but to dumb this down a bit
to a local organization.
Um, I have been on the board of
directors for the Santa Fe
Symphony for the last 8 years,
the last 3 years, I am the
president of the board. The
impact upon local arts
organizations is significant
throughout New Mexico.
Organizations throughout New
Mexico are losing revenue due to
deceptive resale processes and
practices locally ticket sales
typically manage typically make
up an average of 25 to 30% of
performing arts organizations'
annual revenues. In the case of
the Santa Fe Symphony
specifically, these are much
needed revenues.
that provide jobs for our
orchestral musicians and staff,
all of the Santa Fe Symphony
musicians are New Mexico
residents who live, work, and
pay taxes in New Mexico,
revenues that provide musical
education opportunities over 300
students locally in orchestral,
chamber music, mariachi, jazz,
and choral disciplines, revenues
that provide additional
employment.
And we really appreciate you all
being here and we understand, I
think my colleagues.
get what you're telling us.
Let's, um, go online, um.
OK. Anyone?
Online wishing to speak in
support of this bill. Would you
please raise your hand. Anyone
online wishing to speak in
support of the bill.
Not seeing anyone.
All right.
Um
Representative of anything else
before I go to the committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
they said it all. OK.
I have Representative Martinez
on the list.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Everybody showed up in support
of this, I think, uh,
I think we never really realized
how what, what uh.
An issue was until we
Raise it to this level, but I do
have some questions.
Um
Yeah
Is, would it be illegal the way
this bill is written.
If I purchased a ticket.
basketball.
Something happens, I can't show
up.
I then resell it to my neighbor.
Am I going to jail because of
this?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative. It's a
misdemeanor, so, um, uh, uh,
currently not, not, not this,
not this, uh, bill that's
presented to you, but the
scenario you
Mention is a law that's already
in place.
And so the answer would be no.
But I will, Madam Chair.
Have to pay $500 or be
imprisoned for a term of less
than one year. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. The way the
law currently is written, it is
just for a university athletics,
and it's up to a $500 bill, uh,
and up to a year in prison and
that is the law that's been
there for I think 27 years. So,
can you tell, can you give me
the definition?
Of Scalpi
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you representative. It's defined
in the statute, um, but I can
Google it. It's a ticket
brokery. It's selling something
for more than what you purchased
it for.
Madam Chair Representative.
Um, on
Page one, line 19.
Uh, pickets scalping consists of
selling, offering for sale, or
attempting to sell any ticket
privilege.
License license admission to.
Uh, admission or pass to any
college athletic event.
And then you add your language,
uh,
Or an event presented by the
state or political subdivision,
so.
A simple
Um
Offer
We're standing outside, I'm
talking to my neighbor. I say,
oh, by the way.
gonna go to the global game I
bought these tickets for $50.
You want them.
I'm, I'm going to jail for up to
a year.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I, I'm not.
So you're concerned about the
law that exists right now. Well,
I'm, I'm you're amending the
law.
But the part that you're
concerned about is not the
amendment. It's about what was
existing.
So let's just deal with uh
I'm going to, I have tickets to
the opera.
And I offer them
To my neighbor for what I
purchased.
I'm not making money on them.
Am I going to jail for?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. No, you're not. If you look
at uh line 24, 25, the same
page, it says at a price greater
than the price charged at the
place of admission or printed on
the ticket.
If it's for personal use. I
understand going after the.
But this still
gets me is
I just bought them for personal
use. I can't go.
I'm still guilty.
Uh, so
Let's move on.
So this is basically targeting
out of state resellers.
Am I, am I correct? Or, or are
they?
big resale companies here in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
thank you, Representative. I'm
not aware of any, I, I'm not
sure what big means, but I'm not
aware of a large corporate uh
ticket broker that's located in
New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So this is
basically going after
Um
Out of state
Of
Madam Chair Representative,
we're not going after any kind
of companies. What we are doing
is trying to protect our local
arts programs. That's the
purpose of this bill is to
protect our local arts programs
and make sure that they um are
patron and um and supported by
our
by New Mexicans.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, or we try, or
are we protecting.
Uh, these, these local arts
companies from.
And thank you, Representative.
Uh, protecting them from
individuals that are deceiving,
uh, patrons who are trying to
purchase tickets online with
fake websites that will, um,
Will make it look like uh
they're sold out when they're
not and um, you think, oh, it's
$40 to go and then you realize
that they're selling them for
200. We're we're trying to make
sure that the our local arts
programs, um.
Uh maintain accessibility.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um
I'm all for protecting these
local
And
But it seems to me
That
I would say a vast majority.
If not all of them.
Of these resellers are.
On a state
And all we're going to do is
Are these big.
Companies
$500.
I don't think it's gonna
accomplish.
What we're really trying to do.
If I own a million dollar
business that.
That scoops up
Tickets and resells them, I'll
gladly pay $500.
Not gonna, it's not gonna be a
big deal.
And if you can extradite me from
California.
For up to a year in jail?
I, I still don't.
I think that
You're really gonna accomplish
what you want to accomplish.
Um
With this bill the way it's
written.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I, I do
appreciate that feedback. Um, I
do, um, we are taking this
approach because we don't see
the same issues at the Lobos
basketball game. We are able to
buy tickets they're accessible,
they're affordable, and they are
offered to our public and so we
want the same sort of
protections for a fine arts
programs.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um.
I think it's commendable. I
think the concept is great.
I just don't think that.
This bill the way it's written.
Well
will get us there. I don't, I
don't think uh.
A $500
Fine and a misdemeanor charge.
My idea of a good crime bill is
people will
Not want to get caught.
And if we're going to make it
illegal,
But the, the penalty is a $500
fine. I don't think.
I don't think
This vehicle is the way to get
there.
I would like to figure out a
Different way
That we can protect these
entities because I think they
are important to the local
community.
I think um
They do offer
A a great value to our
neighborhoods, to our
communities.
I'm just not sure.
This bill, the way it's written.
is gonna get us
Thank you, madam. I have next on
my list Representative Hall
represented Hoffman, A Martinez.
Representative Paul.
Madam Chair, Representative
witness, um.
Thank you for bringing this
before us today. Do, do you have
any idea of
And I know it wouldn't be exact,
but the approximate monetary
losses as a result of this,
Madam Chair.
I
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
we don't have uh a number for
every arts program within.
Uh, the state of New Mexico. I
do have the executive director
for Southwest Opera, and he can
give you an idea of how it
affects that particular fine
arts program.
Madam Chair, that would, that
would be a good start, please,
sir.
Thank you, thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, thank you, uh,
Representative Hall, um, so at
least for our organization, I'll
take uh just as a, as an example
here, a recent production we did
of a
A fairly popular opera, Madama
Butterfly. It's an opera that
you may recognize, um, and
that's sort of an opera that we
would consider sort of our bread
and butter likely to attract a
large audience and we have many,
many years of, of data on that.
Um, and so on uh a typical
production of Madam Butterfly,
we would hope to sell about 1400
to $150,000 of tickets, uh, this
past year, uh, only sold about
$100,000 of tickets and, and we
can
See, uh, very clearly in the
sales data, um.
What happens when the
bot or algorithm occurs, um,
Online we can see when they
start running the ads and we can
see the shift in the rate of
ticket sales coming up to the
show, um, and so that's why
we're able to
feel with some confidence that
for example, it cost us between
2
And $40,000 and we're only
expecting to sell $140,000 of
tickets. So you can see that
that's a fairly large loss for a
small nonprofit.
Um
Is it because I'm getting too
close? I'm sorry, it's um.
I apologize. uh.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
So with that, Madam Chair, with
that in mind, um.
I know we heard from some of the
organizations, do we know how
many
Of
Uh, performing types of
organizations like this exist
within the state of New Mexico.
Madam Chair
Man chair representative, uh no,
because, I mean, if you're
asking for all types of
Uh
Performing arts programs, no,
but it is significant enough
that we actually
This legislature actually voted
to start an entire economic
Uh, division, uh, on, on, uh,
Being able to promote you know
with the economic driver is for
the arts programs here in New
Mexico.
So significant. We are one of
the top arts areas in the world.
The between Santa Fe and
Albuquerque.
Madam Chair, my other questions
have already been asked and
answered. Thank you.
But, um, Representative Hoffman
v. Hill.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, thank you, sponsor, um,
witnesses.
So, um,
Representative, I'm kind of
interested in in the enforcement
mechanism that you've kind of
chosen and.
With the language in this bill,
so.
It is the goal really to.
Identify those people if they're
in person and they're standing
outside of the venue trying to
scout tickets or resell tickets,
or is it really the focus these
online.
A resell resale.
Websites that are kind of
mimicking.
The original origin of where you
can get these tickets, but
selling them for a higher price.
Is that where, where are you?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative. We're trying
to identify for the large
broker, not that, you know, I
bought 4 tickets and now I need
to sell 2, but that um I
And we are uh trying to identify
is the platform in which we have
to stand on as we move forward
for the, the AI see our laws
are.
Not um.
Uh, they don't.
Uh, reflect what our technology
has become in the last several
years and so this would be the
platform in which we're standing
on for that AI as well, but it
is for large brokers, yes, that
is what is hurting our
performing arts businesses.
So, um, madam chair and
representative with the goal be
then to shut down these websites
that are scalping and selling
tickets from these other art
organizations like just shut
them down completely.
Yes, thank you, madam chair, uh,
thank you, as you know in any um
uh crime or legal, I don't think
anything ever happens
completely, but yes, I would
love for that to happen. Um, we
want to be able to decentivize
them, um, that there is here in
New Mexico if they are targeting
our local arts programs in the
state of New Mexico that can't
be penalized.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, so I mean, and
what would the enforcement arm
be? Would it be the Attorney
General's office or how how
would that occur?
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. So
currently the way this law is,
it is the attorney generals,
yes.
Um
And just one last question,
Madam Chair Representative of
why, why just nonprofits? Are we
not ready to go the full Taylor
Swift, yeah, on everything or or
no thank you, thank you, madam
chair. No, we, we've got a wide
variety uh in our last community
uh last committee wide variety
of musical questions. Um, we do
not want to enter hinder uh
commerce, what we're trying to
do is protect our local arts
programs. So in this, it does
say that.
It is, it, it is if it's
presented by the state or
political subdivision of the
state or nonprofit formally
recognized that
That makes it our local
culturally significant, usually,
um, if, if, uh
Taylor Swift wants to go to a
Private presentation, you know,
a, a corporation presents Taylor
Swift, and they want to sell the
tickets for $1500. This does not
hinder that.
OK.
The swifties might be upset with
that, but other than that, thank
you, Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative.
So I have representative of beta
and then Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, madam.
Chair and representative.
I'm a mother of 4.
I love to take
Different shows to the museums.
However, um, I'm concerned about
age 2 of this.
Line 5C.
And I, I've run into this before
actually.
Where I looked for tickets and
I'm excited to see that the
tickets are the same amount but
they would have been sold at.
However, the fees are where the
loophole.
I
And, and I'm concerned about how
I understand the intent of this.
It's fantastic for it, but
there's still a loophole.
For these individuals to charge.
High fees to get around what
this is trying to do. Can you
help me?
Understand
That is or maybe if there's
another precaution. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and, and thank you,
Representative. I I to become
frustrated by that as well, but
um as you can see, especially
for our nonprofits and our state
arts programs here, their
resources are limited. They
don't have an entire like box
office department. So many of
them may choose to outsource
this that may need to be paid
for through a fee. And so that
This is not a paragraph in which
we changed. It is one that has
been in.
Currently.
But that is why we didn't mess
with it because no two programs
are exactly the same and we want
to make sure that they um are
able to cover their expenses.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you.
Let's call it a little bit to
the other direction, then what
if the scalping sites use this
loophole.
They could still say the ticket,
let's say the $25 example. But
then their fees are gonna be
$100.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative. I'm going to
defer to my expert witness.
So one of the operative uh parts
of the law as it's currently
written is that ticket scalping
um
Because uh selling offering for
sale or attempting to sell any
ticket privilege license or so
forth. And one of the large
problems I described earlier is
this uh
The fact that these scalping
websites are interposing
themselves between.
The consumer and the producer of
the artwork and
As I mentioned, in fact, the
biggest problem is the patron
who becomes discouraged and
doesn't buy anyway, they turn
around and walk out the door.
The the big problem is when
they're advertising that the
tickets cost $150 when perhaps
they only cost $40. And so to
the, to the point of the fee,
um, in order for them to
is the
Comes sort of at a later step.
They if they advertise it in
such a way that it's like, OK,
tickets are 25 and then you run
into the fee at the later step.
It's, I think, less likely to
create that, um.
Uh
Effect of the patron believing
that the um
The ticket is, you know, out of
their reach and certainly at
that point when you're charged a
fee in sort of a scammy way,
hopefully that that stops.
It is a possible um
Yeah, go ahead.
Good
Thank you. Let me just kind of,
I always like to kind of
simplify everything, so, um, so
a fee is not usually 3 times the
purchase of the actual.
A product
So that is why we believe this
has been working for the last 27
years for our uh our university
athletics is a fee is usually a.
Surcharged for the man
operation of, of, of, of
Seeing the box office. Um.
And so
That is why we think this would
OK, because it's been working
for a university.
Thank you, Representative.
Speaker Martinez pass House Bill
2.
Representative Ibiza.
Yes.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Hall.
an answer.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill?
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No, and I like to explain
Oh
Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed
Spansky, yes.
vice chair, yes.
Adam chair, yes.
6 to 2 you pass um uh you want
to explain her about.
OK.
OK, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
this is an outstanding idea. I
wish it was more encompassing.
With
because
My concern is we discussed with
advancing technologies.
This, this may be a band-aid.
Solution for now, but I'm afraid
we'll be back in a couple of
years and I, and I know you all
probably understand that.
what we're trying to accomplish.
like
Substance that I just want to
let you know. I just wish it was
a little more.
Encompassing in its uh
Thank you.
and Martinez.
Madam Chair, I appreciate the
time. I think the
Concept of
Protecting or
scene is.
Right
Do.
gets us there.
I
maybe some partial penalties.
Your language.
Um, but I, I, you know, I
commend your idea. I, I.
We need to do everything we can
to protect the
art scene because they do offer.
or local
against this bill just because
of the way it's drafted.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
oh, we have I see representative
Garrett here is next. Thank you.
Thank you, everyone. Thanks for.
participation.
Yeah
I
response
Are we ready, folks?
Um
Before we get to the actual
bill.
I asked our um
Very capable lawyer, um.
Megan Dorsey.
a very brief overview.
Of the delinquency statute. I'm
not sure I'm calling if I have
the right to children's code.
portion that addresses
delinquency and related issues,
so that we at least we have a
better foundation for, you know,
sort of understanding it's
different from
Criminal law, so um.
She's worked on that and we have
a nice little slide presentation
as a preface to um
Represented Garrett's
presentation.
members of the committee.
back.
Um, as the chair said, this is
going to be a very brief
overview of the delinquency Act
and how juvenile.
Works generally.
The statue for your reference is
32.
A 2.
um, I think it's important to
recognize that unlike many of
our other criminal code, other
sections of the criminal code,
there is a purpose section of
the delinquency Act, which is
relevant as the body considers
amending those sections.
And I am just gonna read from it
because I think that the plain
language of the statute is
important.
The purpose of the delinquency
Act is to remove from children
committing delinquent acts, the
adult consequences of criminal
behavior, but to still hold
children committing delinquent
acts accountable for their
actions.
to the child's age, education,
mental and physical condition
background and all other
relevant factors and to provide
a program of supervision, care,
and rehabilitation, including
rehabilitative restitution by
the child to the victims of the
child's delinquent act to the
extent that the child is
reasonably able to do so.
So as you can see, the code is
designed to make sure that
children are held accountable
for um acts that are illegal but
also to treat them as the
children that they are.
Um, under the delinquency Act,
we don't call them.
crimes or criminal convictions,
a a judgment on the delinquency
Act results in a juvenile
disposition.
And that's important language
that carries weight in the
criminal justice system because
the disposition does not impose
or should not impose any civil
disabilities ordinarily
resulting from conviction of a
crime.
And it should not operate to
disqualify the child in any
civil service application or
appointment.
Further, and this is important,
any disposition to a delinquent
effect offense shall not be
admissible as evidence against
the child in any case or
proceeding in any other
tribunal.
Whether before or after reaching
the age of majority.
Except in the sentencing
proceedings after conviction of
a felony and then only for the
purpose of the pre-sentence
study and report.
So again, the code recognizes
the limited use of a
disposition.
Because we want to protect
children while their brains are
still developing.
Uh, the maximum sentence for a
delinquent disposition is a
two-year commitment, which can
be suspended in favor of
probation and other services.
less.
Unless the children's court
attorneys a youthful offender
disposition.
And this is where the law gets a
little bit complicated because a
youthful offender is um a legal
standard.
That allows the judge to decide
whether that child should be
subject to adult or juvenile
sanctions.
Uh, a child can be deemed a
youthful offender if they're
ages 14 to 18 and adjudicated
for second degree murder,
assault with intent to commit a
violent felony, kidnapping.
Aggravated battery and all of
its forms. Shooting at a
dwelling or at or from a motor
vehicle.
dangerous use of explosives.
CSP robbery, aggravated
burglary, aggravated arson,
abuse of a child that results in
great bodily harm or death of a
child.
Or they can be found a youthful
offender if they're 14 to 18 and
adjudicated for any felony
offense when they have 3 prior
separate felony adjudications
within a three-year time frame.
Or if they're 14 to 18 and
adjudicated for a first-degree
murder.
And those circumstances, the
child, um, the judge has the
ability to impose either
juvenile or adult sanctions.
But in order to seek adult
sanctions, the children's court
attorney must first file a
petition to seek those
sanctions.
is held where due process.
and the child is represented by
counsel, and the judge considers
the seriousness of the alleged
offense, the manner of the
alleged offense, whether it's
aggressive, violent,
premeditated or willful.
Whether a firearm was used,
whether the alleged offense
against a person or persons was
against persons or property.
Whether injury resulted.
The maturity of the child,
including all of the
circumstances of their personal
life and and background.
The record in previous criminal
history of the child or
delinquent history, excuse me.
Prospects for adequate
protection of the public and the
likelihood of reasonable
rehabilitation of the child by
use of procedures, services and
facilities that are available.
And basically any of, anything
else on the record that the
judge thinks is relevant.
Um, if after the hearing, the
judge finds that the youthful
offender should be subjected to
juvenile, um, a juvenile
sentence.
Then the child can be committed
up to the age of 2. If after the
hearing the judge um.
Believes that an adult sanction
is appropriate. They first have
to find that the child is not
amenable to treatment or
rehabilitation as a child in
available facilities.
And that the child is not
eligible for commitment to an
institution for children with
developmental disabilities or
mental disorders.
If the court chooses to invoke
an adult sentence, they may
sentence the child to less than,
but cannot sentence to greater
than the mandatory adult
sentence, uh, basically what
that means is once the youthful
offender is subject to adult
sanctions, they're treated
similar to how an adult would
be, they can be given a minimum
sentence that's available for an
adult up to the maximum sentence
that's available.
And then the most serious level
of sentencing available is for a
serious youthful offender, which
is a child who is 15 to 18 years
of age, who is charged with and
indicted or bound over for
first-degree murder.
In that situation, uh, when
we're talking about the
disposition of a serious useful
offender.
If they are found guilty of
first degree murder and
sentenced as they are sentenced
as an adult, uh, with the only
restriction being that they
cannot be sent to sentenced to
life imprisonment without the
possibility of release or
parole. Other than that, the
full range of punishment that's
available for an adult is
available for a child.
The court may sentence the
offender again to less than, but
not exceeding the same mandatory
sentence that's available for an
adult.
And the determination of guilt
becomes a conviction on the
record, unlike the disposition
disposition for a delinquent
act.
Um, and when the alleged serious
youthful offender is convicted
of a lesser offense, something
that's not first degree murder,
then the court can continue to
treat them as if they were being
sentenced as a youthful offender
or as a delinquent act.
And that is a very brief summary
of how the delinquency code in
juvenile sentence. With that, I
will turn it over to the
sponsors and experts. If you'll
stick around, there might be
questions as this bill is.
Um
Welcome yours, I believe you
have a sub or an amendment. You
have an amendment. I have an
amendment, you want us to
present the bill and then the
amendment or the amendment
first.
I think that I'm just looking at
it.
I think it would be probably
wise to present the bill and
then then we can.
Um, moved to discuss the
amendment.
you should feel free to
introduce your experts. OK, um,
Madam Chair and committee, we're
happy to be here. My expert
witnesses today for House Bill
31.
Uh, 4th degree felony for
shooting threat or Sean Sullivan
from the New Mexico Department
of Justice and Detective Miguel
Mick Riel from the Albuquerque
Police Department, and after I
give some brief remarks, they'll
give some brief remarks and then
we can present the um.
Amendment if that works.
So last October.
I met a 10 year old in my
neighborhood.
She ran after me when I was uh
knocking on doors on her street.
She said, Miss Joy, this is a 10
year old. Please do something
about school shootings and guns
at school. I'm afraid to go to
school and so are my friends
that devastated me.
Um, as a parent.
As a legislator as a recently
retired teacher, because no
child should fear going to
school because they might get
shot, so House Bill 31, uh,
elevate school shooting threats
from a misdemeanor to a 4th
degree felony.
This legislation will assist law
enforcement in protecting
schools and schoolchildren as
well as our neighbors and other
uh public places when someone
makes a shooting threat when a
shooting threat places a person
or a group of people in fear of
great bodily harm or interrupts
their occupation of their school
or their workplace.
When a threat causes a response
by law enforcement, the person
making the shooting threat, uh,
will now be capable of being
guilty of a 4th degree felony
instead of a misdemeanor. Our
kids deserve to be safe in
school.
Unfortunately, the number of
shooting threats has has risen
in 2024 alone, several schools
in our state received shooting
threats that include schools in
Albuquerque, my own school, a
volcano Vista High School, uh,
Rio Rancho, um, Sue Cleveland
High School, Clovis, Santa Fe,
Raton, Pooque, Rio Rancho, and
eagle's Nest are some of them.
In September alone, the
Albuquerque police.
Uh, department investigator 28
incidents.
The strange law enforcement,
obviously.
Also, it undermines the security
and safety of our students and
staff members in school. It's
extremely hard to learn when you
have these things happening.
When we hear these threats,
parents keep their kids at home.
We already have a problem with
absenteeism, that's just
compounds that problem. It's
hard to learn if you're
wondering if someone's, you
know, threatening your school if
you're a teacher instead of
thinking about how to use
effective strategies to teach
math, you're wondering if you
should put the canned goods
you're collecting in the hands
of the kids to throw at someone.
It's, it's a real issue, even
when no uh violence.
occurs, there's a lot of stress.
Um, that negatively affects the
culture.
Uh, today, teachers.
And educators across our state.
Have to spend time at the
beginning of the school year
doing Alice training. That's
alert lockdown and formed
counter evacuate. So practicing
drills, I can tell you as
someone who's done it with
kindergartners is very
stressful.
So this bill makes those
shooting threats, uh, instead of
a misdemeanor of 24 degree
felony and you've heard some
explanation about that. I'm
gonna ask um Sean Sullivan, uh,
my expert witness from the
Department of Justice to add
some remarks to that.
Thank you, Representative
Garrett, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, good
afternoon. Um, thank you for the
opportunity to speak on this
important issue. My name is Sean
Sullivan. I'm a special counsel
with the New Mexico Department
of Justice, of course, the New
Mexico Department of Justice
stands in strong support of this
legislation.
You know, as we analyze,
As we analyze.
The legal and technical aspects
of this bill, um, Madam Chair.
I think what's important.
Uh, is that we don't lose sight
of really what we're talking
about here. uh, and
The magnitude of preventing
school shooting threats, uh,
Representative Garrett mentioned
that in uh
Just this past year, there were
multiple shooting threats in New
Mexico, uh, nationwide, the US
Department of Education said
that between
2022
128 casualties. I know this is
very spotty.
OK.
I can speak, I can speak louder
too. It's um
You know
What's important to remember is,
I think I speak for most folks
here. When we were in school,
perhaps the worst thing that we
encountered was a fire alarm
drill.
Which was really annoying.
And we'd have to go and stand
outside. Sometimes it was cold.
Imagine what the kids in today's
generation have to go through.
Instead of a fire alarm drill,
they have to be told to
barricade.
Under their desks
They have to be told how to
confront an intruder.
That's really what this bill is
about.
It's about giving law
enforcement the tools to address
those very serious situations.
Uh, to frame this issue for the
committee. I think that this is
the operative question.
Can we adopt changes that even
marginally move us closer to
preventing these things and can
we do it without sacrificing our
constitutional protections.
And I think the answer is that
unequivocally we can.
That's what HB 31 is.
Uh, the changes that we're
seeking to this statue will
assist law enforcement. We'll
give them more tools and options
to effectively address shooting
threats at the earliest stages
to ensure that they don't happen
and that we don't contribute to
those statistics.
Uh, the changes will ensure that
those who work to rehabilitate
juvenile offenders, um, which
is, of course, the purpose of
the juvenile code, uh, that they
can succeed.
Um, of course.
Sure when it's a
Uh
probation officer must submit
that case to the prosecutor.
And if it goes through the
juvenile justice system, there's
more structured supervision. And
the reason why structured
supervision is so important.
Is that you can require that
juvenile.
To take counseling classes to
address underlying issues which
really cause, you know, the root
issues that are at play here.
Uh, and so that's what's at
stake with this bill.
Um, the changes will also ensure
that we are not punishing.
Those for First Amendment
protected speech, only true
threats are prevented and
punished by this bill.
This bill, madam Chair,
represents uh a
Uh, input from a diverse array
of folks, many members in this
committee, other stakeholders.
Um, I just want to very briefly
proactively discuss a couple
ways that this bill has been and
can be misinterpreted, uh,
Representative Garrett touched
on this, as did Miss Dorsey, uh,
beforehand as it relates to
juveniles, the purpose of the
delinquency Act is to provide
rehabilitation and care, but
also accountability. It's a dual
track purpose.
HB 31 aligns with those goals.
I want to be very, very clear on
this point.
Juveniles who
are found to have committed this
offense.
are not felons.
They do not receive adult
sanctions.
They do not have conviction.
For purposes of exercising their
constitutional rights when they
become adults, the right to
vote, the right to bear arms.
Uh, the right to serve in the
military.
So I think it's incredibly
important that we realize that.
Uh, and as we'll discuss when it
comes to the amendments, the
amendments were drafted to
ensure that jokes, statements
made in jest are not captured in
this statue and that we're only
punishing those true threats
that can pose harm to others.
Um, so with that, I, I thank the
committee for their time and,
and I'm happy to answer
questions.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Uh, my name is Mick Ryle of the
Albuquerque Police Department.
I'm here to stress the
importance of House Bill 31.
These threats of violence cannot
simply be considered jokes.
There are threats of violence.
Requiring a thoughtful and
thorough investigation in a
short amount of time.
Allowing officers to quickly
intervene by identifying the
threat.
Identifying the source of the
threat, locating the subject,
making a threat.
And through that continued
thoughtful investigation and
interview process identify
additional uh suspects or
subjects of concern.
Determine intent, means, and
ability.
The faster we can bring more
resources.
Gives law enforcement more time
to intervene away from the
school, the mall, church,
synagogue, mosque, or public
venue.
If we are not able to intervene
prior to.
Or during the school day or
activity, there may not be a way
to mitigate the threat which
historically has led to
shootings.
As law enforcement and first
responders are overriding goal
is to create the greatest amount
of safety.
With the least amount of impact
to the community.
The impacts I have seen at
schools.
In reference to school threats
of shootings.
Um, lockdowns and shelter in
place.
I've seen children running in
fear.
Hiding under desks, huddling in
corners in the dark crying.
Parents rushing to schools and
pushing past officers to get to
their children.
Special needs children.
Be comforted by staff.
I've also seen a large
percentage of absentees, um, as
a result of these threats. I've
seen um
Hundreds of students being
removed from high schools at the
onset of a threat, his parents
arrived to take them or students
leaving on their own.
The following days, I've talked
to administrators who say that
up to 30% of staff don't return
the following day because of
their fear.
As well as the students.
Uh, I've spoken to counselors
who were left to pick up the
pieces of these traumatic
events.
Historically speaking, failure
to intervene has led to school,
workplace, religious venues, and
public event shootings.
Hi.
We ready to go to the audience?
You want to hear the amendment
first. Oh, yes. And I want to
mention that my co-sponsors uh
representative Reeb is, uh,
presenting numerous spills and
CPAC and sorry, she can't be
with us and Representative Baca
is covering our education work
group and appropriations, so
they regret they can't be here.
Um, the amendment is uh.
Has it been passed out?
Yes. Hey, it's a 0.230477.4.
Make sure you have 0.4.
Um, this amendment for
discussion.
OK.
is yours if you want to describe
the amendment, that'd be great,
yeah, the purpose of the
amendment is just to clarify
that we're talking about serious
threats and not and angry kid
who says off the top of their
head, oh, I gonna shoot
somebody. It's not like that as
both of my expert witnesses
said so on page one, it adds uh
instead of falsely, it's
intentionally, so it reads
making a bomb scare consists of
intentionally
And maliciously, uh, the 2nd.
is on page one, line 23.
It adds uh making a shooting
threat.
consists of intentionally and
maliciously communicating to
another person and add a serious
expression of an intent to bring
a firearm to property or use the
firearm.
And an intent to.
And then on page 2.
Uh, line 2.
After harm.
Uh, it will now read uh number
one
or group of persons in fear of
great bodily harm.
And a person or group of persons
was placed in fear of great
bodily harm.
And then on page 2 line 4.
Uh, it will now read prevent or
interrupt the occupation or use
of a public building and adding
the amendment and the occupation
or use of a public building was
prevented or interrupted.
Uh, and then on page 2 line 7
we're adding after emergencies,
so it now reads, uh,
Cause a response to the threat
by a law enforcement official.
Or volunteer agency organized to
deal with emergencies.
And the threat caused a response
by a law enforcement official or
volunteer agency organized to
deal with emergencies, so it
just underlines the seriousness
of what we're talking about.
That's the.
So, um, we'll vote on the
amendment after um.
So, um, anyone in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
To um this bill.
I don't see anyone in the
opposite on the opposition, OK.
Online, is there anyone wishing
to speak in online raising their
hand. Anyone in the audience
wishing to speak in support of
the bill, please raise your
hand. OK. We're gonna allocate 7
minutes to the um in support of.
A minute each and then 3 minutes
online.
OK, we're ready.
Representatives.
us
Uh, my name is Amy Suman, and I
am the superintendent of Bauke
Valley Schools. I'm here with my
transportation and security
director, my associate
superintendent whose very life
was threatened by a gun by a 6th
grader and my board president.
I'm my board secretary.
My district, along with 10 other
New Mexico districts were
victims of school shooting
threats in October, dropping our
attendance rate to 45% for a
full week.
School shooting threats, also
known as swatting, don't just
disrupt academic learning time.
They don't just stretch our
already short staffed law
enforcement partners even
thinner. They don't just cost
each school district tens of
thousands of dollars each time
in wasted school meals, wasted
fuel for empty bus runs, wasted
energy and empty classrooms and
wasted salaries on empty
campuses, swatting destroys a
child's very sense of safety.
If you live in a place or with a
person where you already don't
feel safe. School is where you
go to be fed, protected, and
loved.
Schools have become whole social
service agencies, 86% of New
Mexico's public schools are
designated Title I. We provide
on-site health and social work,
food and clothing banks, weekend
backpack programs, housing
vouchers, and counseling.
Schools are the heart of our
communities. And when you
assassinate the heart of the
community, targeting our most
vulnerable citizens, you send
messages of hate, reverberating
through social media, you have
committed an act of domestic
terrorism.
It's a foreign nation were doing
this, thank you.
I'm Miranda V Scoli with New
Mexicans to Prevent Gun
Violence. To be honest, at first
we were not in support of this,
but um the representative and
Miss Dorsay and DOJ explained to
us that 6th graders not gonna be
held with a 4th degree felony,
so we appreciate that. We are
100% behind this legislation.
The majority of the work we do
at New Mexicans to prevent gun
violence is in our schools. We
have been in, I have sat
through, I must say 15 lockdowns
and um shelter in place
situations that
Students are terrified, it has
to stop. We also experience when
there are those um social media
threats that go on how many um
students are not attending
school. Their fear is real and
we are 100% in support of this
legislation.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Gary Johnson, and I'm
the safety and security director
and transportation director of
the Pewaukee Valley School
District. I'm in support of
House Bill 31 as the director of
both safety and transportation.
I see the direct impact on our
students when a threat is made
to shoot and kill them while at
school.
They are often warmed, they are
often warned about not going to
school because the shooting is
planned and will occur. Parents
are notified, as well as law
enforcement, which results in
our classrooms and our buses
empty due to fear of coming to
school.
The fiscal impacts to the
district and community are
measured in meals prepared but
not eaten. Parents or staff not
going to work, fuel used to run
routes for empty buses and
salaries for teachers with empty
classrooms.
A bomb scare is already a
felony, a shooting threat at
school, which is just as
detrimental to students and the
public needs to be a family.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Mario Bihill, associate
Superintendent Walker Valley
School District as a then school
principal whose life was
threatened in graphic detail on
social media 5 months ago, just
15 miles north of here. It is
imperative that we hold all
persons making threats to
schools, students and employees
accountable, seeing your name in
a descriptive narrative on how
your life will end by using a
specific firearm in front of
students, teachers, and staff is
life altering.
Having family members and
friends express apprehension
about being around you in fear
of their own safety is
upsetting. So by supporting
House Bill 31, we are supporting
not only students and their
employees and staff, but also
acknowledging and protecting the
sanctity of human life.
Good afternoon. My name is Susan
Rudolf Quintana. I was a 35 year
old teacher, and today's serve
as the secretary of the Puy
Valley Schools. Um, I back up
everything that has been said
before, but I want to bring up
and a very important part,
leakage as these announcements
are called by the FBI and other
organizations.
are almost always a part of
school shootings, and by
stopping them early, we may be
able to save lots of lives.
let's go online.
Um
I see we have
Um, Enrique Nel.
Yes, good afternoon and thank
you so much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Enrique Nel, and I'm
here today on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. Uh, we do stand in
support of House Bill 31. Um,
I'd like to focus on the effects
on our children when an act of
violence is threatened, uh,
nothing is more terrifying to a
student, especially our youngest
and most vulnerable, making a
threat is a very real form of
violence and intimidation that
can leave lasting emotional
scars, and for
Those that commit such crimes, a
slap on the wrist, misdemeanor
is not nearly enough of a
consequence for perpetrating
that kind of violence. Every
fake threat diverts resources
away from genuine emergencies
and puts entire communities at
risk. Uh, every single New
Mexican deserves to be protected
against acts of violence, as
we've heard today, that also
includes um our, our teachers
and principals and other staff
in our schools. So we
respectfully ask for a do pass
on how
Bill 31. Thank you so much.
Yes, this is Janet Williams. Uh,
I'm with Santa Fe National
Organization for Women, uh, I
would, we strongly support this
bill for all the reasons already
stated. Thank you so much.
Songtree
Yes.
Hello, not a mistake.
Can you hear me now?
Yes.
OK, great.
Um, Madam Chair and committee,
my name is Songri Paochi. I'm
Tas Palogula Lakota, former
chair of the Native American
Democratic Caucus of New Mexico
and current commissioner on the
New Mexico Commission on Status
of Women. I speak today in my
role as a 5th grade teacher and
a parent, um, I wanted to share
um that we have one, we have had
at least one viable um threat
that resulted in loss of
classroom instruction time,
increase in
responses and uh we had um
51% of our fifth graders stay in
a survey, um, say that they felt
unsafe at school. So I thank the
sponsors of this bill and stand
in strong support of House Bill
31. Thank you for your time.
Thank you, uh, I don't see any
other hands raised, so go back
um to the sponsor. I had
somebody wishing to move
adoption of the, OK, we have a
motion to adopt the proposed
amendment.
But it's second by Michael.
Represent, yes, you can.
Um, representing Martinez, 2nd.
I, I did. Just thank you, Madam
Chair. I, I just want to thank
the sponsor, um.
And, uh, many folks from our
district here today from Park
Valley, I think the.
Um
The amendment really strengthens
the bill and some of the
comments that we had in our
previous committee and, and the
concerns that we were having
understanding the um.
Increase in penalties for this
bill and, and certainly how it
relates to to children, so I
really just want to thank the
sponsor for the amendment, um,
and the clarity that it brings.
Thank you, ma'am, of course, um.
Anyone else want to wish to
speak to.
So, would you call the role, oh
wait, any opposition to the
amendment.
To you, um, representative, any
other comments. Uh, no, we stand
with for questions from the
committee.
Many members' questions.
comments.
Who would do pass for Hospital
31 is amended.
OK, 2nd.
All right, we have a motion.
To, uh, for a due pass on.
Oh, wait a second.
This is a bill I would like to
consider for our package.
Oh, I'd like to um.
Ask if you're willing to
withdraw your motion, all right,
and let me just explain that
I've talked to the sponsor about
it, um.
We are working on public safety
package and we've identified
some hopefully broad consensus
around.
And this is one that we, we
thought might be the case. So
what we're gonna do is then give
the committee an opportunity to
vote on it, probably on
Wednesday, that's kind of the
timeline we've been looking at
thus far. So my apologies, but,
um, obviously you see there's a
great deal of support for the
bill, so I expect that pass
through this committee, but.
I shouldn't presume anything,
but Wednesday.
Thank you very much. Appreciate
all your work and willingness to
adjust the bill.
Um, to meet people's concerns.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee and, and thank you for
your support.
Right.
Next on our agenda is House Bill
49, closed captioning.
Representative Morego uh
representative.
Roy Paul Caballero whenever
you're ready.
And we've, I've just been
informed that we have an
amendment for this bill to.
Um
I'm sure, um, substitute.
moisture.
Committee substitute, I have one
copy.
Please.
We have the same coffee you
have.
Uh, for the committee sub which
is uh the.
22 numbers 2305551183. Is that
correct?
Um, does somebody want to move
this for discussion.
To do rips somepans second High
Representative of.
Um
On the committee sub, but if you
wouldn't um mind introducing
ourselves and.
go to public comment and then
we'll come back to so.
Thank you, um,
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
Um
everybody knows we are in the
subcommittee.
We lost the quorum.
Uh, we won't take any action,
um,
Representative, um, until we
have a quorum, um, but we can
continue to hear the committee
sub until then. Thank you.
Thank you, ma'am.
Madam Vice Chair, um, so.
I'm representative, uh, Cynthia
Brego and House Districts 17 to
my left is uh representative.
Uh, Patricia Real Caballero.
And my expert with.
With the hearing and deaf, um.
community.
Uh
Did you want to go ahead and
tell us what the bill, the
committee sub is about Madam
Vice Chair, um, so this, uh,
committee.
This House Bill 49 was heard in
um.
The committee, um.
Commerce, I think it is. I, I
forget the, the name of the
committee, but it was heard.
Previously
Commerce and economic
development, thank you, um,
that's the entire name of the
committee, and they had some
comments regarding um the
enforcement. They also had some
comments regarding um a movie uh
outdoor movie theater, so, uh,
madam, uh, vice chair, we were
in committee we went back and
and worked with the fiscal
analyst.
And um try to address those um.
Comments that they brought up or
that that were raised at that
committee and this committee.
Substitute we feel has addressed
those, those comments and so we
stand for. And um.
OK, so we'll go ahead and go to
the audience. Is there anyone in
opposition?
To this bill today.
Please raise your hand.
Is there anyone in support of
uh.
49, raise your hand.
Um, we'll go ahead and do, um,
public comment for those in
support, if you have a comment,
um, you'll have a minute to
comment.
Please go ahead and form a line.
Hello
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good afternoon.
My name is John Robertson, and I
was past president for the New
Mexico Association for the Deaf
for maybe 10 or 15 years.
When it was first founded,
Uh, I was the president for the
New Mexico Association for the
Deaf.
I was also part of the
establishment of the New Mexico
Commission for the Deaf and Hard
of Hearing as a member of the
board.
And now I am here as a member of
the community of the Deaf.
I have been a board member for,
I believe, 8 years on the
commission, and we have done
Mhm
many different things here.
So thank you for letting me
speak. I am in strong support.
Of this bill
That you will be hearing now?
It really impacts people across
the whole state of New Mexico,
not only the deaf and hard of
hearing communities.
But many.
People, 60 to 70% of people have
some degree of hearing loss.
And that is an incredible
amount.
So, even here in the room,
having captions, I was amazed.
Of course, I still love working
with my interpreters. I do
depend on sign language as my
primary language.
So please consider this bill.
It should be
Accessible for all people to
have visual language and
restaurants, in schools, in
malls.
Hospitals
Everywhere.
We just recently heard about
safety in schools.
We need safety in all public
spaces. People need to be aware
of what is happening.
So thank you again for
considering.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Eli
Freskas. I'm an attorney here in
New Mexico. I work very closely
on disability rights and with
the disability community. I'm in
strong favor of this bill. I
just want to mention that
thinking about emergencies
again, forest fires, uh, often
will take out cell phone towers
and many people will be relying
on television sets in order to
get their captioning and get
that emergency communication,
the most effective manner.
finally, I'll also mention that
there are
Uh, analog bills that are very
similar to this that have been
recently passed in Santa Fe and
in Albuquerque, and they have
been successfully implemented,
and I think it's a fabulous
opportunity to increase that
effective communication across
the state. Thank you.
If there's no one else in
support, we'll go to support um
online. I forgot to ask for
opposition online, we'll start
with support and then we'll go
to opposition.
Kathleen Mosey.
Hi, Kathleen.
Yes. Thank you, chair, and
members of the committee. I have
a son who, um, I had a son who
is deaf and raised in
Albuquerque and we um fought
many battles for access to
captioning and um many times,
um, business folks felt that
they didn't understand that they
were a public accommodation and
so felt they were not uh
Um
that the law did not apply to
them, so I think this helps
clarify that, define it and
underscore it. I know we still
have civil penalties, um, and
can sue, but there's not a lot
of us that want to do that when
we're raising our children, so I
appreciate this bill supported
and thank you very much to the
sponsors for bringing it.
Uh, go ahead and raise your hand
if there's any opposition now,
so we go to the.
OK.
No opposite. OK.
Um, all right back to the
sponsors on the community sub
and.
Madam Chair, we've moved to the
community so Madam Vice Chair,
do you want a madam chair? Um,
do you final comments before we
go to further explain it. If
not, I can just make 11 last
comment and why don't you make
one last comment. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I just wanted
to add that many states in the
United States have closed
captioning laws, including New
York, Texas, California, and
more. These laws are expanded on
these laws expand on federal
laws such as
The Americans with Disabilities
Act. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Right.
All right, we're ready to go to
committee, um.
Questions. I want to be on the
list?
begin. OK, um, represent.
OK
OK, Madam Chair,
well, I'll move a do pass right
we have a motion for a due pass
and seconded.
Made by um representative
Romero, seconded by
Representative Aman v. Hill.
Would you call the roll, please.
Did you have comments? I thought
you were gonna make the motion.
Oh, I'm sorry, no, no, I
apologize. I thought you were.
Well
Oh yes, OK. So just reminded
there's a committee sub, so it
would be I do not pass and uh
well, do you want to say it?
I, uh, move that we have a do
not pass on house bill 49 and a
due pass on uh many substitute
for hospital 49.
And I assume representative
Hoffman v. Hill seconds that
motion.
OK, very good.
We call the roll.
Representative Abita, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Mhm
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reed, yes.
Representative Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes, Madam
Chair, yes.
We have a do pass.
do pass. Thank you, Madam Chair
and committee members. Thank
you, Madam Chair and committee.
OK.
So, uh
As I mentioned when we started
the meeting, we are rolling the
workers' comp.
Um
because there were.
Some amendments that we got in a
little later than we would have
liked.
So now we are on house Bill 36.
Board of Optometry Powers and.
Well, I should congratulate you.
You're one of the few bills on
our list that doesn't have an
amendment or a sub.
Don't speak too soon, OK, no,
this is true. I could have
jinxed you. All right, um.
Represented floor is yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, we are
here to talk about House Bill 36
as already been amended.
Um, I'm known to ad lib, madam
chair, but we're gonna try
something different today and
I'm gonna read a statement uh
about the importance of this
bill, so.
Uh, thank you for the
opportunity to present House
Bill 36, which aims to modernize
optometrist's scope of practice.
This bill authorizes
optometrists to perform in
office laser procedures for
treating glaucoma and after
cataract surgery care.
Is Bill 36 is rooted in the
principles of accessibility,
efficiency, and patient-centered
care. In today's healthcare
landscape, many patients face
unnecessary delays and financial
burdens when referred to
specialists for procedures that
could be safely and effectively
performed by optometrists.
Optometrists are already
diagnosing and providing
postoperative care, including
managing complications for
patients who benefit from these
services.
By enabling optometrists to
perform these minimally invasive
laser treatments. We can bridge
a critical gap in care,
particularly for underserved and
rural communities. This
legislation ensures that the
expansion of optometric services
is accompanied by certification
requirements from the New Mexico
Optometry Board to uphold the
highest standards of patient
safety.
It's a prac
Reflects advancements in
technology, medical education,
and the evolving needs of our
healthcare system.
Um, with that, man, I'm sure I
want to um introduce my two
experts sitting at the table
with me, so to my left is Doctor
Dwight Thibodeaux.
And to my right is Doctor Sarah
Bortz, and I will be helping me,
uh, answer any questions that
the committee may have. And with
that, we will stand for
questions.
Uh, before we stand for
questions, I'd like to go to the
audience. Anyone wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill,
please, um, step forward.
I'm sorry.
My name is Rebecca Lane here and
uh thank you, Madam Chairwoman
and distinguished members of
this committee. I am the
president of the New Mexico
Academy of Ophthalmology, and
our society stands to protect
patients by ensuring their care
remains in the hands of
qualified physicians, New
Mexican's vision is priceless
and precision is paramount. We
can endlessly about the
educational and training
differences about optometrists
and eye surgeons. For example,
eye surgeons, we've all
delivered babies, worked in
ICUs, held hands with patients
were.
dying and worked in ERs.
We understand that the whole
body is connected to the
eyeball.
I want to specifically speak to
the optometrists claim that
increasing their scope of
practice will increase access to
care, particularly in rural
areas of the state.
This experiment has been done
already. In 2023, there was an
article published by a major
medical journal that looked at
long-term data from 5 states
where optometrists have been
allowed to perform the laser
surgery.
there was no statistically
significant increase in access
to care and in at least 2
states, it actually worsened.
The procedure is being done in
the major cities. There's simply
not enough volume of patients in
rural areas to make owning and
maintaining laser equipment
financially viable. So the
optometrists in rural areas
refer to metro areas to
optometrists who own the lasers,
so patients actually drive
farther and buy qualified eye
surgeons to get substandard
care.
So in previous testimony, the
optometrist said that this will
be different in New Mexico.
I do think they agree. I, we
agree, because we are less r
than the states that have
already allowed this.
Our population is only 25% real.
Oklahoma's skis that are 35%.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Angelina Villa Adams. I'm
president of the New Mexico
Medical Society. First, I want
to express appreciation for, I
think, is the amendment that's
going to be presented. Um, eye
surgery is invasive, delicate,
and complicated. New Mexicans
deserve the standard of care
that is on par with the rest of
the country. To that, I would
like to bring your attention to
a letter from the American
Medical Association that was
presented in strong opposition
of the bill. Our ophthalmology
colleagues
years to be proficient in
providing safe and effective
surgeries to ensure the best
outcomes for patients.
Optometrist and ophthalmologist
can and should work together for
quality care and quality health
care as a team. The surgical
part of eye care belongs in the
hands of eye surgeons who have
extensive training in years, not
hours, after 4 years of medical
school, please oppose House Bill
36 to continue safe eye care for
your constituents.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'm Barbara
McEnany. I'm an oncologist, and
despite the fact that I have a
license to practice medicine and
surgery. I never have any
intention of practicing surgery
on an eyeball because I am not
trained to do so.
And as former president of the
American Medical Association, we
have studied for years the fact
that it expanding scope of
practice does not address
increased access if we wish to
increase access, we need to find
ways to either get patients to
the competent surgeons who can
treat them, or we need to get
more doctors across the state
who can do the right job. I have
a clinic in Gallup, New Mexico.
I
Do not send nurse practitioners
there because I believe that
rural people deserve the same
quality of care that the rest of
us need. I would not allow
someone to do laser surgery and
vaporized eye tissue on me or
anyone I cared about, because I
believe that everyone deserves
the best quality of care and
losing vision would be as just
as devastating to a rural
patient as it would be to you or
me. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
distinguished committee members.
My name is Natasha Dark. I'm a
medical school, medical student
from the UNM School of Medicine,
a local New Mexican since birth,
and I'm here speaking for myself
and all future graduates who
intend to practice ophthalmology
in New Mexico after residency.
During my time working amongst
ophthalmologists inside
conversations with patients. I
have observed that many of our
patients don't know the
difference between an
optometrist and ophthalmologist
until they require health care
from the latter. I know myself,
I didn't really understand the
difference until medical school.
I'm concerned for our patients'
safety in lieu of House Bill 36
when they're told they must
undergo an eye procedure, not
knowing the difference in
training that comprises.
Ophthalmologists are surgeons.
I, I, as an average medical
student have already undergone
200 hours of learning on cadaver
tissue as well as about 500
hours' worth of working with
live tissue from consenting
patients in surgery. A surgical
residency of 4 to 6 years after
my graduation will build upon my
training twentyfold.
Our state has a more robust
ophthalmology rural presence
than any other surgical
specialty I've encountered. This
has already made possible in New
Mexico, thanks to the strength
of our ophthalmology community
and now by the creation of a new
local residency program here.
These factors make me more
confident, being a surgeon in a
rural area, assured that a
patient from Lordsburg would
feel safer having a procedure
involving cutting into tissue
done by me as a surgeon, even if
I were practicing less than an
hour's drive away from them in
the future. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Chairwoman
Chandler and distinguished
members of this committee. My
name is Bradford Gillette. I'm a
board certified fellowship
trained ophthalmologist
practicing in Albuquerque.
I first came to New Mexico in
2022 after four years of
residency, ophthalmology
residency in Florida. This was
to complete an additional year
of training at the University of
New Mexico.
In order to better and more
safely serve my patients.
My patients are now the people
of New Mexico, and I'm here to
advocate for their safety.
In the hands of highly trained
ophthalmologists, the laser, uh,
surgeries proposed in this bill
are generally safe.
But they do come with risks and
every one of my patients is
counseled on these risks and the
potential complications before
proceeding.
A study published in the October
2016 Journal of the American
Medical Association showed that
patients who underwent glaucoma
laser surgery by an optometrist
in Oklahoma.
Significantly more likely to
require repeat glaucoma laser
surgery compared to those
patients who were treated by an
ophthalmologist.
Not only do additional
surgeries.
Uh, pose more risk to patient
safety, they impose more burden
on the patient and the health
care system at large.
Furthermore, on January 29th of
this year in the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
one of our colleagues from
Oklahoma testified that he
personally managed 6
complications that were the
direct result of optometrists
performing the very same laser
surgeries that are proposed in
this bill.
Complications that only an
ophthalmologist with surgical
training.
Uh, is capable of managing.
I am here to maintain the high
standard of care that all New
Mexicans have come to expect and
to keep my patients safe and
heart. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
executive director with the
Greater Albuquerque Medical
Association. I'm here today just
to express our concerns
regarding House Bill 36 because
we do believe it puts patient
safety at risk.
Uh, we are committed to
safeguarding patient safety by
opposing inappropriate
expansions of non-physician
healthcare providers scope of
practice. Such expansions do not
solve our state's healthcare
challenges. It may compromise
patient safety by allowing
individuals without equivalent
training to perform complex
procedures. New Mexicans deserve
access to high quality medical
care and our legislature must
work towards enhancing quality
and ensuring access
simultaneously by opposing such
expansions as proposed in House
Bill 3.
6 we aim to maintain the highest
standards of medical care,
ensuring that patients benefit
from the expertise and oversight
that qualified physicians can
provide. We you to protect
patients and reject House Bill
36. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Nathaniel Royval, I
am a New Mexican trained, born,
um.
Retina surgeon, and I want to
speak in opposition to this
bill.
There is an important moniker in
our society today in New Mexico,
and that's access to care, but I
think we need a little qualifier
on that access to the highest
quality of care.
And I am opposed to this for a
couple of reasons. Optometrists
primarily live where
ophthalmologists do, so it
doesn't really give access, it's
just granting permission to do
it across the street from a
place that's already has the
expertise and technology to
provide these procedures.
Second of all these procedures
are, are dangerous, but I think
that really the access issue is
in rural New Mexico and that's
in primary care.
Let me tell you a quick story.
Just yesterday, I saw a woman,
28-year-old from southeastern
New Mexico who called for
glasses check in November. She
didn't get an appointment till
this week. She had a retinal
detachment. She has a permanent
blinding disease now. There's
not a backlog on the surgical
care for that. She went, got a
procedure same day for me.
Backlog is in the primary care
and our optometrists have played
a critical role in the primary
care management and getting
these patients in the door. I
don't think we need to dilute
their efforts by having them do
surgical care where there is
literally no backlog for these
procedures. Thank you very much
and
Appreciate your help. Thank you,
doctor. Um, let's go online.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition.
Please raise your
I'm gonna do 5 Kodash hope I
pronounced your name correctly.
Yes, thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
afternoon now.
My name is Doctor James Chodas.
I'm an ophthalmologist, chair of
the department of ophthalmology
and Visual Sciences at the
University of New Mexico and the
residency program director for
our training program.
Ophthalmologists spend 8 to 10
years after college training,
including 4 years of medical
school, 4 years of residency
training, the latter including
hands-on experience with
thousands of surgical cases, and
then many of us performed
fellowships where they gain
additional and extensive
experience with the most
complicated procedures.
Personally, I trained to be an
ophthalmologist for 11 years
after graduating from college,
optometrists spent 4 years after
college in any education they
receive it, uh, like the ones
they're asking to do in our
state is
theoretical and not hands on. We
spend 20,000 hours in hands-on
training over 4 years. If this
bill is approved, optometrists
will spend 2 weekends and have 4
hours hands on. Who would you
rather have operate on your
mother's eye. I finished my
training in 1993 and had been
licensed for over 30 years. You
may not realize it, but this
bill is one more of a countless
number that optometry societies
have been pushing in every state
in the country for as long as
I've been in practice and
beyond. It's always the same.
The initial version asks for
things that are truly
outrageous, like scalpel
surgery, then just as the
discussions start, the bill is
amended to make it seem more
reasonable, as if a laser cannot
harm an eye, leaving legislators
in the state to think the
optometrists are compromising
and should be credited.
Optometric surgery is not needed
here. It's not safe. It will not
advance the well-being of New
Mexicans. Thank you.
Um, Rachel.
Miss Davis
Hello, can you hear me? Yes.
Yes, hello. Good afternoon,
Chairwoman Chandler and
distinguished members of the
committee. I'm Doctor Rachel
Davis, an ophthalmologist and
glaucoma specialists at UNM and
I'll be talking about one of the
glaucoma lasers in section G of
this bill. It's called laser
iridotomy. Laser iridotomy means
using a laser to make a
permanent hole in the iris or
colored part of the eye. About
15% of the time there's
bleeding, which is a
complication. I always tell my
trainees, generally, we have one
shot to get this laser through.
Once the bleeding starts, an
emergency trip to the operating
room isn't far behind. In these
cases, patients need a precision
marksman. They need experience
and experience matters. As you
can imagine, punching a hole in
the eye can result in permanent
double vision and damage to
tissues. This laser has a much
higher complication rate than
the other two procedures in this
bill, which is why I'm
concerned. Patients that need
this laser treatment are in
severe pain, have lost vision,
have headache, nausea.
Vomiting, rapid heart rate,
anxiety, and a lot of fear. It's
the equivalent of a heart attack
in the eye.
Just like a heart attack. We
start by stabilizing the patient
with medicine, which
optometrists can do. We do
medicine first and then surgery.
The patients want to be in the
hands of an experienced surgeon,
a medical doctor who can treat
them fully and bring them
relief. They want to know that
you have done this before in
someone just like them. And the
truth is, less than 1% of people
are at risk for this type of
glaucoma. It's very rare. It's
very unclear to me. Thank you.
Thank you.
Amar
Yes. Thank you, representatives
for allowing me to speak in
opposition to this bill. My name
is Amer Joshi. I'm an associate
professor of ophthalmology and
plastic and reconstructive
surgery at the University of New
Mexico and an ophthalmologist at
the Veterans Affairs Hospital.
Uh,
I want my colleagues have listed
a lot of good reasons why we
should oppose this bill, but I'm
going to talk about training
requirements, or I should say
the lack thereof. This bill does
not list any specific retraining
requirements for who is allowed
to do these lasers. Instead
deferring to the board of
optometry.
Based on their statements, this
bill are their requirements
would be a 30-hour classroom
course, a weekend course with no
requirements for doing this on a
real human eye under
supervision. Instead, they
deferred a simulators, which in
some cases are a piece of
plastic with a cellophane candy
wrapper. As someone who does
these lasers, that is an in an
unacceptable substitute for the
real thing. This bill will allow
somebody who has never fired a
laser into a real human eye.
To do their first surgeries on a
real patient unsupervised. That
is irresponsible and that is
dangerous. Every single
ophthalmologist in this country
has had to demonstrate that they
can do these lasers on a real
patient in a supervised manner.
So why would we lower the
standards for our optometrists.
Uh, we have a responsibility to
the citizens of New Mexico to at
the very least create a
requirement that
who does these lasers has to do
them in real patience in a
supervised manner before they
would be allowed to practice
independently. Thank you. Thank
you.
Um, one last person before we um
go to those and support.
Elizabeth
Um
Oh, Elizabeth.
Hello, can you hear me? Yes.
Good afternoon, chairwoman and
distinguished members of the
committee. My name is Elizabeth
Cortara, and I'm an
ophthalmologist practicing in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. I also
specialize in the care of
patients with glaucoma. Thank
you for the opportunity to share
my concerns with you regarding
this bill. Um, I will echo some
of the things my colleagues have
already said, uh, but I want to
focus on the misconception that
in segment ocular laser surgery
is safe or uncomplicated. Well,
complication rates may be low,
um, around
10 to 30% in studies that are um
available on PubMed, they can
cause significant bad outcomes
for patients, such as needing
further eye surgeries, sometimes
emergently, and in some cases
irreversible blindness. Some of
these complications are due to
surgeon error, meaning they are
doing the laser incorrectly.
Since this bill dramatically
lowers the bar for training and
experience required for the
individual performing the laser
eye surgery, that is a
significant patient safety
concern.
And other complications occurred
despite a technically correct
surgery. That is why no laser
surgery should ever be
undertaken lightly. This bill
does not require the reporting
of complications and based on
numbers cited in a prior
committee meeting, it would seem
that optometrists in states
where similar bills have passed
are vastly underreporting their
complications by multiple orders
of magnitude.
I'll briefly touch on the issue
of access. Uh, when I started
practicing at UNM, I had a
designated laser, um, clinic on
Monday afternoons and after a
year, I got rid of it because it
was never a fault. Um, I do
lasers during my regular
clinics. I do not believe that
they're doctor, I'm, I'm gonna
have to interrupt your time is
up.
Thank you so much. You're
welcome. Thank you. Um, so now
let's go to the audience and
those wishing to speak in
support.
Please, um, line up.
So, um, we're gonna have to.
to about 10 or so people, which
was approximately what?
The number of ophthalmologists
who spoke, so.
We're going to live it to 10.
Um, so that will be 10 minutes,
so you all can figure out how
much time you want to take, but
no more than 90 seconds each.
The shorter you are, the more
people who get to speak.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I am Doctor Angela
Morgan and I am an optometrist
practicing in Las Cruces and
TRC.
I'm also the current president
of the New Mexico Optometric
Association.
We came before the legislature
in 1977 to ask for permission to
be able to dilate our patient's
eyes. We came in 1985 to ask for
permission to prescribe eye
drops to our patients. We came
in 1995 to ask for permission to
use oral medications for our
patients. We came in 2007 to ask
for permission to do minor
surgical procedures, including
scalpels that we already use.
For our patients. All of these
paths, we have been doing all of
these. We have heard the same
arguments now as we heard then
and none of them have come to
fruition.
In fact, across the nation,
there has never been a scope of
expansion of optometry that has
ever been repealed in any state
in the United States, including
the 12 states where uptown.
We are trained.
Capable and we are educated, and
we can provide our patients
valuable services.
Madame Chain Community members.
My name is Doctor Erica
Anderson, and I'm an optometrist
at I associates of New Mexico,
where I'm also a board member. I
practice at our Roswell and
Albuquerque offices, and as you
know, patients in rural health
settings have a disadvantage to
access to care, especially
specialty care.
I have personally watched
Patience in the Roswell
community go blind as eye care
providers have died, retired, or
moved away.
It's difficult to recruit
providers to those areas, and
this bill would be helpful in
recruiting eye care providers to
these areas.
In addition, patients don't
always have financial resources
to come to Albuquerque to see a
specialist. I am properly
trained and have the skills and
certification to provide these
patients at their home, uh,
cities.
This is well I help our
ophthalmology colleagues to have
more time to do more complex
surgeries for more complex
patients, which further utilizes
their training. I support this
bill as a way to save the vision
in our rural communities. Thank
you. Thank you.
of the committee.
My name is Doctor Robert
Ratsliffe, and I practice in
Taos, New Mexico.
Um, the access to care is very
real in my area.
You can do the math, the nearest
ophthalmologist is actually.
miles away
And that's an area of about
13,000 square miles. These
procedures have been proven to
be safe and effective in the
hands of optometrists and
allowing this bill to pass would
give me the ability to provide
greater access of care to all of
my patients in northern New
Mexico. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
board.
My name is Doctor Jay Folkman.
I've been practicing in New
Mexico in Albuquerque for over
40 years by simply increasing
the number of providers that can
do this vital procedures,
um, increase the access for
patients.
It will also reduce the wait
time for these patients and
certainly for urban areas, um.
I'm support of this bill.
And I'd appreciate you do do the
right thing and uh vote yes for
this House Bill 36.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Doctor Tracy Ho, and I'm
an optometrist and owner of City
of Vision Iya here in Rio
Rancho.
Um, this practice has been
serving the community for 30
years and after earning my
doctorate in optometry. I sought
out more advanced training in
glaucoma, moved her to
Albuquerque to train at the VA
where I had the privilege of
serving veterans under the
mentorship of NIH supported
glaucoma specialists.
In my private practice, I not
only focus on primary care but
also managing complex conditions
like glaucoma. Today, I received
a number of referrals from both
optometrists and
ophthalmologists who trust me to
provide long-term care for their
patients. This trust is built on
my commitment to providing safe,
effective, and evidence-based
treatment. Today I stand in
support of House Bill 36, which
would allow a tares to perform
essential laser procedures that
are already considered standard
care in ophthalmology.
As a result, many patients are
forced to rely on daily drug
resents to endure unnecessary
delays which would lead to worse
outcomes by allowing trained
optometrists to perform these
procedures, we can provide
timely care, reduce dependence
on medication and ease the
burden on our healthcare system.
HB 36 aligns with national
trends and the growing body of
evidence that optometrists can
safely and effectively perform
these procedures. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and the
members of the committee.
I'm Doctor Makayla Botwin Fisher
Ives, and I practiced right
around the corner downtown Santa
Fe.
I support House Bill 36, and
these are the reasons why.
Optometrists or the front line
of eye care providers. In
passing this legislation will
expand the treatment options
that optometrists can provide.
Therefore, increasing the
quality of care available to all
patients.
Current research shows SLTs are
becoming the gold standard
treatment for early glaucoma.
My optometrists provide 80
optometrists provide 80% of
primary eye care to New
Mexicans, allowing optometrists
the right to treat our patients
with these procedures will
elevate the quality of care in
New Mexicans receive.
Additionally, modernizing the
scope of practice, just like the
12 other states before us.
would make New Mexico a
desirable place to practice and
help fulfill the dire need we
have for optometrists.
For these reasons, on behalf of
all patients over the state, I
implore you to vote yes.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is Van
Lin Chan Botwin and I am an
optometrist.
I feel
position
Left the largest ODMD practice
in New Mexico. I associates of
New Mexico were practiced for
the last 11 years, primarily at
the former Las Vegas location in
both of our Santa Fe locations.
And now I'm currently abo I
group downtown Santa Fe.
I'm speaking in support of House
Bill 36, because during my last
decade of practice, I've
witnessed the I've witnessed
firsthand.
All working alongside 50 plus
optometrists and
ophthalmologists, the challenges
in attaining glaucoma care for
my patients.
Even as an internal optometrist
working alongside dozens of
ophthalmologists, it would still
take 4 to 6 months to get my
patients in front of an
ophthalmologist who is willing
to provide this procedure. All
my former colleagues are
well-intentioned. The access to
to glaucoma care is a crisis in
New Mexico.
Passing House Bill 36 would
especially provide improved
access to a population that is
being left behind in our state.
Elderly patients in rural parts
of our state. Thank you for your
careful consideration.
Hello, Madam Chair Board of
Representatives. My name is
Doctor Dustin Dawson. I practice
in, um, real ranch in New
Mexico. I speak on behalf of all
recent graduates of optometry
school. I recently graduated
from the Ohio State University
College of Optometry. I just
wanted to kind of elaborate a
little bit on the training that
we do receive in school
regarding laser treatments. I've
heard the opposition speaking
that we
don't receive enough, you know,
practice or enough education on
these laser treatments. I just
want to let you know we do spend
a lot of time learning about the
pathology of the eye, anatomy of
the eye, physiology of the eye,
and as well as the repercussions
that can be done when it comes
to these laser procedures.
The access to care here in New
Mexico for these special
treatments is very low, and a
lot of my patients complain
numerous times about not being
able to be seen by an
ophthalmologist in a timely
manner.
I'm speaking for this bill to be
passed because it's allowing for
New Mexicans to be seen in a
timely manner and to receive
treatment that we are actually
trained on, including our
board's assessments that we have
to perform before we graduate
from school, we also have to
study all these laser treatments
as well. So to say that we don't
have that training is, is just
simply not correct. We do have
this training and we do want to
perform it on our patients to
better their healthcare. Thanks.
Uh, my name is Doctor Bruce
Hofrey. I came to New Mexico in
1982 for my residency at the VA
Medical Center.
I then spent 25 years at
Loveless Medical Center as the
chief of optometry and vice
chair of the eye department.
I then retired from there and
went to the University of
Houston, and spent 10 years as a
tenured professor of
pharmacology and clinical
optometric medicine.
I will simply state as the prior
speaker did, one of the
students.
That they, I wrote the
curriculum, by the way, with our
committee that includes
Hands-on rotations in their 3rd
and 4th years in the Louisiana
and other states that allow this
procedure to be done. They have
hands-on training.
And actually applying these
procedures to real patients and
not a piece of cellophane.
I also wrote two textbooks on
pharmacology, and I currently
work with the Cua Pueblo special
population in need with a very
high glaucoma tally with the
other three practitioners there.
I never retired, by the way.
Uh, and, uh,
We have a great need for this
type of procedure so we can give
this to the patients, otherwise
we have, we have them sitting on
a chair, we could treat them at
that moment, or it could.
Put them on the list to get them
over to some other provider,
which is not in our area or in
our community.
Provide these procedures. I
support this bill.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee. I am Lindsay,
optometrist. Glaucoma has a big
population in my patient base. I
actually went to and laser
safety. I was one of them that
went to Louisiana and practiced
on consenting patients. Then I
went to um residency at Audie
Murphy VA where I did ocular
pathology and the main, the main
part of it was glaucoma and
cataract post-ops. So, we are
being trained in these. Thank
you, and I support it?
All right. Let's go online and.
We'll hear from 5.
People online.
who wish to speak in support,
please raise your hand. Any
anyone online wishing to speak
in support.
I don't see anyone's hand
raised.
OK.
All right, well
Go back to the sponsor. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair, um.
I think I'm going to leave it up
to you. I think there's
definitely some issues that we
want to correct in terms of
misinformation for training, but
we'll leave that up to questions
from the committee and hopefully
get that information out at that
time.
All right. Thank you very much,
Representative.
Questions?
Representative Reeb.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
representative, um, I'm from a
small rural town and I actually
sat down with um.
The one optometrist, I think we
have in our town, um, to talk to
her about this bill and um have
her explain the procedures that
are actually being done and what
those entail and the training
and I was uh.
I was very satisfied with the
explanations that she gave me.
I'm, I'm sensitive to the eyes.
I have a daughter who had
retinoblastoma, I'm sure all of
you in there know what that is,
and so I, she's lost her eye to
cancer and um well, she's a
different story. I
I, you know, I'm sensitive to.
To having somebody look at my
eyes or anybody's eyes, but
For us and Clovis to get to um
an ophthalmologist, we have to
go to Lubbock, we have to go to
Amarillo. We have to go to
Albuquerque and this is a
procedure of these procedures
seem to be according to my op
optometrist, something that that
could be done in office, very
safely and something that uh
would save a lot of heartache
and travel and costs for in time
for these, you know, patients
that just can't seem to get the
appointment, so.
Could you, um, explain a little
bit, um, I know you're gonna
talk about the training, but
what these procedures.
Entail because when they were
explained to me, they didn't
seem like really and and they
had the equipment for it, so and
they didn't seem like really uh
invasive, Madam Chair.
Oh
defer to Doctor Thibodeau and
then
I'm you. I have been practicing
in Santa Fe for
over 40 years.
Um, I'm incoming president for
the Mexico Optometric
Association, and I'm vice chair
of the state board.
Um
I will talk a bit on what the
board envisions in terms of
certification requirements, um,
I thought the question was what
type of procedures are we
talking about, so we're talking
about, uh, sorry, madam chair,
we're talking about.
Procedures in the front chamber
of the eye, using a laser.
One is um
Tubbeculoplasty involving a
laser, uh applied energy in the
angle of the eye to
Promote fluid.
Draining away from the eye more
than.
Uh, is currently happening and
it lowers pressure, which
decreases the risk of damage
from glaucoma.
Another procedure, and sorry to
interrupt, Madam Chair, and how
long does that procedure take
for you to do? Oh, anywhere from
3 to 5 minutes.
That's what I was told they're
very simple, OK, go ahead,
sorry, sorry to interrupt to
your next procedure involves,
uh, making a small hole in the
iris to uh facilitate flow from
the back chamber to the front
chamber, relieving um
Pressure and relieving closure
of the angle causing acute
glaucoma and Madam Chair, and
expert, how long is that
procedure take?
2 to 3 minutes. OK.
Continue, please.
Another procedure involves
opening up a cloudy capsule
behind the lens has been planted
after cataract surgery.
Um, that can take even less
time.
Less than 2 or 3 minutes.
OK, and are those the only
procedures?
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, and, um,
experts, are those the only
procedures that we're talking
about.
In 12 states optometrists have
been doing those procedures. OK.
So those are the main
procedures, Madam Chair,
representative and experts that
we're discussing that would be
done um in a rural by an
optometrist, I guess. Yes.
And do you believe, um, Madam
Chair, an expert that as she was
shown that I was.
Show the training that they
received on it, and we discussed
that for a long time, you feel
that's adequate training, um,
for what they would be doing on
these.
minute procedures.
Representative.
The arts that training is kind
of mirrored in a very large
study that was done, um,
involving close to 150,000 eyes
and complications.
Associated with optometrists
doing those procedures.
Um
In that study, only 2 reports to
state boards of adverse
outcomes.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, I, you know,
I, I've had talked to people
about this pill and my local
people and this would be great
for rural New Mexico, I believe,
and it's still madam chair and
expert and representative will
give you an option to go to a
larger place to see an
ophthalmologist if you want to.
Would that be correct?
I'm sure uh representative
absolutely.
Um, thank you for answering
those questions. That's all I
have. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Is there anything more to be
said on the 3.
Madam Chair, I am Doctor Sarahor
about this in Albuquerque, and
I'm a past president of the New
Mexico Optometric Association, a
couple things that I do want to
elaborate on directly related to
your question is um.
These are in office procedures.
There is no general anesthesia.
We do these procedures utilizing
the same microscope that we use
every day.
These are medically necessary
procedures. They are Medicaid
eligible procedures. I did want
to kind of refer back to a
couple studies that may be the
opposition had reference to the
question was, I think from the
representative, please describe
the procedures. So I think we
got that if you wanna add.
Some description to the
procedures that the previous
doctor.
Spoke to, I'm happy to listen to
that, but we need to be
responsive to the questions that
the members are are asking.
How's how about that? Yes, thank
you, madam. I'm happy to
elaborate. Thank you.
Um. Instead of Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
much like, uh, Representative
Reeb, I, uh, did spend some time
over the summer.
Or whatever with our local um
optometrists and things to them
for um helping inform us about
the importance of this
legislation and certainly what
the implication is, um.
There was a reference previous
to uh.
The bill and perhaps in the
comments and maybe even in.
Public comment that there could
be a possible compromise on some
of the language in the bill, um,
Madam Chair, Representative, can
you talk a little about that if
the.
compromise that we should
considering.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, uh, Madam Vice Chair. So,
um, the bill has already been
amended once to remove two of
the proposed procedures, um, in
my layman's understanding, I
will defer to my experts to talk
about what those procedures
were, um, there are, uh, you
know, in the sausage factory,
there's always potentiality for
additional changes, but um, we
have already amended once to
take two of those procedures out
and um I will defer to the
experts as to uh the other
pretend the third potential that
they were referring to.
Doctor Thibodeau.
Madam Chair, Representative.
I think you're referring to the
amendments that are regarding 2
of the 5 procedures that are
written in the bill, so what
we've talked about extensively
are regarding some minimally
invasive laser procedures,
procedure number 4 and number 5
that have been since amended our
regarding.
An emergency procedure where the
pressure of the eye is
alleviated with a more invasive
management, um.
And then the second is there's
something called drug eluting
implants where we use uh an
injection into the front chamber
of the eye to release time
released medications.
Both of these procedures are
done by optometrists in other
states, and we felt like they
had a lot of value for our
citizens of New Mexico. But, um,
in honor of working with
colleagues, we have chosen to
amend and remove those
procedures.
So Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, just so I'm
clear.
Is that on page 3 lines 1
through 9, which.
would have
Amended the procedures that we
no longer want in there out of
the bill.
Madam Chair, Madam vice chair,
uh, correct, it looks like line
6, page 3, lines 6 through 9.
Those procedures have been
amended out of the bill.
Madam Chair, on that point, I'm
trying to follow along here, so,
uh,
So we are left with.
H3 lines 1 through 5.
That right,
Madam Chair, Mr. Speaker, that
is correct. Thank you.
And so, Madam Chair, um.
Representative, I, I'm
understanding with that change
that.
You've alleviated the concern
about where the disconnect
between the.
Um, opposition and the uh
outside of just on those.
Um, the bill
Madam Chair, Madam, vice chair,
um, I do believe that that has
we have been working with uh the
ophthalmologists throughout.
This process to um get a a a
better bill, we feel would be a
better bill. It has alleviated
the concerns of some of the
ophthalmologists, but just to be
clear, in all scope of practice,
expansion issues, there's always
gonna be difficulties, there's
always gonna be some
practitioners that have, uh,
that will be in opposition to
the expansion of the scope of
practice generally. And so I
feel like those amendments that
are already in the bill, um,
alleviated some opposition, but
not all to.
Answer your question in a
shorter form.
And so, Madam Chair,
representative, um.
Do we anticipate that there are
going to be further changes to
the bill based on public
comment.
And your
What you're working on currently
just so I'm clear that.
We're not, you're not
foreseeing.
Madam Chair, Madam, vice chair,
uh, no, we would like to pass
the bill and it's current.
Thank you. Anyone else with
questions, comments?
Representing McQueen. Oh, I'm
sorry.
OK.
OK.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Um
Ma'am chair representative
experts, uh, thank you for this
bill. I um
Um, my general philosophy is
that uh.
We should be expanding the
availability of services.
Uh, I represent a largely rural
district, uh, it used to be much
more rural before uh
redistricting, but
This will have
larger area
Land in my district where
medical services are hurt.
Um, I will note
A couple of years ago we had a
bill.
Uh, promoted by the optometrist
that I felt restricted the
availability of service.
And I voted against that because
for the same reason, I think.
Um
You know, I appreciate what the
ophthalmologists do.
Um, but
I, I don't think we can hold out
for.
Um
Gold plated uh medical services.
When some people are going
without.
I'm in support of this bill.
Uh, I think these procedures can
be done.
Um
You know, in office, I'm
convinced they can be done
safely.
Um
And so I'm happy to support
this.
Thank you, mentor.
Representful
Madam Chair
Doctor's representative.
More, mine's more of a comment,
um, in full disclosure, I'm the
grandson of an optometrist, the
son of an optometrist, the
nephew of two optometrists.
I am
Only one who chose another path
in life, it looks like.
In growing up around the
practice of optometry and as I
saw it expand and hear my father
speak about things.
Past president of the optometric
Association.
I never saw where there was a
concern that
Every optometrist's gonna run
out and just do something.
There were other things passed.
In the past
Some optometrists chose not to
perform.
And so
I would hear those explanations.
And I, I think we're.
Need to give credit where credit
is due.
Optometry
Is a
Vital, important practice.
Regardless
Of the population.
But specifically in a state
that's very rural.
I just wanted to say that and
that I stand in full support.
Um, I have a few questions. Are
all of the procedures that um
are currently in the bill
reformed by a laser laser.
deferred to Doctor Thibodaux,
manager.
representatives,
yes, all three of the.
Procedures or laser.
And what is the approximate cost
of such a laser?
A combination laser that does
both the capsulotomy and the
glaucoma procedures is roughly
$50,000.
That's the number I received.
So, um, $50,000 is a pretty big
investment.
Would we not agree, doctors.
I'm sorry, I'm sure I didn't
understand that's a pretty
significant investment.
Uh, Madam Chair,
representatives, um, it is a big
investment but we have
instruments in our offices that
just do diagnostic testing that
are $100,000 and $60,000 on both
of those in my office, um, and
both of those diagnostic tests
pay well a lot less than the
laser procedure, not that the
laser procedures pay a lot.
300 to $400.
But it's it's, it's more about
delivering the care.
Um, it's not about the money,
it's delivering the care. And if
we can just do
10 or so procedures a month, 5
or 10 a month, we can cover the
lease.
So I, I have a concern about
that for rural New Mexico, I
think, um, in metro areas,
you'll have the volume to be
able to support such a thing,
but in rural areas, I really
question.
The optometrist's interest and
ability to pay for such a
significant piece of equipment
and uh.
I, I guess I'd really prefer not
to be interrupted.
Thank you.
Um
So that's one concern I have.
The other concern I have is,
well, let's talk about this, how
many years of training do
optometrists.
After completing undergraduate
education, there's 4 years of
optometry school, which is about
10,000 hours of training over
2000 patient encounters before
graduating. OK.
And how much of that is devoted
to surgery.
Madam Chair, there are different
curriculums for different
schools, but there is oversight
by the association of colleges
and schools of optometry. So
it's written in the curriculum
to be an accredited school that
you have to provide this care,
and it's not just about the
skill itself, it's about
anatomy, physiology, management
of post-operative complications.
So it's over years of multiple
classes that we're building on
knowledge to perform these
procedures. OK, um, so I hear
you say I think there's a lot of
in class.
Learning, how much actual hands
on learning is there in terms of
using a laser and performing the
procedures that you're that are
outlined in this bill.
I can't speak specifically. I
can certainly try to get some
specific numbers for you, um,
but typically coursework is on a
quarter or a semester course,
and they all involve hands-on
training, clinical care, um,
both inpatient and um with
fellow students.
OK, so we don't have an answer
to that, how much hands-on
training. I can provide that
information for you, Madam
Chair, I can provide that
information for you from schools
of optometry, but there's not a
bla.
So, um, you know, I just want to
express my concerns.
First of all, I, the idea that
there'll be greater access in
rural areas is.
Exaggerated.
And I don't think it's
intentional. I I I'm hopeful
that you all really intend to
try to expand financial
investment that's involved in
such a process will proposed and
desired, you know, discussed
here today.
Um, I know we're all concerned
about access to care in the
state, there's no question about
that, but.
I don't want us to now use that
as the fallback.
Um, lead in every discussion
that we have on access to
healthcare because I agree with
one of them or several of the
commenters that.
care, but it has to be.
had a quality that we all.
respect and deserve.
That a rural and um.
Feel that they're that they will
have to rely on a quality of
care that maybe is not at the
urban areas, um, expect and have
an opportunity to receive. That
is a concern of mine. I spoke
not just with optometrists
because, yes, I did get calls
from Ooptometrist this summer,
and I did meet with
optometrists. I also talked to
ophthalmologists.
So that I got, you know, an
understanding of what.
Both sides of the issue was not
just from those advocating for
the expanded scope and, you
know, I thought some very
legitimate concerns were
expressed, some of the
ophthalmologists told us they
refer them out because they're
not comfortable, not doing them
enough.
They're not, you know, in in
terms of practice and so on, and
they have specialties and Santa
Fe and Albuquerque, you do these
things another point that was
made is.
24 hour care is often necessary,
and, you know, if you're
committed to 24 hour care
because if something goes awry
in your eye, you need to be
there to support that person and
not send them to the emergency
room or some other doctor, um,
that's an issue that came up
when I was talking to some of
the ophthalmologists, so
appreciate the fact that um we
were hearing from
ophthalmologist, optometrists,
but I think both points of view.
were necessary to I um.
I'm really, uh, you know, the
thought of having.
I said this to my husband, use
lasers on your eye and he's
like.
Um, I think that's not a good
idea and I don't think it's a
good idea either, and with
respect to all of you, I
appreciate, I go to an
optometrist for my eye care. I
appreciate it very much. I get
very good care for that area of
practice, but um, frankly, if I
were gonna have some of these
procedures done, I would go in
in.
Of training
proficiency, so.
Yes, I'm ready to entertain
emotion
for a pass.
a second that motion.
We have a motion for a do pass
on House Bill 36 as amended,
made by Representative Hall.
Did you call the roll?
Representative Abita Pas.
Representative Chavez.
No.
Representative Hull.
Yes.
Representative Hockman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Represented McQueen. Yes.
Representative Ree.
Yes.
Leader Sapansky
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair
No.
We have a Du pass 8 to 20.
She said yes.
I think someone passed.
Oh, I'm sorry,
representative.
Sorry for that.
It's at 8 to 2. You have a do
pass?
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
I
Oh.
We're adjourned.
Yeah
We're taking the
