There
Nibert.
Been here all the.
Representative read here.
Representative green here.
Representative Penske here.
Madam vice chair.
the general fund madam chair
here you have a quorum Madam
chair thank you.
So we have a.
A little over.
Six.
Our.
Of the four.
Madam chair and members of the
committee this is of legislation
that passed the legislature two
years ago when all the way to
the Senate calendar and never
got scheduled so what we're
trying to fix them this is in
conjunction with the new car
dealers and the used cars
dealers.
There is something that is
called of.
Curbstone.
Curbstone mean there's two
different ways to curbstone so I
buy the vehicle from you request
you not to fill in the title.
Then I go and sell it to another
party and I feel in that party's
name as the person who purchased
it so I avoided the transaction
that came from you to me and me
to them.
So we lost the registration
fees.
And those individuals that are
doing that are not automotive
dealers and so they also avoided
the of women law at the AG's
office.
The next curbs stoner is a
person who registers as a
automotive dealer.
But is technically selling out
of their house so they go to the
corner put the vehicle on
Warner.
And it's an unfair trade
advantage.
And with that madam chair all
stand for questions.
Thank you very much
Representative let's go to the
audience does anyone wish to
speak in opposition to this
bill.
Look online online is there
anyone wishing to speak against
house bill sixty two.
Please raise your hand if you
do.
No one in opposition anyone in
the audience wishing to speak in
favor of the bill.
I don't see anyone in the
audience anyone online wishing
to speak in favor please raise
your hand.
I don't see anyone raise your
hand not in the interest.
You madam chair that I have the
new car dealers in the used car
dealers or the independent car
dealers as Sir called Fillmore
willingly for it with some other
items that we have today
so question from Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair Senator read this is
the the same bill that we voted
on last year.
Madam chair and representing the
queen two years ago yes and so
no changes from that time.
Here Representative McQueen no
changes
madam chair of the regime I was
just looking at the your last
committee and you use not
through with the six five the
how was wondering if you could
if you'd be willing to share
with us.
How you lost five votes in the
committee.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen there was some
discussion about what is current
or current law is you can sell
for vehicles within a year want
to sell I you must register as a
dealer and so there was a
discussion around that point
that is been the loss since the
seventies I'm not touching the
wall.
We're just leaving it alone.
Madam chair is the right thing
for that I did have one other
question on page two.
At the bottom vehicle should not
be teams offered for sale at a
location other than the licensee
there's established place of
business if the vehicles in use
for purpose other than to sell
or offer the vehicle for sale
this is like Michael Harper
stuff like that.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen yes but more
specifically if they took the
vehicle and went down and had
lunch at a restaurant is what
we're trying to cover their.
Thank you and madam chair
reserve Rehm I think I haven't
seen recently but
at in the past I've seen with
the dealership will take all of
its cars I think especially to
use cars down to the mall.
Has at work madam chair and
Representative McQueen that is
under another section and and it
they've this does not prevent
that they can still go and have
their big sale with the
fairground to wherever they want
to go.
Madam chair representative
arranged to have their call why
is it just like the do it twice
a year or you know.
Madam chair and Representative
McQueen take you to a page three
line one and I believe that
sexual let me read through it
for the offsite sale.
I
think we keep going down to one.
So madam chair we don't present
offsite sales with this
legislation.
Thank you that current law one.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative for.
we found.
Of
I.
Have
said.
Somebody.
I.
What
is
the problem that.
More will callers.
The.
And by is here there are there
that they can.
But the the other one.
A new pieces and jump in with
that K. R. this is this allows
you.
The program after they're
finished with the.
Madam chair and representative
all come so there's two avenues
one you could sell the vehicle
you know you have the title go
it and sell it or you could take
the vehicle down as scrap metal
and sell it to scrap metal so
however you wanted to do it.
Madam chair and representative
we remove sellers this means the
money out of.
That's a I mean that saliva
delays were so you have I am
going to do that most of the.
Estimate the.
And I'm about five of you gave
me the title if you have that
Well.
Is get to the to the.
R. and I do the same thing.
And
The whole time.
UP you madam chair and
Representative outcome you would
need the title for each vehicle
and then a bill of sale and then
you could go ahead and dispose
of it or sell it or however
whatever you wanted to but the
Madam chair representative I've
never did title I do we did go
to with the VA diverted anything
with those.
And I just on loan to those
title for maybe a five six
months a year or two.
Madam chair and representative
all come let me understand so
you bought this nineteen twelve
Studebaker was two years ago.
And you have the title and you
have the bill sale.
But you never want to do and be
entitled to your name.
Okay you can now go to DMV and
tied with your name and then
sell.
So that so my question I had in
order for me to get rid of it
now I have to go to be in the
with all of one that was a the
part for that car the tail
lights or whatever and that's
all I wanted on it but now I
have to go to the in the check
that the Monday with an order to
sell it to the young men where.
And madam chair and
representative outcome that is
current law.
Okay thank you madam chair
thank.
I could.
Thank you Representative
Representative Romero.
You madam chair I'm Lujan up my
head around this bill mostly for
the little guys that I know if
you visit my faith we converse
they have cars for would cards
for pulling in our V. cars for
hauling stuff card I mean it
goes down the list so my concern
is that without exceptions to
this on the forum for more I
mean it's unintended
consequences of somebody who say
my elderly grandmother they have
you know all these cars titled
in her name the got to get rid
of them because she can't drive
anymore I mean I can go through
so many different case.
Intentional you know case
examples of this but even so the
on the questions
That are posed as to who this
bill is for is this for the car
dealers specifically who is this
bill for.
So madam chair and then a vice
chair is really a consumer
protection bill you know you
have a dealership and I'm
dealing with that dealership I
know where they are they have a
business on on you know they
have a business location I can
go to not a street corner and on
the other one of the first style
of curbs stoning what you're
seeing is individuals that are
circumventing the law and
selling the vehicle.
and and going around the lemon
law out that the Attorney
General plants.
Madam chair representative if I.
Don't know a lot about cars my
dad does if I ask him to go sell
my car from for me.
It and my breaking the law under
this new law madam chair and
madam vice chair you probably
should be with your dad money
actually makes the sale fills
out the paperwork.
Madam chair representative
that's part of my point is that
being able to transact in this
way on behalf of me you're now
taking away my ability to give
him that power to give him that
agency to do that which I find
to be very common practice in
the state and very common
practice
you know when we're talking
about these types of
transactions on the side of the
road or where what have you want
to go meet somebody to drive
your car you they love it you're
in the middle of nowhere
transaction may happen right
there so madam chair
Representative I that would be
gives me pause but more so we've
invited new folks into this
state like Tesla and others who
have to go around current law
with auto dealerships that are
now able to sell their cars on
public lands madam chair
representative and so this would
also almost exempt them from
doing that from what I'm seeing
in this analysis would they be
protected from on from their
sale of cars with this law Madam
chair representative madam chair
and madam vice chair if I went
to the Tesler dealership in New
Mexico walkie and I went in and
said I want to buy that Tess was
that's out there they're going
to they're going to give me a
bill of sale and what is
actually called is that M. as so
manufacturer's statement of
origin.
If you will it's the birth
certificate of the vehicle and I
now go to DMV and register the
vehicle.
So madam chair representative
what what our analysis says is
that if you have to Trent do
that transaction in that place
and you're not going through a
dealer through this law you
would be prohibited from doing
that.
Madam chair and representative
Romero I disagree with that so
I'm tell us what you come in to
me I give you the title.
And I give you the bill of sale
you now have them.
And go to DMV and register the
vehicle.
Madam chair representative at
Tesla side what about internet
based dealers those late carve
on a those that are advertised
all across the state.
How does how that operate here
under this law Madam chair
representative madam chair and
representative Romero you're
purchasing the car from car
Bonner.
Carbonyls doing the transaction
to you your name is on the on
the bill of sale so again the
bill of sale I I if you have a
third party we don't care about
it it's going straight from them
to you.
Madam chair representative page
two lines
I guess twenty one through
twenty three.
Or just this entire new section
on offsite sales basically says
that vehicle shall not be deemed
offered for sale at a location
other than the licensed dealers
established place of business.
In which case madam chair
representative if they are not a
licensed dealer in the state
they're now considered illegally
operating that.
Car sales location is that not
correct mentor were
Representative.
Well.
Madam chair and Representative
Romero let's take yes what can
we.
Can we tell.
walkie Pueblo how we will
transaction business.
And the answer is no we can't do
that so that's how Tesla got in
there.
Now that you have paperwork in
your name for the vehicle you
can register at.
Madam chair representative.
That still doesn't I mean we
still holds many we we hold the
publicized and for many other
issues this is not this still
doesn't make clear to me that
you're not trying to exempt them
or to I'm sorry to make it's not
explicit they're exempt from
this and that it wouldn't be a
situation where there was a
conflict of law between their
practice and between what this
is attempting to do
Madam chair representative I've
I've I think I've just stated
some of the issues that I have
and in particular the little guy
just trying to.
Sell their car potentially
breaking this law if they go
down the road and and transact
in that way that's the one that
gives me the most pause but then
again with all the conflict of
what current practices if you're
not a licensed dealer
I just find this to be
You know beyond the scope of
what I think we should be
proposing to a madam chair
representative thank you.
Representative.
Representative night were in and
Representative.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative.
What you're really trying to get
at if I understood the bill
several years ago correctly was
to prohibit.
People who are really in the
business of selling cars from.
Skirting.
The dealership laws if you will
by having these offsite
transactions and doing the.
As explained title they never
have their name on it and in is
just a flow through so that the
warranties that would normally
be associated with that
transaction would not approve is
that.
Correct understanding.
madam chair and representative
Nibert yes under the first coat
curbstone in that is correct and
and then with respect to the
second one if I recall correctly
it was two.
Basically.
Keep.
People from entering the
business.
Off.
Of books if you will.
When they're really engage in
selling a number of vehicles and
if I have five vehicles in my
backyard I sold the five
vehicles.
That's.
I mean it's over the limit but
that's not what you're trying to
get out here trying to get out
people who really are engaged in
business without a license and.
The consumer then does not have
the protections that are
afforded by state law for
warranties and am access to to
make good on on various
statutory remedies that they
might have is that accurate
madam chair and representative
Nibert yes.
I'm sorry yes Sir in the.
Discussion regarding parts funds
selling.
Parts off of eight or ten cars
that's not this bill is a.
Madam chair and Representative
Nibert no that's not this bill
if you want to sell parts out of
your backyard that's something
else.
That's all the questions I have
madam chair.
Senator pants.
Chair Representative.
Right.
What you're trying to do I think
I have a really worried it.
Something that is different from
when this bill went through two
years ago as the cost of used
cars has absolutely skyrocketed
you know and I've had many many
friends in the situation where
they are trying to find a
vehicle they're looking online
they're going to dealers and
there just isn't a whole lot
available that's affordable or
that doesn't needs significant
repair and so one of I don't
know if you see in the FIR but
in the FIR is noted
the price of this may cause the
price of vehicles to go up so I
just wondered if you could
comment on that
just as a result of reducing the
number of locations of vehicles
can be sold reducing the number
of people that can sell vehicles
and then including all of these
other fees and the price it is I
think good it's a significant
concern to me.
Madam chair and representative.
The real reason why the vehicle
prices as gone up as the lack of
computer chips.
And up there for the new cars
coming on the market was a lower
number and so the use cars then
became the commodity that people
had to buy
I'd anticipate that the price
will steady here's you know
probably in six months or a
year.
Because now they're back into
full production now the COVID is
over.
Thank you representative madam
chair
Do.
You know I have run across you
know there's some constituency
within my district that you know
they spend a significant amount
of time fixing up old cars.
Selling them buying another one
fixing that one up there truly
enjoy it it's it's certainly a
side business but it's also
really a hobby you know a lot of
them are retirees
but I think under this bill they
would not they would have to
register as a dealer is that
right if they had more than four
sales in a year.
madam chair and representative
that is current law I'm not
changing current law.
Current law is if they sell more
than four they're supposed to
register as a dealer.
okay thank you madam chair
representative I thought that
that language was being added on
page two lines two through four
is that is it also present
somewhere else in the law it's
chair and Representative yes
it's already current law.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Martinez thank
you madam chair I think it was a
ream I I really wanna like your
bill.
and I'm reading through it and I
think there's some technical
questions maybe issues I don't
know but I think what it what
let me describe the situation as
I see it from my my community.
these unlicensed.
Corner lot.
Sellers of vehicles.
Can be a source of good Madam
chair representative he can get
people out of of money we need
of an expensive vehicle.
The problem is that many of
these guys can also prey on
people.
Employ people specifically.
And.
As is the case with.
Predatory lenders.
Many times lower income people
don't realize that in fact they
probably have a better credit
score than they think and they
could probably qualify for a
better loan then they think.
but they don't know that and so
they go to the printer lender
because that's where the.
Being able to access capital
Generally speaking and it's not
very different when it comes to
these vehicle sales.
I don't think people realize
that they can actually qualify
for an affordable loan at the
credit union.
and so they end up depending on
some of these folks you're not
going after the guy who.
I have like four cars in my
yard.
to anyone.
You're going up to the guy
that's going so a couple of X.
requires that.
You know he.
Got from dad or mom and grandma
and she died or whatever going
after the guy that's doing it
constantly and for good that
down to course and south course
course and that in other groups
for lots with cars all the time
is out there that's we going
after.
madam chair Representative Rehm
it's unclear to me though
subsection B. page two of the
bill.
The person Shelly we process to
title to the use motor vehicle
that was not obtained as a
result of fraud or duress in the
motor vehicle shall be
registered in the person's name.
My understanding is that when
you buy the car from that person
is they're gonna have a title
how you do how do you prove that
the title wasn't.
Zest due to fraud address.
I don't know I mean I I I'm not
sure how you prove that
it seems it seems like overkill.
Aside from that how did you land
at the four vehicles a year
madam chair representative.
Madam chair and of for later I I
didn't understand your question
what about is about the for the
yeah how did you land on that
number one not six way not to.
Madam chair and
Mr speaker the that is current
law.
In another section in another
section of law yeah another
section of law okay.
So.
Okay so help me understand and
this code section a unless a
person is a motor vehicle dealer
efficient person shall not sell
more than four motor vehicles
registered to the person to
another person calendar year.
Why is that here if it's in
another section of law.
That's both.
Go to sixty six dash three and
we're going to have to the
lawyers want to grab my
computer.
We have the one for.
Yeah.
I am sure there's also bill
rural.
The vice chair would like to go
check it out do a field trip.
It and I don't want to belabor
the point but if if I mean if if
it's there it's there I just
don't know why you need to have
it here if it's somewhere else.
And madam chair it's really hot
in this.
Is or member is.
The faces and six dash three
dash to.
Is to.
There's a section that defines
dealers.
Do it this way.
Madam chair well reserve ream
finds that for other relevant
statute I think they're a couple
of other issues to address here
and that's for licensed dealers
selling vehicles offsite
Does that mean they can't sell
anymore outside a cost school or
outside of the state fair
because it's not technically in
their premises madam chair
representative.
Madam chair and Mr speaker I'll
take you to page three of wind
one through.
Well all the way down through
twenty five that to offset
offsite sales and it does not
change that.
What about subsection two.
For section two subsection may.
Not sure if it's a drafting
issue what is the this doesn't
read very clearly so subsection
a.
On page three.
page two I'm sorry section to.
A licensed dealer shall not sell
a vehicle or offer a motor
vehicle for sale at a location
other than.
The place business.
Okay up madam chair and Mr
speaker I don't think you were
here when I describe curbstone
and so the second form of
curbstone has I am a licensed
dealer but I'm technically
selling out of my house and so
I'm using the street corner to
go ahead and so all my vehicles
and that's after that guy.
Okay.
Because your license dealers
selling your house.
But you're not impacting the
license dealers selling out of
state fair for Costco the the
the Costco one is over on page
three where they have offsite
sales and they going get a
permit for that correct be able
to do our we're not change
correct got it okay.
What about the license dealer
who violates the statute is
there a penalty for that.
Madam chair and Mr speaker what
was the question again what if
you're a licensed dealer who
violates so subsection a page to
section two if you're the guy
that is a licensed dealer
selling out of your house what
is a penalty for that person
madam chair and Mr speaker there
is a penalty I don't know
exactly what DMV but I know it
can result in a hearing
the could jeopardize your
license but I don't know what
their specific penalty is.
So there's a penalty for that
already.
But we need language to make
that practicing legal.
And has a new language here.
madam chair and Mr speaker there
is already a penalty and that's
by rules and DMV if I remember
correctly on how they regulate
dealers.
Got it okay.
And so is your language in
section two subsection may
nearing rules within the envy
that are already in place.
Madam speaker our madam chair
Mister speaker yes these are
already in other sections of
law.
For rural chia.
Okay I I I really wanna like I
really want to like the proposal
I'm having a hard time I I
thought I don't know if it's I
don't know if it's the way it's
structured I'm having a hard
time following it
and and not really understanding
why we need to put in life it's
already in rural I mean is there
a problem with the rule not
being implemented.
but needless to say I think
you're on the right track in
terms of what we're trying to
accomplish here which is
that at least from my vantage
point folks that are selling
vehicles.
In order to meet eight
professionally preying on people
who because our license there on
regulated.
And there's really no recourse
if you are sold.
You know a lemon when what do
you do right go back to that
street corner where you find the
guy.
verses if you buy it from the
license percent a licensed
dealer you know some sort of
storefront.
There's some records there but
all I won't belabor the point
thank you for bringing this
forward I think you're on the
right track I I don't know if if
this needs some re drafting or
or maybe a little bit more more
vetting but but I definitely
think you're on the right track
thank you madam chair.
Anyone else I guess my
perspective on this bill is I
think the number is too low as
my colleague Representative
Romero mentioned we have many
many people in the state who
have four or more vehicles.
And maybe shape or for whatever
reason to need to sell those
vehicles within one calendar
year and I really don't want to
sweep in that type of seller I
understand the other concern
about I don't know sort of a
sort of a road person has got
vehicles and they're selling on
from the curbside and so on but
I think it's a little too
expensive at this point
so with that I don't see.
So we I'm happy to entertain a
motion.
Or move the the pass.
This is actuals okay we have a
two passed motion made by
Representative Snyder and
seconded by Representative
Reeves
we call the roll please thank
you madam chair calling rules.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker speaker.
Thank you.
We go no.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night part yes.
Give me one second.
Mr Representative McQueen that
was a test for you.
For thank you Representative
nine point.
Representative read yes.
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representative Penske.
No.
Madam vice chair no.
Madam chair no.
Madam chair you have six.
Yess I knows.
Do have a due process
Representative you have a do
pass Representative and your
bank manager you're welcome.
Next up next on our agenda is
house you'll forty four federal
loan home loan banks
Representative Matthews.
Provision for.
Okay.
Good afternoon the floor is
yours Representative Matthews
thank you madam chair members of
the committee
I'm here today on behalf of the
federal home loan bank of which
is a bank that lands to
Other banks to credit unions to
insurers and does not I am told
make car loans.
And with me today Hey is Derrick
Etienne Mr ache in is the.
Assistant general counsel of the
federal home loan bank in Dallas
and I'm going to let him
described with this bill does.
Thank you madam chairman
Representative thank you for
your time today to entertainer
our kids a little background of
the federal home loan bank
system we were created in
nineteen thirty two as a
response to the Great Depression
to provide more liquidity to
community banks and local
communities to make home loans
so we don't directly make home
loans we we land to
to banks credit unions and
insurance companies to either
land
either make almost by home loans
or securities backed by home
loans
we were created by a federal
statute in the statute we have
certain provisions related to
the receivership of a bank or
credit union that allow us to
have us more certain access to
our collateral and it allows us
to land on more favorable terms
to to banks and credit unions
over the last ten years or so
various states have sought to to
mimic those protections for
insurance companies because
insurance companies are
creatures of state law rather
than federal law so that
insurance companies can benefit
in their liquidity from those
changes so this bill will
allow home loan bank collateral
to be access in in the event of
a receivership of an insurance
company without some of the
normal delays that may take
place related to preference laws
and fraudulent transfer laws
along with any sort of state
judicial state the bill also
as provisions that would
organize and bring order to sort
of the back and forth between
the receiver and home loan bank
home loan banks are often the
only into the that
It's around to provide liquidity
if an insurer is in that a
situation where insolvency may
maybe possible in our federal
statute provides for us to
coordinate with the local
insurance supervisor before we
make loans to somebody in that
situation which allows these
changes that will give us
several terms for accessing our
collateral to have some
protections around those and
with that I'll open it up for
any questions Madam chair I I'm
also joined by birth more local
lobbyist and
See if you'd like to add
anything to.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore.
registered lobbyists for the
federal home loan bank of Dallas
the only thing that I would add
is the neatness of this
provision as we come to the
state of New Mexico because
insurance is regulated on a
state level and we're nearing
the protections that are in the
federal regulatory regimes
twenty three other states that
have passed the the similar type
of protection thank you.
Madam chair of leaving now stand
for questions.
Thank you let's go to the
audience anyone wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill.
Let's go online we are on house
bill forty four anyone online
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill.
Please raise your hand.
All right no hands raised anyone
wishing to speak in favor of
house bill forty four.
There are you know a member of
the public representative.
Mr.
She was feeling lonely.
Chair members of the the
committee he John Anderson who
represents acres Association is
was unable to attend today
because he's attending is grand
child's birthday party and he
asked me to share with the
committee that he the bankers
association has no objection to
this bill great thank you
Representative anyone in the
audience
in favor of the bill.
Okay I don't see anyone raising
their hand anyone online wishing
to speak in favor of the bill
please raise your hands.
Okay I don't see anyone online
all right let's go to the
committee anyone having
questions.
Chair of rules all right give
opportunity for people.
Well I know I'm sure they'll
flock in on Monday if they only
had known of the first
representative of a phone and
then Representative Gleim.
Thank you madam chair it is a
guide to the bill I don't
understand the bill sorry I'm
not a banker okay.
And the federal government
pretty much much for regulates
federal home loan bank.
What is going to do the New
Mexico ahead so to make life
easier for you Mexico
that manager I'd like
restrictions answer that please.
Madam chair representative.
This will allow the home of
banks are a key source of
liquidity for insurance
companies in New Mexico it
allows those insurance companies
to have access to liquidity that
puts them in a stronger position
to to be able to pay
policyholders and so the these
changes allow our lending terms
of them to be more favorable.
So so madam chair
Would this make it if I am
applying for a home loan with
this to make it possible that my
interest rates could be lower
because we pass this
legislation.
Madam chair representative we
were not in the direct lending
business so we
we provide the liquidity to the
insurance company who may in
turn it use that liquidity to to
buy home loans or or mortgage
backed securities and so in turn
that helps with the liquidity of
the market
whether it leads to a lower rate
or not would be too speculative
for me for me to comment on.
Thank you madam chair still
confused.
Alright Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair of Madam
this is a pretty esoteric the
law would submit
I.
I don't know who New Mexico
precedence law it's probably a
very very niche.
Businesses to have their primary
do each other typically that's
how that goes so.
Madam chair so I understand the
context the the way I sort of
understand what this sets up the
scenario is basically you have
an insurer whose in receivership
and we're we're we have a
shortage of assets or early for
this we have more debt then you
have assets avail to satisfy
that debt is that of just a fair
general understanding of the
scenario.
Yes.
And madam chair.
And so in that context I it it
becomes really important who who
gets preferred claims who has
priority essentially to have
access those assets and so madam
chair is that really what we're
you know fighting about source
because who who gets to claim
status as a preferred Clemente.
Representative madam chair that
that this bill would not change
priority or preference of
various creditors the hope the
home will mix or are already in
a position where we're fully
secured creditors and so it's
it's not whether we'll have
access to that collateral it
it's more the timing of of how
long it would take up a home
will make to get to school out
of the the more certain and
short that timing is the more
favorable collateral terms were
able to find to insurers and
also the more certainty that
will be there as a source of
liquidity when the insurance
company is is may be nearing
insolvency but not yet at that
point.
And madam madam chair so I look
at section for the bill.
So the way I understand this
David this is existing law that
is basically if you have a
transfer of assets within one
year of of when we go through
this procedure receivership
process we're gonna attached to
that and some shin that it was a
fraudulent transfer that's
existing how existing law works
is that correct the the
preference yes.
And so madam chair I think one
of the things that this.
Bill does differently is.
If there is an actual intent.
To hinder delay or to fraud.
On behalf of the.
Go over what the federal home
bank is what's what's the for
the federal home loan bank so if
if there's an actual intent to
hinder delay or to fraud on the
part of the federal home loan
bank then that still considered
a fraudulent charge under the
change is that correct.
Madam chair representative
that's correct okay and so what
this bill would change managers
I understand it is we're just
taking out the the language
that.
currently exists of without fair
consideration.
So Madam chair representative.
We would probably not
characterize it in that way just
because the nature of what home
makes do we lend money to take
collateral so so there there is
an existing piece in the statute
Representative related to that
to that to consideration
it it's not really applicables
for our normal course of
business
that would be more and purchase
sell situations
The.
Okay I don't know if you're
finishing off have the answer
okay M. and madam chair so does
this create any kind of
preferential of.
Treatment for the federal home
loan bank that
I would change that preferential
treatment from any other
creditors.
So the home on breaks would it
would be gaining parity with
with how this works for
receivership the banks and
credit unions and so we wouldn't
move up in line
but we would have more certainty
as to the timing of which we
access our collateral so so the
issues it is more not that we
are are getting moved up in
preference from
the assets but instead just the
timing the will have to access
our assets which then allows us
again that to to be able to land
on more favorable terms and also
land into situations with an
insurer who might be up on the
edge of its offices okay and
madam chair I think this but I
think this might help the
committee can you just explain I
think you do a little bit at the
end but it made for a little
more meat on on it so to speak
in terms of.
Why is the current timing a
problem and how how would this
help New Mexico Madam chair
representative.
We at the home loan bank of
Dallas part of our chartering
statute requires us to be fully
secured at all times our our
regulator has interpreted fully
secured to include enough
collateral to cover fluctuations
in the market and so the longer
that the the home loan banks
have to account for to access
that collateral the higher our
hair cuts or on collateral so so
it would mean that our members
New Mexico insurance companies
would have to provide us more
collateral to get the same
amount of money.
Thank you thank you madam chair
the those are the questions I
think that that sort of for me.
Explain sort of why the timing
is an issue and and how this
might help some of our our New
Mexico lenders so thank you
madam chair.
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair I'm just curious so
what is so under current law
here you can enjoy and.
Some sort of.
basically stop you from having
to collect collateral from
certain clients that are paying
or aren't meeting the demands of
their
Their current
Contracts with you so now they
can you can you can they can
enjoy and you coming after them
is that correct madam chair and
this prevents them from just so
I can be clear that that's Matt
Matt manager Mister this this is
only in the context of the
insurance company who has been
placed into receivership
and then in in so the the the
court could under current law in
join the the home loan bank
from from accessing its
collateral to pay itself back on
its debts that are already
secured and said which would
delay the time frame that that
that we're able to access our
collateral and and that's
inconsistent with how it works
for banks and credit unions
under the federal so so we're
trying to synchronize the timing
so that we can treat all of our
membership sort of equally Madam
chair representative you could
just talk about some of your
membership is that commercial
banks credit unions in the our
state and insurance companies
here that and can you just talk
a little bit about because what
what how New York engages with
our communities just so I'm
clear sure yes chair vice chair.
We the home on bank
had it has membership in a five
state region that includes New
Mexico New Mexico credit unions
New Mexico community banks
New Mexico insurance companies
as well as CDF ice and so that
we also provide for housing
grants throughout a five state
region and including
New Mexico part of our
chartering statute
allows us requires us to to we
we give ten percent of our
profits every year towards for
housing projects which which
many are located in in New
Mexico thank you madam chair
thank you Representative does
the super intendant of insurance
have any.
Up by an idea of how this
affects them and how that
affects insurers across the
state wants these claims can you
know go through this process
rather than.
the current process Madam chair
madam buster we we did speak
with the superintendent is to
provocative madam chair
Representative Romero we spoke
to a superintendent till in the
fall about this proposal they
said they had no objection to it
but that it was a policy choice
for the legislature
superintendent told us since
retired spoken to interim
superintendent Jennifer catches
she is continuing with that
position we have heard nothing
from her that that position is
changed all right thank you.
Thank you I don't have anyone
else on my list on happy to
entertain a motion.
Madam chair move the do passed
house bill forty four.
Is
that we have a motion to do pass
Representative of line for a
second by Representative lane.
Would you call the roll please.
Thank you madam chair proceeding
with the vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative green yes.
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair you have eleven
votes yes we do pass on house
bill forty four.
Do not you're welcome thank you.
All right.
We are now on house bill one oh
five.
Freight locomotive person
requirements Representative
Alcon.
For the.
Yes.
That.
Yes and no because I called the
reserves that could.
Thanks.
Representative the for is here
yours we are on house bill one
of five thank you madam chair
members of the committee it
really happy to be here on a
Saturday with this in this bill.
Our letter to members of the
committee this bill is relating
to real road safety the request
it is asking the requiring that
at least two people
be involved in the operation of
the railroad train or locomotive
that is used to the movement of
freight and the prescribes
penalties.
madam chair to my left and to my
right I have the two expert
witnesses that are going to
answer any questions you might
have affected.
So I will the Clinton to do
himself first.
Madam chair representative Al
Capone hi my name is Clint
Harris I represent the
brotherhood of locomotive
engineers and trainmen as a
state legislative chairman for
the New Mexico state legislative
board.
To my right of that not
introduce himself Madam chair
representative of Cologne I'm
Donald angles and the state
legislative Representative
person their rail transportation
transportation division I also
the safety inspector on this
national safety team for the
NTSB.
Thank you now let's go to the
audience I I will say that I've
spoken with you Pacific and
Burlington northern I asked for
some time to speak and I have
spoken to the Sanchez about this
so to that end I will first call
on Representative tell Espinoza.
Thank you if.
If you'd like to use the Mike is
Espinoza that's fine and we have
a yeah handling the.
I've had full.
All of this with it.
Because in fact that there are.
Madam chair members of this
committee the.
You have to full the.
Just about now.
Okay madam chair members of this
committee my name is Raquel
Espinoza and I am the public
affairs director for union
Pacific in New Mexico and the
state of Texas we operate six
hundred miles of track and
employ four hundred people here
in New Mexico and our goal is to
ensure that every person on our
team goes home safely every
single day.
It's important to note that
testimony at a previous hearing
talked about accidents that did
not involve.
Two people in the locomotive.
I've served the railroad over
fifteen years and can assure you
that every time or any time that
someone from our team
Has an accident it's a matter
that we take seriously.
And.
It's important to note that our
regulator the federal railroad
administration has publicly
stated that data does not
support the need for creating
staffing.
Regulation.
So trains are operating with two
people in the locomotive right
now and they will continue to do
so until railroads and our labor
partners.
Determined otherwise through the
collective bargaining process.
Passing house bill one oh I
would have unintended
consequences when the
collaborative spirit of the
railroads and labor determines
that technology advances.
Have allowed for a conductor to
evolve his or her role to an on
the ground position.
It would put New Mexico
businesses at a competitive
disadvantage with states that do
not have this regulation of
having two people in the
locomotive forcing every train
to stop with the state borders
to wait for somebody
At the state's borders this will
hurt.
Companies in the Senate that
just industrial complex I urge
this committee to pause and
consider all of the facts and to
actually visit Dona ana county
and see the economic engine and
the job creation that we have
helped build their.
So this bill's passage will put.
Progress and supply chains at
risk and it's not something that
we should take lightly and I
urge you to take a little bit
more thought that by coming and
looking at what the unintended
consequences would be thank you.
Thank you Mr Spinoza could we
hear now from Connie rose very.
Third person and she online okay
so could we on mute Connie rose
very could you please on mute
yourself.
Good afternoon madam chair
person can you hear me yes I can
then as brief as possible
please.
Yes ma'am my name is Connie rose
very I'm currently the assistant
vice president of safety and the
chief safety officer at union
Pacific.
In the rail industry criticized
has largely been addressed
pursuant to the requirements of
the railway labor act and the
collective bargaining process
safety improvements have been a
primary catalyst in those
negotiations state legislation
that attempts to alter terms of
these collective bargaining
agreements threatens the
integrity of labor agreements
and compromises future
cooperation and negotiations on
this issue for many many decades
railroads and their labor
partners have negotiated and
maintain collective bargaining
agreements regarding appropriate
and safe creating sites this
issue has a proven track record
of successful resolution through
local collective bargaining
agreements which also addressed
limitations on the amount and
type of work performed
compensation and work rules
ensuring creating safety DVDs
criticizing remains have been
and should continue to be
negotiated by representatives of
both real management and the
appropriate labor unions who
know and understand the details
of railroad operations and the
various safety aspects
requirements and ramifications a
New Mexico state law mandating
crew size will interfere with
the ability of railroads and
unions to fully bargain the best
and safest crew size for each
particular assignment it would
hinder investment and
implementation of technology
driven safety improvements
moreover if crew size is
determined to be an issue for
regulatory action is most
appropriately addressed at the
federal level currently the FRA
the federal railroad
administration has the proposed
train crew size real pending
that would establish minimum
requirements for certain trains
and certain trade groups it was
first introduced in twenty
sixteen and later withdrawn in
part because FRA's data
concluded there was no safety
justification for many of its
proposals and requirements after
the withdrawal.
All the industry and the F. R.
A. could not come to a consensus
on an appropriate scope for
rural and the rules recently
reintroduced and shows a date
for final release in the spring
of twenty twenty four.
My colleague Jason Kander will
testify soon regarding
technology operating practices
and other industry leading
improvements union Pacific is
considering implementing to
continue to be relevant in an
ever evolving competitive
economy trucks on public
roadways full many of the same
commodities as railroads yet the
trucking industry is not
required to have two person
crews and most people would
consider it ludicrous to mandate
two drivers for over the road
trucks when in fact the opposite
is occurring as technology
advances driverless trucks are
being tested on public roads in
some the rail industry has a
long history of investing
capital in implementing
technology operating practices
equipment and infrastructure
improvements to enhance safety
and productivity the industry
needs the ability to remain
flexible to incorporate the most
current safety strategies and
technological advancements into
its operations Madam chairwoman
I thank you and I'm happy to
answer questions at the
conclusion of the testimony.
Thank you we won't be having
professionals prefer people in
the audience to so you know so
we can hear from Jason Pender
and Jason if you could keep it
brief I'd really appreciate it
thank you.
I will thank you madam chair
members of the committee check
and you can hear me please.
In your.
Great I work CENIC railroad is
the director
that have eighteen years of
experience and I'm a former
license can drive remote control
operator my current capacity in
leading cross functional teams
but who has spent the last three
years carefully building our
pilot program for the
redeployment of conductor safety
is our top priority but his time
is limited I want to share a few
things the work of a conductor
confirming signals monarch speed
compliance and observing trains
is come completed today by
federally mandated positive
train control operated by the
locomotive engineer the engineer
doesn't respond PDC will stop
the train work there remains is
remaining on planned stops in
planned events were cars and
locomotives are being picked up
or set out our pilot program
includes both an engineer and
conductor in the cab with a
ground based conductor and a
truck road access is challenging
we're also pilot the usage of
mounted high reels other ways to
access to training during this
time will test measure new value
we ground based conductors
ability to complete planned and
unplanned work meeting customer
expectations we also measure the
change in the quality of life
for large population over
workforce as today's conductors
subject to call stay in hotels
have a predictable days off
round these conductors during
this pilot what regular shift
regular days off the ability to
build a ship that works best for
their personal lives an
agreement will not infringe
American moratorium exists
includes job protection no
current conductor positions will
be at risk this collaborative
effort with our labor
organizations is creating
innovation now's not the time
for the state of New Mexico to
interrupt the real industry
collaborative and innovative
efforts with representation of
the conductor craft is conceived
by the railway labor act thank
you.
Thank you and lastly for
Burlington northern we have JD
Bullington.
Mr chairman.
Thanks.
Why there are the act.
Check check one two thank you
madam chairman JD Bullington
representing union Pacific not
burly and just one just one I
just want to clarify that.
madam chair members of the
committee and JD Bullington
register lobbyists for union
Pacific railroad thank you for
the opportunity to speak and all
I'll be brief
so the operative word here
safety let's talk about safety
real quickly just talk about
facts there's never been an
accident in New Mexico.
On a train has been caused by
less than two members in the
locomotive two crewmembers
that's because there's always
been at least two crew members
and locomotive that's the policy
now and that's the policy going
forward until labor agrees to a
change at the collective
bargaining table and that's got
that policy is set in stone
through the crew consist.
Arbitrated agreement between
labor and railroads.
And it is final and it is
binding and it has no expiration
date.
You Pacific cannot change the
group policy unless labor sits
down and agrees to change it to
and that is a fact.
positive train control was just
mentioned that's a fancy phrase
for anti collision computer
software system.
The way it works is that the
person who is.
Controlling the locomotive they
must interact with the computer
screen.
On a on on a regular basis and
if they don't respond the train
stops by positive train control
train doesn't go anywhere it
stops because there's no
response at the helm of the oil
if this is such a safety issue I
think you should ask yourselves
why is this bill only applying
to class one class two
railroads.
Why doesn't it apply to
passenger trains.
Hopefully we'll get that we'll
get that answer so if you take
safety out of the question
knowing that there's no way to
change the crew staffing without
labor agreeing to it then what
is this bill about what kind of
precedent does it set going
forward.
Well I think you have to take
the bill of face value it's
simply a bill to mandate in
statute that there are two crew
members in the locomotive and
going forward as technology
increases and as negotiations
continue that policy may need to
change it might look something
different but you're going to
have this binding statute in
place that we can get around for
two people in the in the in the
locomotive so this is a very
very happy situation here you
Pacific has a very complex
operation and senator just a I
hope you all get to see it it is
logistically complex and it is
transforming the economy of
Southern New Mexico and as we
move in the state for to
diversify our economy what's
happening on the border what's
happening and senator risa
what's happening because of
union Pacific is a key driving
force to diversify this economy
so we would urge you to vote no
against this legislation it is
completely unnecessary there's
no safety issue here because the
crew staffing policy can't
change into labor agrees to
changes thank you.
Thank you thank you I have of.
Mr Burke Moran also.
Mr Marino.
The state Mister Marino.
Shortly short.
The keys consulates in your
online is Mr Moreno.
You need you yourself yes.
You madam chair members of the
committee.
My name is Sheila went from what
I know director of land
development sales within our
resources which is a shoreline.
Railroad operator Senator SNU
Mexico.
My job is to develop our
industrial park rail service
base track the new companies
into the region that will
generate you rail business and a
steady jobs regarding B. O. H.
B. dash one of five three
locomotive personal requirements
we are the bulls if this bill
passes it will have consequences
in arbitration center present we
potential decreasing service
levels from union Pacific or
something that is a gateway rail
park.
No expected outcome of these
legislation passing these bills
will be increased freight costs
resulting compassion of rail
freight the track for a.
Rail freight is more
environmentally efficient than
tracks according to the
association of American
railroads things are up to four
times more fuel efficient than
tracks not only did they consume
less fuel they also reduce the
strain of traffic on roadways
and air pollution we ran the
short line operations and that
that is in New Mexico.
We have three locomotives and
Side in around forty miles of.
We operate the jar switching
operation serving around base
the stores.
Recently I to our resources
acquired thirteen hundred acres.
And we have been developing and
attracting new companies into
the region last year twenty
twenty two we had a great year
with track two new companies
that will be developing their
facility these here and will
generate around a hundred new
jobs for these regions I should
also imply that we have an
excellent service from union
Pacific.
At in a rebel Sir park I based
per week we can't afford to get
a reduction of the service from
very poor rail Sir park.
We have a very active marketing
plan for the region and our
pipeline does have companies
like plastic injection molding
fuels construction materials
between orders our existing
customer base includes companies
engaging more recycle sheet rock
we weights rail materials
cardboard steel Exeter our goal
is to provide customers with an
efficient and safe rail service
please help us to keep the level
of service that we have we union
Pacific the C. Seki factor for
success in these regions and
companies establish here value
the service.
We will appreciate if you allow
us to continue with our success
story in this region madam chair
members of the committee thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr Marino we have Mr
Czecho from the New Mexico
border industrial association if
you could focus on the bill that
we have before us which is
whether or not we should enact a
law that relate that requires a
two person rule I'd really
appreciate it so we we have
limited time and if we could
focus on the bill that we have
on hand that would be very
helpful Mr Czecho.
Madam chair members of the
committee can you hear me.
Yes.
Jerry Pacheco president of the
board national association we
represent the sentries
industrial base five one C. six
we stand in opposition to this
bill you Pacific as of
reinvested a tremendous amount
of money about five hundred
million and it's an anchor
tenant for us and we built an
industry around union Pacific of
companies that that receive
rural rail commerce and we all
know what happened during the
pandemic and we're still
experiencing logistics
disruptions and delays and this
could be this bill could
potentially impede upon our
ability to recruit companies if
they see the train has to stop
once it comes into New Mexico
and a driver as opposed to not
that not happening hours on in
Texas we try to make our
industrial base very competitive
and I don't think in my
membership will pull my
membership does not agree with
this bill so we stand in
opposition madam chair.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr Czecho
and and now we have
representatives from Burlington
northern I got that right.
And thank thank you.
The thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee instead of making
comments like I get to talk to
you at the wrong house we have
Representative should be as self
online rather speak to and if
you don't mind if there's
anything I feel I really need to
close without being repetitive
the individuals we have online
are Tammy Middleton.
Sam Brownback is proposing to
say this but it's Sam MASINT
o'neill.
And that Lindsey Mullins I don't
have anything to follow up with
but just in case I wanted them
to be able to speak because I
think it's important to hear
from company representatives
thank you your you're welcome so
let's hear from Tammy and if you
could keep your comments
relatively brief.
Thank you very much and care yes
I can.
Right thank you madam chair and
members of the committee good
afternoon my name is Tamera
Middleton I'm the vice president
and general counsel for BNSF
railway thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you
to discuss the proposed
legislation on freight rail
criticized I just want to make a
one very quick point other than
the ones that I've already been
made which is that the federal
rail administration has
exclusive authority to issue
creating size regulations
therefore preempting any state
action on this issue.
Federal road safety statutes
like the former federal rail
safety act of nineteen seventy
which is now codified at forty
nine USD two oh one oh six
mandate laws regulations and
orders related to railroad
safety be nationally uniform and
preempt state law for the
federal railroad administration
prescribes a regulation or
issues in order covering the
subject matter of the state
requirement.
There is little doubt that the
current F. R. A. proposed
rulemaking on creating size is
intended to cover the subject
matter of the state's
requirement that BNSF disagrees
with the operates current
version the rule does not change
the fact that the operator has
clearly indicated its desire and
intent to occupy the field with
regard to creating contest rules
thus preempting any attempts by
states to regulate in this area
the reason for preemption is
straightforward and critical
individual state crew size
mandates cost inconsistency
across the national rail network
and pose a risk to safety when
states implemented different
sets of regulations.
Creating mandates like the one
proposed here harm the rail
industry's ability to compete in
a rapidly changing freight
transportation secretary and
undermine our nation's efforts
to address climate change this
proposed statute would
effectively freeze the
modernization of operations and
US railroad cab for the duration
such a freeze on railroad in a
patient would hamstring
railroads making it especially
hard for railroads to invest in
new safety enhancing
technologies adapt to changing
customer needs and compete with
commercial trucking which is
rapidly automating operations to
reduce costs and receiving
significant support from policy
makers in doing so the resulting
competitive distortion in the
freight transportation secretary
will divert traffic from rail to
trucks which are less fuel
efficient creating additional
highway congestion and further
damage New Mexico highway system
I urge the chair and the
committee and members of the
committee to vote now thank you.
Thank you
I think Sam is next.
That right.
Okay yes
our comments are getting kinda
long so if we could try to keep
shorten them up a bit that would
be very helpful thank you.
And on the.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for giving.
The opportunity to address you
guys today my name's sensibility
of assistant vice president of
labor relations for BNSF railway
I responsible for administration
of negotiation of labor
contracts concerning train crews
among other things I've been
involved in and or let these
negotiations for over twenty
five years in fact I testified
extensively in front of a reason
for presidential emergency board
of twenty twenty two which
include our most recent national
round of bargaining the members
of that PED which were appointed
by president Biden chose to
allow crew size negotiations to
continue along its natural
course that's to local
negotiations and that's where we
are today I never asked the
Legislature to leave this part
of bargaining and between the
parties under the railway labor
act Representative has been for
over a hundred years.
sizes been bargained by the
parties for decades you are now
asking the legislature to step
in and grant them something they
must achieve at the bargaining
table the railway labor act
which was enacted into federal
law nineteen twenty six mandates
are parties bargains and what
subjects should be considered
bargained marketable the federal
courts to review the decision as
recently as twenty twenty one
and determine that federal law
did not preclude the parties
from bargaining over precise
issue creating size being
subject to bargaining then was
reviewed by a neutral arbitrator
on our collective bargaining
agreements and note that
arbitrator ruled the crew size
must be bargained locally
between the part of the carrier
and the unions that is again
where we are today.
Since nineteen seventy two we've
been talking about creating size
of the bargaining table in
nineteen eighty five we were
receiver in a landmark decision
would reduce correct for train
crews from five to four we
remain for and told nineteen
eighty nine and then again in
nineteen ninety two we read
reduced again and finally in
nineteen ninety three we reduced
the crew side.
Just to to employees and capital
of the motive that is where we
are today as stated before
railway labor act mandates that
are greens do not expire they
continue into perpetuity that is
the case with two person crews.
In two thousand and seven we
reach an agreement with our
engineers granting them extra
pay which will one day come when
they are the alone in the
locomotive in twenty fourteen we
reached another agreement with
smart TV to operate one person
crews but unfortunately that was
not ratified by the membership
so again we are back at the
table since the twenty twenty
bargaining over one person crews
we like you P. C. to redeploy
these individuals from the cab
of the locomotive to the ground
so that they can more
efficiently serve our customers
and continue the high level of
safety that we are accustomed to
this will also give those who
are impacted a better quality of
life.
To legislate something that has
been bargained over decades
disrupts the purpose of they are
away which again has governed
since nineteen twenties.
Six.
We've done this we took when
technology went from steam to
diesel and we remove the fire
and we did it once which meant
were taken out of the caboose
and we've added electronic end
of train devices we reach fair
and equitable deals that have
been in place for over thirty
years and rewarding our
employees these deals involved
compensation and work rule
changes that continue to this
day and benefit our employees to
the state to insert state
mandates regarding manpower into
the bargaining process will
stand in the way of the
railroads being able to
efficiently move goods by
stacking the deck against
railroads and negotiations.
R. as a bargain over crew size
for the past forty years and
should continue to be a subject
of bargaining in the future
states should not pursue the
standards course of action as it
will surely believe and other
businesses grant an issues
essentially replacing the
collective bargaining process
with the legislative one thank
you for your time consideration
of this bill.
Is.
Mr Mr Lindsay Lohan's listed you
can minutes please refer a lot
from the industry so please.
Yes ma'am may madam.
Thank you madam chair.
Can you hear me madam chair.
Yes I can.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and members of the committee
vice chair of Romero my name is
Lindsay Mullins are present BNSF
railway and of course rise in
opposition to house bill one of
five we've heard a lot of good
policy arguments I won't repeat
them the facts around safety are
indisputable the law around
preemption in collective
bargaining indisputable and
tested I want to note two things
that haven't been said number
one a federal court has ruled
that a bill such as this one is
preempted most recently two
months ago the governor of New
York vetoed a bill just like
this on preemption grounds I
respectfully urge you to please
listen to these facts and let
these facts in the clear legal
principles be your guide as you
make your decision the economic
health of our companies and our
employees depends on it thank
you very much for your time
once thank you very much miss
Mullins.
Anyone else wishing to speak in
opposition at.
Anyone anyone online anyone else
online wishing to speak in
opposition raise your hand
please.
Okay
those wishing to speak in favor
in the audience please raise
your hand.
All right so we'll start over
here gentleman will go across
and back thank you.
Please give us your name and
good afternoon madam chair
committee members my name is
order those Griego.
Representative with
international brotherhood like
to workers local users level.
We are in support of the
legislation and Keefer is simple
this by clarifying.
The requirement through the
legislative process.
Is the only way that the that
the rail workers are gonna be
able to do this you heard the
opposition they said they've
been negotiated this forty years
they can get it done.
So through this process to
clarify that and we add another
layer of protection for rel up
really worker that's going to be
able to come home to their
family and I safe and sound and
then finally.
Opposition talks about
disruptions.
In of goods that's what's more
important of a life of a real
worker or a minor disruption of
goods being transported across
this country thank you very much
thank you anyone over here again
yes Sir.
Madam chair representative so
you don't heard enough about
what's all the all the Martin
I've been working I've been the
with BNSF for twenty six years.
You've heard a lot of stuff come
on through here let me just give
you a few a positive train
control was brought up about how
safe it is will stop the train
positive train controls not one
hundred percent effective we
have multiple issues with
positive train control not be in
not working.
In this will be a quote from the
general manager with BNSF safety
is not number one profits are.
They came from the general
manager.
Another thing was it was brought
up that a semi only has one
driver it's all in one trailer
we're holding for five hundred
one person crew is not going to
delay for the goods getting
across America because they
can't get it across as it is.
Thank you.
Thank you on now moving to my
left in the front row here I saw
some hands.
Senator all members of.
This committee my name is
Gilbert until push the button
there's a little that's what you
have to hold it in the unit my
name is governmental
I'm first by under clam
Today I trust that you guys are
all here for your constituents.
The public and the safety of all
New Mexicans.
I stand before you behalf of
many constituents folks Cibola
County the county Bernalillo and
curry counties who support this
bill.
They did mention shipment of
goods want to tell you a
transcontinental for person.
Shoreline was also mentioned and
that's because we don't return
Representative shorelines.
PTC has been mandated by the FRA
for CP overlaid and safety over
the only.
they may have been trying to say
that
The technology might be.
Able to take a take over our
jobs but it's not there yet as
of yet it's not there.
I think everybody's been.
Putting up the on scene other
topic that the president would
be able to share.
Holly that there.
Thank you yes John.
The.
Madam chair madam vice chair
members of the committee my name
is Charlie Jeffcoat I am the
legislative representative for
B. Ellie T. eleven in Clovis New
Mexico I've been an engineer for
twenty six years and
Representative over a hundred
seventy members that actually
drive locomotives in curry
county Roosevelt Chavis Eddie
Depok Guadalupe Lincoln Torrance
and Valencia counties I believe
it is imperative that this bill.
Is passed for the safety of Cruz
safety of the public in your
counties thank you.
Thank you yes yes Sir.
Hello.
My name is Jimmy Valentine on
the president the brotherhood of
locomotive engineers and
trainmen Division five ninety
two to our I'm gonna be honest
with you I'm a little confused I
got the call last night I
understood we were working on a
bill for safety I just got out
all these collective bargaining
agreements for years.
I for the agreement we just got
through the railway labor act
that's federal that's nothing to
do with this so I'm a little
confused why I'm here now I
thought I was here for safety.
That is what we're talking about
I'm gonna Mexico residents hired
two can carry as a last class
are there for you Pacific
clothes are terminal we went to
del hard also a little upset you
Pacific's productively about us
and we run a hundred fifty miles
in New Mexico but they've talked
about Santa Theresa.
The.
I realize the real road it's
come a long way in the twenty
five years I've been with them
we now have the big change
positive train control positive
train control is an awesome tool
is a great safety device but it
is just a tool it's just like
this gentleman's computer when
he got up here earlier he had a
hard time use and it had a hard
time finding that bill that's
the same thing happened to us we
have three computer screens were
looking at Senator buttons we've
got several levers we've got to
work we're trying to control two
other sets locomotives lot of
times were three miles long plus
our focus is on that it's not
focused on the track right in
front of us we need that other
conductors said eyes up there
the Talisay look up stock pay
there's a car in the process
there's a school bus we need
their help that PTC does not
positive train control once
again does not replace that
conductor in any way shape or
form.
If we have a medical emergency I
run through rural New Mexico
there's a lot of places they can
not get EMS to us I've actually
perform CPR on a conductor sadly
you did not make but had I not
been there there would be nobody
they talk about the alert PTC
stopping us that is correct the
PTC is working correctly and the
lower system is working
correctly it will stop us when
it determines when it goes off
there's a lot that can happen in
this bill between that time it
will not stop us if there's
something on the track ahead of
us if there's a car for a
person.
We also have incidents where we
go into emergency we have to
have our conductors go back to
cure break so they won't roll
away hazardous material we haul
everything you can think of
through the state.
When that happens we're supposed
to sit there we can't go because
we're trying to secure our
locomotives so who's supposed to
secure the detached portion of
our trying the conductor that's
coming in to pick up let's hope
you don't have a flat tire the
topas truck don't break down
let's hope we haven't had one of
our great New Mexico blizzards
in the interstates closed and he
can't get to us.
There's lots of safety issues to
go over and lots to look at I
guess I'm just economic this was
saying for my safety your safety
please don't leave me sitting up
there alone and helpless.
Thank you is there anyone else
on the left here John.
It shifts.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee John Lipschutz
with The New Mexico federation
of labor AFL-CIO.
we represent thirty four
thousand union members across
the state I also like to think
that we fight for workers
whether they're you or not
deal I'm sure you all are kind
of confused up there about this
whole issue as much as I am in
order we're debating about
something that's already in
place and we're debating whether
or not it should remain in place
my opinion I think our members
opinion we've never viewed any
safety issue at the collective
collective bargaining issue that
is never an issue that should be
ever bargained for
we have a whole lot of folks
from the industry telling us
that they know what's best for
safety and then we have a whole
lot of workers for on the ground
to are telling us what they
think is best for safety I think
this battles probably been taken
place over hundreds of years
but I sincerely hope that if
there was ever a time you would
take the workers were for what
is needed to keep themselves in
our community safe this would be
that time thank you very much.
Thank you anyone else wishing to
speak in favor okay yes miss.
Hey my name's the million brown
I'm a member of the sheet metal
air rail transportation and the
transportation department I'm a
conductor to switchman hearable
in New Mexico and you can't
negotiate safety and it seems
like the issue with all this is
destructions and stopping Cruz
when our neighboring states have
made laws in Arizona and in
Colorado for two person crews.
M. that's I support this bill
thank you
yes Sir.
Good afternoon to all you
honorable Representative richer
are appreciative you guys spend
your Saturday here I am the
local chairman of division four
four six I represent a hundred
twenty five of your constituents
that run from the New Mexico to
Winslow Arizona.
Three hundred miles.
Through that territory we have
witnessed several things that
only required to then to get the
job done I have no over three
instances in twenty two years
that if it hadn't been for the
other man in that case we've
emergency services the to these
men that I still know today
wouldn't be alive they be dead
because nobody would have been
there to save their life and
call for emergency services
access to all the Indian
reservations that we run through
it is minimal we all know that.
The fact is is that two men to
make a great difference of me
going home to my family and
friends and families of you so
I'd like to be in stand in
support of this bill thank you
your name is Jacob Williams.
Just put part of that.
Good.
Anyone else wishing to speak
favor of the bill the audience
okay let's go online.
I'm sorry yes.
Yes Sir.
That thank hello my name is
Michael how do you thank you
press chair and the committee
I've been with the BNSF twenty
nine years a locomotive engineer
I've lived all over the state
working with the real world I
did notice that one comment was
made about one person in the
truck whose last time you saw
Abrams tank being down the high
for your I. twenty five.
We haul hundred at a time you
know that's a national security
safety and I would hope that you
support this bill for the safety
of the communities that we run
through and that you guys
Representative this is has
nothing to the collective
bargaining agreement this is all
about safety thank you when I'm
support this bill thank you
anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in favor.
Okay I don't see anyone let's go
to the online I see three hands
raised there's an indicated that
says zoom user so I'm not sure
who that is but you may know who
you are thank you and if you do
which you know for yourself.
Okay zoom user you yourself
please.
Hello my name is our tourism
Lopez on the president of
existentialism Council and also
a former F. R. inspector and
I've used to provide both the
railroad and Representative were
deploys and I can say that this
bill should be.
Enacted it should be acted upon
we all know in this state that
are general fund come from oil.
How would you like if on oil
train between Amarillo Texas and
Gallup ordered the rail with no
crew on board not even one
member maybe to have to on board
because you do not want oil a
key training spilled all over
New Mexico.
And I'm going to organize member
of labor and the relative this I
mentioned late because they know
New Mexico is for labor.
What the message was for labor
and that the bill support your
constituency supports safety
support the state budget.
Don't sell out of state to
lobbyists who don't even live
here only one does and he's
sitting there with cap we had a
forty.
Pass the bill because I've seen
accidents I've investigated
accidents thank you so much okay
so let's not refer to other
people in the audience that I
think that's not appropriate so
please observe appropriate
decorum
Let's see Josh Baker.
Joan Baker.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's John
Baker I'm with United
association local four twelve
that's a plumber and pipefitters
union we stand in solidarity
with our brothers and sisters of
the locomotives and
transportation industries
Not too long ago as the country
almost came to a screeching halt
and the economy was almost
drastically impacted because of
the importance of the of this
labor force and when this labor
force comes forward and says
we're not safe we need this we
need this in statute
I believe them and I stand with
them at the second point I'd
like to make is I've heard in
other committees and and madam
chair
that a locomotive would have to
stop at Texas with one person in
it and get to people in it in
New Mexico
and then again I heard wealth
there's always to people all
across the country so I'm a
little confused on on policy and
and rule between those the
contradictory of those
statements and I think New
Mexico leads the way in many
things and New Mexico supports
its workers so I ask you to
support house bill one of five
thank you thank you
Mark strand.
Yes thank you madam chair my
name is mark strand I'm
secretary treasurer of the state
of New Mexico AFL-CIO we stand
in strong support of this
legislation to ensure the safety
are brother and sister
railroaders thank you very much.
Thank you
Nate dean.
That being thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
I was the as a person with a
disability I use the rail runner
and a couple of months ago I was
on the rail runner and there was
a very.
A significant jolt and.
And that's like Representative
so that was echo the rail runner
stopped and they were able to
make a repair on site so for
safety issues madam chair
members of the committee I think
that's a reflection on we never
know what will happen and we
would rather that it not be
family and individual a vehicle
or a pedestrian thank you madam
chair members of the committee.
Thank you I don't see any other
hands on the computer so let's
go back to the sponsor is there
anything you'd like to add
Representative of all come
before we go to the committee
madam chair most I I am thinking
that the they would probably be
better that we go to the
committee because I know they
have the answers to just about
everything the opposition I had
and I think the committee will
have the questions that will
bring up the answers very good
Representative I look to the
committee for questions or
comments.
Representative reap.
The Madam chair representative
I'm from curry county I'm in a
railroad district and job as a
rose that obviously and I I
agree with what all these people
are saying about safety I think
safety should be first I've
heard from so many of my
constituents on this prior to it
getting to my first committee
and then after that before this
and I appreciate it because I
didn't understand you know the
issues are happening so you will
have my full support of this
bill and I just want to thank
you for bringing this forward.
thank you representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair of Representative.
Let's assume this is all about
safety and so let me look at
page twelve.
Winds eleven through twenty one
we have four different types of
I guess.
Situations are those those that
those those four categories
consume.
All the categories of rail but
we would be dealing with in the
state of New Mexico.
When is.
Two one.
Madam chair and representative
Nibert we have class one
railroads we have no plans to
railroads helper locomotives
there are some situations in the
state with that will choose
because we are mountainous state
of going up Gloria that they
used to use a lot of helpers
sometimes we get a situation
because locals are maintained
the way they should be I want to
show him up and over Gonzalez
doesn't happen very often but
the helper used to be used quite
a bit of hostelling hustling is
done in the yards of in our X.
hostels power around the
Albuquerque's the moving
locomotives from one point to
another to assemble a train the
art and blend does it I think
Amtrak does it in Albuquerque
also all the yards Gallup in
Clovis also it just means.
Each year gets on there and move
the locomotive on to a whole
training that's what hostelling
is
Anything else.
Okay.
That your question Sir ma'am.
Madam chair and
Representative no it didn't
answer my question I didn't know
if that was a yes or no.
Yes.
Madam chair of Representative
Nibert the only one that doesn't
apply to New Mexico at this time
is a quest to railroad.
Then I noticed madam chair and
representative number he said at
this time.
Okay so so we can knock out.
Class two.
The other three classes
Representative all of the
situations in New Mexico where
there's a locomotive on the
rail.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that is correct.
Okay madam chair and and
Representative
So if this is all about safety
then somebody brought up the
road runner there too
My my gift that terminology
conductor Representative
locomotive engineer on those
trains.
Thank you madam Madam chair
representative Nibert this bill
does not include anything that
affects passenger service and to
your earlier question
class one class two railroads of
federal definition codified in
the federal law that defines how
much tonnage and how much money
that they make over the course
of the year.
Madam chair.
I.
I preface my remarks was saying
I I agree this is all about
safety.
And then we hear that this is
the whole class of rail in New
Mexico.
No other.
And so I asked the question does
the rail runner because somebody
brought it up the online those
Roadrunner have one or two
people on that train Matt madam
chair representative Nibert they
have they have at least two
people on their creating conduct
of certified conductor and a
locomotive engineer also occurs
so includes a
are there any other
Situations where there may be
because staffing the latter two
helpers and hospitals are very
other situations in New Mexico
where they would be lesson to
crew members in the locomotive
motive.
Madam chair representative
Nibert there used to be a train
of culturing that ran from of
pegs which is proof electrical
generating station near near
grants in Milan and the coal
mine was up at the also going to
on the the ranch subdivision the
short line it it's less than
thirty miles simply ran coal
down from the from the lower it
to the power plant now they have
a conductor but he followed
along in the truck so he would
be at the top train would come
down the line just which led to
train the power plant line
behind it but the train didn't
go more than
forty nine miles an hour it was
less than eighty cars I think
and you know less than thirty
miles so in other states in
other conditions that's where
they have a single person on the
crew but there's always somebody
on the ground and it's not that
for thirty miles.
I just wanna make sure that
every training every locomotive
forever trained and has at least
two members of in the locomotive
except for the two exceptions
helpers and hostelling.
Madam chair and and
representative
We look at the words on the
piece of paper I think I
understand what you all have
said recent testimony and that
is that.
You want to people the
locomotive.
I'm not sure.
Page thirteen paragraph a says
that.
My question is madam chair
representative.
Can a crew member.
Of a locomotive be someplace
other than on the locomotive.
Madam chair representative
Nibert of my in my daytime job
I'm an Amtrak locomotive
engineer
At the very smallest star
cruises a locomotive engineer in
the cab of the locomotive and a
conductor that is in the body
the training that helps call and
speed restrictions coming up and
additional other other items
ahead of the the train.
Is it possible with technology
for someone to be a member of
the crew and not be on the
train.
Work in the locomotive.
Possible that.
The Madam chair representative
Nibert at this time it's not
possible to operate train like
that not safely.
I'm I'm just asking the question
because it says is used in the
movement of freight without a
crew composed of at least two
persons and one even though.
Is it possible to have a crew
member.
Who may be in Omaha Nebraska or
who may be in for Texas for may
be him Barstow California.
Of.
At a terminal.
That.
Deals with the interactions of
that locomotive.
He has no ability to sound chair
what lately guys we have
the.
You could just spend chair of
Representative Nibert
The technology doesn't exist for
that for the person to be by
himself
there's other things that need
to be done on that locomotive
pilots moving or or one I don't
understand your question.
Ashley will madam chair
representative we're being told
every day the that
we're going to get to a point
maybe already where vehicles on
the highway are operated without
a driver controlled by.
Maybe a person at a computer
terminal somewhere maybe by some
machine somewhere and and so I'm
just wanted to to note I mean it
it says without a crew composed
of at least two persons and I'm
suggesting to you.
Saves me that your language may
be somewhat ambiguous as to what
you're meaning that is what I
hear you saying what I read
maybe two different things based
on where the entire world is
going with respect to these
issues and I mean Google and
apple and all these giant tech
companies are investing billions
and billions of dollars trying
to figure out how to deal with
with.
Movement of people movement of
goods and other items from point
a to point B. without the
necessity of having a person in.
The cab in the car whatever you
want to call it and it seems to
me that same technology
available for our highways where
I'm six feet from a big truck.
Is not much different than a
locomotive that's on steel
tracks and shared Representative
my part I think I have an answer
for you.
At the airport as a passenger
train that goes around in
circles does not interact with
traffic.
The train comes in there's
nobody on it doors open people
get off people get on it goes to
the next terminal.
There's a computer controlling
it.
It does not interact with any
traffic whatsoever.
The the tracks are set it's
automatic to apply that to a
situation where you're moving
freight at this time.
At this time is not possible
maybe in the near future I think
a claim had some examples of how
they do steal mine in Australia
it's totally automated.
But because we interact with
traffic crossings other trains
and justifier mental factors no
broken rails and things like
that
It's not possible with freight
at this time it isn't it Dallas
fort worth airport.
To answer your question.
The answer to question madam
chair and representative so when
we hear bills that are going to
allow economists vehicles on our
highways.
You'll be objecting to that
because it will be interacting
with other motorists.
Less than sixty four from from
other passenger cars and and
other trucks and what have you
But that's not where.
That's not where the arguments
going that's not where
technology's going technology's
going to a place where there
are.
Over my objection by the way.
I want to be in control of the
car I I don't want something
driving me around but but that's
neither here nor there.
The language in your bill.
I don't think get you where you
want to go and and so I I think
I
think that if the.
Getting involved in something so
force some negotiations or
something I I prefer not to get
in the middle of people
squabbles but
if it's truly about safety than
they would tell me that we need.
Two people in the locomotive in
every trying.
Is forward on the backroom I
forward looking at this stuff
but it seems to me that the
that's.
Neglecting all the other
arguments that we're getting in
front of us whether it's in this
committee or elsewhere with
respect to.
The advent of technology to
move.
My district is but virtually
every other mode of
transportation we know including
probably airplanes around the
corner so
you know I I'm.
I'm really wondering is this
true about safety or or is this
just about the getting involved
in somebody's negotiations so
thank you madam.
Thank you representative of
other other Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to
one of my constituents is out
here I want to explain to him
what you forget about this bill.
Could not take up the after the
vote but
madam chair what I see this is a
contract negotiation and whether
it was union Pacific that came
W. or the union or BNSF I I
think it's improper for us to
get into the middle of the
negotiations
you know and I mean that on both
sides of madam chair and
Representative outcome on one
thing that hasn't been
mentioned.
Is are they in the process of
developing a a federal rule on
this subject and if they do will
it preempt any of the
legislation.
Madam chair representative ring
we currently have.
Seven states that have two
person crew built and therefore
has not preempted and they've
had in Colorado was the last one
to get it Arizona has had a
regulation on the books for
several years in California
passed a law among the other the
other states
it has not been discussed at the
F. our a level if it when and
will it be preempted so this
time those laws are still on the
books they were they're pretty
new built a pretty new laws in
those particular states.
Madam chair and Representative
it's my understanding that on
the.
At the federal level third
developing a rural.
On the number of
Would have to be in the cap is
that correct.
Madam chair representative of
ring that is correct okay.
Madam chair I think that's
problematic if we're going to
try to pass up this could be in
conflict with rules that may be
forthcoming the other thing is
mentioned we start talking about
technology that we're seeing
right now many of us have got
cars that have a lot chronic
stability control controls the
braking on each tire it controls
of the.
Your the APS on each tire as
well to keep the vehicle from
skidding off the road.
We see wanting to a you know
technology to keep you within
your lane
There was a discussion about the
trucks New Mexico is currently
under of the testing driverless
semi trucks on the interstate
now they have a driver in there
because we don't have all the
systems worked out right I agree
with that.
Madam madam chair and members of
the committee I have a friend of
mine that's a commercial pilot.
He says when he flies the year
bus and it's fifty feet off the
off the ground he puts it on
automatic control.
And he says by federal law he
has to have the automatic
control land the plane once a
month.
So technology is getting there
yeah
I'm again I I understand the
issue but I I don't want to get
in the middle of it but thank
you madam chair thank you
representative Representative
Martinez and then representative
a claim thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Alcon
and thank you experts are being
here what is the what is the
current.
Federal is it federal rule I
hope I'm not misstating it what
is the current federal madam
chair.
Madam chair Madam speaker
there's currently a notice of
proposed rulemaking that it was
out of for almost six months the
federal railroad administration
at this time is not made a
determination either way other
than to ask for comments from
the general public the
anticipated date that they've
expected act this is two
thousand twenty four are
realistically first is
functional as Washington is a I
don't anticipate that happening
in two thousand twenty four
thank you madam chair thank you
at could I add to that the one
thing that that me when the
opposition was speaking.
Is that W. the gauche Yeading
this for forty years.
You heard that from the
opposition.
And that that for that minute
the federal rules says the be
negotiating a two man crew for
forty years but there's nothing
in statute that says the state
of New Mexico could not make a
lot better than the federal law
so that's where we're coming
from with this thank you Mr
thank you Representative thank
you madam chair so so currently
currently there is no federal
rule that dictates how many
people in a crew.
And therefore.
It's been collectively bargained
is that is that accurate.
Madam chair madam chair the
speaker it is yes in the books
for marketing purposes for the
last forty years the member
reached an agreement.
Got it okay so there's no rule
currently.
It is in place through
collective bargaining that is
got it now there is a federal
report a proposed federal rule
that is in the process as you
stated Sir madam chair
Which is at the COVID.
Stage public comment stage and
you expect that maybe in twenty
twenty four but to your point.
Who knows.
Understood.
Do.
Do collective madam chair
representative are these these
forty plus years of of
collective bargaining that have
created this two person.
Rural.
Are the state by state.
Collective bargaining agreements
or are they.
Federal is is our one big one
that covers everywhere where
where where these companies
operate.
Madam chair of Mr speaker.
Of the.
The bargaining agreements are
our national agreements the
national grievance and then each
railroad and each district will
Taylor
Taylor the needs their specific
areas.
So there's union Pacific there's
BNSF there's CSX railroad
there's Norfolk southern
railroad and then within BNSF
there several other divisions
that have their own agreements
and it depends on where they're
at got it thank you madam chair
thank you Sir so there it's a
federal collective bargaining
agreement between the.
Representatives of the of the
workers the union and the
specific railroad company I
think there's like six or
something the compact when
Rovers representative madam
chair K. six class one railroads
in the in in in the country and
then specific to the districts
than those get tweaked to meet
the needs of the workers and the
companies within those districts
Madam speaker that is correct
understood
so currently when a train
crosses over from Texas.
There's already a two person
crew in place madam chair Mr
speaker that is correct correct
okay.
This is one of my favorite bills
this session madam chair because
I've read it like ten times the
cylinders.
I've talked to people are both
sides of the women and so on the
one hand.
The bill is being proposed.
In the event that.
The feds don't reach an
agreement and the companies
try to bargain in your view
safety out right so this is
spree and preemptive just in
case.
On the other hand these
companies are saying wait a
minute in a cross from Texas one
guys gonna have to jump on so
that the drinking continue but
we're not exactly sure that's
going to happen because it's all
in the future.
Madam chair and and
Representative no I mean you're
seem very excited.
I guess so I am sure it and
speaker we want to jump on this
fantasy we're not gonna stop the
train so somebody else can get
on or off that this is not gonna
happen you know that that's.
Well but madam chair he said
this contract chair
representative I mean it I think
I think that the I I I I and and
that I'm I'm I'm glad you raise
that because I think that the
fact that this is.
Looking into.
An uncertain future.
So we're here with the house
bill one of five.
And each side has state their
position based on what could
happen in the future.
Right which I I again I
understand I mean I I I I I get
why I get what I get why both
sides are are are going at it
here up but this could all be
moot moot point if the federal
government comes in and twenty
twenty four.
With a two person crew federal
rule.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair Mr speaker currently
in order to force the federal
railroad administration's hand
to make law they need to have a
total of twenty three states on
board with this legislation and
have some sort of similar
legislation in place and this is
a building block to get to those
twenty three total states for to
force the federal railroad
administration's hand to make
this happen Madam chair
representative of the the rate
at the that's new information
for me so so the federal
railroad administration the F.
FRA.
Right that is speaker yes Sir
the F. R. A. is in its
rulemaking process.
But if twenty three states pass
this is out force that does that
does that mean they have to do
what those to twenty three
states asked for.
Madam madam speaker madam chair
Mister speaker excuse me I'm
sorry that what that what that
does is that gets the FRA moving
and that tells and there is
enough interest nationwide but
we need to do this as a nation
as opposed to an individual as
the cares of referred to it as a
patchwork quilt of regulations
got it so just madam chair just
to be clear there's not like a
magic number of states that have
to come on board in order for
these for the feds to do it what
you're saying is if enough
states come online it forces the
issue in a different way that
otherwise you may not force the
issue with so that's understood.
is there any chance that the
federal government in its twenty
twenty four proposed rule comes
back and says well wait a minute
there's enough technology you
only need one person.
Is there any chance that the
chance of that could happen
madam chair Mister speaker it's
it's no currently they've just
closed the comment period as of
December twenty first if if my
memory serves me correctly and
they're still formulating what
that basically from from those
comments and what direction
that's going to take we don't we
don't know what that looks like
right now Madam chair
representative but that's a
possibility the feds could come
back and say you only need one
person and and that would be the
rule.
Madam chair Mister speaker
that's no and I don't want to
speak to something that doesn't
exist currently well I think
that's the gist of the problem
right we're we're trying to
solve the problem that but it's
not quite here yet and I think
that that's my point.
as I was doing research I think
I saw somewhere correct me from
wrong you guys would know more
about and I but I think under
the trump administration they
opened up the stuff I think they
may and is that what led to some
of the neighbors for potential
labor stoppages a few months ago
Madam speaker Mr chair all that
is correct the COVID was kind of
the monkey wrench in the in the
bargaining process of that
admittedly however it did take
three and a half years through
that process to get to the final
point through the what where why
labour Act one of the world's
grievances that labour could
even say the word struck.
Before it became an adult before
because any time before prior to
that it becomes an illegal job
action.
And we don't have that so much
of what everybody looks at with
this they think of this in the
terms of the national national
labor relations board and
Weingarten rights and all that
kind of stuff we don't have that
because we are covered by the
railway labor act we are forced
to go through this very long
drawn out protracted process
and.
The national carriers conference
in this in the presidential
emergency board told everybody
that labor does not contribute
to profits.
Thank you madam chair I think
that the I I I think that that's
a big part of the reason why and
I think somebody mentioned
public comment this is like a
two hundred year fight in many
cases with with railroad company
that's why we have an anti
donation clause in New Mexico is
because of the railroads which
is totally interesting in any
any constitutional learned out
there was a good read it's it's
right in there okay well this
isn't and I thought of a better
way of saying that I I tried to
think of a better way of saying
this but I couldn't so here goes
it's like two trains passing
each other at night you can see
each other right that's what's
happening and you know I I I I.
I I I wish
that you know that this could be
one of those issues and and I
want to be clear like this is I
would never
I don't think anyone should ever
try to negotiate safety
in a collective bargaining
agreement is that should happen
it it should be it should be
the the work of of of government
hopefully if we're doing our
jobs to to to look out for the
public safety public health of
of of all of our communities and
constituents and and that
includes these what can be very
dangerous profession that's
right to the gentleman's point
online right if you're.
You know if you get a tanker
full of oil or whatever I mean
right safety first
but at the same time I think
that
As is bill continues to move
through this process I I hope
that there's space for the two
sides to come together because
we're not yet doing.
We're not yet dealing with the
media for immediate problem
that's in front of us right pass
this.
For.
You name it right hello health
care coverage will end for New
Mexicans for.
Kids won't have teachers in
their school classrooms or roads
in the southeast part of the
state will crumble and you're
gonna have accidents or the
Carlsbad brine well which we've
been working to fix for the
since I've been up here eight
years now because that's
literally gonna cave in and
literally people die.
We're not there yet I see what
you all are doing you're trying
to preempt us from getting to
that point and I to I really
appreciate that
and and at the same time I I
think they're still a little bit
of time not only during session
but really even after and beyond
to do the right thing for the
companies to do the right thing
by its workers right because you
don't have the company without
the workers the end of the day
and and and and also for you
know all of us to act in the
best rate possible to reach an
agreement
and you know other stuff that
needs to be collectively
bargained absolutely and I want
to get in the middle of that
fight but the other stuff that
should be right and stuff that
that is basic
You know.
Basic safety basic human
necessities right so all leave
it at that madam chair at one of
the real points but this is
truly an example of those two
trains passing each other in the
just didn't know that the
passage other and and here we
are thank you madam chair.
We have Representative McQueen
and Representative lane.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair just couple quick points
We've talked about this bill lot
the two things that stood out to
me are one that the trains
always have to people except in
those times that they have to
stop at the second person which
seems inconsistent to me and the
this proposed bill is.
Preempted by a.
Proposed federal.
So I I mean both the statements
just don't seem to supportable.
But this point the safety aspect
of this.
For the time into effect thank
you madam chair.
No that if I could just go to
the committee.
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair
so madam chair a lot of
discussion this afternoon's
consider and safety and I and I
think that's important and and
in fact the gentleman to the
left of the representative madam
chair can office we talked about
this and how to I think a good
discussion and so madam chair I
I actually wanted to spring
maybe a little different
conversation which is in the
language of the bill I think
there's something that we should
look at if if if this really is
about safety that I would submit
that maybe we need to to work on
on cleaning up a little bit and
so madam chair and explained
when describing so.
And see if if the if the
committee feels the same way so
page thirteen.
Paragraph a so we're told.
A class one or class two road
should not allow in New Mexico
the operation ro ro trainer
locomotive that is used in the
movement of freight without
approved composed at least two
persons and and here madam chair
I think is the problem with the
bill it doesn't define what crew
is.
And madam chair the reason why I
think that's problematic is if
if the issue is truly safety I
don't see anything in the
language that would prevent the
railroads from circumventing
this so in other words I put
that maybe manager disagrees
with me okay so if on the
railroad and I'm sort of a bad
actor and forgive me railroads
for for saying this out loud but
if on the road on the bad actor
I I put in and madam chair
what's the what's the technical
term for some of the control the
train I'm sorry Maria expertise
Madam chair of.
Representative Lane the person
tries it is engineer okay so
madam chair I I put engineer in
there and then I put a janitor
of a you know a staff person
and so I I don't think that
would be a violation of the
statute as it's written now I I
understand there's custom I
understand there's federal law
but none of that is referenced
in this bill it just says
approved.
And so if the crew is on to find
the I think that's a problem in
the bill and something I madam
chair I think we need to
resolve.
If I could speak to his point
which I don't want to do very
often I agree it would probably
be wise to have a definition of
a crew and if I may aswell there
was also the point that
Representative night that was
making about what that does that
does the crew have to be
actually on the train that's a
good point to because the what I
inferred wise you could pretend
that somebody in Chicago who was
actually maybe in communications
with the engineer was part of
the crew so I'm I'm wondering if
we want to work with you
gentleman to come up with a
definition if we if the comfort
and and bring it back very brief
Madam chair it real brief we yes
we have an answer okay good
answer sure.
Madam chair representative line
currently that's codified in the
federal law in forty nine CFR
part two forty for locomotive
engineers and forty nine CFR
part two forty two for
conductors and federal laws cut
is been kind of a moving target
is as a qualification process
evolves and changes over time
that changes that definition
ever so slightly and that's why
you see two persons because that
is already codified into federal
law what those what those two
people are what their
certifications are Madam I I I
appreciate that but I actually
don't think it fixes the problem
because one we don't cite
anything regarding Feds in this
bill and to is that that
definition changes on the
federal level if if the idea is
safety in New Mexico we don't
care what the feds are think
that's part of the thing that I
heard I think we need to be
consistent with that so I think
you a technical cleanup makes
the bill better accomplishes
what the what the you folks are
trying to do make sure we don't
have a run around from industry
madam chair so that would be my
recommendation on.
The anyone else which I I agree
with Representative lane and
this is intended to help improve
the bill this is not in an
effort to undermine the bill at
all we're trying to strengthen
the bill so and can clarify so
this is what I'm gonna maybe
state my position on the bill
will bring back an amendment on
Monday whatever day to us today
Saturday Monday if we can
working with our staff it will
be a small it will not be a hard
thing we can have an amendment
did you wish to speak I just
wanted to suggest respectfully
madam chair maybe maybe a
committee substitute.
So that it gets out of here
without I mean I'm happy to do
it cleaner it's a fit for their
gonna be pretty small fixes but
I'm happy to suggest that too if
you prefer if the funds to
refers yes I did just that of I
know in the past when when I by
street for chairwoman for leader
Chasey that was our practice
even with minor fixes just
because it's cleaner once it
hits the floor.
The number of the leader once
comment on that but that's my
recollection from my two years
and you to share.
Okay I don't have a problem with
that madam chair I in fact is a
I it's going through here more
or less as to what needs to be
done I hadn't seen that but I
mean the thing is that we had
discussed that before and we
know what the foot F. R. A.
says.
We know what the if the F. R. A.
says this is what it creating is
for the two persons so we
figured that we know what the F.
already says that maybe we just
have to say ask for federal
regulation or just for the
federal regulatory authority.
Chairman I'll call on fat I
appreciate what you're saying
but I think I will serve as our
staff that's an excellent idea
but if I could conclude by
sharing my perspective on this
so we don't have to have a re
discussion of the merits or
demerits of this bill we will
not be taking any additional
public comment when we hear the
the the substitute and that is.
Thank it there's been a lot a
lot of discussion about how this
is already in law and this is in
the collective bargaining
agreements and I've been hearing
that from the railroads a lot
and that's been a point that has
been driven home multiple times
and in thinking about it I kept
thinking well then what's the
problem you know if this is
already the practice that this
is already in law or about to be
in regulation that this is
already in the collective
bargaining agreements why is
there so much turmoil over
something where the state is
simply reinforcing for its own
citizens a safety rule and I
just couldn't get my head around
that the idea that there's a
real problem in doing what we're
doing so and for that reason I
you know I'm gonna support went
when you bring the bill back
with with a with some cleanup
language just work with our
staff and will hear it first up
on Monday and dispose of the
bill and and move forward with
our other agenda items but thank
you for your time gentleman
thank you for.
One minute just to mention a
couple of things number one a
trade going to Arizona or
trading going to Colorado
through New Mexico does not have
to stop at the border to add
another person because follow at
and Arizona already have this in
that you can get that are just
that one question the other
question that I the other thing
that I have to add you to tell
us we I think we are we've got
the idea that that bothers me is
tried to the government in Ford
ranger with the with the trading
that's Haledon up the wonder to
callers three hundred.
Late night for ranger has that
automatic thing that handles but
there's no way that trade with
the hundred cars into what my
range and us.
Thank you madam thank you
chairman all COVID thank you
participating participants and
members of public can give we're
now on house bill fifty four.
And speaker it's one train going
to house an hour the other thing
going on hundred miles an hour
and then.
Do you understand.
One of those questions on like
the S. eighties or something
but the they're going different
speeds and yes option the only
one on the New Mexico.
Senator taking
up to twenty.
Frankly.
For the speaker.
Thank you.
Hello good afternoon
Representative Figueroa good
afternoon madam chair and
committee I commend your
insurance.
The floor is yours we're and
house bill fifty four in the
title of is it ballot requests
for open primary elections
Of the city.
The floor is yours
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee good afternoon as your
chairman and I'm here to present
house bill fifty four on behalf
of myself and the co sponsor
Representative Dixon you should
see and the zoom.
member of the secretary of
state's office Lindsay Partin if
you ask super technical
questions about our voting
process in New Mexico she's here
to answer those you should have
already received a letter from
the secretary of state with her
support also in the zoom is the
expert witness I would introduce
you now he is Jeremy Gruber
senior vice president of open
primaries dot org.
House bill fifty four is a voter
access bill the purpose of this
bill is to allow the voters who
have not designated one of the
three major parties in the state
of New Mexico to participate in
primary elections.
In those public elections on
primary day is such a voter
would choose a ballot and vote.
Under this proposal Republicans
registered Republicans would
still vote in Republican
primaries registered Democrats
would still vote in the
democratic primary and
libertarians would vote in the
libertarian primary they would
not to be able to select about
it from a different party what
this bill would do was take into
account that the population of
New Mexico has changed our
electorate has changed.
Twenty three percent of voters
nearly one in four in the state.
Have declined to affiliate with
one of the three major parties.
That's over three hundred
thousand according to your FIR.
Who are those voters.
They include fifty
Voters that we are trying to
draw into our democratic
process.
And maybe surprisingly to you
there are fifty percent include
fifty percent of our veterans.
Fifty percent of the folks who
have fought for our country.
it's a veteran added that the
door who told me I didn't go to
fight for the red party or the
blue party I went to fight for
the red white and blue.
And that is always stuck in my
memory as part of the population
that is disenfranchised in our
current primary voting system.
second point to remember is that
primary elections are not party
elections there public
collections funded with taxpayer
dollars.
They were held in government and
public buildings and they are
run by publicly rate hold
workers also funded with
taxpayer dollars.
If we have qualified electors in
the state who have met every
requirement that we ask for age
for residency for citizenship to
be able to.
They should not be shut out of
public elections.
The third point I'm gonna ask
the expert witness Mr Gruber to
weigh on weigh in on is where we
are in context where is New
Mexico in the national contacts
we are out liars right now
around primaries we are one of
nine states that is still
essentially closed for primary
elections forty one other states
have some version and let me
tell you there are many
different versions there are
twenty states where voters don't
even register in a major party.
At all and so they run their
primaries very differently this
model is done in ten states
including Colorado to our north
but if Mr Gruber can keep it to
two minutes madam chair he has
something to share in this area.
you raise your hand Mr Gruber
chairman.
The reason.
And
what.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee my name is
chairman Grover on the senior
vice president open primaries
for a nonpartisan nonprofit
organization dedicated to Mar
open elections and I appreciate
the opportunity to speak in
favor of HB fifty four as
Representative noted there's
three hundred twenty five
thousand registered independent
voters in the state of New
Mexico that are currently
disenfranchised by the state's
closed primaries that's a
quarter of all registered voters
in to put that in context.
New Mexico bars more voters
right now from participate in
its primaries by virtue of being
independent than exist of all
political persuasions in the
state of Wyoming.
That matters because general
election races in New Mexico and
across the country are becoming
more more I'm competitive that
means primary elections are
where the real choices and real
opportunities to have a
meaningful impact exists for
voters as Representative noted
New Mexico is one of only nine
states that continue to maintain
a close primary forty one states
have some form of open primary
including all of New Mexicos
neighboring states.
The Maine legislature passed
open primary legislation similar
to HB fifty for just six months
ago and Colorado voters adopted
a similar form in twenty sixteen
all states that have adopted
open primaries red states blue
states and purple states have
done so without incident each B.
fifty four is the most basic and
common form of open primary
we're independence can pick a
ballots.
And they do so hi the states do
so because primaries have a
market effect on voter turnout
when Colorado adopted the same
form of open primary envisioned
by HB fifty four voter
registration in the state
servers and the state shattered
records for participation
finally as a representative
noted.
more more states are docking
open primaries because primary
elections are not private their
taxpayer funded but they remain
closed to many of this taxpayers
that actually fund that it's
really a modern version of
taxation without representation
open primaries enjoy broad
bipartisan support among voters
I hope you and your support and
I'm happy to answer any
questions thank you.
Representative the floor is back
to you thank you madam chair
the last thing I would know
because most of your committee
madam chair are returning
legislators there might be a
sense that didn't we fix this
didn't didn't we do something
about this already and we did
slightly slap a band aid on it
We decided as a state that folks
could do unaffiliated voters
could do same day registration
on primary day and vote in a
primary.
and I would submit to you that
is extra and unnecessary cost.
Based on our last primary
seventy five hundred independent
voters chose to do that.
Which is something like to
percent no where near our
turnout percentage for voters
across the state election.
And it is.
An extra barrier we are putting
between people and their vote.
It.
It like asking them to it would
be like asking me as a Democrat
to say yes you can vote in any
one of the primaries.
If you say your Republican for
twenty four hours.
Thank I would find that
offensive.
And the independent voters that
are reaching out to me.
The independent voters that are
reaching out to me also find it
offensive we choose our parties
because we have something in
common with their platform and
we have one quarter of the
voters in this state who say I
don't want to affiliate with
those platforms either one of
them.
But I want to vote and I have a
right to vote in public
elections so madam chair with
that I would ask that you and
the committee support this
effort to stop this and
franchising a quarter of our
voters bring them into the
election process and recognize
their fundamental right to vote
in public elections stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative is
there anyone in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill.
I don't see anyone in the
audience wishing to speak in
opposition on line is there
anyone wishing to speak in
opposition and if you're in
favor please take your hand down
like Mr Gruber I think you're
probably.
Take your hand down if you are.
Speaking in opposition.
All right I see a hand Janice
Arnold Jones.
Sorry.
Janis.
I can.
You
chairman members of the
committee my name is Janice
Arnold Jones I'm here today to
make clear the position of the
Republican Party of New Mexico
regarding open primaries the
Republican Party of New Mexico
does not support open primaries
just described in H. B. fifty
four nor does it support the
elimination of pre primary
convention there are other
options available to provide
greater access to decline to
select others by lowering some
of the requirements for DTS
candidates to get on the primary
ballot so the debate photos can
select their preferred
candidates in a nominating
convention actually further
discussion of how we select
candidates to carry a party
banner would be clearer if we
talked in terms of a nominating
election Canada's run under the
party banner as the
representative said because they
support the majority of that
party's platform it makes it
easy for voters to choose to do
so to engage I ask you to reject
HB fifty four as well as SB
seventy three thank you madam
chair.
Mexico.
Yes there is Stuart Ingle
England England.
Yes ma'am my name is still
working on and I'm in opposition
up if it feels like on the to
the that this bill would create
an opportunity for the opposing
party to manipulate the
situation and and have
Wirth.
Declined to state or or the
people in their own party to to
register has declined to state
so that they could sabotage the
primaries for those the other
convention I I just don't agree
with this methodology and I
would I would hope that you
would pose thank you.
Thank you I don't see any other
hands up in opposition those in
the audience wishing to speak in
favor please raise your hand
please limit your time to two
minutes please some agency the
first person here thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Hannah Burling
president of the league of women
voters of New Mexico.
I believe strongly supports the
right of every citizen
development.
We support methods that increase
voter engagement.
Including a system of voting
that allows all registered
voters to participate in primary
elections we ask that you pass
this piece of legislation thank
you.
The.
Yes miss.
Your.
If you wish to use the might
that be great.
Hello my name is Ezzell and I'm
the executive director New
Mexico open elections thank you
so much for having us here
currently under New Mexico law
individuals who have changed
their voter registration in the
past two years are prohibited
from participating in the
electoral process such as
the coming election judges poll
workers and participating in the
citizen redistricting committee
so we by forcing individuals to
choose a party before the
primary election we are forcing
them to decide whether they want
to participate in the electoral
system or serve their
communities we do have the
support of the secretary of
state and the county clerk's
office verifying that this is a
good bill for all New Mexicans
and this is just one small step
forward to allowing all voters
who are eligible to vote in
every election this these
primaries are publicly funded we
use taxpayer dollars we all pay
the same amount of taxes for
these elections so why are we
putting extra burdens on a
quarter of our population.
I hope you yes for two passed
today and I thank you for your
time.
Thank you is there anyone else
who wishes to speak in favor of
the bill in the audience now
let's go on the line
I see a lens the Beckman and I
see a few other hand so I do see
so Mister Ingram I think you
need to take your hand down.
And we'll start with Lindsay
please.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
having me today can you hear me
yes.
Great my name is Wendy Bach then
I am the director of legislative
and executive affairs for the
secretary of state's office and
I won't take too much time I
just wanted to reiterate the
secretary support of this bill
she believes the expansion of
the primary election to include
these unaffiliated voters would
open an opportunity for them to
weigh in on an important part of
democratic process without
altering their party affiliation
and would likely increase
turnout overall we did give
feedback that there would be
some costs incurred with this
change to election
administration however we
believe less costly manageable
and stand in support of the
bill.
Thank you Lynsey
Carla egolf.
Yes hello madam chair and
members of the committee can you
hear me.
Yes I can.
Excellent my name is Carl Icahn
I'm here is a member of the
board of New Mexico open
elections and also as a member
of the department of political
science at the university of New
Mexico where I'm a graduate
student specializing in ideology
political communication and
polarization polarization has by
all accounts dramatically
increased over the last few
decades and those who care about
the health of our democracy are
or at least should be deeply
concerned about it polarization
makes it more difficult to
engage in compromise and
consensus building more mentally
taxing to engage in politics and
decreases trust in government
while this polarization is
clearly caused by many things
most of which would not end by
the signing of this or any bill
somebody open primaries can be a
key safeguard that slows the
spiral allowing independence and
decline to state voters most of
whom are so because they're
ideologically moderate to
participate in primaries with
fewer barriers means that
they're fully is heard at an
additional step in the
democratic process their voice
can be heard on more issues than
just whatever handful of
rancorous fights happen to have
media tension during the first
week of November it means that
moderate politicians will not be
driven out of the election and
out of office just because they
don't adequately cater to the
most extreme voices this bill
will make parties more
accountable to the people who
are frustrated Lee leaving that
who are exactly the people the
party should be listening to
right now because those people
know best how their parties can
be more responsive to them again
that will make parties better
equipped to develop ideologies
that take many voices into
account build coalition and
consensus and that's serve the
interests of all with a capital
a all the people let's make
primary elections a time to
bring ourselves together not
pull ourselves apart thank you
for your time thank you there's
a person named Randall.
Randall.
Yes can you hear me now yes I
can and if you could give us
your full name please.
Yes my name is Randall Handcock
I'm sorry Madam speaker and
members of the committee thank
you my name is Randall Handcock
and I'm just here as the
independent citizen of Sandoval
County and I'm also one of those
U. S. army veterans mentioned
earlier since the nineteen
ninety seven independent voters
not affiliated with any party I
focus on back in the right issue
or candidate regardless of party
affiliation currently though I'm
not given access to participate
in all the taxpayer funded and
government ran elections
therefore I don't have the same
rights to choose the best
candidate to represent me and
this is at all levels of
government unless I falsely
state that I believe in one
party another which I find is
honorable I also personally hate
the label declined to state but
we can solve that another day my
view is that the parties want to
conduct a process for choosing
which can it to move for the
general election they should pay
for and run that process
themselves should not be done
with my taxpayer money and
government expenses at the loss
of my own rights so can we
twenty other forty one states
please allow for representation
of all voters in the primary
process not really I just to ask
you to restore the
constitutional right to vote in
a primary election for twenty
three percent The New Mexico
registered voters by supporting
voting for this bill thank you
for your time and the
opportunity to participate in
this democratic process.
Thank you Randall Susan Kelly.
Susan.
Good afternoon thank you for
including me Madam chairman and
I just want to reiterate what's
been said I I think the young
people are registering decline
to state in large numbers and
that if we are forcing them to
choose a party at the time of
our primary
we're starting to disenfranchise
them when they just get going so
I think we should be doing
everything we can to increase
turnout this is a small step
forward and I would ask you to
please support house bill fifty
four thank you.
You're welcome.
Louis
Louise.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Tuesday
August you'll I am in the board
of New Mexico open elections and
I am the UNM and UNM School of
I'm not I am in support of HB
fifty four because I believe
that open pipe primaries expands
our democracy by allowing
everyone to both in a primary
election as a twenty five year
old I have a lot of friends were
not necessarily involved in the
political process and don't
identify as either a member of
the Republican Party for
Democratic Party and I try to
explain to them the importance
of being involved in specially
the importance of primaries and
how a lot of times it is in the
primary election where the
winner is selected so whenever I
explain this to them and the
start getting excited how being
how to how to get involved and
then I'd let them know that they
have to identifies one of one of
the two major political parties
to vote in the primary system
they become dissolution so I
believe that this bill would
ensure that they are fully
integrated into our election
system from the beginning and I
think you to send a message The
New Mexico cares about the views
of every single voter and not
just those register with the
certain party thank you.
Thank you Janice Arnold Jones.
I'm sorry your responses both
okay.
Roc ROC K..
Rep
rock tape.
I hope you
madam chair okay great.
Right so madam chair I thank you
I support HB fifty four this
bill is a good providers which
is good for democracy in New
Mexico.
What is more important than
that.
The arc of democracy is long but
it bends toward more voters
please.
You madam chair.
Thank you rock.
Mario Jimenez.
Maria.
Yes hello good afternoon madam
chair members the committee
others already been excellent
testimony given this afternoon I
will simply just echo all of
those sort of said that you know
they are in strong support of
this legislation I would like to
also up left a comment that was
made by all of the executive
director Water prop every not
only is this going to affect
voters having the right to vote
in primary elections by forcing
image change in claiming a party
is going to affect many
different appointments not only
to as as poll workers or as as
as as appointments to the eggs
are citizens redistricting
committee other committees are
appointed by the legislature as
well as to which urged a strong
support from the committee on
behalf of coming because thank
you madam chair members of the
committee thank you Mario let me
see if there's anyone else I
don't see anyone else with their
hands up speaking wishing to
speak in favor so we'll go back
to the representative
Representative Figueroa anything
you wish to say in conclusion
before we go to the committee no
madam chair let's go to the
committee all right.
I have on my list Representative
Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think we can
all agree that the more voting
participation that we have in
our country in our state the
better I was great and grateful
to some of the advocates I was
able to spend time in the inner
talking about this and had a lot
of questions about the
implication of passing something
like this and so I just want I
want to clarify because I was
asking for data and some you
know what's going on in other
states how is operating houses
working.
and and you know there was kind
of a disparate sort of
responsible sometimes it works
sometimes it doesn't so I just
want to start with a question on
indeed for independents out
there how do independence get on
the ballot.
Madam chair and representative
there is no part of this bill
that addresses or changes that
process that would be an
entirely different bill so I'm
not sure we're actually allowed
to debate if I why I'm asking
okay here Representative so one
of the concerns that I have with
this bill is how it affects
candidates participating and how
we can require candidates to be
able to run for office with the
complication of having to have
an open primary and reaching
voters
my overarching concern is right
now it so this is great I just
feel like it's out of order from
what we have to deal with right
now with money in politics and
to being able to reach voters
who we already have a really
difficult time doing that and
with that.
For as state representatives
we're not a modern legislature
right we don't have the ability
to
meet the demands of even meeting
our own constituency much less
being able to run primaries and
generals with the complication
of money in politics and being
able to reach voters so now
we're actually trying to cast a
wider net to inform everybody
what we're doing.
Right out the gate starting in
June and my concern I concern is
how are we meant to do that and
reach everybody tell what our
story and then not even know who
shows up to vote the day of to
be able to equitably understand
who it is that we're we're going
after to target our best
interest in those primaries so
madam chair representative I ask
that because independence choose
to be independence.
What is the process for which
they can vote for independence
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair and representative
to circle back to the beginning
part of the question I think how
independence would put someone
forward for election would not
change in this proposal it is
what it is what this bill
addresses is an independence
right.
To vote in that public
collection not necessarily to
put a can forward.
But to vote for the person who's
out there and I would posit that
are difficulty or the difficulty
in running for office that idea
that we have to cast a wider net
that is really difficult.
Is part of the job it is what we
are asked to do to reach out to
all voters.
And tell them our story and tell
them what we represent and tell
them what we will fight for.
It's it goes with the job.
So madam chair representative so
we're asking folks to go and
vote for partisan people in an
election where they're
unaffiliated with those partisan
groups and so that so I'm just
going through the process
however after that vote gets
taken an independent candidate
can then put themselves are
numerous independent candidates
can put themselves on the ballot
for the general is that not
correct madam chair
representative.
Madam chair and representative I
will trust you if you say that
is the case.
That's my understanding madam
chair at least for this for for
state representative seats you
after the primary then we go to
the general and independence can
office to put themselves on the
ballot as on it unaffiliated
folks yes madam chair so madam
chair representative my concern
is that.
There keep if you're the way the
rules are currently stated if
we're affiliating ourselves
early this could be potentially
as candidates I think a
detriment to what we could do
through the process because
we're asking those who have
decided not to affiliate
themselves not only first we
have to spend all the money to
reach them and then secondly
they can play games with how it
is they want to be able to vote
for candidates that they want to
potentially get off the ballot.
So that they can then vote for
candidates that sick come in
after the fact and get
themselves on the ballot who are
unaffiliated.
I Madam chair representative
would love to be able to get
voters in at at any given point
in time.
My concern madam chair
representative is that the
current system being as it is
with money in politics and the
way that this this entire system
functions from the beginning to
the end.
Sits many candidates up for
failure to begin with not to
mention those who are in a
citizen legislature much less
those that
you know are running for
statewide office and are already
up against it trying to figure
out how to fundraise and.
Perhaps yet in the most poor
state in the United States in
which our second most whatever
it is money is always tight and
the fact that it's available for
these
elections madam chair
representative makes it even
harder for us to be able to have
that conversation with Fodor's I
had had that discussion madam
chair representative with
advocates about let's change
money in politics and then we
can get to open primaries
because of that concern and
Madam chair representative going
through that each of those each
of the parameters that are in
place I just don't see how it's
fair
to those who affiliate versus
those who don't and then to how
it affects the ability for us to
recruit great candidates for
office whether they're
affiliated or not
and if the idea it Madam chair
representative long term is that
we don't have parties that we
just do good jobs and we're not
affiliated with anything.
I don't know where that that
gets us so Madam chair
representative I'm I'm very
concerns that this.
The way the system works the
primaries are
Very much
affected in a negative way for
for how we get good candidates
and some of the potential
dubious acts that could happen
after the fact
and so you know I I have
concerns I would like to have
the information and the data.
How regarding how we can protect
those interests and and how it
is that we can get the word out
without having to raise millions
of dollars for little you know.
Of house seats like ours chair
representative on on how much
already cost us so if I had that
I'd be happy to be axed super
advocate about this bill but
right now I I I just I have so
much pause as to how I can
support it Madam chair
representative thank you.
Madam chair if I may actually
I'd really rather go we have
we're trying to get out of here
at six so.
We can make a close you know
kind of wrap up come thing
before we get to the vote so
Representative Sapan ski.
Thank you madam chair
Representative
you know I I thought long and
hard about this bill as I read
it and
I really am inclined to support
it because I.
I think that partisanship has
gone too far you know the the
level of rhetoric that we see
within both major parties is
pretty extreme
And that's that's not the
majority of people in those
parties by any means and I can
be as partisan as they come work
knows but
you know I I I I do think that
looking at some of these to
systemic reforms as what it's
gonna take to bring us back
together as a country you
I in particular have been
looking at California which has
a really interesting primary
system where people of all
parties compete against each
other for a top number of slots
I think it's top the top I I.
Alaska has a similar system
you know the other thing that I
have been looking at this the
way that our election systems
are run can also really empower
or disempower candidates don't
look like candidates that have
come before so when you look at
electing more women electing
more people of color there are a
variety of election reforms that
I don't think we have conclusive
proof but.
It is it is promising in terms
of some of the effects that
ranked choice voting can have.
Possibly open primaries I think
that research is still out on
that so you know to me those are
some of the things I'm thinking
about sort of long term
And I do think parties are
important so I because I think
party serve an important
organizational role but I think
they also serve as a great
shorthand for voters that maybe
don't have a lot of time to
think about researching all of
these candidates in figuring out
who they're going to vote for
and maybe they don't ever get to
meet any of the candidates say
no
and many of us work really hard
to be out in the community but
it is yeah I think party service
an important shorthand I guess
that you know just those are
kind of my comments I guess my
question is.
Why and what when we have same
day registration where you can
shut you could show up maybe you
can just walk me through what
the difference between what we
have now and what this is in
terms of you can walk in and you
can say I'm an independent but I
want to.
Register as a Democrat for the
day right
you know what we.
What's the systemic advantage of
this proposal over what we have
now madam chair and
representative I'm glad you
asked that question right now we
walk in and we ask for valid the
prints out of the machine and we
go vote as the system stands
right now for an independent
voter if they want to vote on
primary day they have to first
go to a different machine and go
to go through the registration
process in a previous committee
the county clerk one of the
reasons I support this bill
county clerk stood up and said
that a lot of expense to have
the same day registration voting
machines everywhere and the poll
workers to staff them
and.
They don't see the need for that
expense if we just do it this
way people can come in like we
do they look at my name on the
list I'm in it it Democrat I get
that ballot
under this proposal someone
would go and they say oh you're
an independent which one you
want they only get the one.
But then they printed and go
vote so that is the difference
in the process and I would
submit I also appreciate the
opportunity to clarify my
earlier statement.
the representative of lane's
face and some others when I said
I would be offended that the
state required me to register
for a party with which I don't
agree it's not that I would be
offended to be a Republican I
would be offended that the state
would tell me I had to do that
before I could vote so thank you
for getting me an opportunity to
clarify that.
Thank you madam chair
representative so if this system
were implemented there would be
the safeguards in place to make
sure that people were not voting
in multiple.
Primaries is that right yes it
would be the same system that we
have now thank you madam chair
thank you I'm gonna go to
Representative McQueen I
neglected to put him on the list
even though he had asked so.
I hope you'll bear with me.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative I see
this bill or versions of this
bill every year I will vote
against them every year
I really don't like this bill
the.
Just say that think one the
things I dislike most about this
bill is the rhetoric that some
of the advocates used to support
and I will compliment you you
didn't do this very much.
But the idea that we're shutting
out the orders they were
disenfranchised voters that
we're barring voters.
It's not true.
Any registered voter can vote in
a primary.
It's really pretty easy.
A primary the final purpose of
the primary.
For members of a party.
To pick their can.
That's that's how it's always
been.
In in fact the publicly run
primary.
Was it was a great democratic
reform.
If you look at the problems
that.
The parties have had with the
pre primary convention.
With having a relatively small
number of people.
The.
And just.
Train wrecks.
Imagine what it would be like if
we try to go back to a system
where the parties ran their own
printers.
I mean that would be a huge step
back for democracy will do
democracy.
If we adopted the system like
this.
There would be abuse.
We've seen it already in other
states there would be strategic
voting.
This happened in the in the
twenty six I think with.
Hello my the twenty twenty one
the Carolinas there is a
movement to vote for for
Republicans to vote for Bernie
Sanders.
Because they thought trump would
be Bernie Sanders and the mother
been right.
Four years ago in this state so
not this last cycle four years
ago.
In the general election.
On the Republican side and this
was.
Not a criticism intended as a
criticism of the Republican
it'll happen on the democratic
side at some point.
We can side not a single one of
their statewide candidates was
contested.
No one.
So if you're an independent
voter and I understand this does
apply to currently Richard
Republicans but if you're a
conservative independent voter.
You're not gonna vote in the
Republic party you're gonna the
than the Democratic Party Andrea
vote for someone you have no
intention of voting for in the
general election and you're
gonna vote strategically.
And I think we're gonna see
this.
We we potentially have a coming
up in the twenty twenty four.
You know if either party and
that frankly could happen either
party has only one presidential
candidate.
So I just I I cringe at this
Because I can see it being
manipulated.
And I I will say
two things one.
Part of the I think part of my.
Sort of passion around this this
issue is that I had the an
independent run against me.
And he pushed this hard.
But he also made it very clear
that he despised the Democratic
Party.
And it bothered me that he
despised my party so much.
But one of the state in who are
candidates were.
That seems in Congress to me.
The other thing I will share and
I've told people this before.
As I I was once independent.
In fact the spent most my life
as a Republican.
And they became independent and
literally I want to vote in the
primaries servicers Democrat you
know what I didn't have to sell
my soul to do that.
I just feel that different
important servicing in the
democratic primaries news okay.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you
we have Representative of the
and I and and Martinez and we're
shooting for a six PM departure.
Thank you madam chairman I I
will be quick I have involved on
this issue.
I I used to worry about the
strategic voting.
That Representative pre
mentioned although I I think
that I've heard.
expert testimony that there
doesn't generally proved to be
much of a factor in other places
and I see our former colleague
nodding her head so I know that
common cause.
has research on that.
Hi.
At first I thought you know this
is our party this is our primary
and and I would you know just
our voters to choose.
But it is a publicly funded
elections.
And
I also.
In a perhaps influenced by the
independent voters in my own
district which are probably
somewhat different than
independent voters in your old
perimeters Representative
McQueen.
But I I think this is possibly
way to engage these people in
good faith.
A greater
In greater numbers and I the
county clerk's did make pretty
compelling testimony that this
would simplify things a great
deal on their end so under yes
madam chair and that's it thank
you.
Representative Nibert thank you
madam chair I too will be
quicker most of the comments I
had we're already covered by
my neighbor to the last year
One thing that wasn't covered
and and madam chair and
representative.
You talk about unaffiliated
voters with this bill is much
more than unaffiliated voters is
that correct.
Madam chair please clarify the
question this bill covers more
than unaffiliated voters does it
not the madam chair this bill
covers all voters who are
unaffiliated with one of the
three major parties okay some
madam chair and representative
of.
People who have affiliated with
a party.
Who are diametrically opposed to
one or the other or both of the
major parties under this bill
can still participate in one or
the other
primaries of one of the two
major parties.
Is that correct.
Madam chair if you adjust that
to three major parties yes okay.
Three major parties I thought
that third one didn't get enough
votes last time but maybe
they're still still majority
party anyway if if someone is
affiliated with a party who is
diametrically opposed to what I
one the major parties are all
three of the major problems.
That person can can vote in that
primary and that's.
To me is the major shortcoming.
I.
With respect to unaffiliated
voters declined to state.
Maybe we're headed in that
direction.
But with people who have
affiliated with a party who has
a platform.
Allowing allowing them to
participate in
The primary.
Of people who are supporting a
platform that is diametrically
opposed to their own just
doesn't make sense to me so you
know from for that reason number
others I too would encourage my
colleagues to not passes
legislation thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative speaker Martinez
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for being in the
bill forward I'm gonna vote for
this bill.
just put that out there I
however it and the reason why is
because I think that as we as we
work to build better government
you know baby steps right
nothing this one along.
hi you know I don't think this
is gonna affect when we're in
other primaries although to by
this point I'd that's a very
good point now we're gonna have
to raise more money.
Which we all can agree is
probably the root of most people
in politics are speaking as a
guy who races a lot of money for
the caucus I mean I get it.
But you have been steadfast in
your work to.
Build better government and and
I truly respect that having said
that I do think that and and no
one in the room by the way but
some of the advocacy that comes
our way on this is is very much
on a very tall high horse
and and I I mention that
because.
I think that each person up in
this.
Die is.
Has.
Very well informed and formed.
Identities and we live in
communities where.
We feel we can be the best
representatives of those voices
and and that's why we put our
name in the ring and that's why
we pick a team.
And I believe that both of these
teams are.
Pretty broad I would argue with
we're a little broader in our
tent and then these guys but.
But we're we're still pretty
broad and read it and you see it
yes and if you're gonna see with
the vote here today actually on
this bill you know we're not all
in one box and and I do I do
reset I think from from the
public sphere sometimes hearing
that you know this two party
system doesn't work it's broken
look I come from a country my
family comes from a country
where there are a lot of
political parties and that
doesn't work either so you know
democracy is messy a
representative democracy perhaps
a little mess here the fact that
there's money in politics make
makes it even meant agency here
and I think we've taken great
steps over the last few years to
build a more inclusive and
accessible voting system
including for those who don't
want to pick a party for them to
be able to vote in primaries and
yes we've got to register for a
party when they walk into vote
in that party's primary but then
they can just easily go back to
the TS of the choose to read
afterwards up and even though it
probably is going to take an
extra ten minutes maybe to do it
it is not it is not absolutely
horrible if the if there is if
they feel so strongly a that
they want to keep their DTS and
be that they want to participate
in a particular party's primary
one of my best friends was a
firefighter he never will tell
me the primary
because he's he's he's DTS is
actually let us only the party
which is I'm not even sure to
recognize party in our system
here so he's DTS you can vote
for me but by golly I got put up
a big huge banner on in it in on
his fence which over overlooks
the the Boskin anybody anyone of
goals and Joxer Rights bikes
down there by the most caring to
see my side right.
Now is he so compelled to go to
the primary that he just
absolutely fields and change up
robbery not right at the he
really respects his own position
as an independent and I respect
that as well but he still
participates in the process in
my case he participates with
putting up a sign and he'll you
know shoot me twenty five Bucks
a once in a while
so I will vote for you bill but.
The.
But it's not I don't see a huge
problem coming our way that we
need to actually do this but if
you look in order to move the
ball forward we've got to get
the conversation going and in
your case you've kept the
conversation going for many
years now and and I look forward
to voting for this bill and for
it getting to the floor I
believe because that's where he
goes after this.
If it passes I don't know where
the votes are on this one thank
you madam chair.
Anyone else wishing to speak on
this topic.
So I'll just say a few words I
have struggled with us because
my brains like logical.
And a
The the primary system is
designed to pick the candidates
for the party.
And to reflect the values of the
party and so I really struggle
with the idea that members of
not members of our party are
picking us or not
so it it's a very simple process
to.
You know registered same day on
register if you're so offended
to actually have to register for
in a party on register yourself
and move on and deal with the
next round you might want to be
a Democrat won here in my one of
the Republican of the year and
that that's great and you have
that choice but you're at least
participating in the party
system and acknowledging that is
what it is
I had an order of what
Representative Romero mentioned
that really pushed me
we have to work very hard to
communicate with our voters very
hard and to identify who they
are and if we don't know who are
voters are because they're not
part of our party and we don't
know where that message and who
to reach out to and whose door
to knock on during the primary
process.
We are going to have to raise
hello heck of a lot more money
potentially and
it's a struggle
it's a struggle and I know my
Albuquerque colleagues are
racing four of two hundred
thousand dollars a race just to
communicate in their primaries
with their voters with
registered Democrats I can only
imagine what that cost could be
if we then have to figure out
who might be voting in our
primary and so those of you who
are are worry about big money
and politics bring it on because
that's what we're gonna be
talking about even to a greater
degree so I I appreciate the
intent of the of the bill I
really do and I know it has it's
of all from all the best of good
government principles but I
think it just does not quite hit
the nail on the head in terms of
practical goals in what we have
to live with this candidates and
in dealing with the public so
with that analysts.
Madam chair.
There was a whole string there
that I very politely did not
respond to because you asked me
to wait till the end very tough
very tough from so so I would.
Then and it's too much to to try
and address all at once.
Our governmental system has big
problems money being part of it
but the principle that we have
to reach out to voters and the
more voters we have to reach out
to is a good thing.
And forcing us to do that I
think is a good thing.
Of the party process the primary
process invented in the sixties
was I'm gonna agree and I want
to go on record agreeing with
Representative McQueen madam
chair it was a huge step forward
getting it out of small closed
door
Smoke filled back rooms and
bringing it into the light was a
tremendous step that step
happened one hundred percent of
the voters were into parties and
we have evolved from that system
we have recognized the people
don't have to be part of a party
to both.
The primary what we call the
primary election.
Election to pick front runners.
And it's done differently all
across the country it is not a
party election it is a public
election and I hold firm to the
belief that they should all
qualified electors should be
able to vote in public elections
and I'm relieved that we're not
proposing something radical like
the speaker said it's a
relatively small step especially
from where we are now.
But there will be three hundred
thousand voters.
Who will be able to vote in our
next primary if we choose to do
this.
Who will be able to exercise
that fundamental right.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank thank thank you
Representative and thank you for
bringing this bill forward I
think we're ready to take a
vote.
Representative yes we'll be
ready to take a vote when we
have a motion.
Okay.
Are you seconding the do put up
Representative Alcon.
To move to table.
Substitute motion to table which
makes you one second which I
think is unnecessary but thank
you I'm not debatable will you
call the roll on a motion to
table the bill.
Motion to table the bill right a
yes is table a note is will
consider it some more.
Thank you madam chair proceeding
with a vote Representative Alcon
table.
The vote to table yes yes thank
you Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane no to table.
Mr speaker noted to with.
Representative McQueen.
Yes they will.
Representative Nibert yes the
table.
Representative read yes to
table.
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representative semansky no to
table.
Madam vice chair yes to table.
Madam chair yes to table.
Madam chair you have seven yeses
in for nose.
The bill was tabled thank you
madam chair thank you thank you.
It is house bill one all three.
Chair in these areas.
Cool posts.
For the full set for.
But nothing else okay for
committed to ensure you're
ready.
Question K..
No Sir.
And here are you ready yes
please proceed Representative.
The manager house bill one of
of three you've seen before also
on three was house bill one
fifty three years ago it passed
the house unanimously does not
acted on by the Senate.
One of three would provide
better and more timely
information to the public
through our campaign finance
reports you would move the price
of the reporting period and set
up a month or more after the
election to be seven days after
the election when people might
still be paying attention we
also line the reporting period
it's better with the electoral
cycle so if you're if you're
filing a report a month or more
after the election you're gonna
get other contributions in their
and so what people one though is
how did you finance your
campaign for that past election
that that I still remember just
happened to this with the line
the state's.
It would also align the
reporting for individuals not in
election year the currently file
twice a year in April and
October April and October are
not particularly meaningful
dates this with the test those
times to be the middle of the
year so on actually on primary
day and at the end of the year
and they were provide an
additional report if you accept
money during the prohibited
period so if you don't accept
money you don't have to file the
supplemental report but you all
know we have this this law that
says that.
We can't solicit money we still
accept it which I think is a
little so what what this is just
doing is if during the previous
period you accept money then at
the end of the period the files
of the supplemental report
reporting those funds I will
May I think it's important that
this bill passed unanimously
last year I I I do knowledge
that he received a couple no
votes in its first committee
But I am still hopeful you'll
support with that it is also
supported by the secretary of
state's office so with that I'd
be happy to answer any
questions.
Let's go to the audience
is there one anyone in
opposition to the to the bill
one oh three.
I don't see anyone in opposition
go to the online is there anyone
in opposition to house bill one
oh three.
Please raise your hand.
I don't see any hand raised is
there anyone in the office
audience in support of have.
Yes ma'am madam chair members of
the committee have a grueling
press for the voters of New
Mexico and we support this.
Campaign finance sure the
public's right to know.
And work to maximize.
This will have the ability in
transparency thank you thank you
anyone online wishing to speak
in favor the bill please raise
your hand.
Okay when C..
That meant.
Madam chair members of the
committee hello again I want to
do too much time understanding
you all are trying to get out of
there but I did one of the ways
that the secretary of state's
office is supportive of the
amendments that are included in
this bill.
Thank you see anyone else
wishing to speak in favor online
please raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised
will go back to the presenter of
the sponsor any other comments
before we go to committee and
chair if you have an answer
questions
Representative Martinez.
Well the best madam chair.
Second.
Most of has been made dependent
do pass second has been made but
there are a couple hands up
let's go to representative L.
column real fast madam chair it
will not show how many days how
many reporter we add to what we
are doing now.
manager one the one that you
would be added to and.
Perhaps and the supplemental if
as I said you took money during
the previous period.
For pretty much madam chair was
just adding one more report than
what we are doing today that's
correct thank you thank you
thank you Representative Nibert
thank you madam chair
Two two things I've always hated
the the April first report
because everybody's trying to
get their tax return but
the the fourth general Uh
reporter moving up from December
thirty first two seven days
after the election and.
I probably am not unique in this
regard but frankly my minds much
for probably more than a week
and having to get a report in
seven days after the general
election would really be
So for me to do
and in that period because
you're you're.
Just happy the election got over
within your mind is elsewhere so
I've always appreciated having
the rest of the year to.
Get back back to earth and and
do that report and then with
respect to the supplemental
report that you're wanting
If you I guess I'm I'm not
understanding why that report
would necessarily be necessary
because it's going to get picked
up on the next report why is it
important at that point in time.
Here Representative mentor to
neighbors I think it's important
in that period of time because
it it highlights money coming in
during the session during the
prohibited.
And I.
I think that's important and it
you know I thought I also think
it would be a disincentive to be
taking money while you're voting
on things.
Well matter madam chair and
representative I.
I know that there may be some
some money that comes in but I
think the reaction would be that
people would not.
Want to accept impact I don't
want to accept any money.
From from basically Christmas
there after because I don't want
to have to have to deal with a
variety of issues that that
raises now I may be unique in
that regard but I I just I mean
I don't have anything going out
us and and I don't want to have
anything come in during that
period but I just don't see any
advantage or reason to have that
additional report because it
does get picked up and and hi I
mean whether you got an
unsolicited check in January or
February or March.
And then reporting it.
Seven days after we leave here
again in a state of probably
confusion hand health twenty
that have to focus on doing a
report it's still gonna get
picked up on the on the next
report that's due and people can
see you know on such and such
date that money came then and
then if you have to tell that it
was unsolicited with unsolicited
I just don't see.
Why that timing is is absolutely
necessary Madam chair
representative divert to me it's
the same reason why we should
and the reporting period on
primary day it's the same reason
we should in the reporting
period on election day because
those reports we get filed in a
timely manner seven days it's
not five days three days it's a
full week
in people will still be paying
attention if you we vote on
You cannabis bill in the
cannabis money is flowing into
the legislature during the
session that should be made
public and to be made public
promptly it should be made
public it is the way that people
see it and understand and I'm I
should have select campuses
should you pick something else
but he also knows versions of
the cannabis industry but the
point being if if we're voting
on things and they're making
donations and their other
restrictions on when you can
make donations and things like
that it's a it's providing as I
said when I started the public
with not only more timely
information but that information
because it's bookended by
curious that they understand.
Madam chair representative I.
I didn't I yes I live in another
world because the stuff is the
furthest thing from my mind and
if that money.
Had come in during that period
and it gets reported on on
April.
Whatever seven days after we
adjourn.
What what benefit is that what
what what is what why it is
being cast so it's not cast
several months later when the
next reports two or six months
later with the reports that I
because the the lights not being
cast when the when the.
Check is deposited.
It's after we've already
adjourned from the session and
and our on down the road.
I I I just don't want to I'm not
putting two and two together in
that case chair representative
Nibert I can guarantee you there
will be more press scrutiny of
our contributions if if this
these time frames are adopted
because all know these reports
are coming and they'll want to
see okay who is taking money
during the session.
And that will get reported
publicly in because it'll get
reported publicly.
I think that will affect our
behavior in a good way.
Okay madam chair.
I'd I'd.
I just think that those are time
periods those are time periods
when.
When we are when we are
When we are trying to do the
focus from everything that's
going up here and you have to
we're gonna have to be worried
about the next filing thing and
and at the those would just be
time periods that I would find
difficult for for me personally
the chair representative number
if I may.
One thing that's in the bill
which I think was put into your
request is that you can return
the money.
I don't have to accept and
back to your house and the in
your mailbox wherever there's a
check you can send it back.
I am not report that's correct.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
I heard there was a
Representative Rehm at a very
short questions I might not make
it into some sort of okay you
madam chair real short so the
reporting period is one week
after the general election the
election is already occurred so
now they suddenly see all my
gosh you got money from this
person I want to change my vote
it's not gonna happen I get
checks in November and December
and I just see it too much work
thank you madam chair.
Representative Flynn thank you
madam chair
madam chair I appreciate
actually the intent but I what
have you leases the intent of
the someone import which is we
want to curtail any perception
whatsoever that we as
legislators are taking money and
that somehow influencing how we
act that's that's sort of how I
view the rationale my thought in
this this would probably be a
poison pill and and I don't mean
it that way but my thought is if
we really want to curtail this
behavior is if you accept a
check when we're in session the
privative period you have to
report within forty eight hours.
And that behavior would stop
because then you have media
that's following it during
session and if T. Ryan except I
Grande from Representative
McQueen and also the flips on a
vote I mean that's going to
raise a lot of questions airport
that within forty eight hours
I'd I'd I don't share the same
optimism that seven days later
that somehow going to spotlight
I think we we've got to report
within session if you really
want to curtail this behavior.
Thank you I there is a motion a
do pass motion on on the floor
on the table or more in the
universe so we take a could you
please call the roll.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes under
a.
Representative read this.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative is a Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair you have ten yeses
and one no with a do pass for
house bill one of three you have
a do pass on house bill one oh
three thank you well I want to
thank everyone for spending time
there Saturday with us and we
got through it important in your
yeah we're ensuring.
