Representative Lewis.
Here.
Representative McQueen here.
Representative night.
Here.
Representative green.
More.
Representative Townsend.
Thank.
Madam chair.
President thank you we have a
quorum with.
We have a quorum very good I
to announce to those of you who
may not have heard it our vice
chair will not be with us today
her father passed away last
night and
And she wanted me to go ahead
and let you all along all know.
And she's hoping to be back with
us on Friday so I'm I'm sure
everyone would want to extend
condolences to the
Family.
Very sorry to Mr here today with
the circumstances so.
Right now I've been sort of
frantically looking for the
meetings.
I have always what what we have
first the.
That.
you know what I want to do first
actually in this will solve my
dilemma right this moment
because I we were working in the
capital outlay process and I
have capital outlay papers all
over
Lisa model who is one of the
committee assistance would like
to give us a brief overview on
how to use the share hello so
Lisa do you want to do that
first and then we'll go on to
our agenda.
We're just trying to get
everybody into using their share
file that's why we're posting
all the documents and there is a
bill senators for each bill that
we're hearing in committee and
inside each bill is the the
actual bill the F. I. R. the
committee analysis and then
there's a separate folder for
The HSD analysis.
So we can all start that.
The share file and I sent a
document the training document
along with it to everyone this
morning.
And if we can start seeing that
we will be having to send out so
many emails to the assistance.
Do you want just anybody need
for Lisa to go through the
process of using the share file
in accessing the documents.
You don't have to accept the
documents they're just in their
automatically is just letting
you know that something else was
up loaded there.
Right what I'm asking is if
anybody wants a little more
guidance about how to move from
the folders to
dollars for.
So everybody is good at all
Representative
Armstrong could you madam chair
I just have a suggestion on
something we do and our our
committee that might make it
easier is to have the bills
organized by the Canadian date
so we have a folder for the
committee date and then the
bills are being heard within
that it makes it easier because
right now there's a long list of
bills there and then I'm having
trouble.
Sorting through funding for my
agenda so that would be helpful
thank you.
That organizer tomorrow to have
a.
Do you have a folder
representative Armstrong for her
like February first are you
worry third.
All of the bills or that folder
correct okay and then if you
roll it out over that gets
transferred to the next correct
holder correct.
that would be great now that
would be very very good.
Okay all righty so are there any
questions.
One other thing Representative
Matthews isn't trying to get and
she can't even get them through
the attendees of somebody can
reach out to her to try and help
her get and I think she has year
for the first bill on the agenda
it does and we're it house bill
thirty four and
The way I got in now and this is
sort of the back up system that
I use is to go to the.
The the
The golden rod for today and
click on that link and it gets
you into the attendee list she's
sending attendees now
representative that way and so
some of the attendees now thank
you okay perfect and so if we
could get Representative
Matthews here she has the first
bill.
And.
Okay and I think one of the
I'm a little this has a question
Jody will post did you have a
question Madam chair
representative Armstrong do and
share file for the majority and
and analyses we do have them by
the date of the hearing in that
file the committee file of
course doesn't have the major
analyses in it because they are
confidential to the majority
members but they are by title by
date.
Thank you.
And the minorities members have
their files available to them
privately as well.
But we don't see those those of
us who have the major analysis
thank you very much any more
comments on that before we begin
with Representative Matthews.
Okay we'll go now to
Representative Matthews.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you so much I got stuck in never
never land for a few minutes I'm
I'm glad to get out of.
Thank you accidently muted
yourself Representative.
Your your your micro there you
go now.
And sorry
and if you could let that doctor
Janet Simon in.
Issues my expert on this bill.
I think she's and attendees.
And then I think we have a
couple other doctors that she's
going to identify if we could
get them into please.
Thank you.
Can you.
Raise your hand so I can point
on the letters in the mail okay
good.
And I'm let me texture.
I put Dr Simon in there already
okay in.
She she come up yet there she is
I'm in drive setting could you
The other doctors you have with
you to raise their hands so they
can be allowed in.
Okay.
They're in their.
Okay are we ready.
Dr Fitzpatrick doctors
pronounced okay all right
Well madam chair members of the
committee thank you
this is HB thirty four and it
was endorsed by the health and
Human Services Committee interim
committee over the summer and
reseeded to pass from the health
and Human Services Committee
last week
podiatrist are one of the key
health care providers for people
with diabetes and other kind of
vascular diseases on the primary
purpose of this bill is to be
sure that diabetics and others
who have those kinds of problems
vascular problems are not
prevented from seeing
podiatrist.
Because of high office visit
copays.
And the way HB thirty four
solves this problem is to
provide of that private health
care insurers can't charge their
insureds a higher copay for an
office visit to a podiatrist
then they would pay for a
primary care visit.
A visit to a primary care
provider is generally said it
twenty to twenty five dollars.
By the insurance company but in
the case of an office visit to a
podiatrist the insurer often
requires that an office visit be
charged at between eighty five
dollars and a hundred twenty
five dollars and that really
restricts the ability of people
to get this really an important
critical service to their health
and with that I'd like to
introduce a doctor Janet Simon
who is a but dieters and the
head of the New Mexico but
dieters society and I will let
her introduced the additional
doctors that she has with her
thank you.
Thank you doctor okay thank you
madam chair and committee
members are I'm the meeting
today I have Dr Robert Ross Dr
Frank snow so Dr William sits
Patrick with me.
Let me start with a few facts
about medicine.
I do PM's are defined as
physicians along with M. D. C.
studios by the Social Security
Act title nine she noticed
chair.
Similar to M. D. C. D. R. owes
GPS complete four years of
medical education after
undergraduate all colleges
completed that and three years
of residency training with
opportunities for further
specialty fellowship training.
As a handout that you receive
identified.
The PM's our she members for the
health of our patients the
majority who do have chronic
diseases such as diabetes
peripheral vascular disease and
our strategies.
We treat conditions such as foot
sores and alterations that need
close monitoring often weekly is
patients are not able to receive
home health care nursing or have
other family members should be
accessible to perform on some
basic dressing changes.
As we all know here in New
Mexico we have a very high rate
of diabetes here's a few stats.
Two hundred forty thousand
diabetics eight out of ten of
those dolls were aware that they
did have diabetes and that is
approximately forty percent of
our population here it's the
sixth leading cause of death.
And we have a very high rate of
pre diabetics greater than six
hundred thousand these are stats
from two twenty seventeen.
Three out of those individuals
were aware that they had pre
diabetes.
We know the cost of both
diabetes and pre diabetes in New
Mexico is extremely high it's
estimated about two billion
dollars.
I can tell you the breakdown of
my own patient population as all
probably sixty percent of my
patients the diabetic at maybe
fifty percent of them being pre
diabetic all of those I would
estimate approximately ten
percent of those patients are
being seen for I'm going care
chronic type it's.
So the what why we are asking
for HBs thirty four we know
current costsharing structures
all do provided financial
barrier to many of our patients
that are in all needing to have
regular care and this also often
results in missed appointments
and
the lack of necessary monetary.
As Representative Matthew
syndicated copays have a pretty
broad range on the lowest price
we being around twenty dollars
up to a hundred twenty five
dollars is it.
We've identified during the
COVID the negative impact that
has.
Certainly are increased
Let's say the burden on our
patients for sure financially.
Are we also.
I heard that many of our
patients because of this
financial all.
Your your are not insure their
regularly scheduled appointments
and although I don't have
specific stats no hearing from
all the podiatrist to do on call
in the hospitals there has been
a significant increase in
diabetic foot infections and
amputations.
We really want basically this
bill to help increase care for
the patients it's not going to
change how we treat our
patients.
This call okay structure our
contractual relationships
between our patients the
individuals and their insurance
companies we expositions and not
wait these insurance sees that
is against our contracts with
the insurance companies.
I also want to say that the
copays are specific to the
office visits which are coded by
valuation management coats
actual procedures or surgeries
are not included in the scope
case that we're talking about
here there is a different co
insurance structure that applies
to procedures.
So a quick example we have a
fifty five year old males seen
by his primary care doctor and
has a several week history of
small an ingrown toenail the
primary care doctor says you
need to see a podiatrist I will
prescribe some antibiotics what
we need to get you in to see the
providers so we see this
individual about a week later
and he's faced with the seventy
five dollar copay to see us you
just paid twenty dollars to see
the primary care doctor week
before.
we evaluate him we take care of
that you grown toenail and we
identified that he is a high
risk.
He has a lack of feeling C..
We suggest that we follow him up
in two weeks following the sale
procedure and the patient says I
can't afford I can't come up
with that another seventy five
dollars on to make that copay.
So we obviously you know want to
see this page the American
diabetes association and the
international working group that
PED's recommends that high risk
C. get screen at least every six
months and if there are problems
such as you grow toenails or
other deformities and such that
they should be seen more
frequently perhaps every three
months.
So right now our this request is
to support this bill if you
certainly have questions I'm
happy to answer thank you.
Thank you and Representative
Matthews you said you had
another witness.
Madam chair
yes we have some other witnesses
to I don't know if they want to
testify in addition to Dr Simon
or whether they simply want to
indicate their support for the
bill.
I'd maybe Dr Simon I was going
to ask if they were not adding
anything you're right that they
just indicate their support so
if you want to leave that to
them but but it madam chair if
we could leave that to them I
think that would be perfect.
Dr Spinoza is not anybody else
doctor he can see a couple
others madam chair Dr
Fitzpatrick and Dr Espinoza and
doctor Ross.
Chair person yes.
This is our the issue
recreational opportunities for
follow up treatment can't be
overstated in my forty years of
practice of medications that are
after one is still better so why
should they some students are
unfortunately these often
patients working to which is
diabetes obesity work our
circulation part of body parts
from part the results can be
devastated so I asked the thank
you.
Thank you so much
Dr Fitzpatrick yes okay.
They can hear you yes can you
hear me.
Yes we can okay.
Good afternoon and thank you for
giving me this opportunity my
name is William Fitzpatrick and
I practiced for fifty years in
Albuquerque.
And.
We're sorry of the first.
What section was very.
And the copays Justice Dr Simon
suggested.
Or disincentive.
Here and the press sets designed
that way by the insurance
company but it's penny wise and
pound foolish with regards.
There are so many companies.
Esperion senior buyer.
Waves the copay for.
All podiatry care for their
people in their plan they
realize.
That.
Small expenditure now.
Frequently presents a huge
expenditure later for
hospitalization representation
and all the downstream things
that come with it including
disability loss of income and
maybe becoming a permanent wards
of the state.
And to give you a case in point
over and over I see I have seen
the patient that who that who
presents with the.
Perhaps a diabetic foot ulcer
and it's a simple matter that
their shoes do not fit correctly
or their shoes are worn out.
And I may recommend to them go
by the chief issue that will be
adequate which is a thirty
dollar croc and they don't have
the money.
If they don't have the money for
a thirty dollar shoes how do
they need a copay which is sixty
dollars.
thank you gentlemen to.
This is one of those things
where announcer prevention goes
a long way and your we can see
those patients prevented from
developing that hazard should
come with neglect will be much
better off and they will be two
hundred thank you for your.
Consideration and I hope to to
look favorably on this bill.
If you have any questions for me
please do not hesitate.
Thank you.
Dr Ross.
Madam chair and the rest it's
thank you for this opportunity.
Mr.
The current situation is not
quite a bit the access to care.
What we're looking to do with
your help and support.
Is that you can now remove this
barrier allow patients.
Of New Mexico have proper care
without worry about feeding
their family or any of our
trainees the.
Thank you.
For.
Okay yes.
To run.
Thank you this time if you're
ready for questions
Representative.
All right we will go to the.
Okay I I just as a manager at
yes when you're ready.
We're going to go to the
attendees and give them an
opportunity to register their
support or opposition to this
bill so I'd like to get the all
up for house bill thirty four
and as those in favor of the
bill to indicate so by voting
yes and those in opposition to
vote no and that's going on now
for.
Not sure how many seconds
altogether fifteen.
I guess.
We can.
Regions and the polling now.
We have
Twelve in favor and two in
opposition and so it's eighty
six percent fourteen percent and
now I'm going to
give those in the who are
attending an opportunity to make
comments no more than please.
Why to make your it and attend
and you to make a public comment
please raise your hands.
Madam chair I good doctor
Fitzpatrick just muted itself
thank you.
Okay.
It looks like I don't have any
those of those in favor who wish
to speak on the I see those.
In opposition who wish to speak.
First I have.
Read more.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Brent
more of a registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans and we stand in opposition
to the bill for several reasons
the first is we would say that
we're not opposed to people
getting care we definitely want
people to get coverage and care
our concern with this bill as it
starts to mess with the product
designs and I would say that
when you're looking to people
having to seek care seek
coverage for insurance are they
have costsharing but they also
have premiums in anytime you
reduce cost sharing your
necessarily pushing costs and
premium so as a.
As a general concept people have
to pay for both of those and.
Health plans incentivize primary
care it's the way that cost
structures work in specialist
care is the co pays for that are
higher I would tell you that
but I just can make a very
meaningful argument that their
care is necessary which also
gonna have other specialists who
can make the same argument and
there are lots of different
specialties they can come after
this bill and say you know they
they care for children is super
important so we want pediatric
co pays to be Justin treated in
similar manner and so we view
this as a a slippery slope as it
relates to to costsharing the
other point that I would make is
that if consumers have
particular needs when they're
shopping for health coverage
they can look for for health
plans that incentivize or have
lower copays in the needed areas
and you know they have that
option on the front end I
realize there is a cost
differential that's that is
there but the cost differential
these copays ranges from twenty
five dollars for primary care to
in the range of seventy five
dollars for specialist copays
that's based on the information
that I've seen I'm not arguing
with the podiatrist they might
have seen higher copays but
that's in the situation where
the insured is selected a plan
that has that flexibility and
likely has a lower premiums
because of it so I would say we
stand in opposition because we
believe that we boppy died just
care is very very important you
could say other specialists make
the same argument about the
needs of their care and that
their co pay should be equal to
primary care we just we want to
maintain that flexibility for
people to shop for products that
have lower copays higher
premiums or higher premiums and
lower copays thank you very much
miss madam chair.
Marlys ships.
Your unmuted.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
The costly shield believe that
podia Ettrick services are
critical to a person's overall
well be.
That is not in question here we
do stand in opposition to house
bill thirty four.
For many of the reasons stated
by Mr Moore we believe that
specialty services reimbursed at
PCP rates will ultimately
increase costs.
And primarily to our commercial
market which is becoming a more
and more fragile as our small
businesses and individual
members in the state are
becoming more more impacted by
the last year particularly.
We also
would like you to take note are
to the FIR and it appears that
the OSI believes that these
costs could be substantial so
for that for that reason and one
of the reasons that to Mister
Moore stated we believe that
this is going to set a
precedent for other specialty
services equally important to
request being reimbursed at PCP
rate again ultimately increasing
premiums thank you.
Thank you very much.
So I think that's all the public
comment we have let me go to the
committee members and first of
all would you like to respond at
all Representative before I go
to committees for court the
committee for questions of yes
madam chair I if I might
of two points
This approach we used for
physical therapy services to
reduce the copay to equal a
primary care visit and I believe
actually a member of this
committee was a sponsor that
bill
Has worked out extremely well to
be sure that people are getting
the services they need without
wrecking the insurance business.
The second thing I would note is
that the fact that.
Copays barrier to needed
services is not a slippery slope
it is an indication that we have
in ways a dysfunctional.
Health care system and that we
we denigrate prevention
and reduce prevention and
preventive services with the
idea that somehow that saving
money and it it's the opposite
preventive services save money
in the long run and potentially
should result in lower premiums
over time not higher premiums
and with that will stand for
questions.
Thank you so much first on my
list I have Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and the
sponsor just summed up what I
was gonna say what I was going
to say I'll preventive services
save costs in the long run so if
the insurance company is looking
at only a one way thing of
raising of lowering those copays
you have to look at what that
gets you and preventive care and
we did do the same and physical
therapy already have services
actually and the point is those
services that have to be
repeated with of frequency
I'm add to lower those Mexico
pointed co pays the same as
primary care so that it's more
accessible and I'm like
specialty care where you may see
some more of that provider a
couple of times or every six
months or once a year
these are services that you may
have to go weekly more frequent
or more frequently for some
period of time and so the co
pays
being the same as specialty care
really is a barrier to getting
these on important preventive
services so with that and madam
chair and thank you on
supporting the bill.
My apologies I have people
working at my house.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Insurance is always been a great
mystical thank you my lights
and.
Never really understood it
unfortunately last month I had
to.
Examine a number of policies and
and make some selections for
employees are and.
Did not realize that there were
so many.
I think that one had to consider
when when purchasing insurance
these days but but
The the longer the short of it
is exactly what Mr Moore and
will cost we're still the person
pointed out.
Is that I was confronted with an
array of products.
And the price very based upon
how much.
Coverage you get how much out of
pocket to pay how much copay do
you pray each time you you
there's a very health care
professional how much your
deductible are you willing to.
Bear
in a variety of factors and and
so you're looking at this larger
array of products are you know
are you you just try to make the
best selection for for your
yourself and for those that
during your ensuring and so what
when I when I read the bill and
and San Representative you know
people are or the testimony that
they're paying high.
out of pocket
payments when they go visit for
professional
part of that is that's.
I think part of the choice of
the person makes
your very large program As the
associate with our policies and
and that's what what they're
paying for and they're probably
not paying as much in in premium
and so I get a little concerned
Graham.
We engage in an exercise to to
set these prices because of
gonna have ripple effects down
the line and so my my question
madam chair what would be yes
bill because.
What do you anticipate the
overall effect to be on the
insurance products that would be
available to to not only this
person but basically anybody
through six insurance in New
Mexico.
Chair.
I answer that.
Yes please.
All right
Well as as Representative Nyberg
pointed out.
Trying to sort through all the
various options and health
insurance is is a yeoman's task
and.
I think it just in response to
The situation I part of the
question I think in this area is
how informed of the choices that
that that consumers make given
the complexity of the products
that they're looking at
but in terms of impact on
premiums and impact on insurance
costs.
The the it is far easier.
And because they have the
algorithms they have all the
information they have the
offices they have the experts is
going to be far easier for the
insurance companies to make the
adjustment and their premium
structure.
To to deal with the fact that
your we may have more diabetics
and people with those kinds of
problems going to a primary care
paying fifteen dollars or twenty
dollars I'm sorry twenty or
twenty five dollars for primary
care visits and reducing the
cost of surgery and downstream
effects than it is for the
consumer to try to figure that
out the insurance companies I
really have no doubt are going
to find a way to modify their
product
so that they are not going to
lose money the effective date of
this call of this of this bill
is the I think it's January one
or December thirty one so
there's a lot of time allowed
for
The insurance companies and
providers to make adjustments in
fee structures and so forth of
moving forward so it's not as if
we have an emergency clause or
something like that and I really
think quite frankly that the
insurance industry is is more
than capable of making those
adjustments and figuring out how
to.
Changes rest because risk
assessments.
Based on the change in the law
and and again I would just note
that we didn't case of physical
therapy and other rehabilitative
services with that as far as I
know and and perhaps
representative Armstrong knows
more about this than I do of
without any drastic of a
reduction in services or any of
disruption of the insurance
industry.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative
I have every confidence that the
insurance companies will
likewise for.
just themselves accordingly and
I think I know who's going to
pay at the end of the day for
for those adjustments.
you get spread over over all the
policy holders
Madam chair and representative
if this is just one more step
you mentioned we did one the
last time we're doing one this
time how many more steps are we
going to have to take
With respect to these types of
issues when the next group comes
in and says a lot my particular
area of specialty needs the same
type of treatment as of this
this care.
Madam chair Representative
Nibert
I don't have a crystal ball and
I'm I'm not clairvoyant so I
don't know how many other areas
of medicine and health care may
fall into the kind of situation
we have in this one but
in in talking with
representatives from the
insurance industry
many of them talk about alright.
Alright specialist and
oncologist and so forth and I
think
Those are very different very
very highly specialized
situations and I'd.
The.
The the thought that that low
copays
are the reason that people don't
go in the have a heart check
treated I think is really kind
of facetious
there are probably a few other
areas where a bill like this
might be appropriate.
But there's a lot of medicine
that on a lot of health care
that doesn't necessarily fall
into the same situation where
with eight needs frequent visits
and relatively low cost visits
in the sense that you don't have
to do surgeries and so forth
there probably are some others
and and if any of us Dr Simon or
any of the other doctors of want
to weigh in on that I'm not a
doctor I'm I'm a retired lawyer
so leave it to them.
We're hearing no response
awesomeness next question hello
Madam chair representative we're
chiropractic care B. one of
those other areas that might the
speaker so more type are
Bill for the services
chiropractors provide.
Madam chair Representative
NABARD my my chiropractor sink
so but of it revert we were
talking about that and I realize
that there isn't a bill like
that pending
I'm I really don't know I mean
that's not to bill on sponsoring
and
I'm I'm not familiar with the
price structure on chiropractors
as I have become much more aware
with podiatrist so I'm I I will
not offer an opinion about that
though maybe I'm going to have
to vote on it at some point and
at that point I hope to be more
knowledgeable thank you.
Madam chair and thank you
Representative
I I do I do.
Because I'm concerned if this is
just one of a litany of of some
are tied built because it may
not amount to a lot of money for
for this right maybe the rate
pairs of the our.
Medical policies for will not
have their premiums go up
dramatically because of this one
thing but
I think if you start lining
people up in the.
You have a dollar here dollar
they're.
You know dollar next week the
you might have some real money
that they're starting to be
absorbed by the people that are
paying these insurance premiums
and you're on the.
Having been one of all now of.
I'm a little more sensitive to
that issue.
Thank you for your your
explanation and yeah I'm
bringing this I think you're
everybody recognizes how
important it is to to our.
Keep.
Your feet in good shape are the
carers.
With the all the things that are
are going wrong with someone if
their feet are not in good shape
there they're all brought the.
it is not going to be doing well
either and so I recognize the
I'm just a concern about whether
we're getting too far into the
weeds are on.
Telling insurance companies and
people who purchase those
products what they have to pay
for thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Townsend.
Yes madam chair thank you
Representative MATZIE it's for
free forward
questions
this is not only.
At the but it covers.
surgical
Services correct.
Sh
Madam chair representative
Thompson I'm sorry you were
breaking up and I didn't catch
the entire question.
Okay said it's not and I repeat
madam chair I said S. U. S..
This not only covers podiatry it
also covers to Pete surgeons
correct.
Madam chair of Representative
Townsend I do not believe that's
correct this only applies to the
podiatrist.
It our fiscal impact report.
Page.
Three.
so that we can issues
That is made by the UN UNM
health sciences.
That
That is one of the issues that
Was your intention.
Or can which.
Ensure that that is not correct.
It Representative Matthews.
All right.
Sorry
madam chair Representative
Townsend that that was not our
intention and I will double
check the bill and be sure that.
there's I'm not quite sure what
they were basing that on quite
frankly I didn't remember that
criticism but we will be sure
that that it because that's not
the the goal of this is just a
cover but
Podiatry services and and
because because they are so
critical basically to diabetics.
Related diseases.
Yes which is very important in
that point at all.
Madam chair and representative.
We lost.
The legislature about preventive
services saving money.
Get our health care costs
trillions they keep going up I
keep looking for the savings
Is there is there any particular
reason.
Then is there been any work done
that you can share with the
committee that that anyone has
so far been analysis says this
will happen in this regard.
All.
Madam chair.
Do you if you needs
clarification that question I'm
not sure if he's asking for a
study or
just the more information like
Representative Armstrong
replied.
Eight.
I'm asking for it is the option
that you could report that shows
me that reduce these premiums.
We're not premiums that this
office visits
In fact reduce the cost of New
Mexicans.
It's going to be picked up under
the full by everyone I mean we
all know exactly how the
providers will cover their
increased costs they will
increase their premiums but
Representative Armstrong.
Mentioned that she believed that
this preventive care will reduce
our overall costs and I was just
asking is there a place where I
can go and find that study
that is indicative of the
battery.
Madam madam chair Representative
Townsend I'm I'm not aware of
that and I would defer to the
Dr Simon who may want to address
that.
If that's alright madam chair.
Yes absolutely.
Madam chair.
I
you have on some studies not
specific to New Mexico well we
do have several studies that
have identified that the savings
in fact one right next door was
conducted in Arizona.
And the study.
Was done at the time that the
Arizona Medicaid program.
Had not covered podia Ettrick
Services.
Several years after.
Podiatrists were no longer in
Medicaid a study was done in
Arizona and I can certainly
provide that resource that
identified the significant
increase costs that the stated
Kurt and immediately thereafter
podiatry was put back into the
Arizona Medicaid program so
that's one clear study that we
have we also have two other
studies Don Juan
through Duke and
they're another broader study
that identified.
The cost savings with
preventative podiatry services
again they're not specific to
New Mexico.
That that.
Spence.
Madam chair and thank our is
there any a steady
or in the
at the at representatives that
says.
Yes when you need this the first
is that out of pocket expense is
there an increase in.
services rendered and does it
flat out over time instead of
just up a bubble of people that
don't have services that go out
and get it and then everything
level software sister trend that
continues over time to increase
do you know.
I'm I think that's really beyond
the scope of this legislation
and I would like to have the
comments directly on this bill
please.
Madam chair with all due respect
when I look at the FIR.
that was provided it says
That.
Word is certain at this stage
all in.
Three currently so I
want to make.
In certain probably substantial
so I didn't think it was out of
I would just try and find is
there it free and.
Or not.
Madam chair on that point okay
Representative Armstrong.
I would sit there are trends
studies on people who've been
uninsured and then get insured
of of an.
Of exactly what you said they
may catch up on on out standing
I preventive care and then it
levels off there's there's a lot
of studies both in private
insurance and Medicaid on those
trends.
Okay and madam chair and
Representative if you can.
And
Right after repeated and thank
you for your question.
So Representative Townsend you
cut out quite a bit are you
finished now.
The cell okay Representative
ream.
Madam chair most of my questions
have been answered of you know
I'll tell one story so.
I have a torn rotator cuff which
is associated with my prior work
well we go in to get a cortisone
shot my copay is a hundred
eighty one dollars and then if
they want to do surgery the MRI
is fifteen hundred and so we can
cover that that would be spread
across the group which is been
brought up.
What in reading the legislation
one of the things I'm kind of
concerned about and what
Representative Townsend this
product let's go to
page two would go to the very
bottom so one twenty four twenty
twenty four we begin describing
the Services when we get to
page.
R. three the first one surgical.
And what I'm worried about
because of we do know that
Individuals with diabetes do
have our of their feet
amputated.
And so I'm wondering if at the
end of surgical and bio
biological means you could go
ahead and answered language that
says
conducted.
During an office visit
and you know under local
anesthesia or something like
that so that we don't say Hey
we're going to have all
surgeries now we're just a copay
if it's associated with.
Maybe one of your experts need
to answer that
Representative mass the use.
Representative and Madam chair
representative Rehm
yes I think I will let one of my
experts that talk about of the.
Whether they that surgery and
office visits and the surgeon
and the coating that would
relate to that.
I'm you want to talk about that
someone may I just suggest that
there could be a pretty quick
answer to whether this bill is
covering outside the office
visit or if the surgery in the
office as contemplated by what
you're the scope of this bill.
Madam chair thank you for that
clarification.
No search it's not my answer is
it is that surgery it would be
it I'm gonna let the actors
Simon explained that she's the
expert on this not me right I
ate it thank you madam chair at
for the question.
The copay structure we're
specifically talking about it is
assigned to our evaluation and
management services there are
differing co insurance our.
Relationships with surgical
procedures so we are not talking
about the surgical procedures
these are specific co pays for
all the office visits.
And madam chair.
Representative Townsend I would
point to.
Subsection two of the bill on
page three and the definition
beginning at line for which then
talked about primary care
services.
Madam chair representative
Matthews I think that needs to
be clarified in a little more
detail is the my comment on that
I think if you just added them
you know conducted in service
with local anesthesia or
whatever the words are better
prop anyway thank you madam
chair that's all my questions.
Thank you are there for the
questions.
I was.
Thank and a couple of comments
here because I too was looking
at the fiscal impact report and
I think the office of this
superintendent insurance kind of
stretched it a bit saying that
surgical and other non office
based but the procedures are
included in the definition
of patriotic Services but you're
not talking about them for this
particular copay so seems like a
stretch but you know with risk
guard what Representative
Townsend was that.
When I said it was beyond the
scope of the bill I wish that we
would get and I know this is
probably too much to ask but I
think for the future as we try
to be more fiscally intelligent
we would get cost benefit
analyses from the from the LFC
so that we can way this.
I'm.
I'm determined cost against the
cost of having some one lose his
or her.
Eight eight and having to have
all of the rehabilitative
services and surgeries that go
with.
We do that all the time when we
just always talk about is how
much it's going to cost we
don't.
Ever try to figure out what it's
going to mitigate and what that
would have cost us if we didn't
do it and those kinds of
analysis actually helpful to us
as as we make policy in the
legislature.
So.
That I think we're through with
questions from the committee and
I would like the opportunity to
make a closing remarks before we
take about or we can.
We have a motion so we'll get a
motion and and doctor.
Did you have any closing remarks
Representative Matthews.
I need it yourself.
Madam chair I I hope after sixty
days I can remember the
difference between me.
first I just want to want to
thank you all for your questions
and your attention
and
I I would I would also note and
is it is it Representative Cook
Introduces bill last session.
And because it was a short
session it didn't it didn't move
forward but and and I know that
Representative Cook and he is a
very wise Representative so it
mostly is a good.
And a dark and Representative al
outcome was the sponsor of the
P. T. bill that was similar to
this he is also a very wise and
good Representative
but I to the joking aside I
This is really gonna make a
difference a lot of people's
lives in a very important way
and and
it's not meant to cover
surgeries and things like that
it's meant to cover primary care
visits that need to happen to
keep to help people who have the
substantial problems with their
walking in their circulation and
diabetes and so forth and.
Would really appreciate and hope
that you will be supported by
the committee thank you.
Thank you Representative Los.
Thank you madam chair I move a
do pass.
Second.
Ocean from Representative loss
for to pass a second for
Representative.
Armstrong well the clerk please
call the roll.
Representative akun.
There's no way I can go but yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Eli.
I think Representative Eli is
doing a deposition right now I
don't his name still up there so
please show an excuse okay.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative nightmare.
No.
Representative rain yes.
Representative Townsend.
No like to explain my boat.
Vice chair.
Representative.
Excused yes.
Eight two two and Representative
Townsend to explain as well yes
yes go ahead Representative yes
very.
Yes very quickly I don't think
there's anyone on this committee
that stands in the way of better
health care but I too am
troubled by the fact that we get
in complete fiscal M. act report
and with regards to the
chairman's.
Comment on a cost benefit
analysis I couldn't agree more I
think a better information to
help us make better decisions
and less options thank you.
Let me just add that I don't
think I realized until I coach
for many.
The anaerobes the tobacco
settlement revenue oversight
committee what a scourge
diabetes has is in New Mexico
it's it's really extraordinarily
lopsided compared to other
diseases and other.
Many other states to so
with that.
I think we're ready for the next
agenda item and Representative
Lewis is going to take the
chair.
I'm going to present a bill.
You madam chair go ahead and
proceed when you're ready.
Okay I have I think I may have
Justin Allen in Tandy's section
and here's my expert witness on
this.
Could he be promoted to a
panelist.
Who is that Representative.
Justin Allen okay just a can you
raise your hand.
I don't see how many attendees
list here yes he said he said
with us now great.
Okay.
Just and you.
Turn your camera on.
Yes.
There you go okay good deal.
Okay madam chair and members of
the committee this bill was from
that
Interim committee and courts
corrections and justice and we
have had a conversation about
this in the past I'm not the
fact that we have had the
restoration of the voting rights
to felons for twenty years now
in statute which.
And as the secretary of state
has been testified and I'm in
our state government.
By the bill we have in the
restoration of voting rights
should work but it doesn't.
It because there are still many.
Roadblocks in the way because
those who complete their
sentences.
Do so at different venues has
the current law requires that
they have cable to file the
paperwork for the completion of
probation and parole with the
secretary of state.
Or with the county clerk in
order to free the way for them
to vote.
So what this this bill doesn't
substantially expand the someone
voting rights it just announced
procedures to facilitate the
exercise of those rights and so.
What we're proposing here is
that basically once an
individual is no longer
incarcerated here she will be a
double to register and vote now
why do we want to do this we
like to the law the first time
but what we have found out is
that many many people who should
be able to register to vote and
vote are not able to do so
they've lost track of their
paper they didn't know what they
had to do the county clerk isn't
cooperative and
for the county clerk tricycle
operating system but what we
have learned in the last twenty
years also is the there's a lot
of requests for each on how to
reduce recidivism.
To keep people from committing
another crime and having to go
back to jail and one of the
ordinary ways is to help people
become engaged in their
communities so by changing and
simplifying the process what
we're doing is we're correcting
it and administer traded
nightmare and we're responding
to the science of.
Help you all to engage in our
communities and not go back to
prison and Justin is my experts
because he has the lived
experience and would like to
tell you how much it means to
him and then I will brag about
him a little bit after he
speaks.
Good afternoon members of the
committee and madam chair my
name is Justin Allen as a former
car sort of person I am asking
that you passed house bill
seventy four because of how
civic engagement and social
inclusion has attributed to my
success and reintegration into
society.
Participating in the functions
of society is how I have become
a productive member.
My right trouble is validation
of my voice and my and mark of
citizenship.
It means that I belong in this
community and not my voice now
enters.
Restoring the right right to go
to returning citizens is an
investment in humanity rather
than sustaining the violence of
potential punishment.
Disenfranchisement law serves no
other purpose except potential
punishment.
Then sentencing is not about
justice or deterring crime
rather it is a mechanism of the
prison industrial complex by
rendering human body silent for
commodification.
This was a purpose during Jim
crow.
The ability to advocate for
myself is how I've been broken
the cycle of recidivism I ask
thanks committee to pass
hospitals have need for as an
investment in humanity to reduce
recidivism and create safer
communities thank you.
Thank you and I wanted to tell
everybody that Justin's going to
be graduating from UNM and
will that be this semester
Justin.
Yes graduated with the I majored
in American studies my miners to
studies I'm interested in
introducing transformative
justice in New Mexico.
I mean I I I just don't think I
can the better
Expert witness because he
He exemplifies the the need for
engagement in the community and
for
Restores or perhaps initiates
for some of us it I'm I'm just
really proud of him I have an
amendment
Madam chair I Joel thank you we
need to put it on before we do
the public comment because it
doesn't change anything we're
just clarifying a few things and
we're expecting a little thank
with the help of economy general
going to clarify that we're not
changing the restoration of any
other rights like the right hold
a public office just the the
right to vote in this section so
I think you could go to public
comment and then we could come
back in and of the bill.
Thank you representative.
Sir Alan congratulations to Care
that's fantastic.
I'm.
Lisa do we have a poll.
To get to the audience.
Okay so the poll is now open and
will keep it open for twenty
seconds if you would like to
vote in favor or in opposition
of.
House bill seventy four.
So we are going to close the
pull right now.
And we have the thirty attendees
in favor and one in opposition
so now let's go in here go ahead
and hear from the opposition if
you would like to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand and you will be
called on.
Erin Jones you are now unmuted.
I am not in the office of this
bill madam chair and members of
the committee no I guess I raise
raise my so to make sure I was
able to make public comment but
I totally support this bill I
think the the chair are excuse
net representations brain that
and I and I and I'm really I'm
glad to know just and as a human
being and your staff for the so
I support the bill and I raise
my hand wrong sorry.
Thank you Mr Jones we will next
heard from Judy Messel.
You're now and made it.
Judy I just have to and then on
your end.
Hello I'm sorry.
There you go we can hear you now
okay thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Judy mass all I'm with Lutheran
advocacy ministry in New Mexico
and we also speak on behalf of
the New Mexico conference of
churches.
We want to speak in full support
of house bill seventy four we
believe that we as a state have
the responsibility to do what we
can to re integrate people
who have completed their
sentences into our communities
and that certainly includes the
right to vote thank you so much.
Thank you.
I'm I think we have folks now
signing up for support but if
you are wanting to speak in
opposition I'm just going to
continue going down our list.
So next we have.
Nicole region.
You are now and made it.
Hi I'm a New Mexico like and I'm
with the Santa Fe and double ACP
the national association for the
advancement of colored people
we've advocated for voting
rights since our organization
began more than a hundred years
ago the Santa Fe branch was
disappointed that the
legislation we helped Act twenty
years ago has not really worked
to restore voting rights to
former felons.
and that so many former
incarcerated have not been able
to regain their voting rights to
the barriers in the process we
believe strongly that voting as
the central part of civic
engagement and that it should be
restored to former felons neatly
upon their release back into
society and we ask that you vote
in support of house bill seventy
four.
Thank you next we have a dynamic
hatch you are now in muted.
Thank you good afternoon and I
and cash I'm speaking for myself
most of us vote in New Mexico
because we were born in the
United States and our New
Mexican residents for us both is
not a privilege we aren't we
nearly had to reach the age of
majority to vote we're not
required to prove that we are
virtuous I wonder if people who
oppose S. H. B. seventy four
believe in the hard part that
people convicted of a crime
don't deserve to vote the vote
does not an issue of deserving
most people aren't other people
are never even prosecuted let
alone convicted they continue to
live among us and legal legally
vote funding center privilege
for good people the right four
told us to all of us fire
citizenship residency in age of
majority we should be able to
prevent you from voting because
we judge you to be a bad person
or disagree with your actions or
beliefs those kind of judgments
are impossible to fairly
imposing history shows us that
we have not in fact fairly
impose them the poor communities
of color continue to be
disproportionately deprived of
their vote and their voice in
our democracy please vote yes on
each be seventy four thank you.
Thank you.
Next we will go to my us clarity
you are now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I am I can I do
with this year we're running
chapter the represent over
thirty five thousand members and
supporters in New Mexico and
West Texas and we support this
bill that route you barriers and
provide assistance for
individuals to register to vote
our justice system is broken and
this bill would help to address
from the nectaries inequities
that exist our justice system is
not fair to people of color or
those who are disadvantaged and
giving people a voice in the
process and insists IT helps to
reduce recidivism as you've
heard and it helps to integrate
our communities so we support
the bill and we think the
sponsor for the spell thank you.
Thank you next we will go to my
car all your now and it.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Monique also I'm the New
Mexico state director of the
fines and fees justice center we
stand in strong support of house
bill seventy before taxes were
permitted in nineteen sixty four
with the ratification of the
twenty Fourth Amendment we
believe the essential feature of
any tax is that it produces that
we some revenues that this
support later held that the
equal protection clause for been
states for making the payment of
any feet and electoral standard
for state elections in recent
decades states have been
increasingly assessing fees on
people who are prosecuted and
convicted by the criminal leaks
them these these are used to
generate government revenue for
many in order to successfully
complete their probation and
that's the eligible to regain
their right to vote they must
also meet all of their criminal
legal financial obligations New
Mexico says is a host of these
fees within the criminal legal
system and uses this revenue to
finance government programs
these bees therefore operate as
an unconstitutional a denial of
the right to vote for failure to
pay taxes under the twenty
Fourth Amendment we again thank
the sponsor and we also thank
the exponential somehow and for
coming and speaking out and
supporting this legislation we
urge the committee to vote and
support of HB seventy four which
would essentially and this
practice thank you so much.
Next they will go to Fernando
Trujillo you are now in muted.
Chair members of the committee
my name's Federal look to see
are from Espanola New Mexico I'm
a policy associate with bold
features formally young women
United old future stands in full
support of HB seventy four M. as
a person living with convictions
and having the game my agency to
will I can say how much as meant
to me which has been the world
it means that I now have a voice
in this country and state that I
live in I even I would now feel
like I Mario more of the human
being and less than less than
the number of as encouragement
to be more civically engaged and
active within my own community
and that's it civic engagement
has gotten me where I am today
and has helped me in my own
recovery disenfranchisement
disproportionately affects
people of color and the poor you
include.
In high numbers here in New
Mexico there's a huge number of
people in my own hometown of
Espanola lying to being loved
ones that have been barred from
voting.
It is not a single person in my
value that hasn't been impacted
by it we urge each support H. B.
seventy four to help reduce the
barriers to voting we have
franchise minute thank you.
Thank you.
Berlin you are now and it.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Hannah
Burling and I'm speaking for the
league of women voters of New
Mexico the league's was promoted
legislation that encourages
participation in voting.
Our members who do voter
registration have encountered ex
felons who one of them and we've
all been struck by the obstacles
put in their way this is
especially remarkable as the
faster we integrate ex felons
into the mainstream of society
the less likely they are to re
offend we strongly support this
bill thank you.
Thank you next is Rikki Lee
Chavez you're now in muted.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you so much for.
You need Chavez what the Mexico
will defense lawyers
association.
This committee and others within
the legislative process to
identify ways in which we can
lower rates of recidivism this
is one of those ways we want to
be able to encourage people who
find themselves in our criminal
justice system.
T. and re enter into society in
all ways and this is one of
those very important.
Burke and thank you to the
advocates for voices we
encourage your support thank
you.
Thank you Mario Jimenez you are
now and made it.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my issue minister
coming because we support house
bill seventy four and believe
eligible citizens should not be
deprived of their
constitutionally guaranteed
right to vote as mentioned by
the chairwoman Chasey this
legislation allows for a simple
transaction between county
clerk's offices and corrections
this simple I process fixes what
has been a significant challenge
to citizens upon their re entry
which has consistently failed
many in their efforts to become
a registered voter and to
participate in elections for all
the reasons already mentioned by
other other individuals who have
testified we stand strong
support of HB seventy four and
again would like to see thank
Representative Chasey and the
expert witness Justin Allen for
his voice in leading this
advocacy thank you.
Thank you next is Eric.
Chamado you are now and it.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
tomorrow I'm a member of the leg
and I stand in support of HB
seventy four because it's the
basic theory of American
democracy that governments
derive their just powers from
the consent of the governed and
that consent comes only from
elections.
So then I think the ability to
give that consent on the basis
of the conviction actually
deprives those who are most
impacted by the awesome power of
our government and and thereby
undermines the legitimacy of our
public so we need to remove
every unnecessary obstacle for
returning citizens to
participate in our elections and
there's no good reason to delay
that participation I urge you to
advance HB seventy four with a
do pass recommendation thank
you.
Thank you next we have.
Maggie.
Senator auto you are now and
made it.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Maggie
sorry no I'm with the ACLU of
New Mexico we fully support this
legislation because denying the
right to vote to entire class of
citizens is deeply problematic
to a democratic society under
productive to effective reentry
and echoing the disinfect this
is an enticement of black and
brown communities
so enacting such law restore
fairness on our elections for
this reason we strongly
encourage you to support this
bill I thank the sponsor
Representative Chasey for
bringing this forward thank you.
Thank you next we have David
Representative.
You are now and it.
Okay hello hope you can hear me
yes we might thank you my name
is Debbie arrests I've born and
raised here in Albuquerque I
represent myself however I am
involved in the community with
many organizations including Ole
the kairos prison ministry for
the Santa Fe penitentiary of New
Mexico and I'm also a formerly
incarcerated individuals
committed a violent crime a
little more than fifteen twenty
years ago and ever since then
I've also I'm also part of the
I'm probably the first fell in
as part of a CPC on part of the
software C. PC as well and I
currently house of of an
individual I had the privilege
of of housing somebody that's
all currently on federal
probation and so I'm in full
support of H. B. R. of this bill
because I'm often times over
twenty five or thirty percent of
the people that I've met that
are incarcerated or the are are
are twenty five or thirty
percent have have a high school
diploma or higher that means
seventy five percent of people
in the state incarceration a
state penitentiary have been
failed by a school system or
some kind of system and and and
we all know that right now the
political atmosphere doesn't
look very good it looks kind of
bleach and many people are are
are disengaging from that and we
don't want that to happen we
want people to be involved in to
be engaged and the only way for
somebody to be engagement to be
involved is to be inclusive of
that person regardless of what
the been through of what they've
gone through we don't know what
their intent is unless we ask
them I think that that that just
restoring of rights in in of
itself allows for that platform
of people to to want to engage
with our community again to want
to rehabilitate themselves and
do better for themselves and
their families I'm a product of
of that of of wanting to to
change wanting to do better I've
had I I was able to vote I've
been off paper for about seven
years now and I'm still going to
continue to fall and I'm still
going to continue to help my
community and.
People that are most needed
because here in Albuquerque at
least one in three or maybe one
and four people have been
incarcerated that's over twenty
five percent of people that
you're excluding from a lot from
from from in the conversation
you're you're you're turning it
back on at the table and I for
one would love for you to just
extend your hand instead thank
you very much for your time
members of the committee and and
chair person thank you.
So.
Karen what like you are now and
it.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen would lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we stand in strong
support of this bill we want to
thank Representative chair check
chairwoman Chasey.
For bringing this bill and for
all the reasons stated better
than I could we support this
bill thank you.
Thank you Austin we us you are
now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Austin
we aqui and I'm here on behalf
of need education project and an
image of both and we stand today
in support of this legislation
for all the reasons already
stated by everybody that this is
a are an important step to re
integrating people to stop the
criminalization of people who
have served their time to make
sure that we're giving people
the opportunity to have a voice
in the society which better
trying to become involved in
trying to participate in that we
give them all the opportunity
and tools provided by the
constitution and by the state we
also understand this is a racial
equity issue that there is a
huge sentencing disparity in
especially New Mexico between
native and people of color their
non people of color counterparts
that you know you might commit a
crime that is is smaller you
know one mile the last one on
the right
that ultimately get your rights
suspended and you may not even
be aware of that and so after
you're trying to get them back
and trying to participate again
so we understand that you know
this is important and that it is
crucial to trying to get some
more racial equity in the state
and to give everyone an equal
point so we urge the members of
the committee to support and I
want to thank the sponsor for
for bringing this bill forward.
Thank you Brenda boatman you are
now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Brenda
boatman I'm a registered
lobbyist for Americans for
prosperity New Mexico I won't
repeat what my friends in
support of this bill have said
thus far but we do believe that
every individual has unique
talents and should be allowed to
realize their full potential we
support house bill seventy four
because we believe in people we
believe in second chances and we
think this bill removes barriers
for the people re entering our
communities we urge you to
please move this bill forward
thank you for your time.
Thank you next is Mandy Vigil
you are now and it.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Mandy Vigil
and the election director and
here on behalf of the office of
the secretary of state we stand
in strong support of this
legislation not only for the
reasons that have already been
mentioned but I'd like to
highlight that we feel like this
legislation would also simplify
and administrative process right
now that not only on behalf of
the secretary of state on all of
our county clerks across the
state and it would also ensure
that we don't unintentionally
kind of prevent an eligible
voter from participating in an
election and like to thank the
chairman and Justin for their
advocacy on this on this issue
thank you.
Thank you next we have lay less
alone.
You are now and it.
Thank you madam chair
representative my name is Layla
Salazar and I'm a member of the
advocacy organization inclusive
democracy New Mexico our goals
are to remove barriers to voting
voter registration meaningful
participation and representation
in our democracy and to increase
voter engagement among
historically disenfranchised and
therefore we strongly support
each agency for as it will
restore the right to vote for
thousands of Mexicans.
Personally serving as a voter
registration agent in the past
and come across with a few
people who said they were not
eligible registered about to the
previous conviction many had no
idea that that's a rights
restored upon completion of
their sentence and I also heard
stories of people who had to
jump through hoops to find the
right people working going
person for substance in order to
be able to register and and this
legislation those barriers.
Probation parole or intended to
reintegrate people back to
society and I believe that we do
need that the right to vote is
important part of what I think
Representative CC and Justin
Allen for the story thank you.
Thank you next we have Kim
Chavez Cook you're now and made
it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I and with the law
offices of the public defender
and again don't want to repeat
everything that's been said
before me I think I'm in very
good company of folks who were
able to explain the issues while
we stand in strong support to
the re in franchise meant of of
folks and believe that it will
help people to feel part of
their communities once they
reenter society thank you.
Thank you next we have J. D.
Matthews here now and it.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members and thank you
for sponsoring HB seventy four
yeah this is an important issue
for a lot of reasons I'm with a
New Mexico working families
party and I don't want to
reiterate all of the facts and
reasons to support the bill that
have been probably better stated
that I could on the issues I
don't think we should be using
voting and voting rights as part
of any punishment and
if we want to truly inclusive
society HB seventy four is
another step in the direction
that we need to get there and so
I urge the committee to support
this bill let's get it through
the Judiciary Committee and and
I appreciate it appreciate the
time to speak and the space for
a public comment that has been
really accessible so I
appreciate that.
Thank you.
John house you are now and
muted.
You'll just have to and then on
your end.
Sorry about that.
madam chair person committee
members of Justin other speakers
and attendees
I'm a resident of Santa Fe and
and president of Representative
us to Mexico nonprofit
organization that supports
democracy reforms in protection.
Taking away a person's
constitutional right to vote is
an additional an extreme penalty
to impose on top of the primary
sentence given a convicted felon
felon that is totally unrelated
to his crime.
nothing in the U. S.
constitution expressly or
impliedly sanctions Association
of such a penalty never the less
it has become the law of the
land in the US to do with
private persons convicted of any
kind of solid Tony no matter you
know the nature of the crime
around related it may be to the
right to fall.
Because the right to vote is
such a fundamental
constitutional rights as a
matter of justice and the
protection of individual
constitutional rights the right
to vote should be restored
immediately was a felon has
completed his or her sentence.
I want to repeat of the the
points made by others that and
we're storing the right to vote
would.
Help of.
Fenders reassemble it into
society and and that that is you
know that that's good you know
it's a win win situations we had
so good for the released
offender and society in general
but I would like to talk more
about you know the the
background that you know we've
had a long of history of
inherent structural racial and
biased in our criminal justice
system for most of the history
of society is chosen to address
unpleasant societal problems
like poverty and race bias
through the construction of
prisons more prisons and
confinement of minorities I
would disproportionally rather
than addressing the source of
these problems take in the way
that the right to vote of these
persons can thus be understood
in the context of the long
history of opposition to
minorities having the right to
vote.
From the age of slavery through
the Jim crow period and the
imposition of poll taxes and so
call literacy literacy tests up
to the bogus voter purges we
have seen in Florida and other
states and recent years.
for these reasons and the other
one stated I would strongly urge
the committee to the vote to
pass on this Madam.
Thank you next we have D. P. aid
New Mexico you are now unmuted.
Members of the committee the
only problem with the drug
policy alliance and strong
support this bill along with our
four thousand members across the
state.
Everything but we believe that
there's evidence that exercise
of the right to vote is an
important part of rehabilitation
I've reducing criminal
recidivism enhancing response.
We have a long indicate.
Thank you next we have miles to
go now.
No base at that rate.
You are now and made it.
Thank you good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
my name is miles to okay now
deputy director of overlay New
Mexico and I'm here to share a
story of one of our members who
is that correct.
Forces the herd in the space
Well madam chair members of the
committee my name is Alyssa
member of away I grew up in
Albuquerque New Mexico I was
convicted of a felony in twenty
eighteen and access fully
completed my parole in twenty
twenty was able to vote in this
past election I think it's
important to automatically
restore voting rights in New
Mexico it's important because
it's our constitutional rights
as citizens there are too many
voices that are being silenced
and we have the right to be
heard voting to me means I can
support candidates who want to
raise the minimum wage and
create pathways for citizenship
for citizenship from
undocumented family members
please vote to support and pass
HB seventy four thank you.
Thank you thank you next is
Rachel Biggs you are now and
made it.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is Rachel
Biggs and the policy director
Albuquerque Health Care for the
homeless I won't repeat what's
already been said that we stand
in strong support of this
legislation and thank the
chairman for bringing it forward
we really believe that the only
way to truly end homelessness
and great housing stability is
to limit all barriers to civic
and community engagement for
people without homes and this
legislation will to a great deal
in terms of limiting those
barriers thank you for your
support.
Thank you that concludes our
public comment so we will now go
to the committee Representative
Townsend.
Thank you madam chair and and
madam chair
I have a couple of questions.
As I read this.
Is it your aunt and come
graduations Justin I'm up and
proud of you for what you've
what you're doing.
Representative Chasey
Is it your intent that a.
Convicted felon on parole would
be able to vote.
Madam chair and Representative
Townsend yes that that the
person who.
It is who has completed enough
of his or her sentence and is no
one.
We are
rated we'll be able to vote that
would cut it on the red tape.
Madam chair just one remind J.
G. at all south.
Madam chair I don't know whether
it's my and or Representative
Chasey CM but one of us sounds
like a violin and I was just
trying to.
Did you repeat that please.
I'm sorry madam chair
Representative Townsend you
didn't hear any of my response
no ma'am I did not I'm sorry.
So we have a restoration now
we've had for twenty years
restoration of voting rights for
felons but we don't let and.
Restore their rights until all
the papers completed and so
forth and it's it's it's
basically administrative
nightmare so yes of.
Former fellow.
Hello in who might still have
some time on parole.
Would be able to vote if your
sheet where.
Free and not no longer
incarcerated under this measure
and I also said madam chair I do
need to amend this at some point
okay so that's what I said did
you hear me this time idea.
Madam chair and and
Representative if you'd like to
go ahead and and then that now
I.
I I can continue afterwards.
I can answer Representative
Townsend questions and then
we'll take a break and.
All right are there any
convictions of of felons that
would not be.
that this
voting right would would not be
applicable to.
There are no car no it's
included in this bill nobody
will be denied the right to vote
because of a specific current.
Okay thank you if I might add
madam chair that's the way the
law is now it's not like only
certain kinds of former felons
get to that it's all
that's the way that of the
restoration bill works.
Excuse me law.
madam chair and and not on the
last page of one of the analysis
being no the fiscal impact
report
The statement was made convicted
felons voter registration would
continue to be cancelled and
they would remain in eligible
about while in prison or on
probation or parole and so by
sick leave what this bill that
you're presenting does is it.
I would allow those people on
probation or parole would be
able to vote in is that the only
change that this bill mix.
I would say essentially yes
that
It would be just going to read
one.
It seems complicated but it's
really that's the chain.
We did add some clarification
about the fact that that can
occur and MVD office.
Although.
This.
Is that we didn't.
Eight that but it bait St Clair.
We wanted to be sure that the
state was staged
the restoration of voting rights
so we were going after the
ability of a former felon to
hold public office.
That's not part of what we're
changing.
And I would just say that one of
the emails I just got it so be I
don't know and I don't know if
it was from a constituent but
was with voter registrar and she
said I've been a registrar for
five years and this is.
It is very problematic.
And she had a family friend who
was trying to get a former felon
family member registered.
Pardoning and it was.
Very complex for them.
Well
madam chair and representative
I continue to look at a lot of
I've had a lot of emails and in
a few phone calls on this bill
next I I I would say mixed in
their response
Most of them are in support of
the convict it's a thousand
regaining their voting rights
after parole and probation and.
And I was just interested is
there.
I mean there's a number of
things that fell on can't do
when they when they're when they
are released on parole or
probation they can't buy a
firearm they can't there there's
a whole list of things and this
one seems to be.
and the issue is
and maybe just and you get you
can
Yes what makes boating.
that important to a person that
has been released from prison
that may still be on probation
or parole.
It's important because most
people will find themselves in
prison lost their voice long
before they became incarcerated
that's the reason we have
accepted plea bargains and
allowed others to make decisions
for us and our and about it was
kind of saying.
Of.
This world is informing.
You know restoring the right to
vote is giving us the
opportunity to be included in
the functions of society there
were normally denied it's hard
enough getting a job housing and
education with the barriers in
place.
Of voting is is not something it
has nothing to do with justice
or UP RG disenfranchisement has
nothing to do with justice or
deterring crime it's perpetual
punishment that leads people to
believe that full rehabilitation
is impossible and so by.
Restoring the the giving us the
opportunity to vote it reassures
us that we can be rehabilitated
that's how it's affecting me I'm
sorry getting kind of emotional
but it it's really a it's school
how it's of Texas motion we it
restores the belief that we we
have a place in society.
Where as many of us and we we
did.
Well
Madam chair representative.
And Mr Allen I would just tell
you that I think you're probably
you sound like your poster child
for doing it the right way
you you have been through the
process and
I I commend you for your efforts
to.
Because
and continue to become
a.
Active citizen in your community
and that's to be commended and I
and I I do mean that.
For me.
Voting should be restored but I
think parole and probation is
short cutting the sense that a
judge has in posed and
And that's that that's
problematic for me but I I
commend you for what you've done
congratulate basins and madam
chair of that so that's all I
have.
Representative Representative
Chasey do you want to move.
with your amendment forward or
should we can.
Madam chair for discussion
purposes I move
The amendment.
And Committee members should
have it it's of the two two
number is two one nine five
three six point one it is
included I know in the committee
analysis.
So if you have that there in
front of you everything.
Is included there.
Right.
We.
Sure on page three line twenty
three.
This is where we're going to of
the motor vehicle parked on
Strike the word for.
In certain Lou there of a
common.
On page twenty four after member
insert the following phrase.
Or at an office of the motor
vehicle division of the taxation
and revenue department.
Period.
We're adding and little on page.
Three okay still on page three
after like twenty five so
we're going to add this new
subsection E. all persons
released from imprisonment who
are otherwise qualified to
register to vote or to.
Register to vote or to vote are
automatically presumed eligible
to register and vote.
On page four line I.
I'm actually wondering if rights
should still be plural but on
page four line I.
After rights insert to hold
office of public trust.
And this.
Would occur that on page four
line eleven.
Page four line sixteen.
In page four line twenty two.
House Tom down if rights should
be plural or singular.
I'm.
subsections there.
B. C. and D..
Madam chair what I just year
Alex was I believe it should be
the.
Right singular to hold public
office and then be changed over
from our it is.
On okay.
So.
That actually creates a little
bit of the work
on the technical amendment there
I want to be sure let's see
who's on here because I know.
Trying to this one is on the
meeting that's good I know
George is not here today.
So as.
Just wait then on.
Page four line I.
We would strike the ASX.
And insert to hold a public
office okay and then on page.
Levin.
After state.
I see which is care.
So it.
I actually think we don't have
to do it but I think Tom maybe
right and if I want to change
that to is and make right
singular I don't think we need
to do that the way.
I think that the and then the
okay like it is and
we can fix the grammar if
necessary for the floor and then
it.
So but this amendment that two
one nine five three.
Eight point one works and I'm
getting text messages but we see
if it's for.
I know it's they're not from the
not about this Amanda so okay
great
If you want to discuss the
amendment that's great.
Right so discussion on the
amendment.
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair it's not on the
amendment.
Okay thank you Representative it
looks like there's no discussion
on the amendment.
thank you
madam chair I'm option.
Okay.
Thank you I'll second that.
Is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment.
Okay seeing none except
scratching of the head.
we can adopt that amendment.
And now back to the bill.
Representative.
Armstrong.
You'll have to and meal
Representative.
Sorry thank you I'm trying to
Take a look at the same time I'm
listening and I was going to
make a comment section of about
the doing allowing this right
out of on incarceration instead
of waiting for through role in
on probation in the yes
somewhere to getting people
enrolled in Medicaid before they
leave there's a whole process as
people are leaving incarceration
we have an opportunity to get
their driver's license enroll in
Medicaid to do all the paperwork
to transition out in this can be
done at the same time is there
doing all of that so that you
don't have there's not that gap
when they leave of trying to
track people down let me know
what they what they can do where
they have to go when they can
get it done one of them for all
paperwork is on file so that and
we do do it last time we heard
this bill there was so much
the lady in red tape to try to
get that done in was and
administrative nightmare were
this would facilitate it so much
easier so thank you
Representative Chasey Madam
chair for bringing this forward
again and I'm in full support
thank you.
Thank you representative
Armstrong Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair
I've said previously that you
know I think that part of their
sentence is of the probation and
parole period and until they
have done that they have not
completed their re integration
and when we talked about re
integration it's from prison.
During their probation or parole
period back into society and so
I think it needs to remain at
the end of that
I thank you this would be better
if we had legislation that said
at the end of your probation or
parole period the department
shall notify of.
The secretary of state's office
that you're eligible for our
having your voting rights
restored.
One of the things of that
bothers me and madam chair and
and Representative Chasey
A person could be imprisoned for
voter fraud or some type of
voter irregularity and when they
come out with this legislation
thank you now vote and I think
that's a bit troubling.
Anyway that's my comment on the.
On this in my justification why
can't support it thank you.
Thank you representative.
Any other comments questions.
Would you pass.
Has motion by Representative
Armstrong and I'll second that.
Click to call.
yes Representative as Amanda
Baker.
I I would like to make a closing
statement because
first of all I want to respond
to Representative Rehm I did not
ask me a question but in closing
I get to do that anyway and that
is that if.
I don't know if there is anyone
in prison in New Mexico on a
felony voter fraud convict
but probably it's puritan on one
hand but right now if there were
such a person and that person
completed probation parole that
person would be but depending
again because we are on the
books and have hello the books
for twelve years the restoration
of the right to.
Reform dollars so I just wanted.
Hello everyone this is not year
after we've had the restoration
of the right to vote this is
your twenty.
That we have had this on the
books it isn't working.
So those of you who prefer to
have it the way you want it the
way you want it doesn't work.
And if you believe in voter the
right to restore the vote then
you want to find a way that
works if you believe in the
science that we have learned in
the last twenty years that one
way to reduce recidivism to
reduce prison costs and keep
society safer is to re engage
people in the community so if
you want to do that that's what
you get to do with this doctor
and if you believe in a second
chance the ability Tatian.
And I really appreciated the
The conservative support from
Americans for prosperity I
believe in rehabilitation and I
believe that a second chance.
And I believe that it makes
society safer and I hope you
will vote for this bill no
matter what you thought when you
first set.
Thank you.
Representative Chasey and thanks
again to hear your expert
witness sent Justin Allen so we
have a motion for it to pass on
Vigil seventy four as amended
and we can take the call now.
Representative okay yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook now.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Eli.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night Burt no.
Representative rain.
Representative Townsend.
The.
Thanks check.
Madam chair.
Madam chair.
Yes.
We have a vote of six to four
two passed.
Right private of sixty four you
have a do pass.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you thank you just is.
For being here today.
Thank you for having.
The next item on the agenda is
representative when I heard.
The uniforms.
Secure transaction language.
Thank you madam chair and if
Jack Burton could be are raised
as a panelist he would be my
experts.
I see that he's joined up.
Madam chair house bill sixty six
is a uniform law commission.
Touch up.
Measure.
It is one that
Provides for two additional
definitions the first on page
thirteen defining good faith the
second on page twenty one
defining public finance
transaction.
And then all the subsequent the
sections are remember that after
that the second definitions of
page twenty nine contains some
minor touch up language.
Twenty three
have the defined term of public
finance transaction in the year
and the discusses what that is
page thirty four have the work
adds the word yes.
Age thirty six results in the
repeal of of a section that's no
longer needed
it was amended.
To perform the language in the
state government committee and.
Mr Burke and I are are here to
answer any questions it simply a
bill to I do some slight
modification primarily dealing
with that public finance
transactions into the New Mexico
uniform commercial code
specifically article money.
Mr Burton would you have any.
Have with respect to that.
Madam chair members of the
committee I have nothing to add
to that.
Answer any questions.
Okay let's go to the audience
and see if there are people here
in supporters of the bill are in
opposition to the bill so could
we get a pullout for twenty
seconds.
If you're in favor of house bill
sixty six as amended please vote
yes if you're in opposition
please vote no.
I were seconds.
Okay we'll stop we were fifty
fifty okay.
Let's go to the
Members the attendees and see
who would like to speak first I
will begin with those in
opposition if you'll put your
hands up if you're in
opposition.
I'm Christina Chavez.
Please send it yourself in your
and you can talk now I apologize
I'm actually in favor of this
bill I raised it too soon
Going on I think we'll just go
with the flow here okay sorry
about that my name is Christina
Chavis I'm that director
businesses services for the New
Mexico secretary of state's
office and I just wanted to say
that the secretary of state's
office is in favor of this.
As it will help to clean up and
to make it more uniform for the
F. current federal laws so and
we're available for any
questions thank you.
Sitting on their hands.
Is there anyone else who wishes
to speak.
So it looks like even if people
voted now we don't have any of
those people who wish to weigh
in here so we'll go back to
Representative divert.
thank you madam chair
Essentially the the one definite
or the major definitional
changes public finance
transactions and deals with that
you're probably affects two or
three lawyers in the state are
the.
All of the.
Language changes to perform so
that it reads exactly as the
your for.
Los read in their present
version so with that the Mr
Burton and I stand for any
questions of the committee my.
Representative let's see speak
Mister speaker.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I had a question
about
a broader question when what is
the.
What is the problem or issue
that we're facing with this
bill.
Mr or madam chair Mister
speaker.
I don't think it's a it's a
problem I think it's basically
acknowledging that public
finance transactions are needed
to be brought in to the uniform
commercial code secure
transaction portion article line
and so this is a vehicle to do
that
Mr Burton would you have
anything else to add their.
Madam chair Mister speaker
members of the committee I think
that's correct they're actually
already included and
governmental transfers which is
part of the act we're just
making that explicit that they
are included in there some New
Mexico all lawyers were having a
hard time finding the because we
were in that uniform term public
finance transactions so we
decided to use that uniform
Turk.
Okay it's so we.
In high presume that correct me
if I'm wrong at all the.
Thank you will now be defined as
a public finance transactions
are already so they're already
in the country saying just a
different under a different
definition.
Madam chair.
Mr speaker members of the
committee that is correct
they're already in there
in the in the general term of
government transfers.
We're just making that explicit
by using the uniform term public
finance transactions.
In in what is the and what so
again is there any other than
making this easier to provide
for lawyers looking at the
definition is there any other
consequence to enacting this
bill.
The that's the main that's the
main one of the main
consequences the other
consequence is on page thirty
three lines I'm sorry line
I'm cert page thirty four line
to we're adding the work
that was taken out.
Accidentally when we passed
these amendments a few years
back and the of the noble kirke
lawyer wrote do Raul Burciaga
state Hey you got to put that
back in it's causing real
problems to buy consumer clients
because you left it out so
that's.
Now the minor amendment it looks
like but they're saying it
actually causes major
consequences to our consumer
clients so that's actually a big
big J. one more is a big change
for that so we it's a big it's a
big change.
The other two newest what have
you so when you say madam chair
when you say
consumer clients what is that.
That's what they tell us and I
don't really understand it Mr
speaker madam chair that's just
what they told roll Senator
major change but major ovation
it made a big change in that
section in that subsection
eighty three of that section.
and it it you know you have to
work in the area to understand
what they were talking about but
They they forward the forwarded
the email to me and I work with
chase that order to draft the
amendment few years back and
we've been trying to get it
passed.
madam chair Mister speaker
I don't I wasn't party to those
conversations but.
We'll see up above and.
Page thirty three why fifteen.
The R. word yes so so basically
except as otherwise provided in
sub section G. of the section a
secure party more except
collateral in full or partial
satisfaction of the obligation
it secures only itself.
And then this subparagraph three
if you don't have that this the
the preparatory language the
collaterals consumer good it
didn't really make sense so now
you have.
All these things that they exist
you can and set partially or
fully satisfied.
That in itself collateral is
consumer goods.
Then the collateral is not in
the possession of the dead or
when the debtor consents to the
acceptance so are.
We had some comments early on
that that double S. doesn't did
need to be there but at and
actuality it does need to be
there because the the yes that's
were inserting limit set to the
types of of collateral that is
affected by that subparagraph
three so it only deals with
consumer goods.
The confusion but I think
Madam chair representative Mr
Burton I think you're missing
the word and at the end of line
seventeen H. thirty three.
If you read it without it
without the word and at the end
of FY seventeen I are I think it
also doesn't make sense this is
current.
Going back to work.
Where you are the item I was
looking at yeah so page thirty
three line.
One seventeen page thirty three
after the semi colon I think you
need to work in.
I just I'm looking at the
numbers in context so I can't
follow that way I'll go to the
other one thank you right
because right now it says that
is secure party mix of
collateral for action the
obligation secures only F. one
the debtor consents to the
acceptance under subsection C.
of this section.
It is no.
Junction.
It is to the secured party's not
receive I mean I think both of
these things have to happen
right the debtor has to consent
to the exception of this of the.
The has consented acceptance and
subsections in section and this
is your party doesn't receive.
Notification of the.
Objection.
They would meet those next four
criteria that's correct and then
you have three on page thirty
four if it's consumer goods and
then you have the and at the end
the line for the which brings
all of those sections into play
and for.
So I see.
Okay.
So.
He's been.
Start again you
okay okay I'm getting confused
between the letters interest
madam chair the other question I
had is the definition of good
faith.
It's on I think it is on page
twelve I think.
Page thirteen yes Sir page
thirteen so madam chair
representative.
I I don't know that I've seen.
The term before.
Quote honesty in fact.
Madam chair Mister speaker I
would agree with you until I
read this I had not seen that
that either this is how the
uniform commercial code is
defining good right now.
And madam chair Representative
I'd.
It seems to me like my
understanding good faith is that
the other person father they
were in the right thought that
they were acting appropriately
and thought that they were.
Performing correctly.
In sort of a a good faith is a
subjective standard.
Yes to the mentality of the.
Person is acting in good faith
or not.
This is a you have to be.
Honest in fact so he.
It is contradictory you could be
you know that subjectively I
feel that I'm acting in good
faith.
But if it turns out the facts
show that I.
There was.
Good my factual assumption was
wrong but I'm not acting
honestly in fact is that.
And I I fear madam chair that
Representative night working I
and Mister Burton are all
operating far field from any
area of the law in which we ever
practice I I have no idea what
this means I just I just saw
that I was very strange.
Madam chair you Mr speaker I.
I do deal with the article nine
in my practice for.
The way our I read that and Mr
bird you might correct me if I'm
wrong that are honestly in fact
in the observance of reasonable
commercial standards for dealing
our mains that you have to
approach it as a as a reasonable
person that that.
Deals with this type of
And Matt
you can't you can't hide behind.
Your actual knowledge of things
that we're gonna contrary to
that.
You know you're you're.
You have to.
Come to the table with the
actual knowledge that you
possess are you can't hide
behind.
Maybe well I didn't exactly know
that
our our I think you're you're
stuck with what you what you
know and so I can't I wasn't
part of the the grocery ations
of the UCC when when the staff
was negotiated but there are
this is a language that they
have come up with and if we want
our act to near the uniformed
are are this will be the
definition for.
Of the scholars that are only
uniform law commission have come
up with that I'm sure they have.
Whether a of of our comments and
and things that go along with
the.
It will Representative before we
bring this drop on the floor
thank you.
Maybe ask madam chair.
Representative driver keeping us
your purchase here in this area
were.
Something on on that honesty in
fact just make sure we're not
doing something and I yeah I
hate to always ask questions
about these uniform laws right I
just.
You know I have a hard time
forgetting it was for five years
ago we have one of these bills
and it came in he was and I was
just cleanup language and yeah
we found these provisions in
there that allowed mortgage
companies to file for closure
that signing documents and waive
signature requirements and
change presentment opportunity
here and all the staff and I've
always been a little.
Skittish on these
as results is that this one does
not seem like that madam chair
representative that I'm
interested in your.
Just a paragraph on this honest
you think Google it since we've
been talking about it seems like
your place it turns up in
uniform commercial code so
you know maybe it's not that big
a deal but I just.
See I appreciate no a little
more.
managers only questions thank
you.
Madam chair and Mister speaker
Mr Burke and I will certainly
try to ferret that out and I I
might remind the speaker you put
me on this.
Next I have Representative I
madam chair I did so because I
need you have excellent answers
to every question all the
process
madam chair Mister speaker thank
you.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair Representative
Robert I was just listening to
the debate I I thought the
speaker is good points
And he covered up so I I don't
need for PS questions but if if
there's an explanatory note in
the year from laws or something
about that.
I appreciate seeing that before
the the floor debate so I can
better understand that thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Macquarie will
we'll try to get that to you as
soon as possible.
Okay.
Are there other hands anyone
else wish to speak.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
I move a do pass.
Also removes to pass
Representative Nibert seconds
the motion.
Okay let's call the roll please.
Representative occurring.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong said.
With the same comments as the
speaker and make and
Representative McQueen about
yes.
Representative Cook this is to
be passed yes yes yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Eli.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative nine.
yes.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Thank you
madam chair.
Yes.
By a vote of ten to zero we have
a due pass.
Okay you have to pass on
Representative night I was going
to say yes to table just to get
Representative Cook.
Because.
Well I thought that should be
that okay okay so we're.
the extension I don't and and we
should have the Majority Leader
I'm ready to present to.
Bill twenty seven.
Representative Sheryl Williams
Stapleton are you there.
Or is your sheet setting a
designated here.
These are you advising us of
something.
Expects to panelists great yeah
you don't.
Are you there.
If you are can you raise your
hand.
He's.
Is already.
Okay.
Yes there I don't see
Representative Stapleton.
I'll be happy to cover for her
our or perhaps maybe
representative Armstrong would
do that so that we can go ahead
and let her experts
President.
I'm madam chair I'm happy to do
that and hopefully someone is
texting or to come.
Yes I'll do that too.
Okay thank you and I'm madam
chair I'm gonna turn it right to
our experts on house bill twenty
seven.
Hey there Sonya or or Tommy
wished to go first present the
bill.
Sign your I had.
You are muted or we can't hear
you.
Madam chair can you hear me is
that better.
Yes we can song and we can hear
you I can't hear you okay great
sorry about that those
Your budget is supposed to work
but they don't anyway good
afternoon madam chair and
committee on Sonya Smith and I'm
also the secretary designate for
the department of Veterans
Services but I'm here today to
talk about hazing.
Presently hazing is a crime in
forty four states it is not to
be confused
action to see current workers.
It is usually done on on going
basis hazing is associated with
someone seeking admission or
membership to one organization
and is typically done on a
single event for admission into
our fraternity or sorority.
New Mexico remains one of six
states that does not recognize
hazing as a crime.
This is the third time we've had
an opportunity to present this
legislation with the hopes we
are successful this year.
This thing is still happening on
campuses and those committing
the acts should be held
accountable.
Well we can see the physical
effects of hazing the most
damaging are the emotional and
mental effects that we can't see
and sadly sometimes this can
lead to self harm.
I am a member of delta sigma
theta sorority incorporated a
public service sorority founded
over one hundred eighty years
ago on the campus of Howard
University.
My sorority along with the other
black Greek letter
organizations known as the
divine line have zero tolerance
tolerance policies for hazing.
Those found guilty of hazing are
reported to law enforcement and
face sanctions from the sorority
leading up to expulsion from
membership.
Our purpose here today is to
raise the awareness of hazing
and its damaging effects.
As you can see we take this
matter very seriously and highly
encourage hazing be recognized
as a crime in New Mexico thank
you madam chair committee.
Thank you has.
And Justice Joel did you want to
add anything judge Joel.
Madam chair a Representative
Armstrong well I'm not be
repetitive of the secretary
designate Smith but I I do want
to say that perhaps my expertise
is is not the fact that I I
serve on the bench.
In the state of New Mexico for
twenty two years but that the I
like Sonya have as part of my
background of involvement in
historically black fraternity
omega sigh I paternity
incorporated
as a student at New Mexico
university New Mexico State
University pardon me and a law
student at the university of New
Mexico.
Paternity life was was part of
my experience I think I think
I've always wanted to contrast
the social action a function of
my fraternity with of the image
of of the party hearty
fraternities that the somehow
Has the deaths that we see
publicized I think this to taste
the statistics show that there
have consistently been deaths in
our colleges and universities
and and so
it bears out the importance of
making a public statement and
and I would ask the committee to
the past house bill twenty seven
the qualifying a crime of hazing
and I I am pleased to answer any
questions that the committee
might have for me thank you
madam chair and representative
Armstrong.
Thank you
madam chair I think we're now
ready to stand for questions.
Will hold here for just a second
I'm assuming that are chairman
chase is trying to reach.
leader Stapleton.
I do see Cheryl Stapleton on the
attendee list.
Police if you could move her
over.
We can let the.
Representative Stapleton are you
able to hear us yes.
Madam chair.
It and
Representative stable Tennessee
representative Armstrong and I I
took a student in your place and
and your experts have both
commented we were about to
go to the audience and but I
thank you you should have an
opportunity to
make additional comments on your
bill.
Madam chair I I thank you very
much for sitting in for me I
have been listening to the
presentation since one thirty I
was on and apparently the staff
didn't see my name in order to
move me into the section that
I'm supposed to be but I have
been sitting here patiently
waiting so thank you very much
and I apologize for whatever
problems that created that I
couldn't get through that she
didn't notice that I was in I
was on and I have been on so
madam chair and members of the
committee I'm House Bill
twenty seven creates a crime
creates a new misdemeanor of
haze in I'm provide penalties
for personal will knowingly
commits Hazen madam chair
members of the committee.
The committee said Hazen Act of
the public a private post
secondary educational
institution by requiring I'm not
the person to perform and act
all create the situation that
recklessly or intentionally
endangers the mental physical
health of another and madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Activities fall into three major
categories and have the capacity
to inflict mental and physical
harm on its target at any level
how what differential hazing I'm
madam chair members of the
committee an example of that may
be depriving privileges and
requiring new members to perform
duties not required of existing
members and harassment hazing
madam chair and members of the
committee would be by the
Beatles tracks so implied tracks
sleep deprivation stunts with
crude oil all humiliating acts
Madam chair of the other would
be violent hazing the use of
alcohol or drugs paddling public
nudity expected illegal activity
abductions kidnapping bondage
Brandon water intoxication madam
chair and members of the
committee wanted for states
currently have he's impact
across the entire hazing laws
across the United States and six
states does not New Mexico is
one of those states and madam
chair members the committee we
hope that house bill twenty
seven will be passed so that we
may have an anti hazing law in
the state of New Mexico madam
chair this bill this very bill
exactly as is passed from the
Judiciary Committee and pass out
of the house for a couple of
years ago and now madam chair
now that I listen to judge do
will and Sonya Smith from
Veterans Affairs I now stand for
questions.
Yes thank you very much.
We have not gone to the audience
have we had a representative
Armstrong covered for me.
No I would not go on the
audience yeah alright let's
start there and just in case
you're it's your first visit to
Judiciary.
Is generally
in the to the audience here the
at the attendees we if we were
in the committee room we would
say with all those in favor of
the bill please raise your hand
in and then we would say with
all those in opposition please
raise your hand and did we would
hear from everyone so we have a
little Paul and we have twenty
seconds and that will be posted
and you have twenty seconds to
say yes if you support the bill
and and you know if you do not
so if you would do that let's
begin that novel.
And then we'll take Madam.
Okay so we had nine people sixty
nine percent favor.
Four people thirty one percent
in opposition and will now go to
the attendees I'm gonna start
please don't raise your hand and
tell I tell you which side of
the health first let's start
with the opposition first so we
know what those who are in
opposition please raise your
hands.
Looks like I don't have anyone
in opposition who wishes to
speak we check I here we go
Rikki Lee Chavez.
Go ahead regulate late you may
talk.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association I want to start off
by thanking the sponsors and her
advocates however we do
respectfully have to stand in
opposition to this measure
however the opposition should
not be viewed as
disregard or something akin to
not acknowledging that there are
victims of hazing that we have
seen stories of what happens
when he seen
does occur and so I wanted to
just note that for the committee
however NMCDLA generally opposes
the creation of new crimes
specifically when those crimes
that are created are focused at
younger people we think that
it's more appropriate to focus
our efforts and attention on
creating educational programs so
as not to rope in more people
into a criminal justice system
that makes it too easy to fall
into cycles of recidivism for
those reasons madam chair we
still that addressing the really
the very real issue and concern
of he's in might be better
served if there was an
educational or campaign of the
store to address why it is
important to refrain from these
sorts of activities as opposed
to creating a crime for those
reasons madam chair members of
the committee and sponsors and
advocates we respectfully oppose
the legislation thank you for
your time.
Thank you the agency if there's
anyone else to speak in
opposition I don't see hands
raised all right let's go to
those in favor will you please
raise your hands.
First I have Ryan Lindquist.
Madam chair and committee
members hello my name is Ryan
question I'm the director of the
student activity center at the
university New Mexico I have
over twenty years experience
working with our fraternity in
forty community UNM not
including my four years as a
member of the sigma pi
fraternity as an undergraduate
student I've seen hazing take
place in many different types of
organizations not just for
Trinity's and forties and in
many different forms over my
time as an employee at UNM as
one of six states nationwide who
does not have hazing legislation
our administration staffing
chapters are all in support of
H. B. twenty seven we realize
it's important to have policy in
the books and provider justice
system another tool in
addressing actions that do not
belong in our fraternities
sororities and society as a
whole UNM has been able to
address most hazing incidents
occurring on our campus for our
own student conduct to
additional process but there
have been no repercussions
providing individuals through
New Mexico's judicial system.
Only very high profile and
extremely violent incidents like
Kappa sigma fraternity shooting
a new member New Mexico State
University have seen criminal
charges we hope this bill will
be a step in holding those who
choose to he's criminally
responsible.
Well we do support the passage
of H. B. twenty seven we intend
to work with.
With majority floor leader
Williams Stapleton to strengthen
this legislation next year many
the actions of hazing on our
campus have been committed by
alumni of those organizations
this bill does not apply to
alumni as it is based on student
on student hazing we would also
like to see specific hazing
behaviors address such as
directing encouraging and first
hand knowledge of the planning
of hazing this allows
authorities to pursue charges
against the president team
captain or in adviser of an
organization if they know about
the upcoming hazing and do
nothing to stop Representative
if we require leaders who know
about and allow these traditions
to occur members will void
injuries and in worst cases
death.
The future bill should also name
specific actions so there's no
question about if the hazing law
will apply.
The last change we would like to
address with HB twenty seven
next year is not to limit to
student on student and
postsecondary institution.
I think we all know the highest
profile incident of hazing in
New Mexico was the Las Vegas
Robertson high school football
team incident of two thousand
and eight.
Hazing does not just occur in
higher education and
fraternities and sororities it
happens in private clubs private
sports clubs RTC units high
school's street games Kings and
community clubs this bill
eventually needs to apply to all
organizations and people who
commit these dangerous
activities this bill in future
version should not hinder
coaching conditioning and
instructor led activities it
should stop the danger
shenanigans of an organization
to get passed down from
generation to generation as a
rite of passage to belong.
To see the terrible impacts of
hazing simply Google the names
for kill Siddiqui Tim piazza and
Robert champion these people
were killed during hazing acts
they were fraternity then it
Penn state a marine corps
recruit in a marching band
member of Florida a and M.
university.
We do not want this to happen in
New Mexico.
I also invite you to join
families and members of.
Of excuse me I also invite you
to join families and members of
students who were killed during
hazing activities during a free
webinar are a weapon are called
mom and love mom and dad turning
tragedy into progress on March
twenty first simply email me and
I will provide you that we the
majority of our fraternities
ready community will be in
attendance once again we support
the passage of HB twenty seven
and look forward to working with
majority floor leader Williams
Stapleton and any other willing
legislators to strengthen this
bill next year and provide
prosecutors another tool for
accountability when assault and
battery conditions may not be
met.
I'd be happy to answer any
questions about hazing you have
since I have a lot of experience
working with groups that may be
associated with that thank you
very much for the opportunity to
speak.
Your next I have sure I'd
gotten.
Thank you madam chair and hello
my name is Jay gun I served as a
president the Interfraternity
council the university New
Mexico university council is a
self government entity that
oversees regulates and advocates
for all the social present at
the university I'm here on
behalf I see to offer both our
support and advice for house
bill twenty seven the bill
street crime rate we recognize
that there are other members of
your and faculty year to offer
their stand for in the bill I
see also believe they can
provide a critical perspective
from the eyes of student leaders
within the fraternal community
is is discussing Highness Act as
the experts previously explained
in the Interfraternity council
at UNM strongly support any
legislation to make a criminal
however we believe language in
the current bill excludes
crucial aspect that hinders its
ability fully address all forms
of hazing and the speaking to
your committee is a chance to
address those shortcomings
before the bill is passed first
of all we believe that the
funding hazing is only
consisting of acts committed by
students at post secondary
educational institutions limits
a lot from seeing many possible
individuals who are still
capable of rate our own anti
hazing education training have
taught us that fraternity alumni
are some of the most common
perpetrators of paging winters
and fraternal organization with
the language in those and this
bill is a long line or not
students would not be considered
to be hazing under law that is
not to mention the possible band
students in high school with
members of the local rec league
point is it is not something
exclusive we have the college in
order to truly prevent all forms
you the defining language should
be expanded Furthermore we
believe that the closets
explained items such as coaching
training conditioning and
physical etcetera our physical
education in such a to not be
using these crucial loopholes in
the bill.
The much of the hazing that has
occurred in fraternities
athletic teams and other sooner
organizations around the nation
including include things like
calisthenics and the test of
physical endurance we highly
recommend that further clarity
be at to the section in order to
ensure the knowing to the ever
seen seeks to defend its clear
hazing by defining it as
training or physical education
finally we ask you all to
consider raising of sentencing
for hazing from Mr misdemeanor
to low degree felony using often
starts out as a small a small
seemingly harmless actions but
it creates a culture that only
gets worse and so real
substantial and sometimes that
the harms done the weight of a
loss of reflects that reflect
its potential dangers so again
the Interfraternity council the
University of New Mexico
strongly urges the committee and
the house to pass this
legislation to make a crime of
hazing because of the terrible
potential the act contento let's
see revisions made to house bill
twenty seven to ensure that is
fully able to address and
prevent hazing in any and all
forms regardless of the outcome
your name I've C. will continue
to advocate for strengthening
laws against hazing and we will
be in touch with you ought to do
so in the future I ask you
what's wrong we consider each of
our recommendations I think
Representative Representative
Stapleton for continuing to be
an outspoken voice contagion I
thank you all very much for your
time with that I yield.
Thank you very much Mr gun it
looks to me like we have
a lot everyone who wishes to
speak to do so so I will go now
to questions from the committee
and the state records to it.
When you first.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Stapleton.
So I was.
The history of this bill similar
bills that I opposed toward in
the past
but I'm not sure I'm gonna vote
for today in the differences I
I'm concerned about.
the creation of yet another
crime and and and as
Ms Chavez said you know
particularly want primarily
directed at young people.
And you know I was sure that you
know personally I I take this
very seriously and I can recall
when when I was in person and
was thinking about going to
college one of the selling
points of the college hi
ultimately picked.
Was that they had abolished
fraternities.
and that's it press extreme way
to approach it but that was
effective.
In the limited discrimination on
campus as well I think I think
that was the main reason
but then chairs Stapleton can
you tell me why.
We would want to involve these
young people in the criminal
justice system rather than have
this be administrative.
change rather than have.
Universities have hazing in
fraternities or athletic teams
suspend or ban those.
The athletic teams or journeys.
Madam chair and.
Representative McQueen that this
piece of legislation is more of
a tech deterrent all individuals
that participate in
organizations and clubs and
fraternities also righties that
may have have hazing taking
place because if you have the
legislation that shows.
Reciprocally Hazen is a crime
right now there's nothing that
says hazing is not a crime and
Hazen is taking place to the
point of that at times so if you
have the legislation slide show
Hazen is a crime it's a
deterrent to those that want to
commit hazing to know that it
exists in place that they can't
do that.
I also have any one of my
expert witness address your
question also I'm not sure judge
and you will also need a if if
any of you would like to
respond.
Yes madam chair of.
Madam of Majority Leader
Representative McQueen I don't
think that it's a either or
proposition I think that the
there is an administrative
action which takes place when
there is awareness of a hazing
incident but I I want to fully
endorse
The.
Majority leader's comments at I
think it's necessary because
there is a counter culture of at
play you you can say
administratively that hazing is
not tolerated all you want and
and there is still a component.
Did you want that doesn't get it
and and so I think it's
important as it is in the forty
four states that have such
legislation to make that the.
Principal to make that statement
through legislation through a
crime.
And you know I I appreciate that
It to me hazing is sort of the.
the older for of by older and
older and
The person's age form of teasing
you know it and I think I think
we to come in in the last
several years more conscious of
how detrimental to using can be
a young people I think we've
long understood how
hazing can be a bad thing and.
You know high school and college
age people.
We need to continue to work on
that education
about this issue around those
issues you know in secondary
school and post secondary
school.
But the idea the regained pose
The criminal penalty increase
give someone a criminal record.
And as you as you well know you
know those laws aren't.
Enforced equitably I just.
It.
Gives me great pause.
So madam chair Representative
Stapleton I know you care deeply
about this issue and I
appreciate that thank you madam
chair.
Representative McQueen.
Madam okay Representative
Townsend.
Thank you madam chair and
representative for bringing this
forward.
I found it pretty remarkable you
said in your opening comments.
That you waited patiently in a
room I've never seen you like
patiently anywhere so of that
was my first job
But with that said
I was noticing in the FY are
Representative Stapleton is that
on page.
Two of the fiscal impact report.
There are.
A list of significant issues
have you looked at the house and
and what are your comments with
respect to those.
Mr chairman and Representative
Townsend I do have the document
in front of me from the
different agencies in regards to
the language as some of it
saying that it's vague others
saying that
that.
Did the difference in terms of
of definitions
in terms of the term and danger
in
Mr chairman.
Representative I see definitely
see and hear what the different
agencies as saying in regards to
the various languages that's
throughout the battle
but overall Mr chairman
I'm not seeing where it would be
very difficult to pursue and ups
and and and obtain successful
outcomes for house bill twenty
seven.
Madam chair and representative I
guess
kind of in line.
with the common of
Representative McQueen.
you know we spent a little time
early and this committee
meeting.
Randy get convicted felons back
in the boating of.
Regiment of society.
And one of the comments on this
was it.
The FIR was maybe it ought to be
a low degree felony felony which
would be problematic is that.
And I know you and I both want
absolutely no hazing to occur
that crosses.
many of Representative Eli
instances that that we've also
spoken about and work people
work hard in that killed them.
In other ways for the rest of
their life I'm is there any
concern on your part of this
bill could be weaponized in wood
could be used in a manner that
wasn't supposed that you're not
intending it to be used.
Although I'm Representative
Townsend and I did I did hear
you and your points you made
earlier on the bill that seventy
four that Representative Gail
Chasey had and so I would say to
you that this piece of
legislation would strengthen
more to me the possibilities
across universities in the state
of New Mexico and to
organization of clubs that there
is in fact an anti hazing policy
in the state of New Mexico and
all universities and
organization would explicitly
show up the administrative anti
hazing policy according to the
laws that exist so that it would
not it would it would not take
place.
Rather than the opposite in that
it would create more of of
individuals Committee in hazing.
Because right now there's
nothing to show for that.
Representative what about and
and madam chair of what about a
willful of clause in the
definition it seems like that
would strengthen that the.
the ability or or the inability
for this to be used in a
negative way I mean if you
willfully.
And recklessly.
Because Miller fiscal health
that's one thing.
but I.
It just bothers me that.
Continue to listen to the
testimony beta seems like.
That needs to be tightened up so
it's not of.
Where where someone is not
charged.
Where there was no intent.
At all all the harm in was no in
in what and no one wants farming
now.
This that's that's troubling to
me but Representative I do
appreciate what you're trying to
do and I will continue to listen
test.
Thank you with Representative
you are Representative Akan.
Thank you madam chair I I
thought I had to Representative
do we live beat me to the end
up.
I was certain that.
Okay I'm happy that you called
me first.
Anyway my question is.
This bill madam chair and.
The
leader is nearing towards
colleges and universities
basically it's not.
It's not addressing the high
schools in my correct.
I miss madam chair and and Mr
chairman yes it's not.
Therefore.
Somebody that is under the age
of eighteen.
Who's in juvenile.
And income in hazing and they
went to college early they would
not be able to get convicted
under this legislation.
I'm.
I could have the judge respond
to that miss madam chair.
Madam chair of Representative
Stapleton
It is possible that someone
under the eighteen under the age
of eighteen could be charged
with the delinquent offense as I
understand there's a provision
in the children's code that
would make the.
Thanks in New misdemeanors the
link when offenses for purposes
of the children's code so that
if you had a precocious
seventeen year old or sixteen
year old that was in college it
is possible that they could
could be charged them with the
delinquent offense okay so.
Thank you madam chair and the
madam chair and judge I the only
reason I'm looking at this
because it basically just says
misdemeanor.
Funds from that two three
hundred sixty four days in jail
the thousand dollar fine it is
not address the juveniles and
I'll it is not interested the
the the children's code.
So therefore yes I can
understand that that the.
And you could be charged.
But there are juvenile this
hazing legislation itself this
legislation itself would not go
over well would not.
Thank you and I would not fit in
there.
Morning so therefore I'll leave
it at that is a we need somebody
that's under eighteen is not.
The other.
Question I have is and we're
doing a misdemeanor what happens
in the in the hazing the.
It
it higher than those of New
Mexico well in the crime we want
to convict that person all of
Hastings and I remotely at least
him or her own on the
misdemeanor this is a felony.
Continuing.
Can you understand my question.
The.
Do you want.
Question of the judge to answer
that question Representative.
Chair madam leader whichever one
of you would like to add to it
and we have to hear from you.
Judge Joel can you answer that
question.
Madam chair a Representative
Stapleton I'm certainly try and
and the.
If if you could help me again
what the the question.
I want I want to observe.
First it that my answer that it
is potentially possible for a
juvenile someone under the age
of eighteen to be charged with
the misdemeanor of hazing as a
delinquent offense so so that is
a very narrow category that that
Linz a possible charge as a
delinquent offense for four G.
now and then I'm I'm sorry
Representative the if you could
repeat the last question I'll
try to answer it.
Madam madam chair reader and
judge.
Mason question is if the hazing
and up.
Where.
The end result is.
Murder okay.
We.
Take this with the hazing charge
are we we're going to leave it
there are we going to be able to
charge a higher level we know we
have a hazing charge us metal
gear Representative the
Stapleton Representative.
It I don't think it's an either
or proposition prosecutors can
make the decision to bring both
charges and the highest charge
all it it in in any circumstance
so that if you have a hazing
incident that results
in a kidnapping or a or a death
or worse a battery of the
battery or the kidnapping or the
Murder charge can can be brought
but the hazing charge can be
brought as well.
Thank you.
Madam chair Madam leader audio
to representing the lie.
Madam chair is it okay if I go
ahead.
Yes I just didn't quite get the
transition there are yes you're
you're next Representative Eli
the speaker thank you madam
chair Representative David dot a
judge nice to see you so
I got this I am in no way a
criminal lawyer but I so I've
got so I I got this note from
Sheila Lewis one of our analysts
that she's concerned about
double jeopardy applying so she
has a generator note I will read
all of it but it's his region
hazing incident at the New
Mexico State University resulted
in a student being shot in the
leg the student I deal and pled
no contest to aggravated battery
environment able to use the
firearm and the concern would be
that
the court the judge would have
to decide whether impose
punishment under each the
felonies in a separate
punishment for the misdemeanor
is permissible
with the concern being double
jeopardy and so the question is.
If if you want to if you don't
want that concern if you want to
judge to pick one or the other
fine no changes but if you want
the judge to have the option of
doing both then she is some
suggestive language that makes
sense to me that would give the
judge the option of doing both
and it would be right before I
just have the bill up on right
before the they actually on in
paragraph be a person who
commits hazing is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be
sentenced pursuant to the
provisions of section thirty one
nineteen NMSA nineteen seventy
eight and you would have the
language any punishment imposed
for the crime of hazing shall be
in addition to other punishments
imposed for the same Max so we
see that way the court knows
what the legislative intent Wes
and I I don't know what to
drafters I'm sorry the the
sponsor wants to do if you want
to have that as a potential
additional
crime or leave it the way it is
yes and I just thought I'd ask
the sponsor and her experts what
is she like to do.
Madam chair and Representative
Eli
your suggestion would it make it
more what Representative McQueen
and others and Representative
Townsend is saying that they
don't want additional
consequences to young people
would that add in that language
that you just stated could use
that I think right.
Share leader that is what I
would do it with a way to get a
give the judge the ability to
propose additional on sensing
and I I just don't know if you
want to do that or not I I I do
you have to do that madam chair
okay Representative they're not
that's what I wanted to find out
I have my answer thank you madam
chair thank you.
Mr speaker.
Chair thank you madam leader
I.
I believe wholeheartedly that we
need to have a hazing statute
absolutely.
I have the during the time of
this committee I found a our
survey that was put out.
it lists.
All of the other states that
have easing.
Statutes.
And I think the way that they I
think the way that they hate
losing as defined in this bill
is maybe not quite as tight as
some of the examples I'm seeing
other states.
And.
My worry is that if we dropped
it as is because of issues of
being somewhat vague it might
not be enforced so I can give a
couple examples most listing.
California.
Using means any method of
initiation for pre initiation
into a student organization
whether or not it's officially
recognized.
Which is likely to cause serious
bodily injury Jenny former
current or prospective student
of any school community college
college university and
secretary.
I'm so it doesn't include that
definition doesn't include
mental injury to.
It only includes physical injury
and yet
Defines is serious bodily
injury.
it the bill I think just as
physical harm.
And that may be a little too.
I'm.
The building says recklessly or
intentionally engages the mental
or physical health.
I'm and I don't know but I
believe that in the criminal
code
typically we talk about I'm.
Great bodily harm we talk about
your physical injury your
physical health I think that
could be a little.
You know.
If we kind of brought me just
make them smoke.
Two cards the cigarettes
endanger their health right
I I would suggest that we stick
to terms are already defined in
the criminal code said she's
great but only injury
so that prosecutors know what
they're dealing with and what
the elements of proof for.
it and then we limited it lead
you probably limited it limited
to
physical injury in Colorado they
say he's a court hazing is any
activity by which a person
recklessly endangers the health
or safety of work because a risk
of bodily injury to an
individual for purposes of
initiation for admission into or
affiliation with any student
organization except that it does
not include customary aquatic
events
or authorize training activities
conducted remembers
of the armed forces okay the of
the airforce academy.
Else is hazing includes but is
not limited to endorsed and
prolonged physical activity
forced consumption of any food
beverage medication or
controlled substance R. or
prolonged deprivation of sleep
food or drink I'm.
I know has one I thought was
particularly interesting hazing
means this objective person to
bodily danger or physical harm
way likelihood of bodily danger
of physical harm or to require
encourage authorize or permit
that person to be subjected to
any of the following in a long
list of things are typically
hazing
Compelled ingestion the
substance physical assaults upon
offensive physical contact with
the person sleep deprivation I
can find in in the small space
in other you Mr Senator others
Illinois has won a person
commits hazing and knowingly
requires the performance in any
act by student or other person
any school college university
for the purpose of induction
would mission into that group if
the act is not sanctioned or
authorized by the educational
institution and the act result
in bodily harm to any person.
To each of the other several
others and each of those kind of
laid out the elements of what a
prosecutor would have to prove
and would also use terms that we
have are you familiar with in
the criminal.
and it establishes the immense
right out that we have to have
for the statute you know so they
either have knowingly or
recklessly or intentionally.
I'm in those are also all terms
that we have we your your bill
does it will flee but some of
the others I think if we can tie
it up a little bit and maybe use
some of the examples from other
states it becomes a statue that
we can use to achieve a
prosecution.
but I I think the the as is
drafted
You could have someone charged
if they recklessly endanger the
mental health of another person.
And I don't know how to prove I
mean maybe there's a prosecutor
that we know how to do that but
I don't know that those.
I don't know if those terms are
defined madam chair elsewhere in
the law I think everything you
have after your term thank you
being honest on page one
Page one one twenty four we say
for the purpose of the current
prospective students induction
initiation interested
organization I think all the
rest of it is great I think the
east that issue I have is
is lines twenty one to twenty
twenty one twenty two twenty
three.
I just a little tightening up it
may need some language that is
more familiar to you
practitioners of.
Under the criminal code and
we've got lots of examples from
other states I think are pretty
tight.
In madam chair later I'm I'm
curious if you might consider
you an amendment I'm not
prepared awful right now but an
amendment that would.
Yeah one more clearly lay out
the always approve their
prosecutors follow to obtain a
conviction into to use terms
that are more you know commonly
defined.
Madam chair and Mister speaker I
I would be happy to however I
would like to understand clearly
are you saying the term
recklessly and intentionally in
endanger is not the one that the
they're not familiar with I'm
I'm I'm when we talk about
mental with talking about sleep
deprivation we don't have to put
all the outline out liars mental
abuse in terms and physical
bodily harm I agree with the
term bottoming arm versus
physical health.
Well then chair and then later
I.
In in we're in we are admittedly
the only time I ever engage with
the criminal code is in this
committee so I I'm not entirely
certain but I.
if you recklessly is defined I
believe as.
A a disregard of great risk of
serious bodily injury to another
or something like that you have
to you disregarded this you know
great I know in the fit in the
physical injury context right
it's you can disregard
Knowingly in the years knowingly
disregard risk of causing great
you know causing injury to
another I the.
Madam chair in Madelia that.
We don't have a required here as
a physical injury induces
physical health.
And that's the part that makes
we wonder if if it's either do
would you be either hard to
prosecute or.
It difficult if it if it makes
it over the brought.
I would tend to agree with you
but I could refer to my
expert legal witness judge Joel.
Madam chair a Representative the
stable to Mister speaker
certainly I'm not a prosecutor
up in and I wondered as as you
were discussing that Mr speaker
if the
reckless.
Up in four intentional language
were moved up.
And it and it read willful or
recklessly taking the action
rather than having those terms
aimed at the.
Endangering of mental or
physical health that that would
help it
in.
Certainly I I would think again
I'm not a prosecutor but the
more specific you get with the
terms the the easier it is to
prosecute so if you wanted to
change the.
Mental or physical health.
To the term mental or physical
harm that that that would be
that that would be helpful.
Just.
Something Mr speaker may I.
Our.
What I I was thinking is I
really like some of the statutes
that you read.
And
I guess what.
I would like is to have.
More explicit.
Language.
So that people are a lot more
about what the crime in the
penalty is and so.
I'm not saying that that the end
of the discussion because I
think we should probably make
sure if we're going to perhaps
amend the bill I think we're
going to need to do it I fully
in not sit here and try to do
it.
I find it more difficult to.
Then when we're in the committee
room when we're a little bit
more the document and we're
looking at various documents I
was just
I I'm not navigating well among
my share file documents yet and
maybe I'll get good at it but
I would just suggest that we
might want to hear from everyone
about what if anybody else feels
this way about particular
changes or suggestions and then
to
I'm an actual study amendment.
Before the.
the bill out and just bring it
back next time.
So that.
That was just one suggestion I
have Mister speaker I I I don't
feel competent to amend it while
we're.
Talking with out since.
I'm happy to share
in the the study that I found
about other states
with leader and work on a new
definition we get with analysts
from the committee and.
I think it turned out pretty
quickly I'm also getting some.
but folks in the media.
Uniformed jury instructions that
might have some definitions that
we could use
It's a matter of madam chair
it's what it's whatever the will
of the committee in the Sanchez
and I'm happy to work on this.
So let me ask
based.
Stapleton and would you be
willing to let us try to work
with you on some specific
amendments and if you are I'd
like to.
Your anyone else on the
committee who has questions or
suggestions first and then move
on to your next bill and then
try to get this one back as fast
as possible you madam chair
you're willing okay.
Mr speaker you have anything
else to.
This time manager visit with the
leader tomorrow okay and we'll
get right to work on.
I I very sincerely want to get
something past and I want to
make sure that it's.
Okay.
Okay great I have a few comments
but I don't want to I want to
make sure any other committee
members provide feedback to the
leader right now.
If anyone has any suggestions.
Okay I don't see any other hands
on one of the questions that I
had is you know I I I I tend to
agree with Representative
McQueen and and Rikki Lee Chavez
I hate creating new crimes and
yes that.
I think that
There are some cases where.
It's needed and.
Thank you the fact I actually
think this is the type of
behavior that planned in advance
general.
So I.
I make an exception for
increasing penalties on things
that are white collar crime.
Require a great deal of thought
and I think this would for the
most part does have some.
In in planning course a lot of
crimes are committed without any
thought of
What the law is but I think.
That
Definitely I I think the
colleges and universities and I
I would think secondary
institutions to especially if
the juveniles can be
Charged with a delinquent act
under the adult statute
not under the statute but a
delinquent act in the children's
code because there is an adult
statute
I think this is one where.
It's probably better if people
knew what that.
It is against the law.
Where is right now you have to
have great bodily harm or death
or something else that's against
the law so but I also wanted to
ask you and and this would be
amending the criminal code but
what about civil penalties to is
that our civil penalties not.
It's a lot more they not a
deterrence now.
And.
That questions for you
representative.
And or perhaps Joel.
Still kind of madam chair will
judges will answer that question
for me please.
Sure a.
Madam chair the settlement
leader
I think civil penalties are are
a deterrent in and obviously
there's a range of as we talk
about this I mean this
legislature could make this
statement
by making this of the only four
to be felony has as has been
suggested or you could opt
for for a civil penalty with a
fine
it really depends on the
statement that years you're
seeking to make and I know that
the US speaker reference the
California penal code
definition of hazing and so
there are a variety of
statements that are made around
around the nation I think that
the Majority Leader of Stapleton
attempted to craft something of
the that the could be negotiated
could
Could compromise in in the wide
range of interests that are
represented in your legislative
body you have people as you
indicate who do not want to
create more crimes we do not
want this to be the catchment
for younger people who want it
on the other hand aimed at UNM
alumni and in older people who
are encouraging these acts up
quite simply the statement needs
to be made and of.
It it's probably never going to
satisfy everybody so whatever
the pleasure of of the body is I
think my encouragement is that
that you come out with with the
statement whether it's civil
penalty whether it's misdemeanor
of felony maybe I'm a bit much
and and it seems to me most of
those activities are captured in
in existing felony law but but I
think it's possible to make that
statement even with a felony so
the.
In in meandering fashion
madam chair certainly certainly
you could make a statement with
civil penalty unlike of the
speaker I've I've not looked at
the studies and I don't know of
those states he to use civil
penalty.
What the deterrent effect has
been verses those states to use
misdemeanor and or felony
charges so that that's the best
answer I can give you.
Very much so I I do think also
one of the statues the speaker
read out really got at some of
the alumni to cause some of
times the alumni are are
participants here and we might
want to broaden it in that
regard where it's not just the
just all H. age student is
involved but so that's all I had
to and I really appreciate
Sanchez willingness to work on
I'm making this.
Maybe more
useful and then.
Act as a deterrent.
Which ordinarily I don't think
that increasing penalties is
service that but I think this
has.
Opportunity and so we'll get
back to that.
as soon as we get that fixed so
thank you very much and
increased thank everybody who
helped present with you today
and I hope they will be back.
Thank you madam chair says my
might also I don't know if
anybody heard anything I set.
You.
It.
Sorry.
Okay so let's move on to your
next bill.
Madam later the
House bill twenty nine.
Madam chair I do have house bill
twenty nine and madam chair I
will present the bill but I also
would like to vote but I did
give to you Committee on
Saturday a and amendment and
for House Bill twenty nine.
Okay I'd like to confirm that
you.
You do have it.
We do have that.
And madam I have the.
I'm sorry go ahead.
I do have three
With expert witness.
Do need them promoted now.
Yes madam chair.
Just give give us the names so
that looks like maybe we just.
The call was with the city of
the City of Albuquerque office
of civil rights.
Okay she's with us now.
Alexandria Taylor.
Is there.
Okay she's here.
And million the walkie.
She's in there.
Okay.
HM.
Is Asian products not one of the
many more no I'm very has taken
ages position okay.
Madam chair.
Yes Representative point.
Looking at the amendment.
And it's unclear to me whether
the bill has been amended or
whether there's a proposed
amendment.
Madam chair I'm Representative
McQueen I have a proposed
amendment and it was amended in
education.
But that you have one for here
that me to one ninety four oh
two point one.
Share file.
One nine four all two point one.
Yes madam chair.
Two one nine four oh two point
one.
In the Here file.
Madam chair all four but when I
download the file it
I I don't know with a download
file but went down let's file I
think it's all go look for.
Also ended to you right now
Representative McQueen.
The people I just want.
Thank.
That.
Call.
It
would not substantive right.
Madam chair in the amendment
basically add the word religious
or religion.
Right I I was just wondering if
you wanted to just talk about
the bill and go to public
comment before you amend it
that's correct madam chair.
You can just referenced the yeah
the amendment will Amanda Amanda
shortly.
You want me to talk about the
bill first okay madam chair
later yes madam chair
members of the committee.
House bill twenty nine prohibit
schools to impose discipline all
allow discrimination or
desperate treatment again so
students based on the students
race all cultural.
The students race all culture
because of the students use of
protective hairstyles all
culturally addresses the bill
madam chair members of the
committee and then school
discipline policies by requiring
local school boards to prevent
any discipline that reflects the
students culture all his time
house bill twenty nine defines
various styles and cultural Head
dresses that are traditionally
associated with race and are
used as part of an individual's
personal cultural belief often
referred to as the crown Act
create a respectful open while
for natural here madam chair and
members of the committee the
bill intends to address the
treatment of students in terms
of discipline no discrimination
based on their hair many
students madam chair from a
variety of cultures and races
have yes styles and you'll lose
protective.
Address is an expression of
their identity
twenty nine madam chair the
term.
Dress includes.
And.
S. is that I expression of
cultural believe I'm protective
hairstyles it includes braids
locs twists my clients all girls
was burnt to Knox Afroz weeds we
all had wraps madam chair.
Race as use in house bill twenty
nine we flex traits that are
historically associated with
race that includes yes times
length of the year reductive yes
styles of called headdresses and
madam chair we found that in
many school policies exists that
band black hairstyles and
students can be disciplined for
having his styles that are not
accepted by these policies in
some schools.
Yes I was also subjected to
these policies madam chair
H. B. twenty nine in shows that
students in public schools
including charter schools are
treated equitable and I'm not
subjected to policies and
procedures that discriminate
based on students right so at
the city naturally you madam
chair is defined as he is that
as we can with the altitude to
change its kinky curly part of
the state that includes many
traditional black yes styles
madam chair I now stand for
questions.
Representative Stapleton did you
want your experts to speak now
or you are they there to answer
questions yes I do madam chair I
would like to have my experts
address the committee and answer
questions with me why don't you
tell them what order you want
them to proceed and that madam
chair I would like
Miss Taylor first please madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Alexandria Taylor and I'm the
deputy director of the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs and a proud
member of the New Mexico Black
central organizing committee
working with our champion
Sanchez took to pass the crown
Act in New Mexico I am a
daughter of New Mexico born and
raised in Alamogordo and raising
my son here that makes five
generations of my family living
and thriving in New Mexico the
crown Act is not only sound
policy for our state to pass it
is also personal for me as a
black New Mexican I have
personally faced discrimination
based on my hair the crown Act
was created in two thousand and
nineteen by Doug and the crown
coalition to ensure protection
against discrimination based on
race based hair styles my
extending statutory protection
to hair texture and protective
styles such as braids locs
twists and not in the workplace
and public schools.
In reference to the beautiful
diversity of our state we have
included cultural headdresses
and length of hair seven states
and eleven local jurisdictions
have passed the crown Act since
two thousand and nineteen and
since last summer we have been
organizing to ensure New Mexico
becomes the eighth state to pass
the crown Act the efforts in New
Mexico were started by a senior
at Albuquerque high school
Augustine lay on signs who
reached out to his state senator
Alan.
Having witnessed the impact.
Race based discrimination
towards his peers these efforts
led to the unanimous passage of
the crown Act ordinance and the
City of Albuquerque sponsored by
state city councilor land Santa
H. B. twenty nine will do
several things it will add much
needed protection for young
people in school and through our
central organizing committee we
have collected stories from
young people about their
experiences right here in our
New Mexico schools.
The discrimination aggressions
the base because of their hair
are not things for us to brush
off these forms of racism creep
into our well being our self
esteem they keep young people
out of school and hinder their
opportunities whether overt or
not the consequences to young
people are real and impact is
lasting when my son was ten at
the time wanted to lock his hair
I required him to write a three
page research paper on here
discrimination and to learn
about all of the cases of young
black people being forced to cut
their locks off by people of
positions of authority I ask you
humbly if you've ever had to
make such considerations for how
you or your children wear their
hair he should not have had to
do that but I felt it was
important for him to.
In a report titled here politics
how discrimination against black
here in schools impacts black
lives they wrote it goes beyond
hair when across across the
country school policies use the
same language and reasoning to
the band black hairstyles are
grounds for discipline or
removal from school entirely and
I value the long young people in
my life and I honor used
leadership in their lived
experiences I believe we have an
obligation to do everything we
can to ensure they are protected
this bill will also provide much
needed protections in the
workplace housing and public
spaces a research study by dove
in the joint collective found
what many have already known
through our lived experience
black women are one point five
times more likely to be sent
home from the workplace because
of our hair and black women's
hair is three point four times
more likely to be perceived as
unprofessional and black women
are also thirty percent more
likely to be made aware of a
formal workplace appearance
policy compared compared to
their non black counterparts
this impacts our overall will be
and it is time for us to take a
stand against race based hair
discrimination in New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair I miss Luarkie
please madam chair.
Thank you
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Melina
Luarkie I'm a co founder for
indigenous women rising and I
support this bill because I am a
black woman I'm not black or
pueblo I grew up in the listener
is a nation and as a child I was
constantly tease and
disrespected because I look
different.
The teasing wasn't limited so
means that the parents go back
with you as well.
I began straightening my hair
from ten to twenty years and
twenty for.
As older I think the younger
black generation and indigenous
students has been high and no
child should have to worry about
a fellow.
Our teacher just through them
because of their imagine your
elementary student coming home
and asking you to help achieve
things that people through in
their hair then one day haven't
to take into account what
college and or job they may not
be considered for because of
their beautiful hair.
Father served as the governor of
the good enough for two terms
and while he was in office but
using this not only was a
hearing thing about myself but
my family as well.
As a young professional I love
to feel and look my best for any
occasion whether we are in
school or at work we deserve to
participate without wondering if
there will be if will be
discriminated against for our
hair styles in twenty eighteen
according to the bureau of labor
statistics fifty two percent of
the black labor force for black
women we are keeping this
economy going in twenty eighteen
in our own state we made
national news for a teacher who
cut and need to students hair as
a black woman I understand the
amendment the apple so long it's
been since accident taken from
us this time we received the
respect they deserve.
Most black people have here that
requires more care and being
seen as irresponsible or
incapable because of how our
hair has roots in racism knowing
I could potentially take care of
myself and my family but will be
rejected due to my hair isn't
fast thank you just steps
building.
Thank you.
Madam chair Mister Clovis for
the City of Albuquerque's civil
rights office.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak with you today my
name is Tara Jacobus my pronouns
are she her and hers I'm an
attorney and the head of the
office of civil rights in
Albuquerque my office work with
counselors Senate to pass
similar protections in
Albuquerque and early January of
this year and my office will
enforce these protections
radical I'm can't disheveled
extreme unattractive
unacceptable those are all words
that have been used to describe
the hair of black people in the
workplace in schools and in
daily life these judgments
reflects centuries of
privileging straight hair
because it's because of its
close associations with euro
centrism or whiteness and serve
to denigrate natural hair
texture styles curly agency or
kicking us because of its
association with African descent
or blackness.
As a result of these
associations black women are
less likely to get job
interviews than black women
would straighten hair or white
women with straight or curly
hair black children are more
likely to be disciplined for
their hair styles that do not
conform to societal norms
conforming to this implied care
mandate results in financial
impacts to black women black
women report spending nine times
more money on professional
styling than white women.
Provide excuse me this implied
hair Amanda mandate results in
health impacts to black women
black women use toxic chemicals
to straighten their hair these
damaging wicks and we use high
levels of heat to straighten and
these can result in permanent or
temporary hair loss due to
styling techniques black women
also undergo time based impacts
there is a great level of time
needed to undergo the additional
grooming and time and energy and
money needed to repair the harm.
Federal law has not done a great
job of clarifying that
discrimination based on hair
type texture and other
characteristics closely linked
to race are indeed race based
discrimination New Mexico has
the opportunity to provide a
clarifying definition of race in
order to guide our schools and
businesses and appropriately.
And appropriately and fully
describing preventing and
enforcing against on lawful race
discrimination although the
crown Act at a national level
centers black women it
recognizes that discrimination
based on the parents affects all
of us for that reason the
proposed language and house bill
twenty nine also seeks to
provide over protections for
other members of our community
including our indigenous
brothers and sisters.
Adding these protections for
public school code into the
Human Rights Act or large step
towards acknowledging and
dismantling centuries of lawful
discrimination on the basis of
race related to the way our hair
grows from our heads I look
forward to New Mexico joining
the seven states in ten cities
including Albuquerque that have
already provided these
protections for their community
members again I thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you are you ready for me
to go to.
Yes madam chair okay.
So.
In the audience what I'd like to
find out is who is here in favor
of this bill and who is here in
opposition so there'll be a
twenty second call put up and
you need to vote yes if you're
favor of the bill and now if
you're not so we're gonna start
that now.
So it looks madam leader like we
have thirty one people in favor
of the bill in zero propose so
we're going to stop the call now
and I would like to ask those
who wish to testify in favor of
the bill to please raise their
hands.
And
Keep your remarks as brief as
possible bowl.
Because it's been kind of a long
day for us so first I have L. A.
rush forth.
Go ahead Ellie.
You should be able to talk.
There you go.
Helpfully rush forth.
But let me go to
Those kids are Campos your I
need it.
Happening here this compass.
We're ready I'm.
Dr Tulia hacked.
Your unmuted what okay too much
okay here we go okay.
Thank you
Madam chair members of the
Judiciary Committee and others
in the audience thank you for
the opportunity to testify my
name is Julia hacked I am a
physician specifically a
pediatrician and I am here
representing the New Mexico
pediatric society which is a
nonprofit organization and our
state chapter of the American
academy of pediatrics my
testimony is not opinion but as
evidenced by data from research
and it is summarized in a policy
statement by the American
academy of pediatrics from
twenty nineteen titled the
impact of racism on child and
adolescent health you may
already have heard that racism
has been linked to birth
disparities and mental health
problems in children and
adolescents please understand
that it is also linked to
chronic disease in childhood and
later in adulthood how does this
happen racial discrimination
causes stress when we are
stressed our body produces
stress hormones like cortisol
these hormones circulate in our
blood and then enter the most
basic level of our human biology
ourselves there they cause
changes in what the cell does
resulting in inflammation
changes in immunity that
predispose individuals to
chronic disease what I'm saying
is that there is a direct link
between experiences of racial
discrimination childhood and
chronic disease and it is
essential that we address racism
occurring in school because
children spend so much time in
school settings because
educational achievement is an
important predictor of long term
health and economic outcomes for
children and because racism
experienced and schools affects
academic achievement for
children and adolescents and
ultimately impacts help
therefore I hope you can see
that because education is a
critical social determinants of.
for children it is essential
that we recognize racism that
occurs in the school setting and
intervene students from
marginalized racial groups must
navigate a host of both
institutionalized and
individually mediated
disparities in school that are
caused by racism studies show
that a positive and strong
racial or ethnic identity is
protected for children and helps
prevent them from internalizing
the racism they experience but
how can a strong racial identity
and such protection happen for
children if a culturally and
identity affirming hair style is
deemed unacceptable for bid and
or punishable.
Positive racial identity leads
to optimal health and the best
developmental outcomes for
children and adolescents and
research shows that the
importance of positive identity
is critical during adolescence
it is a time when young people
must not only navigate more
complex social lives but it is
also a time when they develop
more awareness of social status
and of racism in their own lives
and discrimination in their own
social encounters before I close
I want to say something about
the experience of bystanders we
know that it is also important
to recognize that the impact of
targeting expressions of racial
identity does not only
traumatize those who are
targeted but it also has a
traumatizing effect on
bystanders although Children and
adolescents who are the targets
of racism experienced the most
significant impact bystanders
are also adversely affected by
racism as an example when asked
to recall the event young adults
who were merely bystanders to
racism and other forms of
victimization and not themselves
the targets experienced profound
physiologic and psychological
effects that are comparable to
those experienced by first
responders after a major
disaster this is the impact of
what we speak about with HB
twenty nine these instances of
trauma even if infrequent lead
to something known as stereo
type threat where children
maintain a chronically stressed
state due to the fear that
victimization will occur again
based on racial stereotypes
please recall the association
between chronic stress stress
hormones inflammation immunity
and chronic disease therefore
for the health of all children
The New Mexico pediatric society
thanks the sponsor and ask you
to please pass HB twenty nine
and stop here discrimination in
schools thank you.
Thank you next I have Charlotte.
But when you.
Charlotte please begin speaking.
I'm it yourself.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Charlotte mother when you I work
with Julie on a coop on behalf
of Planned Parenthood of the
Rocky Mountains we asked you to
stand with us in support of
house bill twenty nine thank you
all.
Thank you next time Burling.
Kind of what.
Yes okay in chair members of the
committee my name is Hannah
Burling.
And I'm speaking for the league
of women voters of New Mexico
the league stands in strong
support of this bill thank you.
Next I have Amanda are gone.
Presented yourself.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Amanda out
of Cologne and executive
director of New Mexico kids can
and we stand in support of this
bill I'm because we think it's
very important that students are
able to bring their full selves
to their classroom everyday to
learn and grow and develop to
become.
All members of our society and
we think that sponsor for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you next I have Lisa deal.
Good afternoon Madam chairwoman
and members of the committee my
name is Lisa deal and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty and we
stand in full support of this
bill thank you.
Thank you very much next Nicole
Martin.
Yes hello madam chair and
members of the committee the
general.
Yes.
Thank you for allowing me to
speak I am on the net and quick
almond living into a territory
which is Albuquerque and
surrounding areas.
In the case that was mentioned
earlier
I just wanted to know that.
we can do Johnson is the younger
sister of one of my close
friends and she was a junior at
the time at Cibola high school
when.
Mary Easton
Cut her hair around Halloween
time.
And.
APS how.
meetings on what type of
justice we can do is going to
receive from being traumatized
and of the demo violence
But there is none.
Many Easton was put on paid
leave.
well this investigation
took place.
And while she was on page the
intention eventually got to
retire so there is no justice
for mackenzie Johnson
and other students like her.
I have experience
We still racial
discrimination in race sexual
Institutions a racialized
institutions and.
I just wanted to say I hope that
you unanimously support this
bill.
HB twenty nine thank you.
Thank you.
Senator Johnson.
good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Johnson and I'm a
representative of yet that we're
using as the climate crisis
action.
Understands and concerts were at
the crown Act students have been
historically targeted for
cultural hairstyles and
headdresses and hurts Education
culture expansion in our sense
of self and just.
Additional push forward
projections such as this one
provide pop communities because
we believe every student
deserves a safe and equal
educational experience.
Students have been taken
advantage of and discriminated
against for much too long and
the contact is a step in the
right direction to provide a
safe environment for us to learn
and grow as an indigenous person
I was brought up with the
teaching that her secret in that
here has power is even apply to
my transpacific me for her it
was devastating to hear stories
about kids in school decades ago
having their hair forcibly cut.
Your values today still
undergoing that same or similar
trauma so this is really do
matter to buy properties and we
should be able to move forward
confidently to our educational
spaces with the hair or have
just as that we feel most
comfortable in thank you.
Thank you we need some technical
assistance here because who's
doing the attack for us right
now we've got the speaker in the
attendee list we have Torridge
economists in the attendee list
instead of in the panel.
And we have.
Some of the people who already
spoke whose names spoken in
whose names are on the paddle so
I need somebody to help us with
this it it if whoever's in
charge will add Representative
Armstrong as a co host she's
going to try to help me get this
done it's hard to attend to hi
my name is and then fixing
where.
So who is who is doing the
technical stuff right now
can you please make
Representative Armstrong the co
host I can I cannot but Lisa or
Taylor should be able to make
her co host I have been trying
to assist with the
Taking attendees off the list
after they've spoken.
People in and out of my office I
apologize that a couple have
slipped through but at Taylor
have you been able to make
Representative Armstrong a co
host.
Don't know.
Now sorry about that I don't
have I don't have those three
little buttons on my end to be
able to ask her for some reason.
Okay I don't know why I think
there can only be done by the
which is Taylor Maria.
Well the host or the co host but
it's not giving me that option
in there and it was for calls
correct yes Taylor looks like
Representative are I am now
thank you all help you with the
list madam chair everything that
needs to happen is that on them
the attendees who wish to speak
after they speak their hands
maybe to come down.
That's what I'm doing I'm sorry
I got on the phone with somebody
called.
Yeah just ignore the phone it's
after five o'clock.
Okay.
Pretty close to the end of this
committee to so okay here we go
now I think the next person to
speak is heather Smith.
Hi there would you go ahead and
get yourself.
Heather Smith are you still with
us.
Yes please send it yourself.
Madam chair looks like she's on
mute but we can't hear.
Right.
So I'm gonna go down to the next
person it will try to come back
to you so Kelsey Barnes this is
the next one in Kelsey will you
admit yourself.
Thank you madam chair and the
members of committee I want to
speak on the humans that
dehumanization of black students
and there's and how they're how
that impacts and schools there
so often it expected to conform
to Y. ideology in schools that
they are robbed of their
individuality that they can find
through their hair in schools
they're also expected to follow
these rules that are meant to
you then to dehumanize them when
they're really just students
trying to go to their sports
trying to finishing graduate
trying to do everything a normal
student is doing except they
have to deal with discrimination
against their hair
discrimination against your skin
and I feel like this this
legislation will help students
who are in those situations
because it impacts and so much
more than we see we don't notice
when they go home and they are
dealing with the mental health
struggles that discriminate
discriminating discrimination
against them shows that we don't
see what happens behind closed
doors in the expected to conform
to this really they're
struggling they're
metaphorically dying in the
schools.
And nobody's noticing and I feel
like this legislation is what's
taking notice that these that
these students are suffering
this is was taking notice that
the students are human this is
say what's taking notice that
the students need hello and it's
voting in favor of this
legislation is showing them that
we care that their lives do
matter and this is what students
need they can't go to school and
face every other thing that a
student is facing going to
school worry about their grades
in their sports and their extra
curricular is when they have to
worry about if they're going to
be discriminated discriminated
against because of just the way
they look this is telling them
that they need this legislation
that for the students thank you.
Thank you.
Next I have heather Smith.
In yes can you hear me heather
we limit yourself yes yes I'm
going M. I. muted are can you
hear me.
We sure can.
Okay awesome.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is heather Smith I I'm a member
of the New Mexico blacks and
organizing committee and I was
born and raised here in Las
Cruces New Mexico
all of my schooling has been
from New Mexico institutions
from public to private ranging
from preschool to college and
hair discrimination has followed
me and every educational setting
your New Mexico
elementary school my classmates
made a game of shoving pencils
into my Afro and when I
complained about it to my
teacher I was sent home because
my natural Afro was deemed as
distracting to other students.
I was a kid who loved to school
I never miss school I love
school and if I could be in
school the rest of my life I
would definitely choose to do so
but in this instance not only
was I being bullied I was
punished and I was forced to
miss school which was
traumatizing to me and from then
on through high school I
straighten my hair to conform
and to not be different or
cannot be myself so the same
discipline in schools and in
work places where natural hair
or protective hairstyles are
your cultural hair dresses is
blatant discrimination and our
students and our citizens need
protection in workplaces and
schools please support house
bill twenty nine thank you very
much madam chair and members of
the committee.
Thank you next I have Nicole
Rogers.
And yourself.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Nicole Rogers and I'm also a
proud member of the New Mexico
Black since the organizing
committee I am a multiracial
woman who grew up here in New
Mexico and I'm raising two
children here my son is three
and my daughter's twelve and not
only did I have to deal with
discrimination for my here I
also have to now deal with them
my three year old recently went
to school with his Afro and Out
which we usually pull back and
the kids started making comments
like what's wrong with the
license here it's weird I can
look to the future to see how
she would intervene and really
the teacher was a loss for words
on how to intervene and so I
said to the kids well his hair
is not weird it's just different
from yours it's magical and it
grows to the sun and of course
the kids thought it was cool and
it really changed the narrative
makes made sure he understood
that he was not aware this hair
was not aware that it was
beautiful and something to be
celebrated and not astrocytes
this legislation will help us
create is a world where our kids
can show up the way that their
hair grows naturally magically
towards the sun thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you very much.
Jan Billick.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee I am Jennifer
billet with good health Santa Fe
and we strongly urge you to
support this bill this is an
issue that impacts the girls in
our programs and in fact the
teen girls were members of our
team leadership council asked
that we put this bill on our
agenda for advocacy for this
legislative session so I hope
you'll vote yes to support it.
Thank you.
Campos.
Good evening chair members of
the committee my name is listed
like a boss I'm a policy
associate and New Mexico bold
futures formerly young woman
United.
We strongly support H. B. twenty
nine.
We understand that the way in
which we carry our hair is not
just a hair style but it's part
of our cultural identity and we
should be celebrating it not
discriminating against it we
spend with the incredible
leaders who brought forward this
bill and we ask that you stand
and support and Boeing favor of
H. bill twenty nine thank you.
Thank you very much next Jason
Espinoza.
Madam chair members of the
committee chase us but as a
registered lobbyist with the New
Mexico child first network
and we strongly support this
bill and I we appreciate the
opportunity to speak thank you.
Thank you Erica Davis come.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee really wonderful
to be in space and I thank you
for sticking around with us so
late my name is Erica Davis
current and I am a member of the
New Mexico blacks and organizing
committee and co chair of the
coalition for choice and as I'm
really really honored and happy
to be here because on behalf of
the twenty organizations in the
coalition for choice we
absolutely stand in favor of
this bill and we ask that you do
the same because just this time
last year I was at session when
you know we could public in
person and was called in last
February to assist with the
young woman who enjoyed exactly
this and was being threatened
with suspension in a public
school out here
it was mortifying the mother was
traumatized as the
administration watched
registered that her themselves
this was a good friend of My
Baby girl in my San in the way
that they fell so ostracized and
the way that we've had to step
in and advocate and fight policy
it was heartbreaking to have to
do in twenty twenty so with that
being said we just ask that you
support this bill ever so
grateful to sharing space and
joyful collaboration and delight
as we get policy done because
that's our love language in the
words of I am a Presley thank
you thanks.
I turn my sound up sorry Monday.
Members of the committee.
Yes we can hear you go head here
you.
Okay.
Thank you my name is money are
two back.
Central organizing committee
this resonates with me because
I've heard the stories of black
youth with the New Mexico that
have been sent home from school
on the condition that they
change their hair due to the
discomfort that their braids
locs head wraps and natural hair
have caused school
administrations although the
discomfort of school
administrators towards black
care staff stems from their own
implicit racial bias there's
been no remedy for the type of
harm that imposes upon black
students I advise all members of
this committee to not simply
dismiss this bill due to the
lack of proximity or awareness
of hair discrimination within
New Mexican schools I feel that
failure to pass this bill do
this committee will contribute
to future acts of our for most
vulnerable students in closing I
would like to remind everyone
within this digital space that
legislation that centers the
most marginalized members of the
community will benefit society
as a whole thank you.
Thank you next I have.
Sandy K..
And yourself.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
allowing me to be here tonight
I'm also a member of the New
Mexico blacks and sorgen I think
unity and it is my honor the.
I had a.
New Mexico who has been here
more than ten generations my
family has.
And growing up in the
Albuquerque public school system
I know first hand what it's like
to be discriminated against
because of my hair.
As a member of the New Mexico
women in film board I also know
what it's like to look for
people to work with our hair in
some communities so we're
working on that as well I would
urge the committee to please.
But this bill goes through
because it is vital it is vital
for students and it is vital to
women in the thank you.
Thank you next Janelle.
On the on.
Yes because
Right.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Janelle and your new and I
too am a member of the New
Mexico Black us and organizing
committee and thank you so much
for letting me all the to dress
you all today I strongly support
HB twenty nine because no child
should have to involuntarily
chemically alter their
appearance or deny their culture
and heritage to feel safe and
accepted at school when
education should be their main
focus so I want to thank
Representative stable ten New
Mexico Centers for bringing this
bill forward and I asked the
committee to please vote and
support thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
And you know there's one hand
still up but I really think she
testified already but let me
check.
For calling.
Maybe I just called her name
earlier and she didn't.
Madam chair I do think that she
was the person who couldn't on
mute herself or or has unmuted
but it wasn't working
I'm misspelling can you and
yourself now.
It that's the only.
I
left.
Yes yes.
It was the committee I'm sorry I
spoke already I don't know why
my hand is still raised I keep
lowering it.
Thank you.
Okay.
Will I said that I thought you
had spoken thank you very much.
Do you agree Representative
Armstrong.
Yes.
Okay we're fine.
We're ready to
go to the committee madam chair.
do I presented my purposes.
All right I'm you know it's been
a while so I forgot about that
let's do your movie now.
Madam chair I propose the house
Judiciary Committee the
following amendment on the house
bill twenty nine as amended
madam chair on page one line
thirteen after cultural insert
all religious.
On page two line I after race
insert religion.
On page two line seven after
cultural insert religious on
page four line ten after
cultural insert religious on
page four line twelve after
cultural insert related all
religious on page four line
eighteen after cultural insert
or religious on page five line
six after race in search engine
on page five line seven after
cultural insert all religious on
page three line thirteen after
cultural insert all religious.
And nine fifteen after cultural
insert all religious on page ten
nine twenty one after cultural
inspect or religious on page
fourteen nine thirteen after
cultural insert all religious on
page fourteen nine fifteen after
cultural insert all religious on
page fourteen line twenty one
after cultural insert all
religious miss madam chair this
amendment is respectfully
submitted on behalf of one of
Representative
You about us in my Education
Committee requested that
in in instead of putting in all
the religious groups that have
the different head dresses that
they wear on their head that we
should just use the word
religious he was referring
mainly to the Asian the Islamic
and the Jewish community that
have different head dresses that
we should use to a because of
religious beliefs and I now
stand for questions.
Hi to questions on the
amendment.
I'll move adoption of the
amendment at this time during
the second I'll second.
Representative Armstrong.
I'm.
Is that the movie.
Is there any objection to okay
seeing the and then it will be
adopted.
Go ahead Representative.
On the bill do we are you ready
for questions from the
committee.
All righty first I see
Representative.
Neither it.
Thank you madam chair
just a couple of comments on
this.
The discussion that we just
heard that took me back almost
fifty years because when I was
and.
Junior high the big issue was
styles and school.
Finding the school board to
allow all guys to have hair that
that went over there caller and
yeah and over their ears was
The issue at the time in the
course of.
after those and got lifted then
we saw a lot of different
hairstyles and are impractical
with a lot of from our
classmates to that
the Afro so it did take me at
background they're quite a ways
of my questions involved.
couple things and I I I am
concerned about to questions
regarding my.
My specific community and that
is.
I want to make sure that there's
nothing in this act that would
report to well at for
procurement New Mexico military
institute from continuing to
enforce its rules regarding
grant which would include that
hairstyles that are permitted on
campus at the military institute
if I read this correctly it
should cover it but I just want
to make sure that I'm reading
that correct is that correct the
madam chair and and there are
Madam jury later.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I saw that
Representative Stapleton was
kicked off of the well not
kicked off she she disappeared
from the hearing a moment ago
I'm not sure she's trying to get
back on.
Right now
I don't see her in the
attendees.
Madam chair she to flickered off
and then she was back for a
moment and now she's going.
Here's a do.
I wonder if perhaps this Taylor
are one of her one of the other
expert witnesses could answer
the question.
You might have to repeat it so.
Hi.
I'm sure I'll be happy to repeat
it
In Roswell New Mexico military
institute is located there and
it has fairly strict standards
concerning dress uniform and
part of that is the the Fairfax
and the way that
Both males and females Care and
you're on where there were there
I just want to make sure there's
nothing in here that we're.
Require New Mexico military
institute to alter yes Sir
Requirements in that regard.
Madam chair on that point.
I might be able to answer it.
Okay go ahead
the military institute doesn't
fall under the
public education department I
think it falls under the higher
end and doesn't come under the
same of controls so I would
assume that this would not fall
under
the school.
Regulations and charter school
regulations.
Madam chair all right.
I would make that assumption as
well but I sure would be
interested in hearing for out
from the intent of the sponsor
on that and that a follow up
question.
Would likewise be with respect
to another institution in
Roswell Nancy used Jalen to
category which is conducted by
the National Guard New Mexico
then Bill garden and all of the
cadets from throughout the state
ten more and maybe call those
students get.
But as cats and treat them just
as if they are in boot camp and
that's part of their their
program and I don't think there
under that are PED either but I
just want to make sure that both
those institutions do not have
to
Conform their practices to the.
Bill that is our before us at
the present time so maybe a for
a if the Majority Leader is.
President then maybe that's a
question for her if it makes it
be honest committee she's back
with us Representative divert so
we were just.
This question was about the New
Mexico military institute now
the youth challenge academy
because their military and
nature Representative Armstrong
explained that maybe is under.
Higher and I I know they do have
a high school program now so if
you could just address that real
quickly Representative
Stapleton.
Madam chair and then
the civil rights attorney
I respond to that in terms of
schools please.
There she is okay their story go
ahead.
Good evening again madam chair
members of the committee it's my
understanding that this bill is
not intended to and will not
apply to those institutes that
the representative mentioned in
fact the military's regulations
the military's been ahead of us
ahead of the state of New Mexico
and many other states and has
removed their restrictions on
protective hairstyles and other
grooming based discrimination
that focuses on race space
characteristics thank you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
With that answer the the second
questions that I have is.
Really regarding.
Page two lines six and seven
And I know a number of school
districts particularly when I
was going to law school.
In the Los Angeles area we're
very concerned about
red bandannas or blue bandannas
and the are inherent danger that
was.
President with respect to
wearing
one color or the other and we
saw a wave of of
Our first more schools to.
Maybe.
Limit or not allow gang are.
Address to
be worn on campus and.
I I I just want to make sure
that there's nothing here that
would prohibit our school board
from.
Continuing policies that we're
trying to protect the well being
of the students by prohibiting
alright gang a tire tool for
recruitment that would represent
some gang that may place them in
danger here's would that be an
actor right of the bill.
Miss madam chair Mister Cole was
could you respond please.
Yes thank you madam chair and
members of the committee the
intent of the bill is not to
remove that type of restriction
from the school board
we would have to go to the
standard definition of culture
which is the customary believes
social forms and materials
traits of a racial or religious
group
and when we go that that that
definition it's clear that the
intent is not to protect getting
related activity or gang related
paraphernalia thank you.
Thank you for that answer on
I'm more glad to hear that this
does not prohibit efforts to
keep our children safe in school
and for our that type of thing
causes them to maybe be and
their payroll at that school
boards would still be able to
address those matters from.
Madam chair and and
Representative those are all
questions that are regarding
this thank you very much.
Thank you Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
You madam chair person Stapleton
could you explain the term
protective hairstyle to me at
with emphasis on protective that
this term I was previously
familiar with.
She here do we lose our again
yes I'm here I'm here Mr
chairman and may I have
Miss Taylor to respond to
protective yes side please.
Taylor you're currently not
unmuted.
Sorry Madam chair
representative it was taking me
a moment to and mute I'm
protective hairstyles a style
that talks the ends of the hair
away from being exposed to
damaging agent such as sun heat
and constant manipulation so in
the bill their descriptions of
protective hairstyles that are
used to protect our natural hair
from the elements that will
cause it to break.
Okay
Right.
That the fire seems odd to me
but okay
I mentor resent Stapleton I I
fully support what you're doing
here I'm actually.
Disappointed doesn't go further.
You know I I think about.
Marshall is kids I grew up with
who express themselves through
insurance including their hair.
In.
I don't see protection for that
yes the
The the the Kitty diss their
pink or as a Mohawk.
Or that the girl who was a short
hair cut or the boy who at once
workers are all.
And I wondered if in current
disability if you considered.
A broader protection for.
Individual choices through perra
styles.
I'm Madam chair of the in the
moment Representative.
The queen individuals that
brought me the bill
Look at.
Cultural.
Dresses dresses and protective
styles
we I don't recall having the
discussion to say if I decide to
cut my hair a certain way that
makes it
Protective but what it does deal
with this bill that you cannot
discriminate someone if that is
decide still have a mall.
So that would apply to them as
well you can't discuss children
in school.
Representative Stapleton I
appreciate that and and I wish
that were true but if the Mohawk
is not.
The expression of racial
identity cultural identity or
religious identity and we will
not be it may be more individual
identity it I don't think it
falls under the protection of
this.
May I have the
Representative from the civil
rights office explained for the
if you need additional
information
please Mr kobus.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee
Representative McQueen you asked
of a number of questions so
please let me know if I don't
answer them fully
The intent of this bill on the
national level is to center
black women and.
And by extension black men and
black children black people
specifically experience greater
levels of discrimination because
of our hair a
A piece of us that scored as
that we can't change easily
without harming ourselves
other hair styles that are not
race based maybe easier to
change I just I say that to
frame my comments.
The other types of hairstyles
that you mentioned while they
may not tied to a culture or
race they may be protected under
other areas of the the Human
Rights Act for example a child
who is expected to provoke to
conform to gender norms in
school based on length of hair
that may be considered
discrimination under gender
identity or sex.
The most hot I believe would be
A bit more challenging as the
first pieces one has to decide
what culture you're seeking to
protect by protecting the
student with the Mohawk if it is
a member of a protected class or
other non cultural community
then yes that too would fall
under the plain language of the
bill as presented if not then no
and there are many hairstyles
that may not fall under the
protection of this act with that
said though this goes much
further in protecting our our
community members again
screaming discrimination than
the current language of the
Human Rights Act and that is a
that would be a great step
forward for New Mexico thank
you.
Representative quickly I just
want to sit suggests that this
is a little bit like the
prescribed burn Act where there
were other people decide they
want to be protected by it but
we went in and and step that's
actually a different
conversation for another day.
Madam chair I appreciate that
but the chances of us bringing
back a not solve your problem I
think are limited.
So I I you know.
I worry about Marshall is kids
can it could be a gender
identity certainly race culture
religion
but.
I've seen who are.
Expressing identity in that way
usually are sort of struggling
to begin with.
And I just I think we're missing
an opportunity here
to not offer them as protection
as well.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
Stapleton.
Thank you very much okay.
Representative Rehm I just sent
you a text message.
And the answer is yes.
I I have a just a couple
comments in I serve warm.
A.
Madam chair go it.
Yes I read my text message go
ahead.
Madam chair
just a couple comments one of
the things that I was thinking
about and maybe there's some
amendment that we can place and
that'll clarify it for
Representative night point in
mind but if we had the
individual who belonged to a
white supremacy group and he
decided to cut swastikas in his
hair.
It seems to me this might
protect him and I you know that
I don't think that that's
something we wanted to but
Our anyway that's my comment and
that's all thank you.
Thank you very much
so either further questions from
the committee.
So do we have what's the
pleasure of the committee on the
bill as a benefit.
You passed.
we have.
I heard you first Representative
Armstrong okay.
I was.
It might have been this is not
Representative Eli.
Speaker of the speaker assuming
we're doing it as amended as
amended yes.
I I I did mention that would be
the motion so we have a motion
for I do pass I'm
Wickedness.
Twenty nine is amended.
Is there for the discussion.
We have the court cultural
please.
Representative all current yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative could no.
A greater.
Yes yes.
That was my daughter voting yes.
Well so madam chair.
Representative the leading cause
she's not pushing any buttons
Mister speaker.
And I vote yes to.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night there.
Yes.
Representative rain yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
I.
Madam chair yes.
We have a vote of nine to one.
With the dual passes Amanda.
Okay thank you so much
Majority Leader Stapleton and
all of your wonderful expert
witnesses and I really think you
should all.
Talk with.
President of the queen's
sometime about perhaps away to
address his expanded concerns
Madam.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
and madam chair as you know all
I live right next to the base
and sometimes we get no kind of
into that all battle with our
broadband service over here but
you get a cold you live five
blocks in for me and madam chair
at yours was low all day and I
got cut out about three times so
thank you guys for bearing with
me today.
Yes my son is listen Denver's
going to try to help me get
better connection but I need a
different generation to help.
I'm.
Yes of the service providers
thank you all okay we have when
we're bill tonight we have
Representative R. Rehm house
bill sixty one.
Thank you madam chair thank you
and I have an amendment for it
it should be two one nine four
two seven one eight one.
And did we have that everybody.
Yeah like we have it.
And madam chair what came up in
the analysis is is who is a
governmental agency that was in
reference stated that and this
just makes it clear that it's a
county chair of board chief of
police of a mess of ality and so
everywhere else in the statute
where it says government entity
it just takes out the as defined
in the tort claims act and we've
said that we're talking about
police agencies.
Okay.
All right well let's do that
public comment real quickly and
and then we can put the
amendment on because you're not
changing then tend to why don't
you explain the bill.
Madam chair and members of the
committee this is a a courts and
corrections endorsed legislation
we actually passed it out of the
house about two years ago and it
died on the vine over in the
Senate Judiciary.
Currently almost every police
agency in the state of New
Mexico has some form of reserve
police officers this so I am The
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy is the category that
develops a training and
discipline for any errant
officers.
The New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy has no authority to
either require training or
discipline any errant reserve
officer so this would create
three different levels of
reserve officers at the law
enforcement academy and the law
enforcement academy could then
right standards
for training and for discipline
of Aaron officers.
Right now they can't do any of
that and with that'll stand for
questions.
I'm in the audience those people
who are here in favor of house
bill sixty nine.
Sixty one excuse me.
we're gonna have a quick pull
those in favor say vote yes and
those in opposition about now.
Find more seconds.
Okay it looks like we're evenly
divided three and three.
And so let me go to the public
and see if there is anyone who
wishes to speak first
opposition.
Put your hand up if you wish to
speak.
For those in favor please put
your hand up.
Who wish to speak.
Looks like they're here
listening but they don't want to
talk so we will now go to are
you ready to go the committee
representative right.
Yes your I. I would move the
adoption of amendment two one
nine four two seven point one.
So.
Second by Representative nine
part I think Representative Rehm
did explain the amendment is are
there it discussion are there
questions about the amendment or
is there discussion.
Still not is there any objection
to adopting the amendment.
Okay seeing I'm we will adopt
that amendment and let's go to
discussion on the bill.
What's that.
Pleasure of the committee I've
I've heard this bill somebody
time Senator questions
Representative about going.
Thank you madam chair of her
disabilities thirteen years now
at the every year in a row.
Justice still worries me that
day
and I look at the analysis page
three.
And then explains of this we
serve officers basically.
The training that are meant to
do anything only got to do is
just the the employees who serve
officers and have all the duties
of the.
A police officer is that
correct.
Your and Representative on for a
week that is correct this would
where they would have to have
the standards
prescribed by the law
enforcement academy.
Looking at the analysis okay
because I.
The first letters on the PS six
frames concerns that the
requirement house bill sixty one
might need to under performing
or Andres reserve officers at
the with the fool Authority is
certified law enforcement.
So I mean.
Scares me to remind people of
the street slapping them bags on
them sending them out there to
be
basically officers of the law is
desired municipalities in our
counties.
And
And they don't have to.
Provided we have all this for a
G. the police officer has
without the training and not
even have to pass a physical
exam.
Can you yes there are.
Then.
What they're speaking about is
the current ones that are
reserves they will evaluate
their current training that they
have and determine if they will
need additional training.
So and madam chair and members
of the jury I don't agree with
us with your interpretation of
that which I have in the last
thirteen years.
And
Concern is that.
This is going to happen is there
is a and and and and do that as
a police union okay as this will
lead to go on strike for
whatever reason police units
would go on strike.
The chief could just start go
out on the street and grab a
bunch of people that
are partially trained and under
police department until they
break straight.
Madam.
Why they couldn't.
Chair Representative you remove
screen that we apply it wouldn't
happen.
They must use provides that
have.
Provide regular officers out in
the field with them as well and
that's in this legislation I
think the other thing is is that
no police agency is going to
have that many volunteer
officers that could lead to that
could go ahead make up a police
force.
Representative Rehm this doesn't
say where these offices are
coming from.
In.
It is these folks madam chair
representative green can be
officers.
The chief or the basically is
chair of decide to do with the
officers.
Because the the live audio.
We coming all the way from.
Don't move grant to Albuquerque
to be police officers there's
nothing in here that says thank
you.
Well as they can serve they can.
Being officer.
And they can serve their under
the supervision.
J..
And the movie due to the union
starting in I mean it charges
above.
The the normal.
Police unions are should not be
members of the union are are
normally not the rank and file
that are members of the union
and but except in some introduce
our sensitive for.
But the so this people these
folks that we are putting the
budget on I know to be
supervised by one person it
doesn't say how many people does
one person will supervise.
Thank you
madam chair.
Correct.
So one one sergeant madam chair
could be supervised fifty of
these firms are officers.
With the very much so the way
I'm reading that.
Madam chair.
One right yes you could say that
but I know no agency that has
fifty officers reserve.
But.
The representative you it's
going to it could be a
possibility that one sergeant
could be supervising fifty
reserve officers thank you said
you don't know Madam chair
representative you don't know
that any agency has fifty
reserve officers would you don't
know that in the agency does not
have the ability to get to use
our officers.
Madam chair representative
Alkhan if they want to get those
we're gonna have to go through
the background investigation the
psychological evaluation the
training requirements by the law
enforcement academy before there
ever a reserve officer if you
remember a couple years ago
there was the HSD down and white
cars or where they had a hundred
and thirty or hundred eighty of
reserve officers and what it was
was a place to go ahead and get
a commission to carry a
concealed firearm around and
travel state to state.
And that was a news reporter
from channel thirteen.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Rehm it
is not.
Yes.
Like I said earlier madam chair
interruptions you remove it
doesn't say that this reserve
officer has to be from that and
that the.
That dollars and we reserve
officers so agency can go out
all over the state and recruit.
Mr officers that impasses
training from all over the state
and bring it into there in the
and what about on the street.
That's the way I see it I I I I
hope you prove me wrong.
I don't know.
Representative they live in the
community and volunteer in the
community there M. but I guess
if you want to move somebody
from Carlsbad to give him a job
in Albuquerque.
Yeah I guess you could move up
here to be a reserve officer.
Thank thank you that's exactly
literary thank you Madam chair
representative very with that is
exactly my areas about this
these other legislation is
always scared maybe still scares
me in.
Hey I mean this is a reserve
officer under the supervision
one officer one under the
supervision of one supervisor
this is a on the news people the
supervisor as under him with the
full law enforcement powers of
the police officer.
With that I'll yield you know
that I can support this
legislation.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative maybe I
didn't to read this our
correctly but I thought the
whole effort was to.
make these reserve officers
after an.
The certain date and twelve
twenty twenty one to have to go
through training and maybe be
subject to.
Our it is not the physical
standards but other standards
and and potentially make them
liable for their actions that I
read that wrong.
Chair and Representative night
hurt now this is currently a
regular police officer can has
not only training standards but
their standards of who can be
hired as a police officer so
this puts employees the
standards of who can be a result
of your officer then they must
complete the training and then
they become a reserve officer at
an agency and if they are Arendt
then the law enforcement academy
can discipline a right now none
of that can occur the of head of
the agency can go ahead and give
commissions to anyone.
And put him out on the street.
So madam chair and
representative this legislation
designed to tighten up the
process that.
Is currently.
In place and make it more number
one uniformed require training
and to maybe deal with some of
the liability aspects.
Madam chair and representative
neighbor you are correct.
Okay well.
Madam chair I'm glad to know
that I'm still reading correctly
thank you.
I'm looking to see if there are
further questions.
Representative Rehm have you.
Yes the committee analysis.
Madam chair I don't think I have
that pulled up.
Well it it.
We have a lot of questions in
the last committee.
And then we had some.
You know the FIR raises issues
that we didn't talk about during
the interim.
You you did you did you address
the issues with your proposed
amendments.
You
She.
What.
That.
We had testimony in state
government on on still for the
Civil Rights Act about how to do
dishes the training is right now
and this is from police officers
in the police academy and
They they concerned about people
being untrained and then
deputised I know you're trying
to solve a problem but I'm not
sure that it's completely solved
and I wonder if you would
be willing to look at the
Not only the FY are
the
Committee analysis from
Judiciary and I and see if you
can't.
Address some of the issues.
That are raised.
About ensuring that.
Under qualified and under
performing.
Officers will not be acting with
full authority.
Because I know that's not what
we're just to walk to have
happened but the fear is that we
haven't this isn't.
Tight enough now
The way it is.
The part of making.
Authority that we're giving the
law enforcement academy will
tighten up all that that's the
way I see yet.
Well.
You are asking for a lot of
specifics earlier in other bills
that we addressed in this is the
seems pretty monumental when
we're concerned about.
officers.
Perhaps.
Quickly because of pressure and
they're not properly trained so
I'm just wondering rather than.
It says this on because it's
going to the floor from here if
you would take the time to look
at the analyses the FIR and the
committee analysis and and I our
you you have your own analysis
and I just wonder if there are
any.
If you're.
Absolutely certain they're not
going to be anti on qualified
people doing things.
For which they're not properly
treat.
Madam chair.
Right now there's no training
and standards so yes to have on
qualify I think that once this
is implemented and they have
training standards
they have a level for each one
of these reserves if you're a
level one two or three whatever
then your job description or you
your the forty to do that is
based on your training.
Well it's early and I mean this
is this bill it's very early in
the session and I'm just
suggesting that you might be
able to improve it.
So let me see if there any other
committee members are with the
pleasure of the committee has.
I don't see anyone else who
wishes to speak.
Madam chair happy to make a
motion if you would like one.
Okay go ahead.
Madam chair I would move our a
do pass on.
While we're on.
Sixty one thirty one as.
Okay aspect a second that second
Representative Townsend
Representative uncle.
Your your muted Representative.
To light.
I was.
As
I said I'd like to offer a
substitute motion to table.
Okay second.
So.
Representative Armstrong okay.
So I think we need to act on the
table the motion I'm I know we
need to act on the table in
motion first so we will start
there well the clerk called the
roll these.
Representative Representative
Chasey I'm I'm here if you like
me to do that for you okay
that's fine looks Senator.
Out there she is looks like
leases ready to do that.
Representative Akan yes.
Representative Armstrong yes the
table.
Representative Cook no.
Representative Mister speaker
yes.
Representative Eli yes to table.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative nightmare.
Noted table.
Representative ring now.
Representative Townsend.
Noted cable.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
Yes.
We have a vote of six to four to
table.
And I do want to say
Representative every move you
want to look at those analyses
and and convince.
Any of us to.
Get it off the table to try to
solve the problem I would be
willing to try to do that so.
We've got to decide whether we
want in standards for reserve
officers that's it right right
we'll check out the analysis
please okay thank you.
Members thank you for a very
long and somewhat frustrating
easy today for a little bit the
technical glitches but I
appreciate everybody's
hard work and have a good
evening at this point.
I don't know if you saw that my
dogs ready to eat and she came
to tell me.
I hope all of you have a nice
meal but I.
Thank you Mr is adjourned I.
