Sure
Representative Hockman B Hill.
He not hell.
I always say
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeve.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Cha
Here, Madam Chair, you have a
qualm. OK, so just a few kind of
housekeeping type things at the
request of the sponsor, we are
rolling 311 to tomorrow, so.
Um, for those of you who are
here for that, I just want you
to know, you're welcome to stay
because we always have these
really great interesting
meetings, but if you're waiting
for that, um, don't, um.
And um, at the request of my
co-sponsor and friend, we are
gonna move house Bill 298 up to
the top so that representative
Duncan.
can present.
And we have the municipal league
folks as experts.
Welcome, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Committee.
Um, House Bill 298 is a
modernization of the state's
municipal code, it hasn't had an
update um or minimal updates
since the late 70s.
And so revisions obviously need
to be made and they haven't been
these changes are only for a
mayor-council form of
government, they are not for a
home rule.
And some of the updates to the
municipal code that this is
going to do is it's uh it allows
municipal governing bodies to
formally cross-commission law
enforcement officers from other
jurisdictionctions provide
support in case of emergencies
or increased need, um, it also
requires governing bodies to
elect a mayor within 15 days,
um, there have been some stories
of
Mayors that have passed away or,
or a left moved and um they may
not have been replaced for a few
months, and so, uh, this gives
some clear cut uh guidelines
there, uh, it talks about how a
person filling a municipal
government body, so, uh, they
can, that's about all.
Madam Chair
Did, did the your experts wish
to weigh in, um, briefly.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good afternoon. My
name is Rebecca Martinez. I'm
with the municipal League and
alongside me is Ellison Nichols
also with Mexico Municipal
League.
Um, sponsors, we thank you so
much for working with us on this
bill, um, as representative
Duncan mentioned, uh, the
municipal code is the statute
that dictates and provides
procedures for cities, towns and
villages within our state. And
so with the New Mexico
municipally we represent each of
these members, and we often get
questions, procedural questions
related to the things that
Representative Duncan just
listed. And so these are known
areas of.
Um, either, um, areas that need
clarification or need
realignment with other statutes
that have been updated over the
years. Um, and with that, Madam
Chair will stand for questions.
Thank you. Great, so, um, let's
first go to the audience, those
wishing to speak in opposition,
please step up um to the lady
with the microphone and uh keep
your comments to one minute.
I don't see anyone, anyone
online wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
One,
those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of this bill,
please line up with the person
with the microphone.
I don't see anyone.
Those wishing to speak in
support on that.
Um, Michael Morris.
Uh, good evening, uh, Madam
Chairwoman and members of the
committee.
My name is Mike Morris. I'm
mayor of Clovis, and also chair,
uh, excuse me, treasurer of the
New Mexico Municipal League
Board of Directors, and I want
to thank the uh sponsors of this
bill. This bill has been uh
crafted by the uh municipalities
in New Mexico, uh, and, um, have
designated with the municipal
league and, and the
municipalities have designated
support for HB 298, uh, and, and
it has, have placed priority.
on this bill, uh, this time
around. Uh, the municipal code,
uh, as it's already been stated,
serves as the procedural
handbook for municipalities, uh,
processes, uh found uh in the
code range from how
municipalities incorporate to
how they provide uh services to
our citizens and um without
current and relevant uh
regulations, municipalities, uh,
like Clovis and others, uh,
often find themselves in a
procedural
dilemmas, um, that, that can
stem from the outdated and
unclear language, um, and for
these reasons, uh, and many
others, but I want to keep it
brief. Uh, I respectfully
request that you please support
HB 298. Thank you.
Mm
Back to my co-sponsor or
anything before I go to
commit?
No, thank you, ma'am. Great.
Members
At home
Aman Hill, anyone else? OK,
Representative Hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just
real quick, um, Representative,
you, you said it doesn't affect
home rule. If I remember, it
also does not affect the
commission style like
Aztec is.
Beer.
Ma'am, sure, um.
Representative, yes, that's
correct.
Thank you, that's all I had.
Right, Representer Hoffman.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Representative, just
wanted to say thank you for
this, um, as a
As a resident of a village going
now over, I think over a year
since we've had a mayor, um, I'm
really, really, uh, this welcome
changes, happy to see them.
Thanks for bringing them up.
Anyone else wish to um ask a
question or weigh in on the
bill.
I'm sure I do.
All right, we have a new pass
motion on House Bill 298 made by
Representative Romero, seconded
by Representative Hall, would
you call the roll, please? Thank
you, Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez, yes.
Representative Paul. Yes.
Representative Hochman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martins.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reed, yes. Leader
Sapansky, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, you have a due
pass on House Bill 298.
Thank you chair. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
All right. Now we'll go on to
House Bill 340.
Representative Grola and
Expert.
And we have
one we can say so.
What is that person's name and
he could
commander, could you raise your
hand so we can find you?
OK, very good. We, we see him on
online, so that's great. um,
representative of the floor is
yours. Thank you, Madam chair.
Thank you for having us here
today. Um, House Bill 340
addresses two gaps in current
law that hinder solving open
criminal cases by allowing
judges to order the entry of DNA
into the combined DNA uh index
system codies from suspects who
died before being charged with a
felony.
Also, um,
Mandates automatic DNA entry for
individuals who die in prison or
were released before July 1997,
provided that the DNA was
collected in accordance with law
and with me is my witness
expert.
Madam Chairman the Mehan Dorsey
from the office of Speaker
Martinez also Commander Harak,
who is on yes.
Um representative, so why don't
we hand the amendment out, um.
Madam, can I have a copy too? Of
course. Thank you.
I do that all the time.
I'm sure I'd like to move the
amendment.
I'm here is a Repentative
General Li, who is also sponsor
on this bill.
The amendment I will only
changes that were in prison for
incarcerated.
Just because of the um where the
bill actually is looking forward
to.
It looks like a pretty simple
amendment. Um, so we've moved it
for discussion when we come back
to the committee, we'll get it
adopted and we'll talk about the
whole bill, OK? Anything else
before I go to the public?
No, I'm sure we time for
questions for this. Very good.
Um, those in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition,
please approach the gentleman
with the microphone. I don't see
anyone. Those online wishing to
speak in opposition.
I don't see anyone.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support.
Please raise your hand, or I
mean please approach the
gentleman.
With the microphone.
I don't see anyone in the
audience.
I see, um, that, um, Dean in
support.
Now
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Nadine and I am speaking as a
per personally on this matter.
My aunt was Karen Claus. He
adopted sister to my father in
1976.
She was uh murdered.
It took 41 years to identify the
murderer, Karen Klaus was Karen
O'Grady, but at one point she
was Karen Medley, the wife of
righteous brothers.
Bill Medley.
Her perpetrator was actually in
prison and had escaped from
prison and he was killed.
But he was identified as the
killer in 1976 of my aunt in
2017 by familial DNA, the
familial DNA was collected from
a family member who is also a
perpetrator of violent crimes
including robberies, assaults,
and rapes.
I stand in support of this bill.
It takes many years to identify,
but identification leads to
closure, and closure can lead to
healing. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, sponsors, members
of the committee.
So we have an amendment, anyone.
I'm assuming there's not gonna
be a lot of discussion about it.
So if somebody would like to
move to adopt, I'm happy.
OK, um, motion from and Paul
seconded by Representative Ree,
any opposition to adopting the
no opposition, you have amended
bill.
Um, so now we're on to the bill,
folks. Any questions or comments
you wish to make?
I'm sure I'd like to move a do
pass.
A motion for Dupa made by
representative from.
Beckoned by Representative Reed.
Did you call the road.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez. Yes.
Representative Hull.
Representative Homan B, yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen. Yes.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have a due pass on House
Bill 340 as amended.
Thank you. Thank you committee.
As usual, um,
House Bill 253.
ceiling of certain court
records.
Representative Romero. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and there is a
committee sub, is that right?
OK.
Could we hand that out, please?
OK.
OK, you representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you members. So this is an
attempt to look at how it is
that we can keep people housed.
Um, when we look at the eviction
rates in our state, especially
post Covid, they've been
skyrocketing and in many of
these circumstances, it's really
due to nonpayment or and of
course that happens in 3 days in
New Mexico, um, or, um, needing
a bit more time. So for the
systematic sort of situation
that we're in with evictions.
For those that are
new um rental locations.
Oftentimes this can be a scarlet
letter for those folks that are
looking forward to finding new
housing. Um, what we're trying
to do here is seal those
records, um, in a systematic way
and with me, um, Mr. Mountain
Chair, members of the committee,
um, is Alison Friedman and Serge
Martinez, um, with the, uh,
well, all of them talk about the
work that they're doing at the
UNM Law School and housing, uh.
Um, but there are experts today
and of course Representative and
we can talk,
um, actually, um, I'm happy to
hear information about the bill.
I love you guys, but I don't, we
don't need to hear about what
the work they're doing at the uh
give me, I'm a little
tired. I know cause I thought I
heard you say that. I'm like, I,
no, no, let's focus on the
bill's another time, Madam Chan,
but today we're talking about
teing records, um, as a, as a
proactive response to uh the,
the records that are being kept,
um, we've been working
diligently with the AOC about
how this would operate, um, and
so that's what we have before
you met.
OK. So if you'd like to, and we
have a sub before, so we're
really gonna be talking about
the sub, um 66.2, is that right?
Last three digits.
That's correct, madam. OK, does
someone want to move the sub for
discussion. OK.
All right, um,
Experts, uh, if you wish to add
anything, uh, briefly, that
would be great.
Madam Chair, Representatives,
thank you. My name is Alison
Friedman from the Mexico Center
for Housing Laws, Serge
Martinez, um, we are the
co-founders of the center, um,
and in addition to, um, what
Representative Romero indicated,
uh, I'm just, uh, walk you
through the, the very few
changes that were made, um, uh,
we worked with the
administrative Office of the
courts and the judicial
Technology Council, um, to, to
come up with a couple of changes
that would make it um less
burdensome for the court staff
to implement um these
procedures. Um, so, on
on page 3,
line.
Uh, I apologize. Just one
moment. Um.
Line 17, um, the bill now reads
um unsealed no fewer than 15
days after the date of the order
upon written request of the
owner, so the phrase upon
written request to the owner was
added, um, and again, that is to
make it easier for the
administrative office of the
courts, um, to identify a case
that should actually be
unsealed. It makes the process
sort of less manual and instead
has a piece of paper before them
that says that they they can
unseal it, so that was the
purpose of that change. Um, uh,
the other
Uh, very minor change that was
made on page 4, is a reference
to the word, uh, excuse me, page
4 line 20, a reference to the
word, um, motion, so the word
petition was replaced page 4
line 20 with the word um motion
and um that was to just clarify
that a petition does not need to
be filed to open a brand new
case, but instead a motion would
be filed in the case that
already exists. So that's just a
terminology change to ensure
that the court, um, doesn't need
to open a brand new.
for something that could be done
through motion in the same case.
Um, the, the word motion was
changed in one other with
petition was changed to motion
in one other place as well,
which is on page 5, at line 10.
OK, very good. Thank you. Um.
Anything else you'd like to add
before I go to the audience
questions,
Anything else you'd like to add
before I go to the audience. OK.
Um, anyone in the audience
that's wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill.
Please, um, approach the
gentleman with the microphone.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore, registered lobbyist for
the Mexico Association of
Realtors, and we stand in
opposition to the bill. We stand
in opposition to the bill
because access to these eviction
records is a critical tool for,
for land or landlords, uh, to
identify folks who've had issues
in the past as it relates to um
property damage, lease
violations, or nonpayment of
rent. Without this information,
they could be in a situation of
making a
decisions without uh complete
data, and we have heard from uh
folks who manage properties and
an eviction isn't an absolute
bar to uh leasing to someone.
It's another piece of
information they can't take this
into consideration or not taken
into consideration, we stand in
the opposition. Thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in a, please raise your hand.
Anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in support of the bill,
please approach the gentleman.
Anyone online.
OK, um, and we'll, we'll pick 3
people, Diane McCash.
Diane.
Good, yes, good evening, Sharon.
Uh, my name is Diane McCash. My
husband and I were landlords for
a lot of years, and we as former
landlords, strongly support the
ceiling of eviction records,
records until and unless the
eviction order is granted and
support that eviction records be
sealed again after 3 years.
Procuring housing has only
become more difficult in the
years since we were providing
housing for rent to families in
our community. We believe that
it is harmful and cruel to allow
eviction records to be available
indefinitely. 3 years is too
long to punish people for losing
a job or losing the ability to
pay for their housing for
reasons beyond their control.
It's also to uh more than
enough, we think, to punish
someone who may have been
evicted for reasons that were or
appeared to be in their control.
Please vote yes on this bill and
the housing market for people
who have already endured 3 years
of the consequences of an
addiction. Thank you.
Thank you, um, Rachel Biggs. I
chaired members of the
committee. My name is Racheligs
with Albuquerque Healthcare for
the Homeless. We serve about
5000 people experiencing
homelessness every year in
Bernnaino County, evictions and
incomplete eviction records are
a major barrier for folks
accessing housing. It makes a
lot of sense to seal incomplete
records and level the playing
field, making sure that we can
get people back into housing so
that our families are not
experiencing homelessness, um,
any longer than they need to
impacting their health and their
early mortality. It also makes
sense to seal addictions after 3
years to ensure that people have
another chance at housing and
that this information isn't used
against them and keeping them
from being housed in the future.
This is a key issue for
addressing public safety in our
communities, making sure
everyone has access to safe and
affordable housing, and we think
the sponsor very much for
bringing this forward.
Thank you, um, Tim Peterson.
Tim Peterson.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Tim Peterson and I'm
here representing Lutheran
advocacy Ministries of New
Mexico. We also expressed the
position of the New Mexico
Council of Churches, and the
Presbytery of Santa Fe, and we
support this bill for
humanitarian reasons. It will
prevent court records from being
misused or misinterpreted, and
as people of faith, we support
this bill and encourage the
committee to vote yes. Thank
you. Thank you.
Don't see anyone else.
sponsor or anything else.
Sorry.
Nothing else,
you know, it's been a long day
for all of us, we get that, um,
representative Reed, thank you,
Madam Chair Representative. Um,
so, OK, I'm trying to understand
the process cause we had your
other bill. I think that was
your bill that somebody's bill
on the expungement, so I'm
trying to clarify the two, the
two, and I know we don't
generally talk about other
bills, Madam Chair, but I.
So in that bill, Madam Chair and
Representative, after 5 years,
it was, uh, it's a bill passes
its automatic expungement, which
means
expungement, it just goes, goes
away.
Is, is that what that bill did.
Uh, so there's an excellent, um,
difference in the ARC's
interpretation, um, but I will
also defer to.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, for the
opportunity to clarify, so, um,
yes, Representative Reed, uh,
expungement it destroys um
records after 5 years, which was
um HB 98. This bill, um, seals
eviction records so that shields
them from public view, so it
doesn't destroy the records
permanently, um, and you know,
there are, there are good
reasons to wanna just steal
records, let's say that, um, you
know, you wanted to, um, look at
the eviction records, you know,
to bring forward a bill so that
you could get data. Um, there's
a provision in the, in HB 25.
this bill that would allow for
that. Um, so instead of
destroying the records, you're
just simply stealing them. Um,
very importantly, this bill also
seals, um, all eviction court
records right at the point when
a case is filed, and that is to
keep tenant screening
industries, so, um, a billion
dollars sort of out of state
industry from um getting the
records on the front end and
then coding every single tenant
name that's on an online docket
as having an eviction before a
judge has ever heard of the
case. So a judge has never
said this person is evicted,
they're not. The tenant
screening company is just taking
those names, quoting them as an
eviction, and then selling that
data to landlords. So this bill
is really aimed at information
accuracy and ensuring that the
records, because they're all
sealed on the front end and then
there's a bifurcated process by
which they become unsealed or
stay sealed, that there's really
accurate information out there.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative that and that was
kind of what I was gonna ask you
to process. So with the eviction
process starts, whether it's
granted or not, it's sealed,
it's an automatic seal.
And I'm understanding Madam
Chair Representative just in
case they're not evicted, that
doesn't harm them. And, OK, is
that my so far on the right
track. That's correct. I'm sure
and even if they win their
circumstance their name may
still be attached as well, so.
There we're protecting both
ends.
OK. Thank you, Mearian
representative. So then it's
sealed, um, and at the 3 year
mark.
Um, it can be petitioned.
I
I, I guess by somebody to have
it unsealed, I assume maybe Ma
at the landlord or somebody. I,
I don't know. I guess my
question is if it's sealed, how
does anybody know to petition
the court to even know to look
for this man.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
the 3 years pertains to records
that become unsealed, so
initially all records are
sealed. There's a bifurcated
process if a tenant wins the
case, the record just stays
sealed. If the landlord wins the
case, it becomes unsealed.
Those unsealed records then at 3
years, um, become resealed, uh.
And that's to ensure that
there's not an eviction on
someone's record for the rest of
their life, so.
I'll stop there. Thank you. OK.
I, I think I under, I think I
understand so.
OK, so it's a, it man chair
representative, so if the, it
has been a long day. So it's the
landlord wins.
Um, it is.
Sealed or unsealed.
Unsealed Madam Chair, and if the
tenant wins, it's sealed.
What about Lieutenant Luke?
Well, I guess that it's, if the
tenant lives in the landlords,
OK.
Got it, got it. I apologize. OK,
yes. So, OK, so then, um, if we
wanna unseal a record, um,
How do you
How do you know, like, again,
how do you know that that record
is there, whatever party, and,
and, and if you could, Madam
Chair Representative, what would
generally be a party that would
try to unseal that record.
Madam sure representative, if I
understand the question
correctly, um.
A record becomes so they're all
sealed if the tenant wins, the
record remains sealed. If the
tenant loses or the landlord
wins, then the record gets
unsealed, um, if the landlord
asks. I think what you're asking
is how, how would someone know
what to do, you know, to unseal
it. There's a judgment of
possession. So the court issued
a judgment of possession, um,
and that is what indicates the
landlord has won the case that
possession of a property will
return to the landlord and at
that point, the court would know
to.
Steal the record, um, upon that,
you know, the, the change we
made. OK, and so Ma represented
if the tenant wins, which is a
sealed.
Why, what, I mean, the 10 at
one, so why would we be sealing
that record.
it's favorable to the tenant.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Reeves, so we have testimony in
New Mexico of tenants that have
won those cases, but they're
still considered eviction cases,
so they're sort of scarlet
lettered with that whether or
not they won or lost is
essentially having this eviction
record.
So it's attached to that name,
and again, aliases, folks that
may not even be that person
understanding. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair Representative, it
kind of goes back to the same
issue I had with the other one
and the, the landlords, you
know, not having the right to
know, you know, whether the
property was damaged or, you
know, what the landlord wins, I
guess they'll, they'll know,
but, you know, who, who knows
how it'll all all pan out, but
um.
So I kind of have the same issue
that this seems like almost a
Double protection now, like, you
know, you have the big
expungement if that passes and
The wreckage is gone. Now we're
going to a sealed, um, it just
seems like we we'll have one
year in there maybe that.
Somebody could find something
out, um, so.
Do you feel about chair
represented this is kind of a.
Like kind of a Madam Chair
representative, I think we're
just looking at the protections
for folks to really be able to
find safe and stable housing,
um, and when folks have been in
that situation and rations with
which folks have faced eviction.
really helps um for stability,
especially if it was a bad year,
you know, something terrible
happened, but not for that to be
remain on their record for the
rest of their life, um, and to
have that opportunity for these
to be sort of preemptively
expunge, we know expungement has
been, um, you know, we don't
have actually a lot of data on
expendment per se, so how it's
being used, uh, thankfully, the
clinic has been doing that work,
um, at UNM for a long time, but
we don't know how effective it
is. We do know.
um unfortunate has been for
eviction, um.
Again, that Scarlet Letter to be
on someone's record for long
term, how difficult it is for
them to get housing, um, and so
this is really an opportunity
for us to just kind of upend
that the nipping it in the bud
for the folks that. All right,
thank you, Madam Chair
Representative just some kind of
get to the end here. Now when
you actually go to court.
Um, on the last page of the
bill, um, to get, to get it
unsealed.
Uh, you have to show compelling
need.
Um, and you say including
scholarly educational
journalistic or government
purposes. Um,
And then it says in determining
whether there's a compelling
need, the court shall balance
the interests of the resident
for non-disclosure against the
interests of the requesting
party, um, and that bulk
requests. So
Compelling, how would you, and I
don't know if you can find it in
here. How, uh, would you, Madam
Chair Representative, Is there a
definition for compelling need
and, and how high of a burden is
that, um, that.
Madam Representative, um,
there's not a definition for
compelling need, um, but this is
something that um other states
have used this similar language
and so there's kind of guiding
case law from other.
Um, may help the judges in this
state.
Other statutes in New Mexico
that use language related to,
um, you know, something close to
compelling need and so um I
believe that judges and courts
um are familiar with that
language and um this provides
them some guidance in terms of
compelling me way, you know,
they need to balance.
the interests of the resident
for non-disclosure against the
interests of the requesting
party, so it provides some
guidance as to what would be
looked at in terms of um
compelling me.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative and expert, I
would, would love to have some
type of definition of what
compelling name was, but I
understand it sounds like it
might be more of a judge
question, um, in the situation,
and lastly, on other states, you
said other states have been
doing this and using this
language, and how many other
states are, are doing this
manager if you know.
Madam Chair Representative,
there are 16 other states in the
District of Columbia, um, that
have a ceiling or expungement
legislation, um, some of them
look like this, some of them
look slightly different, um,
Colorado and California would be
the two states that have
something um closest to what
we're proposing here, but this,
um, legislation is based on a
holistic study of all 16 states
and best practices from
conversations that I've had with
individuals in all 16 states
that have this type of
legislation.
OK, and then I said last, but
lastly, just, just talking Madam
Chair representative and.
And the studies, I know we
weren't gonna go too much into
the studies, but what are you
finding in your studies.
Um
If it could assist me in trying
to decide what to do on this
bill, um, I would appreciate
that.
That's Madam Sharon
Representative, um, and the
other 16 states that have this,
the only one that's had it
really for a long a long enough
period of time to do a study um
in California, and what they
have concluded is that um the
automatic sealing of records
right at the point of filing,
which is included in this bill,
um, is the most effective way to
ensure information accuracy for
landlords and to um ensure
housing stability for, for
tenants. Um, so their bill,
their law has been around since
2016. The other
16 states have only been around
for a couple of years. Um, so
the, the best data we have is
from California.
OK, and
our question
because it's our question came
to mind. I'm sorry, Madam Chair.
I'm gonna be free, um, did you
take input from land the
landlords Association that deal
with the like cause I, I kind of
feel they're not really getting
a fair shake. I understand what
you're trying to do definitely
with people have had a, you
know, bad break or whatever, but
if you uh take input from the
opposite side.
throughout this session, Madam
Chair Representative, we've had,
um, numerous pro and against,
um, from the housing, uh,
community, um, so you heard from
her. OK. Thank you. I'm done.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Anyone else? Representative
Hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
representatives, experts.
Why 3 years?
As a versus to her.
whatever, madam chair.
Madam Representative, um, we
wanted to ensure that there was
a good snapshot of time, um, for
landlords to be able to see
tenant behaviors, so 3 years is
36 rental periods, um, and we
believe that within 36 rental
periods, um, a landlord would be
able to see, you know, if the
tenant was not paying rent for
many months in a row or was, um,
you know, destroying property on
multiple occasions, um, you
would see, you know, time shot,
um, so that's why we, we chose
that to make sure there's a a
substantial amount of time for
the.
landlords to be able to see what
has happened to.
Thank you, Madam chair, um.
When these are sealed,
Um, so
Uh, let me use this situation.
I'm a, I'm a landlord.
Not anymore, thank God.
Um
You.
You have someone who wants to
rent from you.
Is there a way, I know you can
have it unsealed. My question
is, is there some record
repository that shows uh uh
records against John Doe had
been sealed.
And then at that point, if I
want to go through the legal
process of trying to unseal them
or whatever. Is there some way I
can see that?
There's a potential cause of
action against this person, or
is it just like a, a, a vacuum
and I'm I'm trying to be
offensive, I, I don't know.
And.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
if the record is unsealed, so if
the landlord wins the case after
a judge has made a determination
in the case, it would remain
available for 3 years for the 36
rental uh month rental period
and then um it would become
resealed after that. So once
it's resealed, unless you fall
into one of the exceptions
within the bill, then it would
be filled.
So when it's resealed, there's
no way to discover if there's a
record against a person, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
just to clarify what you mean by
record, uh, criminal background
checks, you know, credit
reports, all of those things
are, are different and apart
from this, but as to evictions,
that's correct.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Any
anyone else with questions, I'll
enter to obtain a motion.
I'm trying.
Move
The judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 20.
I'm sorry, small one.
May substitute for House Bill 2.
503.
OK, we have a motion for a do
not pass on House Bill 253, but
it do pass on House committee
just uh substitute for House
Bill 253 made by Hoffman Ehill
and a second.
I by Representative Romero. All
right, would you call the roll,
please?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta, yes.
I'm sorry,
yes, sorry.
Representative Chavez, no.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Hochman B. Hill,
yes.
Represented Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reeb, no.
Peter Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Romero, yes.
Madam chair,
Yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do not
pass on House Bill 253 and a due
pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 2 by 3.
Thank you very much, everybody.
I
So, um,
We have
House Bill 222.
And I understand.
We are working off the bill
itself, there's no committee sub
or anything that people are
planning on presenting, correct?
Man was a committee sent from
the previous committee we're on
that one. OK, very good.
To.
No, no.
We have the, there was a
committee in sub in house Energy
environment and natural
resources, and it shows up in
our book, cause that was from
the previous committee. There is
no other amendment or
sub-related to this in this
committee. So there's no
judiciary committee, so.
Got it. Very good. There's a
little confusion going on there
for a little bit. So, um, a
representative of the floor is
yours. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, thank you, members, so,
um, essentially preventing two
things from happening in the
realm of fracking. Um, first is
the essentially um the
prohibition of PFAS being used,
um, in fracking, which we know
has happened in New Mexico after
a longitudinal study was began
in 2012, um, and
In 2022, uh, and two is ensuring
that while we're um using the
practice of fracking that the
chemical compounds used um in
the wells across New Mexico are
disclosed, um, currently, the
disclosure that is required,
there's a public website called
Frack Focus, um, the companies
who use that practice, use the
practice of um utilizing
produced water currently can
list uh trade secret as their
um.
Definition of what they're
doing, but we're asking is for
that information to be disclosed
to the uh New Mexico Environment
Department so as to understand
that that what they're using is
safe, um, and that what they're
practices, um, is, is
essentially available and
understood by uh New Mexicans to
be a safe practice, so we want
to have that chemical
disclosure um of what's going on
during fracking in order to
prevent, uh, forever chemicals.
and other potential toxins, um,
to be interacting with um folks
in the practice of fracking and
potential use of produced water
generally as we've been
exploring all of that, uh, all
we're asking for is is
disclosure with that, um, and so
with us, Madam Chair, today, um,
is our expert Tim Davis with um
Wilder's Guardian leave Melissa
Troutman is also online to offer
expertise, um, where that we may
need to fill in and of course
um,
My co-sponsor, Senator
Steinborne with us.
to add anything, senator,
briefly,
thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
thanks for hearing the bill
committee. I'll be brief, um.
This bill's being done for two
reasons.
Number one, Madam Chair, we are
generating billions of gallons,
I think over 60 billion gallons
a year of produced water in the
oil and gas field.
But we don't know really what's
in it. We're spending millions
to try to quantify it and this
produced water consortium, but
we, we allow by law.
Uh, some of the chemicals to be
remained secret and
If we're, as we evolve and
consider use of that water, we
need full disclosure of what's.
What's being put down hall,
which is an uh technical term
what's being put down quantify
it, we can know how to.
Use it, not use it.
Keep it safe.
Uh, so that's number one, ma'am
chair. #2 reason for this bill
is frankly, it's in the public's
right to know. We believe that
what is fundamentally put in the
earth, um,
The potentially pollute water.
soil, etc. the environment that
we know what those chemicals
are. And so this bill requires
full disclosure. And by the way,
finally, it's voluntary for the
industry. What this bill says
is, um, you have to disclose
whatever you use in the state,
and if there's something you
don't want to disclose, no
problem. You just can't use it
in New Mexico.
So
That's
What we, how we approach this
issue and
Um, thank you for listening.
Right. Thank you. I'm gonna go
to the audience, those wishing
to speak in opposition to the
bill, we stepped forward and
limit your remarks to about a
minute, I don't see anyone,
anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill.
Please raise your hand. This is
opposition, right? I see someone
named Jim.
Madam Chair, thank you. My name
is Jim Winchester. Um, I am with
the Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico, uh,
also speaking here tonight on
behalf of the Permian Basin
Petroleum Association of New
Mexico. Um, we do acknowledge,
we understand the intent of this
bill, um, we would argue that
what we have in place already
accomplishes that intent, um,
and the provisions in here that
would require pre-submitting
would be onerous, inaccurate,
and
Especially if approvals would
have to be sought on each stage
in the midst of a multi-million
dollar stimulation job.
So for that reason and for
others, we stand respectfully
opposed.
Thank you. Um, there's a iPhone,
that's what it shows as iPhone
116. This is in opposition to
the bill, so there's no name
attached to iPhone.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Ashley Wagner, the vice
president of government affairs
for the New Mexico Oil and Gas
Association. We represent over
200 member companies. Nimoga
opposes House Bill 222, because
all the interested parties on
this very issue went through a
week-long rulemaking process
with many months of preparation
where experts testified about
the proper scope of a POS band,
and the commission is set to
deliberate on that process in
short order. Enacting this bill
bypasses a
very democratic process that
included a great deal of public
participation on both sides of
the aisle, which should not be
ignored by the legislature. The
additional disclosures pose the
risk of frack focus no longer
being the repository for
chemical disclosure in New
Mexico. This is important
because the oil conservation
division has stated they do not
want to move away from Frack
Focus and could not and do not
have the staffing or technology
to do so. Removal of the ability
for supplies to, uh, to provide
a product
with trade secrets likely will
result in use of older chemicals
to preserve their trade secreted
green green chemicals. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um, and one more, um,
Enrique Neal, no?
Enrique,
yes ma'am. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
Enrique Nel here on behalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce in opposition to,
uh, House Bill 222. The bottom
line in our view is that there
are just too many uncertainties
to make this legislation viable.
Uh, first of all, the impact on
production in our state is
unknown. No other state has done
it quite this way. We're
thinking it's not good to be a
first doctor. Secondly, there's
legal jeopardy that has been
well stated by the attorney.
general. And third, as has been
mentioned, there's a rulemaking
process going on right now to
address this subject that would
be completely derailed if this
bill passes. Uh, the statement
in the FIR by Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources perhaps
says it all. It says, quote, too
broad, not connected to
science-based human health or
environmental concerns and
negatively affects oil and gas
recovery, unquote. Uh, we do ask
for a no vote on House Bill 2.
Anything else before I go to oh
sorry
4.
Those wishing to speak in favor,
please.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Marion
Lenai, on behalf of New Energy
Economy and our 5000 members.
I want to address some of the
comments that were made. First,
I'd like you to know that this
bill mimics almost exactly the
bill that's in Colorado that has
passed Colorado and California.
And guess what, they still have
fracking there. Number 2, in the
uh rulemaking in uh the oil
conservation division, it's
ironic because Nimmoga argued
there that um
Hey, you shouldn't be, you don't
have the authority to hear this
OCD that's oil Conservation
division. This has to be a law,
and here in, in, in this, in, in
the legislature, they're saying,
hey, we just, we just, we just
uh to worked all hard in the
regulatory arena. So we're
asking you to make this law, and
it will not derail that
regulatory, um, proceeding. It
will provide direction for it.
Further, Nimoga testified under
oath, not their PR people, but
under oath that it will not hurt
the industry whatsoever.
4th or 5th, the governor ran on
this in 2018. She said, we want
chemical disclosure of
everything that's going on in
fracking.
Further and almost less.
What is Secretary James Kenny
say? He says, disrupt all the
pathways. We must disrupt all
the pathways because if we don't
stop PAS from entering our
society, it'll be a problem.
Thank you. Welcome.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Sarah Canno. I'm a policy
specialist with Amigos Bravos,
which is a statewide water
quality and protection
organization based in Taos, New
Mexico. We participate in the
New Mexico toxic pollutants
Working Group, which is looking
very closely at PAS and the
scope of the problem that that
presents in our state.
And we're also parties to the
current rule being considered by
OCD's water quality control
commission and the rulemaking
process, um, for both of those
reasons, we support this bill.
We think that it is
complimentary to the rulemaking
that's currently being
considered in the WQCC, which
Consids a prohibition on the
discharge of produced water to
surface and groundwater, so we
see it as complementary, so we
urge you to support. Thank you.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sharon Argenbright. I'm
a nurse, I've been a nurse for
many years, and the problem with
PFOS is ubiquitous and it's
harmful.
And it's killing our citizens.
Anything we can do to stop this
chemical.
From polluting our waters, I
would appreciate. Please vote
for this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Right, let's, let's go online.
I'll accept up to 3.
Um, indivisible Albuquerque.
Hi, thank you so much for taking
my comments today. I'm
representing my name is Sandra
Stalberg, and I'm representing
Indivisible Albuquerque. There's
just a couple of common sense
things that I would like to say
is first of all, what's going on
here is the very definition of
democracy in action. So this is
a very democratic process, uh,
in terms of being able to uh
hide behind trade secrets. I bet
you any money, most of us know
that when you make a cake, it
takes butter, it takes oil, it
takes flour, it takes
eggs, and yet I bet none of you
would be able to come up with
the same recipe that I did, so
trade secrets is just something
that they're hiding behind. And
then lastly, I'd like to just
amplify everything that was said
by the three previous people in
support of this legislation.
Thank you so much for taking my
comment.
Um, next, Tim Peterson.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Tim Peterson. I'm speaking on
behalf of Lutheran advocacy
ministries of New Mexico.
I'm here to state our support
for this bill. This bill will
protect the health of current
and future New Mexico citizens
by requiring operators to
disclose the chemicals that they
use in their downhole
operations.
And such disclosure is going to
provide invaluable information
to those people who have to
respond to spills and accidents.
And so we, as people of faith
who want to protect creation, we
encourage the committee to
please pass this bill. Thank
you.
Norm
You need to unmute normal.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
trying to unmute, um.
Do you hear me now? Yes.
Thank you. My name is Norm Gom.
Um, I'm representing the New
Mexico water advocates in
support of this bill.
I was an expert witness um in
the eleven-day rule hearing and
during that time I talked, uh,
face to face with oil company
representatives, uh, who assured
me that there was nothing in
fracking fluid that I would
object to.
Um
We know that that's not the
case. We know that frack fluid
not only contains PFOS but other
extremely toxic components by,
you know, it's that's
deliberate. In order to treat
the ways which everybody's
talking about these days. You
have to know what's in it.
New Mexico State University is
spending a fortune on trying to
figure out how to do what's
called non-target analysis, they
need to know what's there.
So please pass this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um,
Will conclude public comment,
representative, just one other
quick, um.
No, we have heard from two,
first responders who are would
be responding potentially to
need at one of these facilities
or locations, um, we also want
disclosure for their
understanding of what they would
be getting into as well.
OK, um
Man members
um
um McQueen Hoffman V. Hill.
Others
Go ahead,
ma'am, um.
I'm sure members of me. So, so
we heard this in House Energy,
you actually heard it twice. I
came back uh as a committee, so.
Um, they're just two things I'd
like to point out, um.
First is
Talking about uh requiring
disclosure of what's in fracking
clues, uh, for a long time and
for a long time, the responsive
been, oh, you don't need that
because we have fra focus.
Um
But everything's just labeled as
trade secrets. So I, it's just
not getting us there. Um.
Yeah, I think it's, it's, uh,
it's time we address that.
And then the second thing I'd
like to point out is
You know, POS is um
Uh, on the one hand, a really
bad substance or
A lot of things.
On the other hand, it's a little
bit of a a boogeyman right now
because we're sort of aware of
it, um, and we're, we're taking
steps to address it. Um.
what I
The vibe I get from the
opposition to the spill is
Don't worry, we don't actually
use PFOS in fracking.
But, but don't ban it.
You know, and, and it's just
like.
Well, if you're not using it.
Why can't we be on that? I, I
mean.
It
We're, we're, we're getting sort
of different stories depending
on who you ask and when you ask
them. Um.
Uh, I think disclosure is
appropriate.
I think it's time to take PA out
of the out of the mix.
Um, and if, if the oil and gas
companies truly aren't using
PAs.
I don't understand why they
continue to object to that.
Thank you.
Thank you, um, Representative
Hoffman for you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, sponsors of the bill,
so I firstly apologize. It's
been a long day. I'm tired. Um,
I may have missed in the bill,
but my question in particular, I
know for certain agencies like
if let's say this information
were to be disclosed to the
Environment department.
For like the economic
development department, there
can be certain information that
is disclosed to them that can
then be essentially um kept from
IPRA Ever requests because of
the trade secret, um.
Designation and so essentially
whoever is giving information to
EDD can submit two different
versions of a document, the full
document which EDD would then
keep, but if it were to be Ira
by a member of the public.
There's a second version of the
document that any IP would be
redacted from that document. So
how
How would that processor would
that process affect what you are
proposing here in, in this bill,
and it's the point of this bill
to disclose what's in this stuff
to everybody or simply to the
environment department will then
be tasked with dealing with it
if there's something really bad.
For the environment and some of
these.
materials.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
We'll talk about some of what.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative D Hill again, Tim
Davis with Wild Earth Guardians.
The way that this bill would
work is that it would present
the holder of a trade secret
with a choice of either
disclosing that trade secret and
using that compound in New
Mexico or retaining their trade
secrets and not using that
compound in New Mexico. And um
if they decide to retain trade
seekers and not use certain
compounds in New Mexico, they
could certainly use compounds
that are being disclosed in
other states like Colorado
requires disclosure in.
it requires disclosure, racing
is still happening in those
states. And I also like to point
out that in the 16 months prior
to Colorado, uh, enacting their
PAS ban and disclosure law in
July of 2023, uh, and the 16
months after that, they actually
have more production in the 60
months after disclosure. And so
there would be no trade secret
information held by the oil
conservation division or on, on
Frack Focus for that matter
under this bill because all the
disclosures would be voluntary
and.
The bill just says that if
you're going to use something in
New Mexico, it can't be too
fast, and you have to tell us
what it is.
Thank you, ma'am, sir.
Thank you, ma'am chair and
representative an expert. So,
could, could you address the
comments we heard about this 10
day um rulemaking hearing
conducted. I, I, I've been told
it should have results like
March 11th and um
All the different things that
are being addressed in that
rulemaking process,
and so does that kind of
Invalidate all the work that all
these stakeholders are coming.
to the table and and putting
forth and so could you address
why this until that's done,
madam.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
That's a good question, and the
reason this statute is needed is
because number one, we don't
know what's going to happen in
that rulemaking, but more
important, the rulemaking can be
undone. We saw this.
With the pit roll that was
adopted during the Martine
during the Richardson
administration, and then undone
by the Martinez administration.
And what we're talking about
here is a, is a permanent uh uh
uh.
Disclosure regime that will
That will, uh, frankly go beyond
the role because of the
disclosure involved, but also
because it'll be in statute and
not a rule, and so that's why
this is needed.
In Mearian and represent an
expert. I, I understand that
that, but
It just seems like, you know,
you, you've got kind of a very
democratic process taking place
here with all sides are coming
to the table, and I understand
what you're trying to do, but it
just seems like
It might be a little premature
and I would, I would, I would
love to see what this task force
and, you know, these
stakeholders come out with
before we just come and, and
start making changes, um.
And so that's just a common, I
guess you, you know, you said
you've answered that, so, um,
Thank you for that. um.
It's, and I guess my other
question is,
So are the current procedures.
Not working right now because I,
I seem to remember that, um,
The uh oil and gas.
They're complying with all the
reg uh related to the
disclosures of ingredients and
things like that, is, is it not
working?
That an issue, Madam Chair.
So Madam Chair, representative,
um, what we do know now is, you
know, subject to frack focus,
the easy out is trade secret as
the response, with no additional
follow up for that. That's the
disclosure, um, and so when
we're looking at how we're
thinking about repurposing and
using, you know, produced water
for different, um,
Purposes we want to be able to
understand what that is, so it
it is quote unquote working, um,
but to the advantage of non
disclosure.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
representative experts. So what
happens if like um
I wasn't in the other committee
and maybe this was addressed in
the in the sub, but if I like an
oil and gas company.
Unintentionally, you know, from
I've heard the valves, I've
heard you obviously you get in
the water somehow and it's not
something that the oil and gas
industry.
Did, and I, I remember looking
in one of the subs. I've got
like 3 different ones, uh, one
dressed unintentional and then
one.
didn't, and so could I get a
little clarification on that I'm
sure.
Out of the chair Representative
Reed, this committee sub, the
0.2 that we're looking at on
page 5911, uh, makes the band of
PAST to those that are
intentionally added, OK.
So that was
Madam Chair representative take,
taken out.
OK, so that's good. Um.
I guess another question I had
and I, I.
I'll look for trade secret stuff
and talked to about by somebody
else, but um
In this committee, um,
I was given information that the
experts, and you can correct me
if I'm wrong, um, that testified
during these POs rulemaking
hearings and not even come up
with really a consensus of how
many compounds would be included
within the definition.
Um, so
How can we prohibit something
and force it if there really
wasn't even consensus in your
rulemaking committee, you know,
what's gonna actually be uh a
violation. It seems very broad,
so could you address that, Madam
Chair, representative and
expert.
Madam Chair Representative
Reeve, um, part of the
rulemaking was about the
definition of BFAST. And the um
The definition that is used in
this bill is a definition that
has been adopted by 23 states
that regulate PFAST currently,
and that is for.
Any compound with at least one
fully fluorinated carbo.
And that is thousands of
compounds.
The um
The other approach would have
banned about 40 to 70, um, and I
am not a chemist, but uh in
short, it would have been
basically too fully fluorinated
carbon compounds.
And testimony during the hearing
showed that we know.
For the compounds that have been
studied.
And, uh, that have been
regulated by the EPA drinking
water standards, there's
sufficient toxicology data on
about 6 of those. And they've
been regulated in the parts per
trillion.
And uh expert testimony at the
hearing, uh, did show that that
is not a coincidence that it
just so happens that these 6
that have been studied pretty
thoroughly are toxic, uh, we, we
should not be assuming that
these other thousands that have
similar mobility, um, uh,
similar.
Chemical makeup, uh, and, um,
durability, we should not be
assuming that they are not
likewise quite toxic. But madam
your point of order, um.
The expert reference point to
we're all back here looking for
a 0.2 substitute. I only have a
0.1 substitute in the book.
Make sure we're on the same
bill.
I have a 0.1.
E. 5, 0.2, 0.1,
I have, wait, wait, let's talk
about the official book. We, you
only have one bill in your book.
So what
I had a point.
Which
Yeah, I print it off.
Oh
The analyst has a.
And some of us have 0.2s and
some of us have 0 ones, it
sounds like that's.
OK.
So, who has 0.1 in their book.
12.
456.
So we have 6 members who have
7
Uh, who have a 0.1.
Um
we can speak to what the
difference was, um, well, I do
think we need a copy of the
point too for the book. So what?
Where
what's the story of ours.
Thank
Um, I'm gonna, the staff will go
and check what's in our office
and maybe there was some
confusion about, I don't know
how that could have happened,
frankly, if they got it from the
bill room cause these are in
green, obviously, I don't know.
And it is the house um energy
and commerce built, so.
Um, I don't know what happened
there. So, let me suggest this.
We, why don't we suspend our
conversation till we get, I
don't think we should be
talking, you know, we're gonna
suspend the conversation, and we
can go to the next bill. We'll
try to get the point 2s ready
for us, so we're all on the same
page. Uh-huh, and
and um.
Yes, sir.
So ma'am just for
for clarity, the 0.2 was
adopted.
Uh,
house energy. That's so it's not
a, it's not like the 01 was
adopted by House Energy and they
changed it. The point2 was
adopted by Energy, so the glitch
is just what copy we're
distributing. Yeah, I don't know
how it is we got some point ones
and some 2s and very strange.
OK, cause they're on the
official green paper, um, so
let's suspend, we're gonna do
the next bill. Hopefully we'll
get the paperwork sorted out.
All right.
Um
So next on our is the cannabis
testing.
take this
for a minute. I'll get. Yeah,
yeah.
OK, Maine, are, you have the
floor on House Bill 2:30 as
amended.
Thank you, madam, vice chair and
members, um.
So I have house bill 2:30, uh,
and basically what this bill is
trying to address is that uh
back in 2007, we passed the
linen errand compassionate you
to act.
Um, and, uh, it allowed uh uh
employees of many employers to
um uh participate in the program
if they were qualified patients
and received a recommendation
from their physician.
Um, and it's used for, uh, among
other things, PTSD, chronic
pain, anxiety, and other issues.
Um, what this bill is attempting
to address is, uh, whether, uh,
blood testing for medical
cannabis can be used
specifically, um, because we
have a number of folks in
professions who uh whose
positions have recommended, um,
that they use medical cannabis,
uh, however, due to random drug
testing.
They're not able to participate
in the program. So we're simply
trying to give everyone um
access to this if they are, um,
medically indicated for it.
Um, and I do think this bill has
been presented a few different
times over the years, and I
think, uh, the language that we
have this year is very, very
folks, um, and Madam Chair, we
also do have an amendment.
Um, and I'm gonna introduce my
expert, so I have uh Mr. Miguel
Titman, uh, president of IAFF.
And um secretary Sarita Nayer,
Secretary of Workforce Solutions
department.
Um, and if they'd like to add
any anything.
Sure, thank you, Madam Vice
Chair Representatives, um, my
name is Miguel Tipman represent
firefighters. This is not a
firefighter bill. This is a
worker's bill, but this was
brought to us um by our members,
uh, a lot of our members who are
veterans who um have been
animals by doctor.
And then been unable to use them
because of the no tolerance
policies that their employers
have. Uh, I represent
firefighters in Albuquerque and
Burling County, um, but this is
statewide. Uh, we have recently
been able to um adopt a
resolution through Ber Berlingo
County that allows Berlingo
County firefighters to use
medical cannabis, um, this
statute would allow firefighters
and workers all over the state
to use medicals besides um ones
that are federally prohibited.
Um, and those are people that
use uh a firearm for their
occupation, so law enforcement
as well as the CBO for their
occupation, um, per the federal
uh code of.
regulations. Um,
Our members are more likely to
get PTSD by 6 times. They are,
um, is a very physically
demanding job. They have pain
management, um, but the biggest
use besides PTSD that our
members want to be able to use
medical cannabis for is sleep
irregulations and sleep
deprivation. We are a shift uh
shift working occupation.
Sometimes we go 48 hours without
sleep.
Um, and they do there my my
members doctors are telling them
that you can use some of these
sleep aids to help regulate
sleep, and they can't use it.
Um, they can't use bombs with um
With hemp or uh CBD or anything
because they're afraid to lose
their jobs, they're afraid for
adverse employment actions. So
by no means is this any uh this
conversation about
Being able to use
While you're employed or while
you're working, this is on your
days off, uh, and responsibly
under medical direction, um,
solely. So,
We 100% advocate for a drug-free
workforce, drug-free
environment, uh, that's not just
cannabis we're talking about
every single substance, um, and
we're, we're very prideful about
that. Um.
But we see no reason for there
to be uh what we consider an
unconstitutional way to test us,
and that is, um, your analysis.
Your analysis is not defined
impairment, um,
Impairment
is best defined from our
research in 3 different ways,
one from a, a drug recognition
expert, a DRE, uh, a cheek swab
or a blood test. So we would
like to uh advocate through
coordination with Department of
Workforce Solutions, uh, testing
methods that better define
impairment and to not be able to
use your analysis in randoms.
Um, for to divine impairment, so
appreciate your time. Thank you.
Madam Chair, we, we do have an
amendment, um, and that
concludes our um, why don't we
go ahead and move the amendment,
uh, so moved by um.
Chavez.
Um, before we get into the
amendment, why don't we go to
the audience first. Um, is there
anyone here in opposition to um
House Bill 2:30. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Grace Phillips. I'm
speaking on behalf of New Mexico
County's, um, safety sensitive
position is defined as a
position in which performance by
a person under the influence of
drugs or alcohol would
constitute an immediate or
direct threat of injury or death
to that person or another
person, are bored, um.
chose a um an opposed position
based on
Of what, what could happen from
a safety perspective if a law
enforcement officer or
firefighter or detention, um.
Officer or under the influence
at work and recognizing that
this bill does not authorize use
at work, um, but it would limit
the ability to randomly test for
metabolites, which can be a
deterrent to using um it is used
as a deterrent. In fact, the
reason the Fourth Amendment
allows random testing of safety
sensitive employees is because
the the safety risk is deemed to
um over
Overweigh the person's privacy
interest in avoiding a test.
Another aspect of the bill that
was a concern to our board was
the liability exposure if um
tests for metabolites were
admissible in court following um
an accident or use of force or
some kind of incident, and I, I
really want to thank the sponsor
because the amendment that she's
providing today, I believe, um,
really addresses that concern.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, is there anyone online in
opposition?
You'll raise your hand.
OK.
No one online, back to our live
audience. Is there anyone in
fever possible 220. All right,
if you want to line up and speak
in favor.
Yes, Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
As a retired military with PTSD.
This is really important. These
people
That can participate, will be
able to sleep better and do
their job better.
In the daytime or the nighttime,
whenever. Thank you.
Thank you.
Next
Hello, my name is Jeremy Renda.
I am a member of IFF local 4366.
I have a 25 year uh veteran of
the fire service and the longest
serving fire officer in Santa Fe
County, I can tell you that
every single one of our members
is in favor of these bills to
allow us to use cannabis off
duty. What we're doing right now
with urine testing does not
prove impairment. It only allows
our employers to, uh,
Um
It allows them to take
employment action on us for what
we do on our personal time. No
one wants to come to work, uh,
impaired. That's why if we
update the the way we test
people, the way we do impairment
testing, we can more accurately
define what is impairment and
what is not. Past you should not
matter.
this, this substance is, is a
great benefit to uh
Anyone that has used it, has
prescribed it, and can be used
safely off duty. Thank you for
your time.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexican Federation
of Labor, uh, for our over
40,000 workers throughout the
state. We stand in strong
solidarity specifically today
for, uh, with our, our
professional firefighters. Uh,
these are obviously people who
are, um, their job is to run
into burning buildings and save
lives, and they do this at great
risk to themselves. They do
this, um, and oftentimes are uh
injuring themselves and
Certainly, uh, suffer from
things like PTSD and other uh
mental uh mental uh illnesses
and, and, uh
Um, all this is to say, listen,
we, we want to support our
firefighters as much as humanly
possible if, if actually finding
proper tests, um, to, uh, on, on
cannabis would help them we
stand firmly on board with them.
Thank you.
Thank you, John.
All right, we'll go online, um,
if you want to speak in support
of this, please raise your hand.
Chad Lizano.
it.
There we go. Am I muted now?
There we go.
OK, thank you. My name is
Chalozano. I'm a veteran, a
combat veteran of the Iraq War,
and a longtime cannabis advocate
here in New Mexico, I stand
fully supportive of this bill.
I've been a patient since 2013
here in New Mexico and I've been
discriminated against when it
comes to jobs and certain things
just because of having a card,
etc. etc.
Um, this bill will update that
and hearing these firefighters
finding relief in cannabis, you
know, just warms my heart
because, you know, they, they do
a lot of crazy things
themselves, put themselves in a
lot of crazy situations, so they
deserve this, you know, just as
much as those veterans do. Um,
if you guys could pass this bill
because in 2018 they updated the
medical cannabis laws, but they
kind of fell short when they
added the employment protections
and I feel this updates that. So
thank you so much. Thank you.
No one else. All right, back to
the sponsors.
Anything else?
No, madam chair, uh, just, uh,
if you'd like me to explain the
amendment. Go ahead.
OK, thank you. Um, so with this
amendment, um, you know, what
the what the legislation is
doing is ensuring that um solely
relying on metabolites or
componentss of cannabis without
evidence of.
Will not
Um, a source for adverse
employment action, and so, um,
in a sense of fairness, we also
wanted to ensure that the
employer um was also addressed,
and so that's what this is.
or any opposition to adopting
the amendment.
We need a
Right, uh, no, uh, opposition,
you have.
Uh, all right, we have
Representative McQueen.
Thank you, man, uh, rooms
representsinski, um.
Is this just pursuant to the
lander professional Use Act.
Like you have to have a medical
prescription for this to apply.
Is that correct?
Yes, uh, Madam Chair. And um
representsinski. I, I'm I'm
curious.
Mhm
Yeah, since we have legalized in
this state recreational use, and
we have
storefronts all over the place,
um, do people still go and get a
prescription.
Um, before, uh, acquiring and
using cannabis.
Madam Chair, uh, and
particularly for those that
Requires specific types, it is
helpful because there are so
they can get access to those
specialized one of the, the
some of the public testimony and
support was that
He had been discriminated
against for having a card.
I uh
The existence, is that something
people
Uh, resist doing because they
don't want.
The medical record that they
didn't prescribed cannabis.
Madam Chair, uh, and
Representative McQueen, um.
Probably, um, however, this
bill,
I don't believe would impact
that.
OK, so I, I,
I support the bill, um, I think,
uh, you know, of course, the
members would, would need to
know.
That
They, they need to go through
this extra step, and they can't
just, you know, sort of
self-medicate.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Speaker Martinez.
Madam, thank you, Madam Chair,
when appropriate I'd like to
move a do pass on house with
2:30 is twice mended.
OK, we have a motion, um, before
we uh take that motion.
Uh
And seconded by, um, we'll get
the motion right when we're
ready. Um, uh.
Seed by Representative Chavez,
we have, uh, Representative
Hochman for him. Oh, you had a
question. OK, sorry
go for it, um, we'll take your
motion in a second, uh, uh,
representative Homan be able to
speak on the. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam leader
and expert. So, um, I, I just
had a question in relation to um
like professions that are
regulated federally.
So let's say, um, operators of
heavy equipment or uh people
that are required to um have
commercial driver's licenses
under the Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Act, how does this
interact? How does this piece of
legislation interact?
In situations like, um, thank
you, Madam Chair, Madam Whip.
I'll start the answer and then I
love for Mr. Tipman to uh
continue, but if you look on
just the first page of the bill,
um, it does state unless failure
to do so would cause the
employer to lose monetary or
licensing-related benefit under
federal law, federal regulations
of that.
is addressing it, so it
basically says that they can
take adverse employment action,
um, against someone for uh
following conduct that's allowed
under the linen errand, so
basically if you have a medical
card, but you have uh fall under
one of those but not use medical
cannabis, but I
Sure, thank you, Madam Chair. um
Representative Hucker V. Hill,
um, from and, and I'm not a
lawyer but from the research
that we've done through uh the
NMAC requirements.
that coordinate with the uh the
the federal ones. There's an
exemption for firefighters and
the federal ones define CDL, um,
and like you said, have you, uh,
operational.
Operators. Um, so for us
personally, firefighters would
be exempt based off of that
federal regulation.
And how the Mexico DOT standards
have adopted that specific one,
and I think it is.
49 CFR 40 is, is what's sign.
Very interesting. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
All right, next we have
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, I just
had a question because uh I
know, I think it was
Representative Ree that was
trying to pass a bill, um, based
on cannabis testing and
We excluded cannabis
specifically because
They stated that there was no
way that any kind of testing
would be able to show whether
that person was high in that
instance, or if they had
cannabis 24 hours before or a
week before, um, and you guys
had referred to something um
other than urine testing that
there was a test, maybe that
could show measurements or a
difference if somebody was high
on the job or had it been 2 days
ago. Is that accurate?
Um, Madam Chan working hard to
earn your 2nd. Um, but, uh, I
would say that, uh, so that's
the reason for this bill is
because with the urinalysis, um,
just the presence of meato what
this bill actually calls for is
Department of Health and
Workforce Solutions to work
together to determine how to
assess impairment and and um
more than likely it's uh uh
testing at the time of
actual like physical motor
skills impairment, uh, and I
don't know that.
Thank you, ma'am Sher. Thank
you, uh, Representative Chavez.
Currently, and I think to, to
reference previous uh
conversations. Things change
pretty quickly with this. So
currently based off of our
research, the best practice for
defining impairment is what's
called a drug recognition expert
or DRE, um, those people are
highly trained in identifying
substance use, multiple
substances including cannabis.
That's a physical motor skills
test, including ate eye gaze,
um, all of those things. They
are um
Not great supply, so uh current
recently when we uh negotiated
MOU with Buro County to um have
a process to define a pairment
for post accident and reasonable
suspicion. That's what we
recommended. Um, what we ended
up settling on because there's
not a lot of them is a cheek
swab for nanograms per miller
and if they don't want a cheek
swab, a blood test.
To your point, those don't uh
define impairment, but the cheek
swab is what best defines most
recent use of the 10 hours. So
you can define up uh with 44
nano liters per milligram, you
can define somebody used um
based off of reason suspicion
and post-I.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative expert
witness, um, I think that helps
a little bit. I just, um, I wish
that all of this information or
the secondary testing was built
into this bill cause I don't
want to pass legislation and
then we just forget about the
rest, um, because we passed this
and, and the workforce would be
clear and using, and I guess I'm
afraid just in.
personal experience, um, there
have been, um, first responders
that have made mistakes and to
fatalities in the instances and
so I would wanna make sure that
the people that were responding
to my loved ones were not high
on the job, and if there's not a
specific way.
That we can prove that currently
right now, I hesitate to pass
legislation without
The other language built in. Is
there any way we can do that or
is that in another law or
workforce. Thank you, Madam
chair and Representative Chavez.
That's why it's built into the
bill to keep updated with
current pro uh processes and new
technologies and working with
the Department of Workforce
Solutions whose representative
is here to ensure just what you
said is that our.
Every employer, including
firefighters, are not impaired
and don't make mistakes because
that is our goal as well. Um, so
that's why it was drafted in
there that way that we can keep
up, up to because it will change
in the next 2 to 3 to 5 years.
And um Madam Chair and
Representative Chavezo just add
that it does, um, specify um.
evaluation of physical
performance, so that is
specified, so it's not.
Uh, completely open ended, um,
but the other piece, you know,
tech technology is moving quick,
allowing that to continuously.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives. Those are all
the questions that I have.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Reeve.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
expert. I
I'm looking on page 2, the the
section that I'm having a
problem with this is being
The random drug testing of an
employee shall not include
testing for cannabis.
And it goes into an employer may
require a drug test for cannabis
if the employer has reasonable
suspicion of the employee's
impairment by cannabis at work.
I can understand that if
somebody, you know, you suspect
is high or after an accident
involving the employee and at
least one other person.
I can kind of get that too, or
this is where I have a little
bit of a beef with it an
accident causing significant
damage to property if the
employee has reasonable
suspicion of the employee's
impairment by cannabis at the
time of the accident.
Um
So it seems like
If an employee gets into just a
fender bender.
Um, in a parking lot.
Um, they can't be tested and it
would have to, what, wait for a
more serious accident to occur
before you can test them, which
kind of then.
With your amendment.
Um
And the evidence of an
employee's positive cannabis
tests that relied solely on the
presence of the metabolites or
components of canvas without
further evidence of cannabis
impairment as defined in the
section is inadmissible in a
civil case, exposing the
employer to liability.
So
I mean
When you get in an accident,
that actually
At least in my line of work can
be evidence of impairment, not.
Not foregoing whether it's
significant.
You know, property damage. So I
would, I would like to see the
word significant taken out of
that. Um, I don't see any reason
why it would need to be of
significant property damage if
you run into a pool, you run
into a car, the baby is only,
you know, what, what's
significant damage and I, I have
an issue with that, um, and
then, you know, you can't.
It's inadmissible because um
according to your amendment, um,
it's not further evidence of
cannabis use and that.
Totally is used in any
impairment case if you run into
anything, and so that's where I
have an issue, so I think that
Madam, you should possibly.
think about taking out the word
significant.
I, I mean if it's a friendly
amendment, I would make a motion
that
Significant be taken out of, um,
I guess it would be on page 2
line 11, and it just say causing
damage to property.
Um, would be my, um,
recommendation on that issue,
I'm sure.
there any opposition to removing
the word significant.
OK, you have an amended bill for
the 2nd time.
I don't know how to. That was my
concern.
Anything else uh Representative
Paul.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative expert witness.
Is there a standardization to uh
In your case, firefighting days
off, days on, I know some
agencies run
To
and then
and come back 3, then 4 days off
and.
Is there a standardization of
that throughout the state, you
know, sir, Madam Chair.
representative, um.
The majority of fire departments
in New Mexico operate under what
we call the 4896, where you work
two days on and you're off 4
days. So you're on a 6-day work
schedule instead of 7 and you
work 2 out of 6.
So I'm sure that's 8 days in a
month testing my massive.
Math skills here, correct?
And I understand this bill is
not just for firefighters. It's
for
one of the things I was
concerned about on the FIR under
the DOH Department of Health
explanation.
is uh
A History of cannabis use.
can largely affect toxicological
and psychom motor test results.
They have shown that see the
main psychoactive constituent of
cannabis can be detected in the
blood.
And chronic cannabis users for
up to 30 days following last
use.
The same studies have shown
residual psychomotor impairment
in chronic users.
Up to 21 days following the
last.
use compared to controls.
Now I understand this is for
chronic.
Users, my question is,
Would it be regulated how much a
firefighter could use this or
any other worker because they
have regular work schedules.
And so is the residual would
build up.
In the body, which THC does,
that's not me making something
up.
Um, how would that be addressed
by employers, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the question,
Madam Chair Representative Hall.
Um, it would be regulated by
their medical provider and I'm
not, I'm not a doctor, but I
know medical providers don't
give recommendations to, but I'm
once again, I'm not a doctor
that.
And I'm pardon me, Madam Chair,
I'm not trying to insinuate that
they would be.
chronic what I am saying though
is, uh, if you have enough pain,
Um, coming out of law
enforcement where we do have a
little PTSD and occasionally
have injuries too.
Um, sometimes you just, you kind
of have
But if they're going to
prescribe it.
With this testing process.
Is there a way or mechanism or
do you guys have plans for
Where the agency would
Instead of waiting for
impairment, just not to get you
and jacked up in trouble.
But just to make sure we don't
have this going on where you
could say maybe you need.
Some time not on the beach, but
on the bench just for a little
bit. Does that make sense? Am I
wandering too much about.
Representative Hall, um.
We do have plans to protect the
employer as much as possible, as
well as the employee. There's
definitions of impairment that
that dictate 10 to 12 hours.
Don't use before you report to
work. So I think we would have
some kind of um definitions to
not report to work in so many
hours.
Madam chairing would there be,
um,
You know, like now I know it is
a former agent in law
enforcement, we did, we did this
surprise UAs all the time, and
I've heard those don't work.
But I think
random where, you know, listen,
you're not gonna get necessarily
in trouble unless this is the
4th time in a row.
But every now and then just
saying we need to test you.
And then you might
Get someone to say, well, yeah,
I used it 10 hours ago. I'm not,
I don't want to see anyone get
in any trouble if they're truly
dealing with issues you've
described, sir, but I do believe
there needs to be some
guardrails on something, madam
chair.
So there isn't anything in this
legislation being some
guidelines and policy in our
research, there are some
employers that ask, um, you
know, if you are a medical can
provide that information to um
the human resources office, and
that's part of the conversation,
um, so I think it's, it's this
bill is just dealing with
adverse uh. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
All right, um, what's the role
of the committee?
Would you like to take that
motion again again? Do, all
right, yeah.
Du pass, madam chair on Oville
2:30.
That's twice amended.
rice 3 times. That's right, 3
times amended. Thank you.
We have a motion for you pass.
Thank you Madam Vice Chair
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavez, no.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Hockman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Represented Reed.
No, but thank you for the
amendment.
Leader.
Yes. Leader Sapansky.
Leader Sapansky. Oh, I'm sorry.
Yes, Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do pass
on House Bill 2:30, 3 times
amended.
OK, um.
Bye
We are going back to
House Bill 222.
OK, so we had Representative
Reed, she's just finished. We
have Representative Hall, who I
think was next, and then
Representative Chavez on 222,
OK?
And I don't know what the
mystery is with with the 0.2 and
the 0.1, but we'll just move
forward.
the chairman of Energy was
pulling a fast one,
All right, um, so representative
Pa.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, explain the fracking process
to me, please, Madam Chair.
Briefly, we will do our best,
yeah.
An overview. We don't, I mean
the bill is related but not, you
know, that closely aligned. Go
ahead, Madam Chair,
Representative Hall, uh,
briefly, uh, prior to fracking,
uh, a well must be drilled and
then um that, that drilling will
extend horizontally and the
fracking process is a process in
which the
Rock formation is broken up in
order to extract the resource
and in that process, um,
fracking compounds are used down
hold the same could be said
during the drilling process. Uh,
and as it was mentioned earlier,
uh, there are partial
disclosures right now in New
Mexico, uh, but those
disclosures are subject to trade
secret claims and there's no
state entity that verifies those
claims. So if they're claimed,
they're basically granted.
Man, so my understanding of
fracking, um,
Also means that depending on the
sand and the rock formations
you're trying to penetrate.
Uh, it can change the types of
uh
Telling agents, biocides,
corrision, corrosion inhibitors
and scale inhibitors.
That are being used with the
water that's injecting.
So could that be part of the
trade secret because it depends,
you know, if you know the four
different formations of the uh
types of
Geo geographical formations
where we hit different levels of
oil and or gas in the state of.
Would that not answer the reason
for why they have some of these
proprietary.
And it can change from well to
well, I imagine.
Man.
Madam Chair, Representative
Hall, I
If I understand your question
correctly, um,
These compounds that are used
can change at different points
in the process.
And the bill provides that
disclosure must be made upon
commencement of downhole
operations.
And then if there is a change in
any of the chemicals that are
being used down whole and
operator would have 30 days to
report those changes. So it does
nothing to prevent that.
Right. And so,
Uh
Any time during the disclosure
process. This bill would require
Unique chemical identifiers of
chemicals that are going down
the hole, and the 0.2 version of
this bill actually removed the
requirement for trade names to
be used in disclosures. So it's
separating uh
a chemical compound disclosure
from any sort of trade name.
Those would not be disclosed.
Uh, under the 0.2 version of
this bill.
And my understanding is
Um
The concern here, even though
they're doing a PAST rulemaking.
As if there's a potential for
PAS to still go in the hole,
correct?
A manager.
Uh, Madam Chair, Paul, correct.
So is it fair to say due to the
large number of POSs in our
society, whether it's wiring.
Cover on my phone, some of the
clothing I have, I think you and
I discussed earlier today about
umbrellas.
I, is it, it would be almost
impossible to not.
have some type of a pithos.
Go down the hole during the
process.
Even if it's unintentional.
Madam chair.
Madam Chair Representative Hall,
this bill, um, accounts for that
possibility by only banning
those PFASTs that are
intentionally added to the
compounds that are going down
the hole.
In the in man chair, and that's
assuming you're assuming someone
is adding.
The additional PFOS, do we have
any scientific proof on the
Newer wells that would indicate
that they are intentionally
doing this, not that it's just
present kind of chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Hall, the study that um
representative Romero uh
mentioned in her introduction to
this bill, uh, found over that
10 year period ending in 2022
that uh there were two separate
PFAS compounds that were
actually disclosed onto rack
Focus and one of those was PTFE
and there were 2,605 pounds of
that injected down a hole in New
Mexico over that time period.
And the other one was uh
A really long chemical name that
has been referred to as FPEG
during a lot of these hearings,
and that was 6400 pounds of that
material that was uh injected
down the hole over that 10-year
period.
And then we're we're the pardon
me, madam chair, where these,
these were brought.
To um
The organizations have been
working with the rulemaking.
As to
That this had occurred.
Man.
Madam Chair Representative Hall,
these were disclosures that were
actually made to frack focus.
Uh, and this bill is trying to
first acknowledge that PAS have
been used in the in in the past
in New Mexico and
Acknowledge that we currently do
not know what is being used. So
these were compounds that
actually were disclosed by
operators to frack Focus.
And we also know that there are
Thousands of pounds of trade
secreted materials that we do
not have a chemical identity for
that are also being injected.
So the fact that there are
thousands of these types of PAS.
You're saying that this bill
will only go after.
The ones
That are
Intentionally being used.
It shouldn't be used or will
only go after if they disclose
and if they don't disclose.
Is there
That you just can't use it, how
are, how are you going to follow
up with it? They, they can't
just use it.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Hall.
If this bill were to become law,
there should be no PFAST
disclosed because it would be
banned from use in downhole
operations. Um, but in order to
enforce a ban on PFAS, we have
to know what is being injected
down hole.
Representative Madam Chair, I
just want to add, it was really
interesting cause I'm the vice
chair of the state's Radioactive
Hazardous Materials Committee.
We had a presentation about the
proposed rule in the MOGA issued
a statement that they're not
using EFAS and that they were
not opposed to
To even that part of the rule,
they were more concerned about
undisclosed substances, that's
kind of the representative
McQueen's point there, they're,
they're telling us that there's
no issue here that they don't
use it, but they're trying
really hard to.
At the same time oppose it,
which kind of
a conflicting message.
Madam Chair, and I, I, I
understand that, but I also
understand the oil and gas
industry to an extent having
A lot of family in it and uh
yeah.
Full disclosure, I'm a big fan
of oil and gas.
And I think uh
Some of these companies
definitely you get drillers who
are career drillers and.
Um
I can see how they wanna have
their trade secrets.
But right now, if they're
working on these rulemaking, my,
my major concern here is I don't
want bad water. Nobody wants bad
water. I'm not, it wouldn't
trade that frame.
But if we have the rulemaking
that's going on.
Shouldn't we wait and see what
the rulemaking comes out before
we pass legislation, Madam
Chair.
So Madam Chair Representative,
this would ensure that this is
in law, right, so as rules may
change and adopt what we want to
do is prevent PAS from being um
and so that in law creates a
very clear mandate for the oil
and gas industry that that's.
Fair enough. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. I'm Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative. We've had a few
POS bills, it feels like, so are
there products that can be
utilized safely.
And with POs in it.
As we understand, Madam Chair,
Representative, perhaps, um, but
most of it has been phased out.
I don't know of any, I can't
come up with one.
So, has the EPA passed drinking
water standards for people.
Um, and representative.
So I guess my question is, and I
know, well, I would hope the,
the oil and gas industry um
doesn't intentionally use Pons.
It's what we're told, and I'm a
huge fan of oil and gas as well,
so I'm just gonna throw that out
there too. Um, but does New
Mexico already require PFAST to
be reported by the frackos. OK.
Um,
So why are we bringing this
forward? Did the OCD ask for
this or where is it coming from?
Uh, we're representing the
people of New Mexico, I think in
disclosure and understanding how
unsafe these chemicals are, um,
and no longer want it to be. OK,
so where would the additional
workload go or in the current
industries that the EPA has for
different tiers, it doesn't look
like oil and gas would.
fallen any of that. Is there
gonna be another one created.
OK, so Madam Chair, what, what
it does is the, the, the
disclosure happens in kind of
two parts. Number one, for
fracking are OCD rule requires
oil and gas to make a disclosure
on track, um, which is not
controlled by the state of New
Mexico the government's helped
set up this website. It's kind
of a clearing house used by a
lot of states, but they get to
exclude a lot of stuff that we
talked about and they could lump
anything under it and call it a
trade secret. What we don't
require disclosure on chemical
disclosure is non-tracking
related downhole oil and gas.
This bell would create a new
disclosure with the uh with the
um um oil conservation division
where they would set up a non
racing chemical disclosure which
would probably be an online
portal we spoke to the division
before we introduced the bill
about their process and what
would be involved in that. They
do a lot of filings online, so
it would probably be created
online.
Uh, module where they would
report to a non-fracking
chemical disclosure. So that
part would be.
Through um
Through what OCD.
So it would just be
Somebody from the department
that's going to now be in charge
of this new online disclosure.
Yeah, it's, it's probably one
better than that or in a way,
it's that once they set it up,
it's really, it's just self.
Uh, I don't want to use the word
regulated, but self-administered
by the operator uploading that
data with this bill says is that
they have to do that disclosure
before they're given a permit.
So, and the same thing with the
filter frack focus disclosure.
couple of questions I have.
Thank you.
Uh, I had a question, and that.
Relates to trade secret. It is a
protection of trade secrets of
federal policy.
It's a state.
State statute, Madam Chair. It
sticks issued on trade secrets.
New Mexico has adopted the
uniform Trade Secrets Act, and
I, I also like to add that
Colorado has done the same and
they require disclosure. But the
uniform Trade Secrets Act does
is it provides a cause of
action.
To the holder of a trade secret
against anyone who
misappropriates that trade
secret. So it's not that
disclosure of trade secrets is
in any way contrary to law. It
just provides a cause of action
for someone who was to, uh, sue
someone who they believe
misappropriated a trade secret.
OK, that's helps me that.
We kind of
Be all these things like patents
and trademarks and um trade
secrets kind of in this little
box and um it's interesting,
it's kind of see how they're
distinguished, OK, um, anyone
else with questions or comments
on this bill?
happy to entertain emotion.
But I'm trying to move it.
Do not pass on this to do pass
on house bill.
222
energy, natural resources do
not.
It's tired. Are you? I'm not
tired, are you? I'm.
Not even a little bit, OK. I do
not pass.
On the house energy, natural
resources do do have some house
energy and natural resources
Committee substitute for House
Bill 222. Correct. 22nd, and
it's the 2 versions so we don't
have any confusion, all right,
we have a motion, um, what you
call the roll, please?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez, no.
Representative Hall.
Representative Pachman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez, Speaker
Martinez, Representative
McQueen.
Representative Reed.
No
Leader Sapansky.
Yes.
Madam vice chair, yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do pass
on house energy environment and
natural uh resource committee
substitute for HB 22.
2.2 version.
OK, um,
Last Bill, everybody.
Mhm.
We are on house Bill 287.
telephone text and social media
crimes.
is being handed out, everybody.
OK, um,
The floor is yours,
Representative Ree. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, so there's a
sub and it's the, do you want me
to read the number?
But if you gave us a number, so
we're all on the same page. Yes
ma'am. 22. OK, that's what we
have in front of us. OK.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I also want to introduce my, um,
expert witness. He's Officer
Burling from his from the Las
Cruces Police Department, which
I told him I hope it wasn't
driving home tonight cause it is
snowing out.
Yes, but
He's not, so that's good. Um,
anyway, thank you, Madam Chair,
um, just to introduce the
substitute um after going
through uh the first committee,
there were some some suggestions
made by, I think even uh members
of this committee about doing
some definitions, um.
They, uh, some of the members
wanted social media to find
electronic communication define,
there was also um some concerns
that uh we should include emails
in this form of of harassment
and so what, what this bill does
is we have an old uh law in the
books called telephone
harassment, um, and so when if
you remember it, so, so we're
trying to get up to the actual
day and age where we are with
actual cell phones and
computers.
at social media and threats over
emails and things of that
nature. So what's different
about this bill is, uh, you do
have a harassment statute,
because I know I'm gonna get
this, you know, why can't we
just do this under harassment,
um, harassment in New Mexico
requires a very specific element
which you suffer suffer
substantial emotional distress,
which is very actually hard to
prove. You're not eating also,
it requires a pattern, um, and
this bill, um, the telephone
does not require that. It never
has it as a misdemeanor offense,
but if you do it twice, it is a,
uh, it could be a felony
offense, and so, um, I don't
know if my expert would like to
add why he felt it was important
to they they approached me from
Las Cruces.
Good evening members of the
committee. My name is Officer
Benjamin Berling with the Las
Cruces Police Department, and
worked with the police
department for about 10 years,
um, in that capacity of
investigated numerous cases of
telephonic harassment, um.
And
There's, it comes in very many
different forms right now and
unfortunately the the law in the
books as it is right now.
Um, the language is, is just
strictly outdated.
Um, the spirit of the law, I
think is, is there in terms of
the stuff that we deal with on
a, on a regular basis, um.
Specifically, you know, we see
it frequently with domestic
violence incidents, um.
I had one not too long ago where
the uh the male was texting a
female.
things to the effect that I paid
someone to watch you or kidnap
you, I'll pay them $2000 to kill
you. I'm gonna come and break
your windows.
Um
And under the current language
of the law, sending a text
message with, with that intent
to intimidate harass.
is not a crime.
Unless it becomes a pattern of
conduct.
Right, in which case, um, like
the representative said it
would, we could file it under
harassment.
Um, other instances where this
would have been applicable with
with the new legislation was a
neighbor dispute where.
This guy
We sending text message threats,
um, saying that he was gonna.
Uh, sexually assault, his
neighbor's wife sexually
assaulted his neighbor's
daughter, he was sending
pictures of his genitalia.
Along with those messages.
Um
Saying go ahead and get the cops
involved, they're not gonna help
you.
Um, I've dealt with it in gang
investigations where gang
members are trying to intimidate
the people of the community out
of
testifying against them or
reporting them to the police.
things of that nature, um,
saying things like they're going
to kill their.
You know, somebody's daughter
hurt their family members, shoot
up their houses.
And as as the law states right
now, uh, it's strictly telephone
calls, which is.
Again, just outdated so that the
need for this is clear to catch
up to the, the current level of
technology.
And the only other thing I would
add, Madam Chair, is it's uh
still something we would be
required to prove that.
was typed by.
on that computer or that phone
call, you know, was made by
somebody that they recognize the
voice. It still would definitely
have to be investigated and
proven, uh, to make sure we are
not charging someone who's on
somebody else's so, um, just so
that that.
Thank you. Um, anyone in the
audience wishing to speak.
Person.
Anyone wishing this
speak.
You know position to the
to the bill, please speak into
the microphone. This is
opposition, OK.
Oh, this is opposition, no. OK,
well, why don't we let you
speak.
Since you're up.
Hello, I'm Kathy Elliott, and
I'm a registered lobbyist for
Union County as well as uh
several municipalities and I'm
listening to this bill this
evening for the first time, and
I think it absolutely makes
sense, and I appreciate you all
taking the time this evening on
your Friday night to um listen
to this, and I ask for your full
support. Thank you.
Thank you for sticking around,
otherwise we would have been
lonely. So, um, let's go online.
Those online wishing to first,
I'm taking opposition first.
No opposition. Well, um, yeah.
I didn't think Enrique was
opposed, so not that I sort of
know who's who now. Enrique, um,
do you want to raise your hand
and speak in support. Thank you
so much, Madam Chair. I
appreciate it. Uh, members of
the committee, Enriqueel
speaking in favor of House Bill
287 on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
Uh, the iPhone hit the market
back in January of 2007, uh, the
Android phone wasn't that far
behind. That was 18 years ago
and the
Without
It
support rip.
To criminal account the changing
ways in which we communicate
with.
We're pretty choppy there,
Enrique, but we get the message.
OK,
thank you. Um, there's an M
Montoya. This is in support and
Montoya.
Madam Chair committee members,
good evening and uh thank you
for allowing me to speak here,
Marcus Montoya, a judicial
district attorney and president
of the New Mexico District
Attorneys Association. I'd like
to thank the sponsor and the
expert for bringing this bill,
uh, similarly around the state,
we encounter instances where,
um, typically there's a lot of
threat via text and social media
and um like the expert.
Said earlier, um, unless there's
a pattern, uh, harassment and
stalking does not fit, um, and a
salt doesn't fit because of the
immediacy element, and so we
unfortunately have to tell these
uh poor ladies that there's
nothing that we can do, but if
they continue to be um contacted
and threatened then to go ahead
and call us back, but that's not
a good answer. And so finally
we'll be able to address this
immediately and hopefully, um,
intercept this um threatening
and, and, uh, scary behavior
before it gets out of control,
um, and so thank you for
allowing me to uh stand and
support you tonight. You all be
safe on the roads and um we
stand in support. Thank you.
Thank you. All right.
Go back to the sponsor. Anything
else? The only last thing that I
did do a search in there, I
believe it said 48 states have
some form of legislation on um
specific threats by phone or
social media, um, if not, they
use the harassment statute. It
just start harassment statute. I
just wanted to add that, but
nothing further.
Questions, everyone for a pass.
OK, so we have a motion for a
due pass, a do not pass on house
bill, um, 287.
But I do pass on house Bill
judiciary Committee substitute.
That was built to a I'm glad I'm
performing to your expectations.
I'm sorry
it wasn't bad. I apologize.
I just teasing, you know that
made by representative Hall and
me and um represent seconded by
representative Scott Harman.
We've been up for a very long
time, officer, we're usually not
this silly.
All right. Will you call the old
please. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez.
Representative Hall. Yes.
Representative Homan B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky.
Yes, Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Che, yes, Madam Chair, you
have a do not pass on Hells Bill
287, and they do pass on House
Judiciary.
Committee substitute for House
Bill 287.
Yeah.
Yeah, don't drive home tonight.
Yeah, I'm sure you do drive
well, officer, but it is very
slick. It is a long drive. Yeah,
she's gonna call your mother to
make sure you didn't do
anything.
Thank you.
Yeah,
that was one
Yeah,
that was
pretty awful.
8:30 burritos will be provided.
Breakfast burritos will be
provided.
