s
Speaker Martinez
Representative McQueen here.
Representative Ree.
Leader Slapansky.
Madam Vice Chair here.
Madam Chair. Here, Madam Chair,
you have a corn.
OK, so there are a few things I
want to clarify about the agenda
and order and things like that.
So 1st, 303 is off the agenda. I
think pretty much permanently.
Um, we are gonna move to 12 up,
it was returned to us, um, from
the floor. There, I believe, is
a consensus CS that has been
Um, socialized with the members,
and so I'm hoping we can get
through that item relatively
quickly, and then we'll go
through it, um, in, in the order
that is presented on here. So
we're gonna do 2, 12, um
represented Ferrari and um
Chairwoman Ferrari and Secretary
Kenny.
So if you could, and we will not
be having public comment or any,
hopefully minimal discussion and
we'll try to focus on just the
changes, if we could.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members, um, uh, this
is, uh, we're uh committee sub
for House Bill 212 and it
represents a joint effort
between stakeholders,
legislators, and the Environment
Department. Can we hear the 202
number?
It is.
0.231827.2. OK, that's what I
have, I think they're, they're
handing it out, you know, we'll
double check.
Thank you.
Oh my goodness, it's got one of
these really incredible titles.
I can't wait to read them.
Oh,
so the number for everybody
double check it because we've
had some interesting experiences
with our numbers. It's 27.2 are
the last three digits.
Yes.
Right? So if we could just get a
brief overview of what the
changes were.
Thank you, Mountaineer, I'll
have um Secretary Kenny
explained that.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you committee. Uh, this is
the House Bill 212, the PAS
Protection Act, uh, Madam Chair,
uh, the, the changes and I'll,
I'll go fairly quickly but slow
enough that you can follow
along, um, the first set of
changes are in the definitions,
and there's 4 such changes.
Uh, the definition on page 3
line 3 of Cookware.
was modified to add words
intended for intended for direct
food contact, end quote.
Uh, the second definition
changes on page 3 line 23, and
it's
Uh, the, the definition of
firefighting foam was aligned
with House Bill 140's
definition, so they're the same
and
Hopefully stay long.
Uh, the third change, Madam
Chair, members page 6, line 4,
it's the addition of official
Compendium, uh, this definition
came to us from the minority.
Uh, and then the fourth
definition is, uh, and I should
say that page 6 line 4 official
compendium relates to the
medical device exemption.
Um, the 4th edition, uh, in the
definition was page 6, line 8,
the definition of PFOS was
modified for consistency with
other state laws, um, the words
at standard temperature and
pressure.
Um, or solid and liquid at
standard temperature and
pressure were removed because
it's redundant with exemptions
that are already in the bill.
That concludes the 4 changes to
the definitions, Madam Chair,
uh, members, um, the other
changes, uh, we, on page 12 line
8.
We, uh, at the request of
industry, we move the compliance
date for P PAS, uh, products
with intentionally added PFOS
that are not otherwise called
out in the bill from January 1,
2029 to January 1, 2032. Again,
that aligns with other states
who have adopted a very similar
state law.
Uh, Madam Chair, members, page
13 line 17 and page 14, line 15,
really what we did here was
added additional exemptions
where PAS is an unavoidable use
in certain products.
Um
Madam Chara page 15 line 15, we
added protections for
confidential business
information and trade secret
information.
And finally, Madam Chair, uh, in
the exemptions, I believe it was
item number 16, uh, was removed,
and this was at the I was Madam
Chair um members that the
minority whip was here, uh, we
had a lengthy discussion and he
convinced us that uh something
we had added to the bill was not
serving New Mexicans or others,
and that was the removal of the
PAS, um, stewardship program.
aspect of the bill. So that was
removed and everything else,
Madam Chair was, uh, ketchup
cleanup in terms of renumbering,
uh, conforming to legislative
council service language.
All right. Um, any questions
specifically about what we
heard, the changes were.
I don't see any questions. Um,
do we have emotions?
And it's a funny one just
remember.
to do the do not pass on um.
House Committee substitute for
housety substitute for House
Bill 212.
The shorthand, um, and I move a
do pass for the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee Substitute
for House Energy, Environment
and Natural Resources Committee
substitute for 22.
212.
Excellent job.
You
very good. And do we have a
second? 2nd manager. I'm not
gonna read out the whole thing.
Well, I am. So we have a do not
pass on house judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Energy environment and natural
resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 212, but we have
a due pass for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for post
judiciary Committee substitute
for house.
energy, environment, and natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 112212 damn, I
was so good there until the very
end. All right, 2:12, would you
call the roll, please. Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abita.
Representative Chavis.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hockman v. Hill.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez, Representative
McQueen, yes.
Representative Reed.
uh leaders ofpansky.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair. Yes.
Madam Cherry.
No, Madam Chair, you have a
do.
Do not
pass,
you all know what happened.
We passed this substitute, you
got.
Hoping this bill does not rise
from the dead again
and we can get it, get it um to
the floor. So thank you very
much, Madam Chair, there's a
pretty good joke about forever
chemicals in there somewhere.
It keeps coming that the bill
that just keeps on coming back.
Yeah, but what's the monster
that keeps coming up? Is that
like a vampire? They're always
come back zombie, oh, zombie.
This is a zombie bill. OK, thank
you, Madam Chair and committee,
um, appreciate it. OK, thank
you.
Right. Um, we're now on House
Bill 354.
Um, community criminal justice
division project and
Um, that's representative Lujan.
She's not here.
Well, I, I have a feeling we
have uh Wuhan would like to do
it.
Yes, sir. Oh, you want to do
yours. Can somebody try to find
Representative Louhan. I, I can
try and find her if you want to
move on. I just saw her.
Uh, pardon me?
OK. So why don't we move to the
next item and hopefully she'll
get back here. OK.
Um
I have a feeling, oh, we have
the psychology in our
jurisdictional, um.
Act
Is the, yes, sir.
Oh, for her.
That
Did I bump over you? I'm OK, my
bad.
OK. House Bill 124.
Sorry.
I understand there's an
amendment.
Right
OK. Snap.
Um, could we pass that amendment
now, please?
Some.
It's
So could you um give us the 202
number. Yes, it's 231-431.2.
OK.
Everybody have that and like for
discussion, madam chair.
All right.
So, um, perhaps you might wanna
share us, share with us first
what the bill's about and then
what you're doing with the
amendment, um, Madam Chair and
Representative. Thank you. Um,
well, um, this legislation
amends the portion of the uh
probate code in particular the
portions that deal with adult
guardianship and conservatorship
cases.
And in 2021, the legislature
passed HB 231 directing the
Supreme Court to establish the
working interdisciplinary
network of guardianship
stakeholders.
Best known as wing and um to to
provide ongoing um evaluation of
the new, um, Mexico law services
and practices related to adult,
um, guardianship and
conservatorship.
And the wings um extensively
reviewed and discussed the
issues that occur in adult
guardianship and conservatorship
cases when the protected person,
guardian, and or conservator
dies.
And this legislation was
unanimously endorsed and
supported by Wings members, um,
to address, there's 3 different
things, um, to continue
guardianship or conservatorship
after the death of the protected
person, and that's to allow
burial cremation or funeral
arrangements and the payment of
those arrangements from the
protected person's estate, and
they authorized the guardian and
or conservator to obtain a death
certificate after the death of.
the protected person.
And the second thing is this um
legislation will allow the
appointment of a guardian as
personal representative of the
estate of a deceased protected
person similar to how the
existing probate code allows
appointment of a conservator to
serve as personal
representative, and it clarifies
the priority of appointment if
both a guardian and conservator
seek appointments as the
personal.
representative of the deceased
protected person.
And thirdly, it provides a
formal process to review a final
report filed by a guardian, aunt
or conservator upon the death of
a protected person.
And this is um to require a
final hearing prior to the
termination of the guardianship
conservatorship.
And the authority of the
guardian and or conservator, and
it ensures the delivery of the
estate of the deceased's
protected person to a duly
appointed personal
representative.
And with that, um,
I'd like um
My great expert, um, Alice Lou
McCoy, who is um
Can you introduce yourself as
your new title.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, my name is
Alice Lou McCoy. I'm the
executive director of the
Developmental Disabilities
Council, we have the Office of
Guardianship. I'm actually pinch
hitting tonight for Patricia
Galindo. She's the supervising
attorney for the guardianship
annual review report division of
the Administrative Office of the
courts, and she is the usual
expert for this bill, and I hope
that I can answer all the
questions for this committee.
The reason we did the amendment
was because
Of how this particular bill,
what 24 interplays with House
Bill 125, which was passed out
of this committee on Wednesday
or on Monday, excuse me, today
is Wednesday. It's been a long
week, um, so on Monday, uh,
House Bill 125 amended the
conservatorship portion of the
probate code that deals with
conservator liability, um, it
created a process for allowing.
the conservator to essentially
have their actions approved by
the court and their liability
ends at that point, um.
We have amended our bill 124 to
limit the liability language for
the conservator to refer back to
125, so 125 uh section 45-5-429
of the Probate Code, and we laid
out a process that
In our bill, um,
The
The second I wanted to start
with the 2nd because of the, um,
the second part of the amendment
because of how it plays, um.
We are referring back to that
particular process that
conservatives can follow to
limit their liability on the
first part of the amendments,
um, we struck that from the
Guardian parts of the um bill
because uh it's
There is no
There is no mirroring or um
there's no, there's not the same
kind of liability issues for the
guardianship either in the law
or, you know, in
In the uh in practice that we
see um with the conservators and
so that language shouldn't have
been in there in the first
place, so we're just taking it
out, um, because there is no
process for a guardians, um,
that language.
In the Guardian part of the
statute doesn't create any new
Causes of action and uh by
moving it, we're just taking out
um language that's extraneous
and doesn't really apply.
OK, so let's go to the audience
now, those wishing to speak in
opposition, please approach the
person with the uh um
microphone.
I don't see anyone.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support, please
approach the person with the
microphone.
And please limit your remarks to
about a minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Ellen Pine's
representing the disability
coalition, I'll be very brief,
um, the change that we're
interested primarily in this
bill is the one that relates to
the death of a protected person,
there are cases where there is
no next of kin to step forward
and if the guardianship ends and
the guardian can't act after the
death. Nobody is available to do
things even as basic as
arranging a funeral, so we
appreciate the sponsor.
Um, moving forward to address
that gap, and we are to support.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Howard
Hess. I'm a volunteer.
Excuse me, have to keep the AP
in New Mexico, we represent
240,000 membership statewide and
had been longtime participant in
guardianship
at
Excuse me, have to keep the AP
in New Mexico, we represent
240,000 membership statewide and
had been longtime participant in
guardianship
which support House Bill 124
because gardenship and
conservative
are put in place to protect an
individual, it should not end on
the death of the individual
appointed to serve as their
guardian or conservative.
A person could do not
immediately disappear on death.
We may need to be disposed of in
an appropriate manner and their
are bills to be paid.
It should be assurance that all
due ends are tied up before
formerly losing the case.
The spill will provide the gras.
But that all parties understand
what is expected at the garden.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you.
Appreciate it. Thank you. Uh,
sir, thank you I appreciate it.
All right. Um,
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support of this bill, please
raise your hand.
OK. I don't see anyone online
back to the sponsor, anything
else before I go to the
committee?
Good, thank you. Very good. OK.
Uh, members questions or
And it's um Representative Ree.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I'm just trying
to, I think I understand what
you're, you're trying to do
here. So is there like a gap
that tends to happen, um,
For uh like a protected person.
I know you're changing that
name. So, when you have a dance
certificate, Madam Chair, and
Um, representative, is that
supposed to go to an immediate
family member, or does that, can
you explain like first how it's
fixing that gap and then I, I
did have a long talk with
representative Tarasis about how
that's kind of all works with
the funerals and all that and
the issues that happen and so
how would your bill address
that, Madam Chair.
I'll refer to my expert. Thanks.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Reed, uh, the
purpose of this bill is just to
step in when there isn't that
immediate family member, so it
doesn't change the processes
that would be in place of family
members are there to do what
needs to be done.
OK, and so mad you an expert,
but if there wasn't, it
basically would um fix that gap
and you'd be able to continue
with getting the funeral done
and all the things that need to
happen. Yes, madam Chair, yes,
representative. OK, that's my
only question. Thank you, chair.
I just like to move a do pass on
House Bill 124 is amended.
2nd.
adopt the amendment?
I did not, so let's adopt the
amendment. Any opposition to
adopting the amendment to House
Bill 124.
2.
I see no opposition to adopting
the amendment, so now we have an
amended bill. Um, now I'd like
to move on House Bill 12
corresponded.
I suck.
Did you call the roll, please.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavis.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hochman v. Hill?
Yes.
Representative Martinez, Speaker
Martinez, Representative
McQueen, yes.
Representative Ree.
Yes.
Uh, leader Sapansky, Madam Vice
Chair.
Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a do pass
on House Bill 124 as amended.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee hope that evening goes
fast. Um.
Let's, so we don't have
representative Wuhan. She's on
in in inappropriation, so she
needs to be notified that we're
getting close to our bill.
OK. All right. In the interim
then, I think we should keep
moving and we have house built
242.
Psychology inner jurisdictional
Act.
We're on House Bill 242.
As far as I can tell, there are
no amend amendments associated
with that bill.
Is that right? Man I'm sure,
that's correct. OK. Very good.
Representative of floor is
yours.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, um.
Um
Representing tonight, um.
HB 242, which is one of a number
of various interstate compacts
that have been uh probably
before the many of them before
this committee, um, and, um, all
in an effort to increase
Um, the availability of
healthcare professionals.
And access to health care by the
people of New Mexico. This one
is for psychology.
Um, and it's everyone's a little
bit different. This one is
essentially for telehealth
services.
And then, uh, it has one kind of
unusual provision, uh, it also
permits the psychologist to be
in stage and practice in stage
for 30 days a year.
Um, my expert is psychologist,
Doctor Dan Matthews.
And uh with that uh stand for
questions.
Let's go to the audience, um,
those wishing to speak in
opposition.
The bill, please approach the
person within the microphone on.
Um, goes online, wishing to
speak in opposition, please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support, please
approach the person with the
microphone and I'm going to
limit it to 5 people, um, up to
1 minute each.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce.
We all know there's a number of
bills authorizing New Mexico to
enter into various healthcare
compacts, and all of them are
designed to bring healthcare
professionals to our state.
When approved, the compacts are
going to eliminate the need for
licenses in multiple states.
We all know how important
attracting mental health
professionals is as we wrestle.
With rebuilding the state's
behavioral health system. This
bill offers a solution to
attract more kinds of
professional.
Um, let me just, uh,
representative Lujan.
We, um
Yeah, we went to the next bill,
but, you know, I would recommend
you come back relatively soon
because I, I don't anticipate
we're gonna have a huge long
discussion.
Thank you. Um, sorry about that.
Yes, sir. I'm sure members of
the, my name is Oam Behumi,
advocacy director for AARP New
Mexico. We believe that House
Bill 242, uh, essentially it
helps our, you know, expand
telehealth services, especially
for our older New Mexicans who
live in rural areas, areas rely
on this for um services and
their family caregivers to take
care of them, so we strongly
support this. Thank you.
And chair members of the
committee. Good evening. My name
is Marcus Luhan. I work for
Think New Mexico. We are in full
support of this compact shocker.
I know. But we believe that
these compacts, well not the
silver bullet to solve our
shortage will be a big waiter
moving obstacle in the way of
people coming into the state.
Thank you very much.
Madam Chair and committee, my
name is Doctor Bronwyn He sir.
I'm a psychologist here in New
Mexico, but I'm here presenting
on behalf of Nami New Mexico,
who's in strong support of this.
I just wanted to throw out some
numbers. Um, we are one of 7
states currently introducing
this type of legislation, but
there are already 40 states who
have approved this. So, we would
be entering into sort of what
the rest of the US is doing, um,
and this not only provides
access, but it also does
continuity of care and provides
legal guidelines and agreement
with the current psychology
practice guidelines. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK
Those online wishing to speak in
support, and I'm going to limit
it to 3 people up to 1 minute
each.
Please raise your hand.
online,
no one has raised their hand.
Um, representative for yours
again unless
Anything you wish, I got a
demotion.
To that
Supreme Court's next video
OK.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, members of
the committee, uh, I, I think
everybody's said the positive
things and why we need this so
much. So I hope I get do pass.
OK.
make a motion for a due pass,
Madam Chair.
OK, we have a motion for a do
pass on House Bill 242 made by
Representative Paul signing it
by representative Romero, um,
what you call the roll, please?
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta,
Representative Chavis.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hockman v. Hill?
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Reed, yes.
Leader Sapansky
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, you have a due
pass on House Bill 242.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So let's try to find
representative Anaya.
Uh
Excuse me.
I'm Luhan, sorry.
Yeah,
I noticed you jumped right up
and you knew I had made a
mistake, didn't you? Yeah, and
you thought you were gonna con
me on that. I
I know, but she knew I was wrong
because I said we need to find
representative Anaya, and we
know where she is.
I just want to give her a
chance. I, I, you know, I feel
bad for her cause she keeps
running over here, so.
OK, thank you for doing that.
She's trying to juggle two
committees, and I feel bad for
her, so.
No, that's OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, yes, I
was presented another bill the
committee as well, um.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
committee, um, coming before you
today to uh
With HB 354, um.
I catch my breath here really
quickly.
Um, House Bill 354 proposes the
creation of the community
criminal justice diversion
project.
is a six-year pilot program also
within the behavioral health uh
Service Division, BHSD of the
Healthcare Authority, the bill
does not amend existing
statutes, but instead introduces
a new statutory section within
an MSA um.
1978 to establish the program
defines diversion as an
alternative to prosecution that
temporarily interrupts criminal
proceedings to allow eligible
individuals to participate in
mental health and behavioral
health intervention services
rather than.
I face traditional adjudication.
Um, the bill creates the
community criminal justice
diversion Project Fund, which
HCA would administer to provide
financial assistance to eligible
participants, support program,
operations and funds necessary
services, the project mandates
specific participation criteria
requiring collaboration between
law enforcement, the judiciary,
and behavioral health service
providers to identify
individuals suitable for
diversion.
Um, additionally, HB 354
outlines specific duties for
VHSD including developing
program.
Guidelines monitoring
participant outcomes, reporting
annually to the legislature on
the project's effectiveness, the
program's goal is to reduce
recidivism, address underlying
mental health issues among
justice involved individuals,
and alleviate strain on the
criminal justice system. At the
conclusion of the six-year
pilot.
BHSD must submit a final report
with findings and
recommendations regarding the
potential.
For permanent implementation,
but I'm sure um I'm gonna have
my expert witness introduce
herself, and I'll have um Simon,
who we all know, introduced
himself. He has a disclaimer, so
I'll start.
Madam Chair, as always, um, I
work for the Legislative council
Service. I'm here for the sole
purpose of providing technical
assistance on the matter before
this committee.
And I do not appear in support
or opposition of this matter.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee
members, again, my name is
Doctor Niser. Um, I am a
psychologist here in New Mexico.
I just wanted to say in addition
to what Representative Luhan
just said very well that with
the passage of HPA's competency
and treatment portion, this bill
becomes even, even more vital.
Each judicial district will
require support to build and
sustain the early diversion
programs in those districts, as
you are all aware, each area of
New Mexico is very different and
will require specialized
support.
However, this bill clearly
outlines while also leaving room
for party agreement to develop a
strong and lasting
infrastructure across this.
Thank you.
Uh, man, I don't know if you
will, if he's online, but um.
Marcus Turner was going to try
and join us as well, who is with
Marco Serna, um, yeah, so he
worked with us also on this bill
and and it was uh uh could be an
expert witness if he's able to.
Um
Mr Serna, would you raise your
hand?
I
Anything else before I go to the
audience representative without
real sound for questions.
Um
All right, so anyone wishing to
speak in opposition, please
approach.
person with the microphone, I
don't see anyone, anyone online
wishing to speak in opposition.
Please raise your hand.
Um, those in the audience
wishing to speak and support,
please approach the person with
the microphone.
And please try to limit your
remarks to about a minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
membersit again, Ellen Pine's
representing the Disability
Coalition, uh, many people with
mental illness become embroiled
in the criminal justice system
because it acts that are
technically low-level crimes,
but are really manifestations of
their illness, and we don't
believe they belong in the
criminal justice system, they
should be diverted into
treatment and services instead,
um, and we believe that this
bill moves to New Mexico in that
direction, as Doctor Niser
mentioned it.
meshes with the provisions in
House Bill 8 which specifically
were recognized um diversion,
but don't actually incorporate
those provisions, so they, they
uh go well together and we are
just.
Good evening, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Daniel Williams. I'm a
policy advocate and civil
liberties Union of New Mexico.
I'm also speaking today on
behalf of the Public Safety
Coalition made up of 11
organizations dedicated to
supporting real solutions for
community safety in New Mexico.
We thank the sponsor for this
bill and strongly supported as
Ellen just said and as Dr. Neer
said, we're excited about the
way this can build on the work
that the legislature has already
done with HB 8. We know that a
lot of folks who are involved in
the cry.
legal system need care far more
than they need incarceration and
further criminalization, and so
we're excited about this pilot
program moving in that
direction, thank you.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Marshall Martinez, the executive
director of Equality New Mexico
and I folks in this committee
and others have heard me say
repeatedly LGBTQ people face
significant barriers to
accessing mental and behavioral
healthcare. We too believe that
any opportunity for those folks
to seek that, to receive that
care rather than to be
incarcerated or interact with
the criminal justice system is a
plus for us. Anything that
supports queer and trans people
supports everybody in New
Mexico. Thank you. Thank you.
All right.
Those online wishing to speak in
support, raise your hand, and
I'm gonna limit it to 3 people.
Uh
Let's see, Diane McCash.
I
Yes, thank you. Good evening,
chair and committee. I'm Diane
McCash. It's not, I'm not just
being polite when I think the
sponsors for this impactful and
important bill. I know I'm not
the only one who advocates here
for care, not criminalization
for our communities. I was
excited to read this bill
because it not only provides for
the particular kind of care that
can make a world of difference
in outcomes for individuals, but
also by extension, the whole of
our community. It provides for a
pilot project that seems to be a
sufficient length to provide
us with the data information, we
would need to demonstrate that
programs of this kind are indeed
not only humane but improve
outcomes and benefit communities
in general. This kind of
community care has the potential
to lift us all. I really hope
you can help make this a reality
with your yes vote this evening.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. Let's see, um.
Um
Ms. Silva.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Monee Silva and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Coalition in
Homelessness, and we stand
strongly in support of HB 354.
Behavioral health programs for
homeless, for homeless by
numerous benefits for
individuals experiencing
homelessness.
Communities in the broader
criminal justice and healthcare
systems. Bipartisizing uh
treatment punishment, behavioral
health diversion programs create
a more effective, humane, and
cost of
approach to addressing
homelessness. In addition, they
help to reduce the number of
people in crisis on the streets
to create safer and healthier
communities, reduce recidivism,
and breaks the jail homelessness
cycle, increasing housing
stability and that stability
leads to better health,
employment, and reintegration
into society. I would also like
to thank
Representative Lujan and
Representative Hockman v. Hill
for bringing forth this
important legislation. They
listened closely to the
advocates and came up with the
bill that will create a pathway
to individuals in our
communities getting the help
that they need. We urge you do
pass on HB 354.
One more.
Um
Naming, nay and Santa Fe,
please.
Hello?
Yes, this is Betty Cisnerohover
with Nami Santa Fe. I'm here
advocating on behalf of Nami New
Mexico. We are in strong support
of this bill. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, and
thank you to our sponsors.
Thank you. All right.
Anything else before we go
committee? Uh, thank you, uh,
manager, I think, um, we're
ready for.
And I have representative Ree.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I just kind of
more have technical questions on
how this will work.
So
When does first, I guess my
first question, Madam Chair
representative, when does the
diversion start?
Um
And what stage of the
proceeding. I'm assuming there's
a criminal charge, and then if
you could explain that later.
Thank you chair and
Representative Reed, um.
So early diversion can look um a
little bit different across the
the spectrum, it can start with
law enforcement. It could also
happen um upon detention or
arrest and then at that initial
arraignment, um, then the
parties could agree to then
defer to uh a an early diversion
out of the criminal justice
system. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, on page 3, line 9.
Section 3, a pre-arrest division
policy for at least petty
misdemeanor offenses or
violations of municipal
ordinances and then if approved
by the local district attorney,
a post-arrest diversion policy
for at least some full of
misdemeanor offenses. Oh OK. OK,
and madam chair, and I would
that I was gonna get to that. I,
I wanted to double check that it
was um
That petty misdemeanors and
misdemeanors and so that, that
answers that question, but so
it's prior to, let's say there's
not an arrest and he said it
could be just local police
contact or something like that.
So who decides?
What happens at that point,
like, um, let's say I chair
representative expert uh sounds
like a local police officer
could have contact or I it
sounds like maybe any
individual, I'm not really sure.
I'm understanding, but.
Who then decides how who's gonna
go to this program and how would
that work because
They haven't committed any
crime. I'm assuming at this
point.
If that's the route, like, uh,
if they commit a crime, I
remember kind of understanding
that, but they don't.
Thank you, thank you. um, Madam
Chair, this is, this is the crux
of like is putting this
together, really understanding
that, so I appreciate the
question. I think right.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Reed. Yes, so the
we currently have law
enforcement assisted diversion
in a few of our counties, this
would expand, that would, this
would inevitably help expand
that option, um, but the way
that it works is the law
enforcement officer may go out
to a call, they might then
realize that they're dealing
with more of a mental health
issue. When that happens, then
it's a voluntary move towards
this type of program. So when
it's law enforcement, it's a
volunte if that person.
seeds to be out of control or
commits another crime, which
typically happens what we see
might be, um, you know, battery
on a peace officer, then that
would move towards the judicial
system, which there would be
then yet again another option
for this diversion.
OK, so no crimes committed and
it's just like some mental
health crisis and to
representative that you can just
be a decision by law enforcement
or their superiors, but if a
crime occurs, and then it moves
into the law enforcement realm
and it's a decision with the DA
and
I guess the public defender,
whoever that way exactly this is
before
that is, yes, that's correct.
OK. And so my, oh go ahead I
have Simon add to that.
Madam Chair Representative
Reeves, so, so paragraph 3 of
subsection D, um, so one of the
required components is a
pre-arrest diversion policy for
at least misdemeanor offenses,
um, and I believe the, the face
of that, um, provision requires
at least some commission of a
crime.
And that would be law
enforcement, um, law
enforcement's discretion based
on the policy that the
municipality or the county
adopts to divert and then the um
paragraph 4 speaks to
post-arrest diversion, so that's
after they've they've been
booked into jail. Maybe it
happens with the arraignment,
then the um the district
attorney would would have to
sign on to that.
OK
Yeah, OK, so, so then basically
it's not really that, so
representative of a police
officer responds to petty
misdemeanor battery.
battery case, and that you have
a victim and you have a, a
police officer, are you saying
that the, the, the cop can just
make that decision on their own
without any input from the
district attorney.
Because I haven't filed yet, I
guess, be my question. I hear,
uh, yeah, in that, in that
process, in that part of it, um,
again, I think that that goes
under this this subsection D, it
would, it would depend on what
would happen, uh, a policy
adopted by.
By those um and subsection D,
what it says a participant shall
design and implement a diversion
program for persons in or at
risk of entering the criminal
justice system that include the
following program components,
and then those of the components
that we're talking about. So it
would depend on what they
adopted, but if there is
Yeah, yeah. So 1 and 2, Madam
Chair, thank you.
Trying to calm down, so, um, 0.1
would be a community referral
process, a mobile crisis
response team and 3 pre-arres
diversion policy.
For the, for at least petty
misdemeanor offenses or
violations of municipal
ordinances, so that's where,
that's the section that would
determine that, but if it is
It goes
Madam Cha and Representative
Reed, again, going back to page
3, section D 12, and 3.
there's provisions there for a
community referral process,
meaning that a community member
could call that in for the the
for the development of mobile
crisis response teams who could
then go out and make that
determination, and then if it
escalates a pre-arrest diversion
policy. So it includes all of
those layers, um, but it also is
left up.
To, like I said in my opening
remarks. It leaves it open to
each jurisdiction on what types
of policies and procedures they
want to adopt, um, and I think
that's in line with what is
currently happening and
available in their communities
at that time.
Um, but this bill would, would.
mandate that they create.
A community referral process of
mobile crisis response.
OK, so, so I'm understanding I'm
sure and representing an expert,
so.
The
I guess municipalities or or the
commissioners or I'm not exactly
sure who would decide what.
And, and that concerns me in a
sense because the salt, battery,
and some victim crimes that were
victims are.
Required to get noticed and, and
be participants um in the
process. I'm, I'm getting the
impression that a police officer
could just make that decision on
their own.
And incorrectly I'm if I'm
wrong, if the policies that this
group decides we're gonna, you
know, I mean, and a DWI is a
petty misdemeanor.
So
And my understanding is I'm
under I just wanna make sure I
understand that. OK.
So I do have an issue with that.
I will, I will say that and, and
how does this crossover with the
pre-prosecution diversion
programs that district
attorney's offices have seems
very identical to that. I know
that those people are arrested,
but diverted, um, but with kind
of the same thing admission of,
of what you did and um
But it's definitely has victim
impact it it definitely has an
input from the victims. I can
still send them to like in this
situation, it looks like one of
my counties.
mental health resources, it's
generally something they have to
do, um, as part of
pre-prosecution version if they
The charges were held in
abeyance, and if they don't do
what they're supposed to do,
then um they could still be
prosecuted, so it seems, I
understand you're trying to grab
some of these people, Madam
Chair, that maybe don't commit
crimes, but it seems really
duplicative of.
programs that are already
At least in place in district
attorney's offices to do this
type of referral or diversion.
So if you could
Maybe
An or talk a little bit about
the pre-ro programs how that
record. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative Reed. Um,
it's my understanding that there
are a lot of pre-arrest
diversion programs, court
programs that exist that like
you just said, hold things open
in abeyance, um, it's still,
there's those individuals are
still actively a part of the
judicial system and so if
certain things are not
accomplished during that time
frame, they can be brought back
to court. This program is
different in the sense.
that when they are diverted,
they are diverted completely out
of the legal system, so
nothing's held in abeyance. It's
dismissed, and we move on, um,
if they don't complete portions
of this, it's not, um, it's not
held over their heads through
the judicial system. Um, I think
largely uh in, in my work at
least with the Supreme Court
commission on Mental Health and
competency and my work in the
community in general, there's a
situation and, and Miss Pines
also spoke to this.
um
individuals with significant
mental health issues, um, that
continued to sort of revolve in
and out of our judicial system.
Some issues I've heard um from
court staff, I also did a um
focus group for these court
programs in the second judicial
district that a lot of
individuals with significant
mental health issues, have a
really hard time completing the
actual tasks in these pre-arrest
diversion, um, and so they're
just continues to be sort of
this judicial battle with these
individuals. So this program um
and some of the pilot programs
that already exist.
sought to sort of rectify that
situation by getting these
individuals completely out of
the justice system and into more
of a healthcare and wellness
setting where maybe more thank
you Madam Chair um
representative. It, it just
seems like there's a little bit,
and I think it's one of the
analysis too, but I think it's
that.
um that
says there's some overlap in
these programs, um.
And there does seem to be some
overlap, um.
And
There's not really a
specification of what categories
of offenders are gonna qualify,
uh, besides the misdemeanor, you
know, so they're not really
crimes laid out or anything of
that nature, um.
But it's saying that in one of
the analysis also, Madam Chair
and representative and expert
says.
Um, the bill states the program
aims to improve public health
that does not define which
public health indicators will be
used to measure its success in
pilot programs.
Could you address that?
Thank you, uh, thank you, man.
Uh, that, that is probably that
is why this is a a pilot program
is to, we know that diversion
programs in the the inherently
buy.
But, by their own tests that
these works and so with the with
this pilot program does is it's
going to assess and be um in
different areas of our state so
that we know how we can assess
what is going on in those areas,
and then.
Make more, make the
recommendations of, of more of
the needs and showing how these
uh how these programs are
probably more needed and maybe
there's going to be um
The infrastructure portion of
You know, designing them uh
accordingly right now, that's, I
mean, that's why we're sending
up the pilot program to do those
assessments and really
understanding those needs.
So Madam Chair and represented
an expert. So is it?
I know we passed all the
behavioral health stuff and
funded all that and so is this
one of those things that, I know
you said goes kind of along with
it, but is this these pilot
programs funded, um, or is this
something that we're just trying
to encourage these communities
to get these assisted outpatient
treatment programs, the fiscal
part of it. Could you help me
with that? is part of the
funding that we do already have
in the budget, um, it's it's
throughout our budget and this
completely covered.
Um, uh, by setting up these, I
think that answers my question.
I, I think just my only concern
is Madam chair representative
the.
I don't know if I like the idea
of law enforcement, um,
deciding, you know, with some
committee of commissioners, it
sounds like what.
Bribes, you know, or, or who's
gonna be diverted without, you
know, actually possibly speaking
to victims, um, so, and the
overlap with the pre-prosecution
diversion. I think I understand
what you're trying to do, but,
um, those are the kind of
concerns I have, but um I do
appreciate you answering all
those questions for me,
ma'am,
you know, the, the committee
that's going to make the
decisions on how this is how um
the how that's going to happen,
include a DA include a judge and
and so
like the, the treatment courts
that you see that they have
these committees that are set up
to do this work is much to the
point of, of, and to their
credit and their success is is
um is um why we set it up the
way we have in the bill.
Sorry, and so just, just
following up on that, um, maybe
I missed it. So does it lay out
in the bill, madam chair
representative who will be on
these committee miss it.
I may have.
to page 2, OK.
Picture pilot program.
5 counties.
I'm just trying to figure out
who will be.
On the committee that decides.
He said a DA judges that listed
somewhere in the building, and
that's, that's just, I, I guess
it's not completely laid out,
but specifically in the bill,
but that's, that's how we um we
uh would assess that this would
be the the the people that we've
worked with and
Have been uh putting this
together, that this is how it
should be set up and so do local
jurisdiction that they would
have that that preview of making
sure that those were in place.
All right, and so I'm sure
representative I would love to
see that, you know, some were
laid out in the bill, so we
don't have a, a committee of
commissioners or something
decided, but we do have the
appropriate players, um, it's
just a thought on that, um, but
thank you. I appreciate that and
representative, I think that's,
that's I appreciate that. Yeah,
thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, um,
Representative Romero.
I think about the chair, uh, I
think you're representatives
thanks for all the testimony.
This is such an important um
idea. I think that you're
bringing forth and just how
we've seen some of these
diversion projects actually play
out in local communities and
coming from Santa Fe, we know
that they've we've been quite
successful. Um, I think just the
sort of questions that have been
um identified already, um, and
then through the, some of the
analysis is just where I would
like to.
Take the conversation, um, and
forgive me, I, are you from the
healthcare authority?
Oh, OK.
So, uh, Madam Chair, a
representative, the, the
healthcare authority is um
Going to be housed, um.
is going to be charged with
housing the, this program for 6
years within the behavioral
Health Services division. Have
you been working with them on
how this pilot will play out
Maam chair.
Um, Madam Chair representative,
I, I have, I have spoken with
them and let them know that this
is that this is happening, they
haven't uh.
I didn't anything negative, so
to speak, um, but we are making
sure that you are uh finances as
mentioned before, that they are
going to be responsible for um
um administering and, and
housing. OK, madam chair,
representative, so when we're
looking at some of the pilot,
um, sort of setup, has there
been with between the class A
class B counties. Do we have an
idea of where those are gonna be
located, and I understand from
the bill that that would be
happening as soon as this year.
Madam Chair Representatives, so
the, the way that it's set up is
it's like it's, it's voluntary.
So the, the counties are the
municipalities, um, can choose
to participate in this and the
behavioral health services
division would um select them
and the, the requirements, so
and your, you're referencing
subsection C, so it's the the
responsibility on the uh
behavioral health services
division just select at least
what's laid out in that
subsection.
Um,
and after this, I could send uh
I don't know if you all have the
committee handbooks, the.
Madam Chair, thank you, um, and
who, Madam Chair, um, within the
behavioral health services
division would be taking care
of. And, and, um, it's um Madam
Chair would be the division.
Mm
Madam Chair, I think I, without
trying to, um,
Ask too many questions about
that. I, I would love for them
to be able to sort of help us
understand.
How they're um how that
voluntary sort of work comes
about who would be sort of in
charge of.
Um
The the process themselves so
that way when we were talking
about accountability, and I know
that this ties into a number of
different, um, programs and
opportunities. Um, there's no
clear delineation as to who, um,
I guess would, we would have
answering to us over the, the
time, um, and so when we look at
the administrative costs and
their responsibility, and I,
I'll just point you to the FIR.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
there's some
Some recommendations in there
just on, on administrative
oversight.
Um, and then just on the
opportunity to look at, um,
The different programs that have
been launched. I think there's
some great ways for us to at
least know how we're going to
evaluate.
Um
What could happen since this
hasn't, since this has happened
before, but we haven't looked
at.
How we're going to multiply
them. Um, I'm just curious, um,
You know, why we would want to
start from scratch if we do have
some.
You know, opportunities perhaps
to scale from other communities
that have done this in the past,
Madam Chair and Representative,
that and that's the that's,
that's also been taken into
consideration. We know that
those models already exist and
so that's why through the the
local districts that they would
be able to determine that
because they, they do know uh
what they have and what they can
be working with, and I think
that that was really important
in making um that determination
to this, but I wanted to
address, you know, your, your,
um,
s question, I think that's
really important question too
for us too, but under the
jurisdiction of the behavioral
health, um, services, uh,
division, they have the powers
and the duties and authority to
already um
Um, encompass what we're asking
them to do here, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you. I really appreciate
that. I, I, I think, you know,
when we look at all of the
different um
Ways in which we've been trying
to create these linkages through
um the various service
opportunities into our criminal
justice system. I think there's
a great.
opportunity to do that. I think
there's just a lot of questions
on how.
You might be able to scale
something like this and while
the program I think has um
Some great
You know, proposals there, I
would just love to have the
behavioral health, um,
Well, first, the healthcare, um,
Sorry, I'm sure Healthcare
authority here as well as the
behavioral health services
division, um,
To just kind of think about.
The housing of this, the, the
long term sort of idea for this
and certainly which models.
would be something that we would
like to actually scale, um, and
without, you know, sort of,
because we're asking them to do.
All of this work, I would just.
I guess, feel more comfortable,
understanding that they were
kind of driving the bus a
representative exactly and you
know, through legislation even
that we passed today, we know
that we are moving things
around, but I just like to and,
and thank you for that. I, I
those are some of the the issues
and questions that I, I'm trying
to make sure that we're
covering, but we do need
flexibility within this, uh,
this infrastructure that we're
creating. So BHSD finds, they
already find the services that
that that may be provided, and
they also have medicate.
So putting this together and
making sure that that that it is
housed there. That is one of
the, the purposes of of why they
would be responsible for this,
um, but that flexibility again
going into our local governments
because we do have diversion
programs that are, um,
Still in their startup and very
surface and they need some
support, and this is what this,
this would give them the
infrastructure and support for
the continuation and growth for
their programs, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Again, I really love the ideas,
um, that have been proposed. I
think we just probably just need
some more clarity on the cost,
the who's who, um, you know,
what are we actually focusing on
within the linkages between the
criminal justice system. I think
Reeves, uh, questions about
who's being selected for these
types of programs on the front
end when we're thinking about
pilot or the folks that might be
filtered through this type of
project, um, and then just on
the back.
weekend, what are we expecting
to, to understand to the data
that we can have and perhaps
learn from some of these other
programs in Donana and San
Miguel, Lincoln, and Otero, um,
that have, you know, sort of
thought through some of the ways
in which diversion might happen,
but I really appreciate the
conversation. I would just love
to see, um, perhaps some more um
Meat on the bones, as it were.
Uh, but I, I'll look, I'll look
forward to the ongoing
conversation. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Uh, thank
yousentative Chagos.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I have the
same exact questions as
Representative Reeb and the
comments that um Representative
Romero said, and then just some
further questions cause I know
you.
Um, added Bernaleo County, and
we have LE and PPD and I just
feel like we're gonna be
competing if we could have put
the funding into that to get
more treatment, housing,
education assistance into the
lead program or PPD, which
already works very well, um, and
does the diversion part, I guess
it feels like we're competing.
Why aren't we just funding more
money with programs that
currently work, um, is my
question, and then I
would just feel more
comfortable, um, I know on page
two it said certain offenses and
then the next page it says which
kind, but it doesn't.
Actually ride it out, like she
said DWI is on there, so I would
want to see um
What offenses would go into
that, I guess, um, and then
Questions on, you know, you
don't have the committee laid
out, um, we don't have the
offenses laid out, and then also
having the healthcare authority
here, um, and then one more
thing is what happens to the
victims? Does that go against
the Victims' Rights Act if, if a
victim is assaulted. How do, how
do we
Go around that part.
Um, I'm gonna try to start from
the beginning that the ones just
suggestions adding to theirs.
The last one is victims' rights
and going around representative,
I've been, I've been,
you know, asking these questions
and in the relative, um.
The relativeness of of how we do
this, and that's why we're
asking for the flexibility. I
mean we went through many cycles
of putting this this legislation
together due to a lot of these
questions that you're bringing
up and putting up these these
safeguards and and and those
sorts of things. And the point
of of us putting of
Setting it up this way is for
that flexibility and to look at
that those models and the lead
model that you mentioned, I
don't think is in Berlio County
or maybe just in the city of
Albuquerque. I'm not quite sure,
but I knew you're talking with
local um
Officers and like my sheriffs
and and communities that
There's not enough being done,
right? There's not enough of
this infrastructure that we are
um committing to and with a
pilot program, then we can get
the assessment and we can
understand those needs better
and really move forward on those
those uh models that are working
the best.
And that leaves it up to the
local choice and our local
governments to help us make
those decisions and how this
looks. And so without moving
something like this forward,
then we're missing the
opportunity to really bring
forward this diversion programs
in a pilot performance measured
a whole pilot.
Um, aspect is to bring forward
those those um the information
and to gather that information
so that we can either continue,
assess, reassess, have the
reports, bring them back to us
as the legislators to assess and
know what, what models are the
best models that are working, as
we know, our state is very
diverse.
And not one size fits all.
So that's why I'm asking again
for that flexibility, and we
know through the interim
committees that we've had and
held in understanding these
issues that we need to be
looking at how we do this.
In those ways, and I would defer
to my experts if they wanted to
add or say anything to that, but
as far as the
The criminal aspect of your
question, can you repeat that?
How does this um work with
victims' rights because there's
certain victims' rights that
victims' rights get, um, whether
I mean, it's a mild assault,
which could happen and does
happen with people with mental
health issues, just how would
you work around that if, if we
were
Diverting away from going
through the district attorney,
police department for those
processing.
I think those those questions
would be met in this in um
formulated, but if I mean.
We would never want to have a
victim's rights, um.
At all, uh, defaulted, if you
will, and um.
They would have to be, you know,
that would have to be preserved
through the through legal um
means, but that that's not where
this.
This, this bill is taking us.
Um, Madam chair representative
of this, this doesn't grant any
powers to the police or the
district attorneys that they
don't know that they don't
already have. So there's so
district attorneys have
prosecutorial discretion, um,
police officers too for petty
misdemeanors prosecute the cases
have prosecutorial discretion.
The the the section that I
pointed um representative Reef
who earlier was it just outlines
because
If the command is that the, the
participant, which is going to
be a county or municipality she
design this program and it just
lays out the minimum
requirements of what's in that
design. So, um,
So the, the short, the short
answer is that the counties, I
mean the, the cities, the towns
decide.
What defenses they're gonna
include.
What types of offenders are
going to be eligible. So it's up
to them within the power they
already have. So it's not
granting them any power that
they don't already have.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, expert you
had stated something that um
caught my ear earlier in your
statement, you said that instead
of calling police, they could
call another number for the
mobile unit. So are we creating
a whole another
Phone number, then how would
that person then be safe if
we're doing that instead of
calling police and, and how
would that be decided then?
Thank you, Madam, uh,
representative. No, we wouldn't
be creating another uh service
would be uh 988 and it's, it's a
service that's already provided.
I think those are all the
questions I have. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative experts. Um,
In doing this or prepping for
this bill.
Have you spoke with any district
attorney in the officers that
currently run these lead
programs.
see how they might want to
integrate this, if at all, Madam
Chair.
Yes, Mr. Chair, we spoke with
the uh
Uh, District attorney from Taos,
um, I believe he spoke with the
former district attorney now
from um San Juan and um former
er uh.
DA uh Marco Cerna and all helped
him and and um
Worked on this with us.
Madam Cha uh
representative and experts.
They worked with you because
traditionally law enforcement
or, you know, they don't like to
give up their right to charge.
Under this program, the way I
understand it is the charges
are.
Dismissed
So I'm assuming like with
prejudice, they can't ever be
charged again.
Is that, is that a correct
understanding of what this is
written, Madam Chair.
And um that that's not included
in in this this bill, I mean, as
mentioned before, they, they
would already uh.
Assume the the right the.
The scope of practice.
I'm sure.
So I, I met him here and.
Representative experts, I must
have misunderstood. I thought
for the person to get into this
program.
The
Um
Would provide a Declan that
provides for declination to file
charges or dismissal of charges
filed in consideration.
Of a defendant's commitment to
participate in treatment or
access services and includes
procedures to prevent the
commission of a crime at the top
of page 2. I misunderstanding
that, Madam Chair Representative
experts.
And uh top of page 2,
Are you
Can you give me the line again,
madam chair,
OK.
Madam Chair Representative is
just, it's on the I think you're
looking at the.
The definition of diversion, um,
it means in an alternative, uh,
procedure in a criminal case in
which the.
interrupted, so that's on page
one, and it gives to where
you're looking at, so it's part
of that definition pursuant to
an agreement between the
prosecution and the defendant
that provides for uh.
of file charges or dismissal. So
that's, that's the definition.
chair
So Madam Chair and
representative experts in in
that definition though.
I know, and in your PPD or the
uh
Other program that we, we do in
San Juan County.
If they don't.
Follow through with what
they're, they have to do, then
they are charged.
I that would be similar for this
if they agree.
to go through this program and
they
They reoffend or drop out of the
program or whatever, they, the
original charges could be filed
again.
That, that's correct, Madam
Chair. I think that's what it
is, so, yes.
And representative, the, the,
the
So pre-prosecution, diversion
program is like a contract. So
the and and the courts have
recognized them as a contract,
um, so that's what we're, we're
just describing in this
definition. So the, the
declination to file charges is
made in consideration of the
defendant's agreement to
participate in these um programs
if the defendant breaches, then
the, the, the agreements
terminated, um.
So the, the short answer for
that is yes, if the defendant
doesn't meet his um obligations.
The charges may be filed again.
Madam Chair Representative, so
and experts when we're talking
about this.
Yeah, I, I'm
And I try not to ask the same
question that's been asked
before, because I know it's
getting late, but as we, we look
at this and we're
Diverting these people, it's
your opinion that if we can get
them treatment.
The recidivism will drop. Is
that what I understand, Madam
Chair, Representative, and
experts.
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, um, the research has shown
that uh one of the main leading
uh
Causes of recidivism is lack of
employment. This, um, this whole
program is wrap around, so it's
not just mental health services,
it also includes housing, uh,
vocational training, um,
everything that someone would
need to meet their basic needs
in the community, um, and to
have support doing that. So yes,
the research has shown that if
these services are provided,
there is a decrease in.
So Madam Chair, representative
and experts on the six-year
pilot program is there cap?
Uh, on the spending, cause I
could see that this could quite
easily spin out of control,
given the number of.
Individuals where you
potentially talking about, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, um, as, um,
And so this is an
appropriations, it's, it's upon
availability of funding, so
right now we are seeing the
funding that is available to the
different um the programs that
have been set forward in our
budget, then that would cover
the, the, the means in this
bill, I'm sure.
All right, I think that's all I
have madam chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
expert. So I was, you know, you
said that you talked to DA's um
do not their former DAs, and I
know they're at AODA and I know
they're not actually practicing
DAs, but I'm, I'm texting with
them, um, and they don't seem to
be in support of the bill, so I
don't know if there's a, a
miscommunication, but um,
They, they had, they had issues
with the bill, so I I missing
something or did you actually
sit down and talk to them about
it. Maam chair representative,
yes, we did, they were, they're
part of the process, so, and my
understanding they were against
the spill at all, Madam chair.
Interesting. OK. I'm just glad
it's not what I'm getting from
them, but appreciate you
bringing that to my attention
and I, I can, I can reach out to
them again, but they were very
helpful and and um drafting this
legislation and, and um we had a
AOD in our last committee
meeting
and did you talk to, uh, Madam
Chair and representative, just
the, the DAs at AODA, or did you
talk to any EAs that are
actually doing the lead program
like let's say the DA in San
Juan County,
um, to see how that was working
the DA in San Mo County.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you. Um,
Representative Hall.
Did you ask already? OK.
OK. I'm done, Madam Chair. Thank
you. All right, um, yeah, I
wanna commend you for really
taking this on. It's a really
hard topic.
to get your arms around because
Um, there are so many variables,
and potential
Issues that you have to revolve
and a lot of different entry
points.
So I can see it, it's um
It's a really challenging thing
to try to put some structure
around, and I do like the idea
of sort of a community-based
approach.
Because
It allows the communities to
You know, kind of tailor things
to how things work in their, you
know, where they live and where
the where the potential the
verdis divertees, um, you know,
could be sent to cause we also
don't know where the services
are in various places, so I do
think it has to be relatively
custom based on kind of areas
and cities and and that kind of
thing. So I think it will be
interesting to see how it all
plays out. I, I seem to recall
um representative that in Santa
Fe, I thought
they did have a pre-charging
diversion program, did they not
um,
yes, they do, and we actually,
um, Santa Fe County does did
come in stand up in support of
this piece of legislation as
well, Madam Chair.
Anyone else with questions or
comments?
Happy to entertain emotion.
Me I to pass on hospital through
50.
2.
Second man.
We have a due pass motion in a
second, would you recall the
role, please? Yes, thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Abita.
Representative Chavis? No.
Representative Hall? No.
Representative Hoffman? Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez, Representative
McQueen, yes.
Representative Reed? No.
Leader Sapansky, Madam Vice
Chair, Yes, Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on House Bill 354.
Thank you man. um, if I may, I
would, I, I would take to a
serious uh concern that what
Representative Reeve just said,
and I will follow up with those
that we worked with and I, I do
appreciate that that is news to
me. Thank you. Thank you. The
challenging topic,
not they
they currently do. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, representative.
All right, next up.
The other representative Anaya,
um.
Uh
The original and other of the
Senate Bill 417 confirmatory
adoptions.
Hot dog, Madam Chair, thank you
so much. Thanks for having us,
especially at this late hour,
uh, Madam Chair and committee
members, this is Senate Bill
417, uh, confirmatory adoptions.
Um, I have with me today my
expert Lynn Pearls, who's an
expert in family law. Um, I hope
this is a small change that will
help a lot of people, uh, what
it does is it creates a new
section in the New Mexico
Adoption Act, and it allows
people who use assisted
reproduction to petition for a
streamlined confirmatory
adoption of their own children.
Um, and Madam Chair, uh, and
representatives, what this does
is it waves, um, kind of an
arduous process and and and
evaluation criteria, um, that is
typically meant for more
traditional adoptions, so that
could be replacement studies,
post-placement reports,
counseling records checks,
minimum residency requirements,
etc. Um, and so, Madam Chair and
uh many we, with that we will
stand for questions. All right,
let's go to the audience though.
wishing to speak in opposition,
please step forward.
OK.
Those in the online wishing to
um speak in opposition, please
raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised.
Um, those wishing to speak and
support, please approach the
person with the microphone, and
please limit your comments to
about a minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee I'm Marshall
Martinez, executive director of
equality in New Mexico. In New
Mexico, we have a long held
values of acceptance,
affirmation, and love, and that
is especially true when it comes
to the way that we create our
families. Our policies have a
history of protecting families
in the myriad ways of which they
have been created in our
culturally rich state. Our
families deserve to know, as
they travel to visit
grandparents, take vacation road
trips, or even drop off an older
child at college that their
family is held, respected and
protected no matter what they
may look like.
We urge your support for Senate
Bill 417 to ensure that all the
children in New Mexico are
protected equally across the
country.
Anyone else wish to speak in
support?
I'll go online.
you wish to speak in support,
please raise your hand and
Go to limit it to 3 people.
Um, Diane McCash.
Uh good evening again, chair and
committee. I'm Diane McCash. I'm
an adoptive mother myself. Um,
this particular situation didn't
apply to my case cause my
adoptions were more traditional,
but I certainly understand where
all of this is coming from, and
I really support um our, uh, uh,
all of our parents out there,
and I hope that you'll, uh,
support this bill as well. Thank
you.
Um
None.
You have your hand raised.
No, no, you don't. Never mind.
Um, Danica, Danica.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Danica Terones and I'm
representing both Futures, a
statewide organization by and
for black and indigenous women
and people of color.
As a part of our work, we engage
with and listen to community
leaders from across the state in
those conversations, we hear how
individuals wanting to start or
broaden their families, often
rely on either fertility
assistance or surrogacy. In
these cases, confirmatory
adoption allows for a smoother
process to affirm parents and
strengthen families. In
addition, confirmatory adoption
offers security for the family
in the beautiful spectrum of
what a family looks like,
something as solid as adoption
paperwork offers needed
confirmation of familial ties.
not just in New Mexico, but if
or as the family travels.
Also, as an example, those
living close to the state lines
and having the fluidity of
traveling to Texas, Colorado, or
Arizona for healthcare or other
needs. We, or did you pass in
SB417. Thank you.
Thank you. And anyone else with,
I don't see any, uh, oh wait,
I'm sorry, yes.
Jasmine
Jasmine.
pronouncing your name correctly.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
committee members, my name is
Jasmine Tying Fong. I'm an
attorney with the ACLU of New
Mexico, and we stand in strong
support of SB 417. We know that
families take many forms, and
that New Mexico's policies
reflect that. We recognize
parents of children in a variety
of ways. For example, placing
non-biological and
non-gestational parents' names
on a child's birth certificate
in certain circumstances.
However, even when a married
non-biological or
non-gestational.
parent's name is on a birth
certificate. There is a risk
that a hostile jurisdiction may
choose not to recognize the
marital presumption of someone
not being biologically related
to a child. Confirmatory
adoption is a process through
which the parents can obtain a
court judgment declaring their
parental status. The US Supreme
Court in 2016 held that adoption
degrees must be given full faith
and fair credit under the
Constitution and be legally
recognized in all 50 states.
This process will ensure that
parents who have a child in New
Mex
Go through assisted reproduction
can protect the integrity of
their family, even across state
lines. Thank you. Thank you.
Right back to the sponsor.
Anything else before we go to
the committee? No, madam chair.
Members questioned.
Man I like to move a house when
we're ready.
We have a, I don't see anyone.
We have a motion for a Dubas on.
17.
it.
We have a 2nd made by
Representative McQueen.
Right
Motion by Representative Romero,
seconded by the Queen.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta,
Representative Chavez.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hoffman V. Hill?
Yes.
Representative Martinez, Speaker
Martinez, Representative
McQueen, yes.
Representative Reap. Yes.
Lead Sapansky, Madam Vice Chair.
Yeah.
Madam Chair.
Yes
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on Senate Bill 417.
Thank you.
All right, we have house built
361.
Right, Representative, the floor
is yours. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, House Bill 361 is
very exciting for New Mexico
when we think about some of um
assets that have unfortunately
gone out of use, and we're
talking about in, in this
regard, some of our oil and gas
wells, um, but currently, um,
perhaps our orphaned or no
longer um.
Basically pumping out oil and
gas. What we're proposing today,
Madam Chair, um, is an
opportunity to convert those
wells for geothermal or battery
um resources.
Um, with me is, uh, Jennifer I
can't remember anything now. Um,
um, to introduce herself as my
expert.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jennifer Brad and I'm a
local attorney in Albuquerque.
I've worked on resource matters
for about 14 years in New
Mexico.
And with that, Madam Chair, we
will stand for questions.
All right,
those in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition to the bill,
please approach the gentleman
with the mic.
don't see anyone.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition online, um,
excuse me, those online which
should this week obviously you
see anyway.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support, please
approach the gentleman with the
microphone.
I don't see anyone.
Those online wishing to speak in
support, please raise your hand.
I'm gonna a limit it to the
people for one minute each.
Um, Michael D'Antonio.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Mike
D'Antonio with Excel Energy, we
serve electricity to the eastern
part of the state. Uh, we see
this bill as uh a very good
option uh for utilities and
others to potentially use, uh,
utilize energy storage. We have
a, an extreme need in our area
for about 3300 megawatts of uh
accredited capacity by the year
2030 and any kind of uh storage
mechanisms for storage.
Of energy, uh, we, we see as the
optionality for us and others to
help us meet our energy needs,
so we support the bill. Thank
you.
Thank you. And there's one more
name, Stefan.
Hello. um Hello, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Stefan Streckfus, and I'm the
co-founder and CTO for Renewable
Energy, and renewal is a startup
with a technology to convert
into I oil and gas wells and
energy storage devices, and
while we do not currently
operate in New Mexico, we would
love to, um, New Mexico is a
perfect combination of traits
for these well bores to enable
us to create some very low cost,
resilient energy storage for the
state, and
We believe that this enabling
legislation will give us the
opportunity to invest in the
state. HB 361 would create a
regulatory framework for
technologies like ours to be
installed on oil and gas wells.
On behalf of renewal, I'd like
to voice my strong support for
this legislation and thank
Representative Romero for her
sponsorship. Um, as Michael
noted, energy storage is needed
to support greater deployment of
renewable resources like wind
and solar, but it also adds
resiliency to the grid, um,
making sure that
New Mexicans receive electricity
at all times. Um, it is
absolutely necessary for us to
be able to to uh install systems
within New Mexico, and I
appreciate the time today.
Um.
OK, um, sponsor anything else
before I go to committee. Um, I
also just wanted to, um, key in
that this is both um highly
supported by environmentalists
in its previous committee. I
know it's after 9 already, um,
as well as industry, so very
exciting. Um, we'll stand for
questions if I'm sure. OK, I
have representative McQueen.
Thank you, ma'am. uh Ma'am
chairs in Romero on the
strategy. Uh, I've heard this
bill before. I vote for it
before, um, it's been a while.
It's late. I'm tired. Um, can,
can you remind me why, like, my
understanding is the main
proposal is, is gravity storage
system, so.
You, you raised the weight or
whatever it is, when energy is
cheap and you lower it with
energy uh is uh.
More scarce
If that's the main proposal, why
is there all this geothermal
stuff in here?
Uh, Madam Chair representative,
um, thank you for that question.
Uh,
Renewal actually approached
inner about this legislation
last year and Deputy Secretary
Shelton's here too, um, at that
point in time, I think inner and
the energy storage company with
the gravity system that you
discussed, uh, discussed putting
in language and House Bill 133
last year, and they thought it
was advisable to also include
geothermal language in there. We
did not want to exclude
geothermal companies this year
when we pursued this effort,
there are some geothermal
techno.
no log ies where you could
repurpose oil and gas wells,
particularly in the San Juan
Basin, it doesn't apply to a lot
of oil and gas wells that
currently exists today, um, but
it does apply to some of them,
and so we didn't want to exclude
stakeholders from the
opportunity. There are
pre-existing statutory
definitions for geothermal
energy in New Mexico statutes
when we worked with the
drafters, it was actually a much
shorter proposal we wanted to
refer to those statutory
definitions they wanted to put
them whole, whole cloth into.
The bill in front of you, which
does take up a lot of paper.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
just kind of have a quick, quick
question, making sure I'm
understanding this, um.
And this was just from a fellow
representative who's explaining
this to, to, uh, uh,
Representative Chavez and I, so
When you have these, it's, it's
not so much plugging the well,
but it's just a well that I
think the word is used inactive,
well, is that kind of more the
correct term, I'm sure that's
correct, Madam Chair
representative, OK, and I
understand the process that, so
is there like we were told like
2, there might be 20% of oil or
something left at the bottom of
this well somewhere that we
can't extract it anymore and so
what this does is allows us to
to utilize the energy with this.
Water and pump and everything,
but would it also then Madam
Chair representative, if
technology does advance down the
road, and we can um that well
owner can actually extract the
rest of that oil. It would give
them the option to to do that, I
representative.
Madam Chair Representative,
yeah, that is correct. So
currently, um there is a process
to temporarily abandon oil and
gas wells under the Oil
Conservation division's district
regulation, sorry, it's like,
um, and you put a steel bridge
plug above the hydrocarbon
buried zones within the well bo.
Um, that is step one to
retrofitting a well for energy
storage purposes, you need to
put a steel bridge plug in to
cap off the hydrocarbon bearing
zones, you'll probably put a
cement formation on top of that,
that's standard temporary
advantage.
procedures today by most
companies as well.
OK, so it's kind of a win win
for both.
industries like the energy and
oil and gas, everybody, everyone
supports this, this concept that
you're aware of? OK.
Yes
Thank you.
There is emotion.
make a motion for a due pass,
Madam Chair.
second.
We have a Du pass motion on
House Bill 361 made by
Representative Paul, seconded by
Representative Chavez, would you
call the roll. Yes, thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Abena, Representative Chavis.
Yes.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill?
Yes.
Representative Martinez, Speaker
Martinez, Representative
McQueen, yes.
Representative Reed.
Leader Sapansky.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
you have a due pass on House
Bill 361.
Right, we are on our final bill.
House Bill 259 Representative
McQueen.
Madam Cher, are you ready?
I'm ready. We're ready.
Uh,
ma'am chairman was the committee
House Bill 259 is oil and gas
Act violation and penalties.
Um, I'm joined by Ben Shelton,
general counselor of Eys.
And that for research
department,
uh, my quick summary of this
bill is we're updating the, the
fees, fines and penalties, and
the reason is this is the reason
for me uh uh supporting this
bill is we want these
To be in the mountain that
encourages compliance.
The goal here isn't to collect a
bunch of finds and penalties.
The goal is to encourage
compliance.
And mentor if, if I could, I
would like to have Mr. Shelton
say if you were. Sure.
Madam Chair, members just to
reinforce with the, with the
chairman mentioned since the
2019 when we received
administrative penalty authority
back from this legislature. We
have assessed about $28 million
or about $29 million I should
say in administrative penalties.
We only collected about 8. What
we do is we assess the penalty,
we get the operator at the
table, uh, we work to get
compliance, um, that is
fundamentally that is our that
is our end goal.
Thank you. Those wishing to
speak in opposition um
please approach the person with
the microphone and please limit
your comments to about a minute.
Man, members of the committee.
My name is Jim Winchester, uh,
executive director of the
Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico, um,
just a, a brief history on this
back in 2019, um, the legislator
gave the administration the
authority to issue civil
penalties for violations, and
that was a negotiation um
between industry and the
administration a up to $200,000
per violation. Um, we feel
specifically with the smaller
operators that 200,000 is
already enough to.
significantly send a message, if
not hurt smaller operators, um,
or put them out of business. Um,
so this is an increase of over
tenfold, and we just feel that's
excessive, so we respectfully
stand in opposition. Thank you.
Good evening man and members of
the committee, Mike Miller,
Premium Basin Petroleum
Association, um, we oppose this
bill for the same reasons that
uh Mr. Winchester mentioned
furthermore, um, House Bill 259
grants accepted excessive
enforcement power to the
regulatory agencies allowing
them to suspend permits and shut
down wells with little due
process. New Mexico already has
strong enforcement tools. We
don't need any more government
overreach that discourages in
production and growth. For these
reasons, we oppose this bill.
Thank you.
Go online, those wishing to
speak in opposition.
Please raise your hand, and I'm
gonna limit it to all right, um.
iPhone.
Wonder who that is.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. This
is Ashley Wagner with the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 200 member
companies. Nomoga opposes House
Bill 259. It is not clear how
the increased amounts were
determined and are inflammatory.
The penalty increases are out of
step and not aimed at keeping
pace with inflation. For
instance, some of the penalties
are increased by 300%. Well, we
appreciate the amendment to
reduce the initially proposed.
penalty cap from 3.65 million to
2.65 million, the increase is
still excessive and could
bankrupt smaller operators over
minor infractions. There is a
cost to doing business, but
these arbitrary increases signal
that New Mexico lacks regulatory
certainty, a key focus to
economic development. Thank you.
Thank you. Um,
We have uh Carlos Santag.
Carla
Carla or Larry, maybe it's
Larry.
Carla, Larry,
OK, I'm gonna move to the next
person, Harry Cole.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the community of the
committee. I'm Terry Cole
speaking today on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce in opposition to HB
259. We believe the fees and
fines increases are pretty
shocking. If the basis is to
adjust for inflation, then we'd
very much appreciate learning
what the base year is and the
calculations that lead to the
proposed adjustments. Fines are
presumably designed for
punishment. Punishment
Exactly for what? Our oil and
gas industry has been extremely
cooperative and forward
thinking, the industry by and
large has a very good record in
compliance with state and
federal regulations, and as we
all know, is frankly that cash
cow of our state's treasury, so
we're left questioning what
infractions the state is after
and why are such extraordinary
increases necessary and
justified. We are very concerned
that the proposed adjustments
should
not be arbitrary, but rather
backed up with some kind of
evidence that explains the need
and the presumed effectiveness.
At this point, we oppose HB 259.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you. I have
representative Chavez.
Oh
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, you said in
your statement, um,
You want to make sure it's an
amount that encourages
compliance. So I guess what
evidence supports the need for
increasing penalties per
violation, um, will lead to
compliance and or um are their
current penalties insufficient
or um
Is there noncompliance issues
happening right now.
And chair representative Chavez,
uh, Mr. Shelton answered that. I
would just point out that, you
know, under the current law,
it's 10,000 a day and it's
capped at 200,000.
So after 20 days of
noncompliance, there's no
incentive.
You're kept out.
So really that the goal here is
to make sure that these
Findselies
aren't just the cost of doing
business.
But, uh, bring the operator to
the table, Mr. Shelton.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
that, that effectively captures
it for mid and larger, you know,
mid-size and larger operators,
$200,000 a day.
that is
Simply insufficient to get them
to curtail the activity that's
violating the Oil and Gas Act
frequently that they're making
more than that in the morning.
So, uh, the, the amount just
does not get them to the table.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative expert. So how
many
Um, issues are you seeing or
compliance.
Results that you have data for
after 20 days, how, how many are
you seeing? Is it that?
Much
Like, what are the statistics, I
guess.
Uh
Madam Chair and Representative,
we do not specifically keep
track of those statistics. The
issue is not that there are
many, many happening to the
contrary, there are actually
fairly few of these levels of
violations happening, but when
they happen, they are extremely
harmful and they present
significant financial exposure
to the state, significant
environmental and health risks.
So we want to be able to get on
top of that right away. We think
one is too many.
OK, thank you. Now, talking
about um small and large.
Could higher penalties
disappropriate,
uh, kid.
Higher penalties,
disproportionately, if I could
talk tonight, my goodness,
affects smaller gaps industries
and companies.
Madam Chair and Representative,
we specifically do not apply a
higher penalties as smaller
operators. We do not want them
to go out of business because
when operators go out of
business, they orphan wells, and
that winds up that liability
winds up shifting back to the
state. We work very, very hard
to craft creative solutions that
let smaller operators in
particular continue to operate
so that they continue to have
responsibility for their wells
and have a chance to uh and
abandon them appropriately.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative expert. So I know
with a lot of these bills that
we create, we talk to everybody
that's involved. So with this,
did we talk to the oil and gas
industries, um, or people maybe
not in our state, but out of
state to see if this would
discourage more investments in
New Mexico with oil and gas.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, I, I heard two
parts to your question. The
first is about consultation with
industry. This language is
substantively fairly identical
to language from House Bill 133
last year, which is a process
that we spent 5 to 6 months
developing with industry and uh
and NGO stakeholders, so that's
the process that we're
developing this language in
terms of um
question now. Uh.
What it deter?
Out of state companies wanting
to come here to start new
operations Madam Chair
Representative, we
Looked to other states when we
set these amounts initially, the
question has been asked of where
we determine that cap for the
penalties. It's very difficult
to determine appropriate cap for
this region for the penalties
because no other state has a
capital.
Um, so, uh, specifically because
the existence of a cap
undermines the the so uh.
Other states, neighboring
states, particularly Colorado
and Texas have penalty regimes
that we think of as being much,
much.
And then my last question is,
Madam Cha represented expert,
you stated that we had a fairly
large, I think you said 29
million, but you only collected
8. So is it your plan to
give these penalties, but then
you're going to negotiate a much
smaller amount.
Why aren't you collecting, I
guess, if you're saying we have
an issue.
And we're increasing penalties
on top of that. It just doesn't
seem like there would be as many
issues.
Maybe
Madam Chan representative the
goal is not to collect
penalties. The goal is to get
operators back into compliance
as quickly as we possibly can.
The penalty amount that we
initially assess is designed to
get them to stop immediately
what they're doing, whether
that's produce water spilling or
venting and flaring in violation
of the waste rules. That's,
that's the point of the
penalties. The largest penalty
we have assessed since 2019, we
wound up settling for about
$60,000.
Um, and that was because we were
worried about putting that
operator out of business or
putting undue strain on them,
and we were also seeing
improvement. They were able to,
to come in and change some of
the things you want.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Um, I think
those are all the questions I
had. It just doesn't seem like
If we don't even have data on a
lot of issues and compliance
related.
issues, especially after the 20
days, I guess I just don't
understand what increasing.
Thank you.
Um, Representative Hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative expert. I was
looking at the penalty section
which
is.
through it begins at the bottom
of page.
It addresses it in Section B at
the bottom of page 3. I don't
have a line number on this.
But it talks about uh
$10,000 per day of
non-compliance for violation.
Unless the violation.
to the health and the safety of
the public are causing
significant environmental harm
or unless the non-compliance
issues or non-complaint
continues beyond the time
specified in the notice of
violation or order issued by the
division commissioner court.
And then it goes on to, how do
you deter, I mean, given that
language, is there any more
specificity to that or is it
just decided
But this is gonna be fine based
on, I mean, it says there's a
level of severity, but I'm kinda
curious where that goes, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative
Hall overwhelmingly the
escalating factor there is time
and ignoring our notice. Those
are the, that's the main
criteria that drives that 10,000
a day up to 20, well, 2 2500 up
to 10,000 a day.
And Madam Chair, representative
expert witness earlier in that
they have how many, uh is there
a general rule, how how much
time they have to begin.
Um
Coming into compliance, sir, uh,
madam chair.
Madam Chair and Representative
expectations immediate
immediately upon receipt of
notice.
Uh, Madam Chair expert and
representative, so
They received this notice, and
I, I guess.
How do you
Cause you're not gonna be out in
the patch with them, obviously,
I'm assuming, I doubt people are
camped in the patch, given the
size of our.
geographic area in this state of
oil and gas. How do you know
they're complying, they have
some kind of a, uh, is there a
reporting system or something, I
mean, since we're
Attempting to increase these
rates.
Um, I would think there would be
a pretty
substantial reporting system,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair represent of all,
that's correct. We do have a
fairly substantial reporting
system or regulatory system is
built around a self-reporting.
Um, structure, the way that
generally um
So, so that's what we rely on
initially, the first severe
violations, there is usually an
inspection, so, uh, in terms of
what the notice is or the time
to get back into.
In compliance, there's, there's
an idea based on how that
inspection goes. Very few people
are surprised with the severe
violation when our NLB arrives,
the other, he said just sort of
neglected to mention my answer
to your previous question was
that the NOV will frequently
specify time to get back into
compliance, so they usually is
uh an allowance for some some
type, but they're on notice of
that, um.
Pretty, pretty clearly when
they, by the time the NOV
arrives.
And Madam Chair representative
experts, so the idea by um
I think the representative
stated your, your ideas if you
Make this harsh enough, you, you
can, you believe you'll force
them into
Compliance is that.
Quicker, is that what I'm
understanding out of this
chair uh representative Paul,
um,
By law, they should be in
compliance.
That's the first threshold. And
that's not a matter of making it
harsh enough. It's a matter of
making it a deterrent.
Um, that's what we're seeking,
we're, you know, we're, we're
not in
We know in the business of
finding oil and gas companies.
Uh, we are in the business of
making sure oil and gas
companies follow the law, and if
they're in violation, you know,
chances are they know they're in
violation.
And Madam Chair Representative
and expert. I, I
I guess I see a little irony in
this as we hear Bell after bill
and we attempt to help people
who are violating things and yet
at this, and I understand you
aren't going after the smaller
operators per se.
But the permit fees have gone
out, up, the penalties have gone
up.
The maximum penalties.
Over 10 times is proposed, and I
understand you came down off of
that.
I would just, this just seems.
Compared to what we do
legislatively on
Criminal matters
Almost criminal, madam chair.
Um,
ma'am we don't need to have it
that it was not a question.
And I rest, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Uh,
that's you rest.
OK
Representative Reed.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
Representative and expert. A lot
of the questions that were
asked, um, I, I, I'm also
concerned about the significant.
increase in the penalties and
I think it was asked um
About whether it would deter
business.
You know, small other businesses
from coming here uh because of
these high penalties and I think
you said something, um, like,
did, did you answer that to say
you don't believe that it would
deter um smaller
Or, or I guess any oil company
or anybody want wanting to come
to New Mexico to do business
with these types of.
Or
So, some ribs in every a couple
of things. First, I don't think
it would deter them.
second, um,
coming to New Mexico to do
business, should play a on
complying with the law.
You know, if they're factoring
in the cost of fines and
penalties as part of the cost of
doing business.
I questioned that business
model.
OK, and Madam Chair
Representative you.
Um, there's also, I think
something I'm following up on
that representative Chavez said,
and this this this.
This affecting the smaller oil
and gas companies versus the
larger ones, um, because they,
they struggle for their day to
day operations were making these
fees so much higher, and did you
say it, you don't believe it
would affect, um,
Expert, uh, Madamarian expert
that I think you said you did
not feel it would affect the
smaller oil and gas businesses,
I hear that wrong?
Me chair uh
uh Mr. Shelton answer as well,
but, you know, the, the practice
apparently is, there is
noncompliance, there's a fine.
You bring the operator to the
table, you get them into
compliance and the, the
department has been willing to
negotiate on that fine.
OK, so, but the madam Chair
representative, but the fees are
no different for the smaller.
Companies were large ones. I
understand that it, it sounds
like over the years, um,
You've negotiated these fees
down to 3, it sounds like
approximately you're not
collecting on it. I, I again,
I'm also having a hard time
understanding the issue with why
we're tripling costs, um, to,
uh, I understand you're trying
to have a deterrent, but uh it
just I'm not really making the
connection. Um, I understand
they're not in compliance, you
want to get them in compliance,
but you're not saying you're.
You're giving uh less fines to
smaller.
Businesses and larger.
Or are you saying?
Madam Chair and Representative,
I want to make sure I'm
following your question. Are you
referring to the fees or the
penalties? What's the penalties?
OK, let's just talk about the
penalties because you're saying
that
I'm concerned that the smaller
oil and gas businesses are gonna
be affected by this. They
struggle with their day to day
operations, not living larger
corporations.
And I believe you answered,
Madam Chair, an expert, that how
we work with them. So are they
treated differently than the
larger companies.
On penalties or, or even fees
you charge them different than
their charge the same, right,
as, as the other company. First
question. OK, Madam Chair and
Representative, I think I
understand. Yes, the fees are
applied to everybody.
Um, you know, you know, equally
the NOVs, the penalty pieces
that we, we developed those NOVs
on a violation by violation and
operator by operator basis that
does result in some differential
treatment honestly take.
Effort to try not to put small
operators out of business, I
would argue that.
$2.6 million as a maximum.
Certainly I can, I can see the
the scenario that you're worried
about, but $200,000 would be
plenty to put in some of the
smallest operators in the state
out of business. That is not
what we are trying to do. The
issue, you know, if operators go
out of business, that well
liability comes back to the
state and becomes a huge issue
for the division, state
taxpayers.
And right, and so my question
is, I know you don't want him to
go out of business, but what did
this make that possibly happen
to these smaller companies.
With these fees and penalties.
Uh, Ma and chairs
representative, no, this does
not increase the likelihood of
that happening.
All right. And so, it sounds
like you have, is it the
This bill expands authority of
I that's the oil conservation
division, right?
Um
So it allows them to impose
harsher penalties.
Um, an issue temporary
shutdowns, um, and what's the
due process of that, because it
sounds like you have regulatory
agencies already that have tools
to enforce these, um, and I'm,
I'm wondering, it seems like a a
big government overreacher, a
possible.
A possible situation where we
could have a, an abuse of some
type of power, and so I wanted
to discuss that a little bit.
Timeshare experts um, the
department is a regulatory
enforcement agency, enforcing
the laws of New Mexico is not a
government overreach.
But don't you already have,
you're, you're trying to put
this into a statute, right?
Mhm and and we're trying to
amend the existing statute. OK,
so the regulations and the
statute are the same?
And uh representative
representative Reed, you might
be thinking of a different
builders as statutory.
you know, I'm thinking of that
you already have regulations
that deal with this, right?
that deal with some of this
stuff, do you know?
I mean, do regulatory agencies,
I guess, already have the, the,
the tools and the power to
enforce these different things.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
yes, we have regulation in
addition to, to the statutory
authority. We have a variety of
tools in our toolboxes is one of
the more important ones. OK, so
I guess why this if you have
regulatory.
I can answer that question with
an example if it's helpful and
um we had an operator who was
not responding to any level of,
of penalties. We were stacking
multiple $200,000 penalty caps
to get them to stop doing it
flare that was causing residents
in Carlsbad to call in
complaints to the division. It
was very disruptive to just
living and.
In that area
Uh, and they were completely
unresponsive and they were not
responding, they would not stop
until we literally
Uh
threatened to pull their
authority to transport product,
which is effectively shutting in
their entire business model.
That is not how we like to, to
regulate any of this stuff. We
like to work hand in hand with
the industry to get them into
compliance. So that is a, that
is an option that is not.
Um, not one that we like to pull
out of the tool kit.
So the more appropriate avenue
is to assess a penalty that is
sufficient to get them to stop
right away, get them to the
table and start articulating a
path back into compliance with
them. We do not like to threaten
shut-ins. We don't like to do
any of that stuff. It's a very,
very last resort and we were
forced into that position in
that particular instance. OK,
that, that helps if you gave me
an example, um, and so Madam
Chair, Representative and
expert, um,
There is currently, what's the
cap now? Is, is it?
did I read the current cap.
Ma'amer represented grievances
currently $200,000 and how many
cases have reached that cap.
thus far.
to.
Madam Chairman Man, um, we
typically go beyond that by
assessing multiple different
violations in a single NOV in
order to get to the dollar
amount that's going to move the
needle.
Right, and when they get to that
cap.
Have you had them, Madam Chair
represent extra pay that cap or
is that one of the things that
you, you negotiate down to about
3.
Madam Chair Representative, the
latter. The latter. OK, so then
how does this impact our energy
prices, or gas prices and things
of that nature. I'm sure
represent.
Right
Madam Chair, um.
And representative of the price
of oil is set in Cushing, Texas
is an internationally traded
commodity.
OK, so this won't uh be an
increased cost to consumers and
former fashion Madam Chair,
I, I can't guarantee that the
way that the price of oil is set
is reliant on a variety of
factors, most of which are
outside of the control of
Mexico.
I just worry that sometimes
these costs get passed on to the
consumers and especially in
rural areas and if, if
You're comfortable, this will
not.
I know you say you can't say for
sure, but this is not something
that could pass on to the
consumers, um.
If uh, if this is passed.
Higher higher oil prices, higher
energy prices, or higher fuel
prices.
Like that.
Not a chair, it's hard to
imagine the scenario where uh
individual penalty or fee
changes by the state of New
Mexico is going to impact.
And so just lastly, there's
something in the bill about um
It this bill allowed for
automatic.
The increases based on
inflation.
Um
Without requiring any
legislative approval.
Um, could you
Could you talk to me a little
bit about why.
There are unchecked fees
basically in this um that
legislative approval.
check fee hikes, I guess you.
Um, Representative Reed, they're
not unchecked, uh, they're tied
to the CPI, uh, and the reason
for this is, you know, what we
do is we put these numbers in
the statute, and then we have a
hard time changing them. So then
it's 10 years or 20 years later
and the fees are too small. So
this is setting the fees at what
we believe is an appropriate
level, and then keeping them
there.
So what if uh
Economic conditions get worse,
and let's say is there a
provision here that
These could decrease.
Um, so that's not, so one-sided.
Ma'am chair and read the, the
keys are tied to the CPI. I
think there is language that
they don't go down if the CPI
does, um.
In the unlikely event that that
occurs, it could be revisited.
Um, thank you. I, I, I do think
it.
I apologize, but I think it's
ironic.
But in this context, we're
saying, um, fines, which is, you
know, kind of what this is, a
penalty. It's a fine. Um.
Shouldn't be relied upon because
it could hurt someone, but when
we're talking in another con,
and it's not a sufficient
deterrent or it could bankrupt
or so on, but in other contexts,
we think raising fines and fees
and penalties when it's in the
criminal context as some sort of
really great tool as a
deterrent, so is it a deterrent
when we have a corporation that
presumably has people running it
with rational thinking and kind
of evaluate the risk.
and the benefits of what they're
doing on a financial basis.
And we compare that with a
criminal who usually, and I, you
know, I'm not an expert on
criminals, but I think they do a
lot of things that are
irrational and not well thought
out, but we talk a lot about
increasing penalties on those
folks.
So, you know, really, in a world
where rationality is working
fines and penalties and the like
should be viewed as something
that's a viable deterrent.
So, um, with that, I'm happy to
entertain emotion, Madam I'd
like to move it do pass on House
Bill 259. 2nd, as amended.
We have a due pass motion on
House Bill 259 as amended motion
made by Representative Romero
said in Dubai Representative
Sapansy.
It was amended in a prior
committee, not this committee.
Yes, but it's still unamended
bill, isn't it, thank you, yeah,
I got that.
Uh, um, thank you. Uh, would you
call the role? Yes, thank you,
Madam Chair. Representative
Abeta.
Representative Chavis? No.
Representative Hall, no.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill?
Yes.
Speak uh representative
Martinez, Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reed? No.
Leader Sapansky? Yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes, Madam
Chair.
Yes
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on House Bill 259 as amended.
Thank you. Thank you, um,
everyone for staying the course.
Um, we got through our agenda
and I appreciate that.
Unless there's any questions,
I'm gonna adjourn. We are
adjourned.
