Representative.
Here.
Representative McQueen.
Representative neighbor.
Representative Rehm.
I'm here I'm sorry.
With that.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
He's here.
Representative Townsend.
I'm here.
Representative Cook.
Representative Eli.
Representative Rehm.
Representative means that he was
there it was nine for.
I think.
Your.
This is Representative and I'm
here.
Madam chair.
Representative live on.
Okay let me begin by saying I
think at this point we're not
going to be hearing House Bill
twenty seven today and I'll
will keep you posted on that.
So we have Representative Rubio
here on our first item.
And I'm so representative would
you like to
begin explaining.
Measure and let me know if you
have any experts who need to be
made up one so.
Zero I'm sorry this is this is
one of the interpreters I think
the interpreter interpreting
feature needs to be turned on so
that people who want to hear
this simultaneous interpretation
can do so okay I should have
noticed that you're with us.
Trying to be inconspicuous and
colleague here's Melissa
Jameson.
If you could turn it on
and and Peter could tell as the
interpreters present so I'm not
sure who turns on be
interpreting
Application.
It would have been Gabrielle a
last meeting.
What can find out how to she
didn't tell me okay we'll get
that done before we begin.
Thank you sorry to interrupt no
I'm happy I want to begin.
Perfect.
It's working.
All right let me begin again.
we are going to have
Representative Rubio introduced
her bill.
And we will
Then.
Go to take a poll of the
audience and then we will ask
the opponents and proponents to
speak.
So we will begin with
Representative Rubio.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you everyone on on the committee
my name is and I think that and
I am presenting house bill forty
house bill forty is really
essentially to address the issue
of private prisons here in the
state of New Mexico and working
on a plan to not only and new
contracts with the private
prison industry here in the
state but to begin to also
no longer renew the contracts
that exist with.
there are a couple of experts
who will who are here just to
work me out so one is are in
rural school if you could be
brought in as well as anything
Craig I'm both of these
individuals are part of a larger
coalition who I've been working
with statewide to
address this issue this bill has
seen a number of of
I guess revisions I first
introduced a version of this
bill a few years ago
this is the legislation that I
feel and is is really work
that's been done over the course
of the last few years that has
has fundamental
but the possibilities in terms
of how we we transition and move
away from this industry here in
New Mexico and so I can give
anything another yet a few
minutes to I'm sure a little bit
about that and the work that
we've been doing and and what's
in what what the details are of
this bill so that folks have a
better understanding around more
of the the the details around
all of that.
So I don't see Mason yet but I
agree I'll is with us so we
shall begin with him is that
alright yes it is in already and
so is this I see both of them
okay I'm just.
Yeah you know first go ahead.
Madam chair representative
review I'm wondering did you
want to give an overview of the
bill or do you want to speak
about the amendment is
technically.
Yeah so I'm chairwoman I don't
know what you prefer we do have
amendments to the bill do you
want us to go over just the bill
or do you want us to also talk
about the amendments.
Here's what I think is helpful
and I'm having bad reception so
let me know if you're hearing me
okay.
You hear you okay it's gives a
little bit it's okay okay.
Sorry.
Generally if you will described
the amendment before we go to
public comment.
Your endowment and then we will
discussed the amendment after we
have public comment.
Thank you madam chair
representative your members of
the committee I'm gonna just
give you a big overview picture
of some of the amendments that
we proposed.
So some of them are more
technical and more rounds
clarity that we've heard from
the community and other folks.
and then as well as all talk a
little bit about some of the
more substantive changes and why
those changes were made on the
technical side you'll see that
there's six amendments that have
the word right.
For each reference to
independent contractor we have
received some questions about
whether
Public bodies should be included
in our consistent of a
contractor we also reviewed
chapter thirty three article
three and saw that there were
inconsistent references
sometimes to private contractors
private contractors sometimes
without that reference so just
to clear up.
Tension we included the word
private in front of each
Representative Mentzer reference
to.
Private independent contractor.
Just to clarify the private
internet contractors are being
prohibited from operating jails
prisons or detention facilities.
additionally the new material in
the forty eight required a
person to have to reference
different sections of the law to
know which sections on that for
the for the phasing out of
currently active contracts
so essentially we were just a
little bit confused about that
is so there are several
amendments there were we've
included in each section measure
affected section
Very specific language which is
that existing contracts with
private independent contractors
are the ones that will be phased
out.
WYO
during the duration of that
contract with those contracts
not be extended for new or
modified.
Also in section three be very
moved and this is the smaller
ones are just note the remove
we're owned.
To allow government entities
referred to in that section
could be able to engage in
conduct that may be needed to in
the transition period away from
private prisons
this includes contact that
allows the department of
corrections to be able to lease
privately owned detention
facilities as well as to
purchase private detention
facilities.
in addition for further clarity
in amendment item number twenty
nine we created a subsection to
section thirty three dash the
past twenty seven that clarifies
that the agreements referenced
in that subsector that entire
section are also subject to the
provisions created and in the
new material the overall act.
And then there is a remembering
their.
And then lastly again a more
substantive substantive and if
you look at item seventeen
eighteen twenty and twenty four.
Which covers over seven of the
inspection reports that are
already required by the counties
with the privately operated
prison or jail in their
jurisdiction we switch the
department of corrections after
we heard some concerns from the
from the corrections to actually
instead the three agencies that
are already required to
participate in the approval of
these contracts and this is
actually also in consultation
with the office of the Attorney
General and so now we reference
the wrist Management Division
the local division of the
department of finance and
administration the attorney
general's office so those three
parties are included there too
also provide oversight to ensure
that from their perspective the
contracts and the obligations of
contracts being made.
Budget was particularly if you
have any questions I'm here to
answer thank you.
Mr current.
Thank you so I'm gonna speak a
bit about the need for this and.
Address those issues madam chair
see members of the committee
incarceration is a solemn
function of the state not one to
be entrusted to the lowest
bidder seeking to turn a profit.
The US incarcerate more people
per capita than any other
country in New Mexico
incarcerate more people per
capita than the nation as a
whole.
Private prisons were invented in
the United States in New Mexico
has the highest reliance on
private prisons of any state
between nineteen eighty three in
twenty eighteen The New Mexico
prison population ballooned two
hundred and sixty eight percent
growth exceeds changes in crime
rate for this period a
disproportionately high number
of incarcerated individuals are
black and Latino mental illness
and substance abuse are largely
treated as crimes rather than
health issues in New Mexico
private incarceration was
embraced under the premises of
cost savings of twenty to thirty
percent improve services from
private sector competition in
rural development looking back
at thirty years of data we can
see the experiment was a
miserable failure.
Cost savings in the state were
not seen that compare what
costly levels private prisons
cost more than public ones
private prison companies charge
New Mexico higher per diem rates
the neighboring states.
LFC finds that moving people
from private to public
facilities saves millions of
dollars private prisons
consistently have higher numbers
of release eligible individuals
costing the state daily.
Services and private prisons are
not better private contractors
cost cutting efforts make
facilities more dangerous both
for staff and the incarcerated
population this creates
liability risks to the state and
counties.
CoreCivic's northwest New Mexico
correctional center boasts
programs to reduce recidivism if
the sentencing commission notes
that staffing levels are so low
the program isn't running
effectively rehabilitation is a
real need in these services
shouldn't be a hollow marketing
strategy.
As incarcerated populations
decline presently contracted
private budget will not be
needed by either state or
federal agencies.
Given current and projected
declines in the state prison
population by fiscal year twenty
four when the first stable state
private contracts expire only
four hundred and fifty six of
the currently contracted three
thousand one hundred and sixty
three budget will be needed
eighty six percent of New
Mexico.
Rex's Department contracted
private prison budget won't be
necessary continuing to pay for
unused private prison budget is
economically inefficient.
The FIR HB forty shows that
amendment CD would only need to
convert one of the two smaller
private facilities this would
encourage some short term
expense the annual post
transition savings of eleven to
six point four million dollars
per year.
Revision of the state's custody
level systems and addressing
technical parole revocations
will save the Tate St tens of
millions of dollars and lead to
additional declines in prison
population.
Federally ISIS current detention
population is less than fourteen
thousand the lowest level in a
quarter century that population
continues to decline rapidly it
dropped more than eight hundred
and fifty cents HB forty was
heard in C. pack on January
twenty eighth just two weeks
ago.
In New Mexico the civil County
correctional center which has a
capacity for five hundred ice
budget has been empty for
months.
The Otero county processing
center has a capacity of over
one thousand currently contains
one hundred and sixty five
individuals well Torrance County
detention facility as an ice
capacity of seven hundred is
holding thirteen individuals.
The twenty two hundred private
ice detention beds statewide or
at eight percent capacity M. D.
C. already threatened to pull
out of a total because the ice
population was so low the
processing center wasn't
financially viable the current
administration instructed DOJ to
cut ties with private prison
companies and is committed to
ending private ice detention.
Meeting for rural development
did not take place in New Mexico
there is no measurable positive
impact on unemployment rates in
rural prison hosting counties in
some cases the effect is
actually negative in many rural
prison settings the majority of
corrections staff commute from
the nearest metro area in the
case of Otero county with the
largest number of private prison
beds according to county
commissioners the bulk of the
workforce commutes from out of
state driving in from el Paso
state private prisons have
significantly higher staff
vacancy rates than public
prisons turnover is high
CoreCivic and geo group have
been unable to maintain
contractually agreed upon
staffing levels they were fined
one point four million dollars
for understaffing and LESC found
that the state had for gone
eighteen point six million in on
pursued staffing level penalties
in early twenty nineteen the geo
group was being fined a hundred
and fifty.
Thousand dollars per month due
to low staffing levels at the
northeast New Mexico detention
facility.
The terminated the contract in
ninety days transitioning this
facility to public management
led to abrupt and unanticipated
state costs but it also meant
better jobs for newly employed
state corrections workers.
In Otero M. D. C. issues press
releases about handing out food
boxes to the poor and chaparral
you will receive your is this in
your email at the same time
hundreds of workers at the
prison had to sue MTC just to
get paid their due wages for
time spent on security screening
a district judge found that MCC
violated federal and state labor
laws this is not a partner for
sound rural development.
Some count some two counties and
towns we'll talk about how they
depend on gross receipts taxes
together CoreCivic and geo group
sought to get out of paying more
than twenty million dollars in
gross receipts tax they don't
want to pay their fair share to
get that money back the status
had to sue and pay litigation
costs.
The state has name dozens the
state is been named in dozens of
lawsuits resulting from bad
conduct by private prison
contractors in twenty nineteen
at the northwest New Mexico
corrections center an inmate was
assaulted for ten minutes while
staff watched the victim sued
CoreCivic and named an MCD in
twenty eighteen after major
violent incident northeast to
Mexico detention facility
regards to geo group and named
and and CD and twenty twenty M.
D. C. in G. O. were sued for
failing to respond to a request
the suit also named an MCD
collectively these and many
other suits represent
significant liability to the
state potential and potentially
the counties government bodies
have to foot the bill for
litigation costs.
Because private prisons were
built under the context of mass
incarceration they're coming out
early.
Because private prisons were
built into the context of mass
incarceration their role in
rural development depends on
maintaining on reasonably high
incarceration levels as society
moves beyond mass incarceration
profit driven detention is an
unstable development model
keeping facilities open requires
over incarceration contracting
with private prison companies is
neither sound Development nor
policy it results in tremendous
risk to the state and to local
communities it is also
unnecessarily expensive on
Justin on healthy it is time for
New Mexico to end this
relationship with private
detention contractors given
state criminal justice and
national immigration policy
changes H. B. forty establishes
a timetable for what the state
will have to do anyway.
HB forty does this gradually
over time as contracts expire
and establishes the commitment
to transitioning to a safer and
healthier State thank you.
Thank you madam chair and with
that we'll open it up to
questions I just did want to ask
that if speakers and and I
didn't get a chance to ask Miss
for of my experts that because
we do have translation if we can
slow down speaking just a little
bit.
Okay thank you very much
Representative Rubio so when I
go to the audience what I'm
going to do first is take a call
and I'm those who favor house
bill forty can vote yes and
those who oppose house bill
forty can vote now then I will
go to the opponents so if you
have your hand up now in your in
favor of it take your hand down
as your chart is it now and then
there will be a one minute time
limit.
Her.
public comment and we'll try to
get through this as quickly as
we can.
So let me go now to the Paul.
So if you are in support yes if
you're in opposition your vote
now.
Okay we can close the poll now
we have
Eighty five percent in support
and fifteen percent in
opposition and let me go now to
the people who are in opposition
who wish to speak.
And I want to remind everyone
that not everybody needs to
speak and please don't repeat
something that's already said
try to bacon the new comments
please.
Let's go to those
Injuring two over there we go.
In opposition.
First sterling divorce help.
Please yourself.
Go ahead sterling.
We'll come back to you I'll go
down to Mike Wilson.
Michael you and yourself please.
Yes I am Mike Wilson I support
just build the of Representative
Rubio is going forward I'm sorry
I did not say madam chairman
Representative.
That's okay.
Of of the United church of
Christ first congregational are
belief is a prisons should be
primarily institutions for
training for rehabilitation of
its and might a motion all bills
are affirmation of this is a
call to service to justice and
for restoration of our fellow
members of the public through
fact and also facilitate is to
sell individuals to promote
privatization for the purpose of
profit from these individuals is
a violation of these fundamental
beliefs.
We.
Do not so for.
So I'm let me try again for
sterling then.
Are not the but sterling are you
ready can you hear me this time.
Yes okay I don't really have
anything more to add to it
totally did what the previous
speaker said.
Thank you.
Hey it looks like we have people
speaking in favor of that's fine
we'll just continue with this
the next one is very I see.
E. L. V. N..
It's an email address you need
on it yourself introduce
yourself please.
Just waiting for you do it
yourself.
Well skip down to Gary may sell.
Is that your cell.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Gerry must still I'm the
director of bill prisons for the
New Mexico corrections
department.
And I respectfully oppose house
bill forty in its current form.
as written house bill forty
would prohibit our agency from
renewing existing contracts
private facility operators this
report result in the loss of
more than three thousand
currently existing budget.
As written house bill forty
would prohibit our agency from
leasing space from private
prison operators that own
buildings we occupy would also
prevent parties from entering
into contracts with private
operators constructing
facilities for public operations
as a secretary as mentioned
previously when it is safe and
reasonable to convert a private
facility into a public facility
we will as we did in Clayton in
two thousand nineteen but doing
so requires significant planning
staffing and alternately
significant fiscal resources
although R. populations can
currently at a historic low
seventy three percent capacity
even if every single public
better filled we would not have
enough public space to safely
house the number of people
currently incarcerated in state
system and at this time we're
not able to adequately project
future capacity needs on.
Fernando Trujillo.
Presented yourself.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's that of non
look who's your I will policy
associate with gold futures a
nonprofit for and by women and
people of color in New Mexico.
Hello New Mexico and then the
side of Albuquerque have seen
and felt the devastation of mass
incarceration in my own
community and my own family.
And it's inhumane to allow
corporations to profit off of
the backs of people suffering
this legislation would help and
the practice of making money off
of off of that SO three so we
stand in support of the B. forty
thank you.
Thank you.
Grace Phillips.
Madam chair my name's grace
Phillips.
Hello.
Go ahead thank you I thank you
counties are not proponents of
privatization in fact counties
have been leaders in reform
resulting in significant
reduction of detention
population the closure of ten
juvenile detention facilities in
recent years but we have today
one one county that has a
privately operated jail and
three counties with contracts
operation of prisons within
their borders those counties
would be very detrimentally
affected by the bill which would
require them to cut off those
contracts that we financial
consequences there will be a
constitutional impairment issue
I'm sorry that I couldn't follow
the amendment so if the
amendments have addressed this
I'll take that into
consideration but as the bill
was written that would really
rip the bandaid off in a way
that is untenable four counties
that currently have private
contractor contracts.
Thank you.
The toria Gomez.
Thank you representative
allowing me to speak my name is
Victoria I'm here in Albuquerque
and I support HB forty because
private prisons are harmful to
our communities they don't
create good jobs then they
continue to criminalize black
and brown communities
we're state that has not
provided the proper resources to
our communities in order to make
better choices at better
decisions for our lives.
And so I urge I urge the
committee to to pass this thank
you so much.
Thank you let's see what relief.
Are to me so madam.
Committee members money is our
mission remotely cover and I'm a
representative of yucca youth
United for climate crisis action
we're here to support H. before
the private detention facilities
moratorium act because private
prisons are yet another
extractive industries the
business of taking lives we want
to raise the name of rules are
not are not in this died in ice
custody under the management of
CoreCivic of the Sybilla
detention center this is not a
secret that we are seeing civil
human right abuses at a higher
rate from private prisons
alongside but inadequate
protections during a public
health crisis we see the prisons
are meant to be an opportunity
for rehabilitation and the
taking of accountability who are
not holding private prison
systems accountable they avoid
paying taxes and violate basic
human rights private prisons are
unsafe and unreasonable and must
be closed immediately justice
delayed is justice denied we
need to act now to protect our
communities and the rights so
today we ask you to vote in
defense of human rights involved
in support of HB forty thank you
for your time.
Thank you I'll try again for the
one where I just have an email
address and then if I don't get
any response this time in a move
you off the list to speak about
Dick B. I. C. P. LV and.
You need yourself and introduce
yourself hi I'm my name is Vicky
Pleven and I'm a member of New
Mexico been New York Jewish
action and we support this bill
for all the reasons others have
mentioned and because for profit
prisons deprive people of their
civil and human rights in order
to save money and that that is
in temple.
Thank you next Mike Wilson.
Please on yourself.
Madam chair I believe us spoke
first but okay.
Again it's all right thank you.
We just need to move your down
dynamic pass.
I'm good afternoon
representatives I'm invited for
profit prison companies to run
prisons in our state was not a
good idea in the first place
ethically creating a company to
make money from human
incarceration is at a point And
physically the prison benefits
to the state in communities has
been anemic at best with the
state of New Mexico must not
pass off our responsibility and
accountability for incarceration
to private corporations please
vote yes on H. B. forty eight
allow current contracts to run
their course thank you.
Thank you.
Is the bell Gabi.
Go ahead.
Yourself and say.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Mike a static IP I am from
chopper ride New Mexico.
We're not going to be some
facility managed by M. D. C.
opened its door the procession
of community west justified
sexual jokes.
It is true that the yes some
people from the community that
works that but my weekly the
sheets to the patient it is
clear that most of the plates of
the parking lot after section
just north of New Mexico so it
seems that the budget is for
Texas no first.
And both the president and the
persecution debt management in
DC many of the cleaning cooking
and the jokes I don't buy the
maids I'm forty eight I wish
Clark date get what I'm going to
I supposed to what and do she
would have to pay yet they're
strong hi your for cleaning
cooking expected the budget goes
to M. D. C. not to chapters.
Thank you also the.
Margaret brown.
Hi thank you and you may speak
yes can you hear me.
Yes we can okay thank you madam
chair committee members my name
is Dr Margaret brown fake that I
coordinated volunteer
organization called advocate
visitors with immigrants in
detention I ask you to pass H.
B. forty today privately run
facilities in New Mexico are
plagued by lack of transparency
and accountability much of the
work that or or organization
does constitutes a form of
independent community oversight
we've documented of leaky roofs
are left to linger for months
that cause people to fall
resulting in broken bones and
severe concussions at the Otero
county processing center we've
documented refusal of basic
medical care that has resulted
in widespread outbreaks and in
the worst case death these
companies are more volatile than
ever they will do anything to
cut their costs to remain in
business New Mexico's more
vulnerable than ever as a result
I ask you to support H. B. forty
today and ensure that we can
remove these cancers companies
from New Mexico.
Q. what I'm John mentions.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John Lipschutz
representing The New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO I we
represent tens of thousands of
workers across the state and
aside from the very this and
more pressing issue that has
been brought up our previously
regarding the moral issues
around private prisons which are
a farce you're more serious
concern all we also do have a
concern about how private
prisons are run and the our
person that I'd do run those
prisons and not being properly
trained like a lot of our public
employees that do run are public
prisons so for all the reasons
stated previously we very much
support this effort and very
much thank the sponsor for
operated out thank you.
Thank you.
I'm it'll Jordan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee of Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children I want to thank
Representative Rubio for taking
on this important issue in the
interest of time I'll be brief
and just say that we're
supporting the legislation
because private for profit
prisons have created a perverse
incentive to incarcerate more
people and keep them longer
that's led to extreme racial and
ethnic inequities in our
criminal justice system and we
would urge your support thank
you.
Thank you Michelle estimate.
Madam chair I am like Michael
I'm sorry.
I am the Otero county attorney I
come up to bearing or please
private prisons but to describe
the reality Otero County has
Otero County owns the two
facilities at chaparral you
heard about the prison facility
which houses state inmates and
processing center which houses
by prisoners.
On the prison facility Otero
county owes twenty two and a
half million dollars in bonds on
the processing center thirty six
million dollars in bonds if this
bill were to pass we would not
be able to renew our contract in
June of this year
the only source of revenue for
those bonds use these contracts
we also get about a million
dollars in rents for our general
fund a tear County is support
County ninety percent of the
land is not pay taxes because
it's owned by the federal
government or the state land
office this bill would be
devastating to our finances the
phones will not be paid off till
twenty twenty eight I ask you to
oppose the bill.
Thank you next I have Emma Kahn.
Thank you madam chair committee
members my name is an icon and
the detention services
coordinator at the New Mexico
area must enter over the last
several years I have seen first
hand the neglect and abuse of
those detained by private
contractors profit incentives
push corporations like CoreCivic
an MTC to cut corners and areas
of medical care food services
and social services to start
social service programming which
regularly subject incarcerated
people to unnecessary harm and
accountability is a huge issue
as well.
This past spring course of the
guards pepper sprayed asylum
seekers and estancias Torrance
County detention facility in
response to their peaceful
protests this much became clear
to me after that attack private
contractors punitive management
measures are not only morally
indefensible but they are in
fact the legal liability these
facilities are in our backyards
paid for paid for by our tax
dollars in a point our neighbors
and it's time to the actually
become accountable to our state
as the by demonstration takes
steps to eliminate private
prison contracts for federal
facilities the same is likely to
happen with ice facilities so
this really is our moment to get
ahead of the game thank you.
Madam chair you're on mute.
No wonder.
The dog was barking.
We colitis maxed.
Madam chair members of the house
Judiciary I represent the
national association for the
advancement of colored people
through its local branch in
Santa Fe we and double ACP
Reeves of preferred grants on
for profit private prisons is an
embarrassing and degrading sting
on our democracy and that the
maintenance and treatment of
those who the state assigns to
incarceration is the
responsibility of the state not
private entities and especially
not those driven by a profit
motive.
Numbers are currently in rapidly
in decline in our private
facilities and if not better not
bodies to be profitable
corporations have and will
cancel contracts with only
ninety days notice to the small
communities where they're
located leaving the community
and the state in crisis HB forty
provides for transition
beginning after four or five
years from now that is plenty of
time to organize the end of laci
P. strongly supports house bill
forty and ask for you to vote
yes on this bill.
Thank you I'm Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee regained the
Chavis on behalf of the New
Mexico from all defense lawyers
association we stand in strong
support of this measure we also
are a member of the New Mexico
state coalition and we did give
this
this H. B. forty eight B. plus
great I will make that report
card available to the sponsor
and members of this committee
thank you for your time and
support of this important
measure.
Next we're going to go to
current Reacher with the
Lutheran advocacy group.
Good afternoon madam chairman
and members of the committee
again this is Kurt record the
director of liberal advocacy Mr
New Mexico with their efficacy
also speaks on behalf The New
Mexico churches I too am here to
offer our strong support for H.
P. forty we believe that the
role of the state in the
operation of prisons should not
be supplanted by economic
players who are guided primarily
by profit so we urge the state
of New Mexico to reclaim its
responsibility for the lives
that are utterly and completely
dependent upon the state for
these reasons and the reason
stated by the experts in
previous speakers I urge your
support for H. P. forty and
thank you for this time to
speak.
Thank you next we have we get
that though.
Chair and members of the
committee thank you for the
chance to speak today my name is
Rick recommend I work at SMU
food etcetera and we strongly
support HB forty are working to
justice mandates that we support
policies that affect human
rights from public health to
civil rights to climate justice
and everything in between
president private Representative
contractors creating conditions
for the people who are in the
facilities and for the
communities around them we
Farman rolled in and the county
as do many of our partner
farmers and the president make
us all less safe and are and are
in the front to human rights the
resources and then the New
Mexico directs rates private
prisons for the profit of
individuals out of state should
be spent on life affirming
programs that increase community
well being not detract from it.
We should not depend on human
suffering for county budgets New
Mexico can do better we can for
a firm human dignity and liberty
we can invest in mental health
education and job training as to
order them for ecosystem
preservation going student
housing and H. before to help us
move instruction please vote in
support today thank you.
Thank you next we have marlin.
Madam I'm getting we're getting
a response here that says we
cannot allow you to talk because
you're using an older version of
the CEO.
let's see.
Well we're gonna go to the next
person and try to figure this
out but we'll come back to you
next we have a laundrette alone
to no I think I.
For the Santa Fe Senator members
of the committee and the number
of some of our favorite among us
on with us on a whole lot of
that wall Act member of the
central they one day that Bill
School in Boston on work and.
There are yes thank you but by
disappointed by seven eight
actually what.
Yes we are Senator thank thank
you.
Yes and what does it stand on
sentiment.
But a lot less about us what the
product is lost because of the
state but less.
Not
yet get the hospitals bus.
Yeah I'm not I'm not Ortiz yes
it was.
Yeah zoom I will but I.
But give us the federal side
of this.
Yes.
Muscle but I must see what.
Meaning
the case of bottled water is
that right but yet it is less
but compliance it was.
Yes also it was thank god second
largest school and just going
with it was cut off I don't mind
us.
You see.
Yes yes also.
Thank you just
last.
Thank you next we have thirty
nine with N. M. D. T..
Hello can you hear me.
Yes we can go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is but none of
on that and I am an organizer
with the New Mexico Dream Team I
don't want to be too much that
has already been said I'm just
going to recite the poems that
have already been made private
prisons are expensive private
prisons commit civil and human
rights abuses private prisons
are a public health threat New
Mexico now leads the nation in
the use of private prisons this
is really unacceptable thank
you.
Thank you next we're gonna try
marlin again.
Marlene are you with us.
Hi my name is Melina is that.
Perhaps you're just it's going
up as my screen is M. A. R.
Ellie and so yes it go ahead if
you're if you're allowed to talk
now you can please make your
comments okay right I'm good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee my name is Malina
Simard Halm and I'd like to
express my strong support for H.
B. forty I'm currently a lawsuit
and I just recently got my
master's in criminology were
conducted conducted research on
private prisons I'm here because
I believe that are from across
the system should not be a
business and that people who are
incarcerated should not be
treated like assets on a
corporate leisure private
prisons are rented with horrific
abuses and mistreatment my
research shows that these abuses
are not a coincidence they are
in transit to the model of the
private prison industry where
there are strong incentives to
increase incarceration by
lobbying for carceral policy
while also reducing the quality
of life to put this in
perspective Tom Beasley co
founder of CoreCivic which runs
several of our centers once
boasted that selling presents
was a little different from
selling cars or real estate or
hamburgers this reflects a lack
of respect for the status of
prisoners as human beings I'm
proud to be New Mexican but our
reliance on private prisons is
shameful and holds us back it's
not what we stand for thank you.
Next we're going to Latvia and
with that a central.
And Chasey and members of the
committee my name is that M.
I've been as a domestic worker
organizing what is sent by well
that might have been was the
tenant December thirteenth two
thousand seventeen and I'm here
to support it HB forty because
those intentions then and I
think you may they treat people
worse than animals that is how
my husband felt where he was the
department have the my husband
wasn't taking weight off the
family didn't ask for medical
support as a that was never
needed and now my entire family
depend on medication to help
with that trauma and even with
this trauma we like all the New
Mexico seven families in New
Mexico we continue to contribute
to our community economy with
our small business that we as a
family with help support in more
than eighty five families every
week to month in email go to
dissent and it is not that the
while many of us going to the to
roll our state this operational
come to to what we work for and
I'm making the money on the back
of our families.
Thank you we are getting a
message that the interpreters
are having a bit of trouble
keeping up because people are
speaking so quickly in an effort
to get under the one minute but
we do want to make sure we can
hear clearly what you're saying
so if we can just please have a
reminder to all of are
incredible New Mexicans calling
in that we do need to speak
slowly and clearly so that we
can keep up with the
interpretation services today
next we have
Carla Cruz.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee can you hear me.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Carla
creating Hafer enough behalf of
the centre for CENIC policy we
support HB forty I'm gonna
simple review of contracts with
private companies for detention
it is clear that these deals are
intended to be a state of New
Mexico enter for their
dependency on the industry
rather than create economic
development we see this bill as
an opportunity to transition our
communities to better industries
that invest in our communities
we heard previously during
testimony as that New Mexico has
already indicted into this
private prisons in must continue
to operate them in order to
fulfill the economic cost this
underpins the main issue this
industry has become more of a
out of state corporations
pockets and Justice Committee
the motivation for private
prisons are simple the more
people detained the more money
they get.
If we care about restoration
then we should get rid of the
for profit model private
companies should have no say or
interest in the justice system
and we commend the sponsor for
introducing this bill and
encouragement that legislators
today to vote in favor of this
bill and take this opportunity
to transition out of this model
thank you.
Next we have oriented with
Silas.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is will be able to silence from
the New Mexico Dream Team and
also part of the coalition
people over private prisons I am
also a member of the community
of Chapman and I have lived
there for most of my life.
As a community organizer I have
learned that the private prison
in the detention facility in
check but I would be able to
generate money from the private
companies and not for the well
being of the community that is
the reason why I now advocate
for my community but if the
service better other than the
county and state to keep
investing their tax money on
useful things the the private
extension industry.
The reality is a peeping Tom but
I have little to no idea of how
this industry is positive factor
affecting their development.
The truth is a topic that is a
major people of color many of
them with the immigrant
background so I definitely being
that most people would agree
with those with
the efforts of closing this
private prisons my community can
I wait a more years to pay the
bonds of being pushed away in
humane drops and suffering in
their business model for the
base future my community I hope
you can also support HB board
thank you.
Thank you next we have B. judge
please introduce yourself and
again.
The jet if you're still with us
and interested in making a
comment we do need you to
underuse yourself you are
currently allowed to talk.
Yes we can.
Committee my name is Richie may
need from a quality assurance
manager at northwest New Mexico
correctional center.
It is our job to provide pre
release preparation programming
and substance abuse treatment to
adult male inmates we are one of
the first in the country to both
create and roll out this week.
Our.
The company we.
Most public agencies do not.
We want people to be.
And that would not be further
from the truth we take pride
when these inmates do not come
back we go above and beyond to
ensure that their release would
my ID card social security card
or resume Medicaid other
resources to find a job this
week six inmates will graduate
with their GED and two with the
bachelor's degrees and twenty
nineteen twenty inmates complete
their GED and twenty twenty
eight inmates completed their
GED last year fifty two inmates
completed our intensive
outpatient drug program eighty
six inmates completed the
residential drug and alcohol
treatment program three hundred
and sixty inmates completed our
reentry program.
Even during the pandemic your
time has elapsed but thank you
for waiting in.
We're now going to Chris let
onion.
Thank you madam chair Gail
Chasey and Representative Rubio
for your support in banning
private prisons and H. B. forty
as a member of the U. of the New
Mexico association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
New Mexico works to have these
party we fully support.
HB forty in banning private
prisons although there are many
flaws in our penal system summer
very pronounced such is the
establishment of private prisons
for profit if we ever wish to
reduce recidivism recidivism
rates in our state here is a
prime opportunity this includes
banning private prisons reducing
racial disparities and
injustices.
And also are making changes to
the parole and probation our
system that we have here in our
state on that note I urge you to
support and passed H. B. forty
thank you so much for your time.
Next we have Paul Gibson.
Thank you madam chair committee
members and bill sponsor for
introducing this important
legislation my name is Paul
Gibson co founder retake Our
Democracy an all volunteer
organization with twenty five
hundred members statewide we
work with allies across the
state to identify bills we will
support each year this year we
identified twenty bills we call
transformational bills and H. B.
forty is one of those bills we
will hear from private prison
operators in lobbyist I've not
seen them but their testimony is
heavily influenced by their
thirst for profit private prison
operators are not required by
law to offer truthful testimony
in hearings like this they're
only legal requirement is to
seek the greatest possible
return on investment and that
thirst for profit means that
expenditures for and make
counseling health care nutrition
are always going to be kept to a
bare minimum resulting in
emancipating inmates poorly
prepared for the reentry in the
interest of racial social and
legal justice retake our
democracy ask that you give HB
forty it to pass it's time to
and then.
Next we hop near Recker.
Good afternoon my name is Neil
Rucker and I'm the policy
council and regional manager of
the ACLU of New Mexico in Los
crucis I am here representing
the ACLU of New Mexicos
organizational and membership
support of an end to private
prisons.
As a result of documented
widespread abuse and neglect we
filed lawsuits on behalf of
dozens of people detained in
private facilities we've
testified about the horrendous
conditions and committee
hearings at our state capitol
and we written letters to
government agencies expressing
grave concerns despite
widespread knowledge of human
rights violations that privately
run facilities New Mexico
continues a dangerous
partnerships with for profit
prison corporations even the
federal government is moving
away from for profit prisons in
late January president by then
issued an executive order
directing the Attorney General
not to renew department of
justice contracts with private
prison companies ending private
prisons will not fix all our
problems but it is a necessary
start towards ensuring better
oversight greater transparency.
Yes.
This is Representative Townsend
I think I think it would be
prudent if we reminded us making
up on that not to insinuates
that those that.
Did not agree with their point
of view for being untruthful and
all.
That is not in in line with the
form of the processes that we
set forth.
Thank you Representative
Townsend
We're going to go on next on the
list is Mike Wilson but I
believe we already had Mike
Wilson speak before.
My question are you a different
person otherwise could you take
your hand down please.
Oh I'm sorry I.
Well now yes thank you make
next we have Tim Davis please.
Thank you madam chair this is
Tim Davis with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty I
think we can all agree that the
states should not monetizing
cards iterations and provide an
incentive to put more people in
prison but that's exactly what
private prisons do it's a
business model that depends on
locking up more people to attain
greater profits so we urge the
committee please to pass this
bill and we just hope that the
state can stop investing in
profits for private prisons and
instead invest in the people of
New Mexico thank you.
Next we have models of on
windows.
When I started this good
afternoon madam chair committee
members my name is I'm a process
involving Los and I'm work with
the Santa Fe chambers project.
Specifically with our
transgender asylum seekers I had
the opportunity to work with the
transgender unit at the Cibola
detention center for two years I
witnessed first hand the
conditions of trans gender some
speakers were surviving the most
critical atrocity I witnessed
was a lack of care for mental
health and physical health care
CoreCivic did not find Spanish
speaking mental health
contractors CoreCivic did not
provide adequate health care
Santa silence seeker had
seventeen pool while she was
detained for two years another
asylum seeker had seizures and
was not given immediate
attention without advocacy and I
would like to respectfully
remind this body that
represented non this died in
ICE's custody really died in
court under CoreCivic's private
prison contract one death is too
many I witnessed a gross lack of
oversight of this president
private prison contract and with
that I ask you to vote in favor
of HB forty thank you next we
are going to advise though that
one.
You
You hear me yes we can go ahead.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is a lot of a
lot more evidence of our New
Mexico.
The president of these.
Damaging my town and on only
using money while doing so our
county one two million dollars
to open the facilities in my
town a terrible reputation that
is how to take away the
community settles the president
out misses don't want to do
business in those towns I see
that happening in each of the
last this much and madam chair
and members of the committee I
want my child to stop who's
incarceration facilities they're
not serving the community thank
you for.
Thank you next we have Carter
Bundy.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Carter Bundy with
us
prisons obviously heard a lot of
the people who are being
arrested on fairly CoreCivic was
responsible for Arizona's
horrific Senate bill ten seventy
which resulted in locking people
up just not caring the right
papers including citizens by the
way so that they could Bruce
there are profit margins one of
the other ways of these private
companies that are from out of
state and have very rich
executives and shareholders make
their money is by cutting pay of
correctional officers by making
sure they don't have great
health care and they have no
retirement speak up so if we
want to do right by New Mexicans
in New Mexican workers we will
and the private prison industry
in this state we will make the
ones where we still need
facilities to be public
facilities so that New Mexicans
do well and we stop sending our
money to these out of state
predators thank you.
Next we have Louise.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is provided up
I'm a second year law student at
UNM a member of the people over
private prisons coalition and a
member of the UNM Law School
border justice initiative.
I want to echo the this ethical
and moral concerns that have
been expressed with these
companies increasing the stock
price at the expense of our
state and our communities
additionally this bill combines
the appropriate provisions that
provide a reasonable transition
period of four counties that
house these facilities and it
can be used as a model for other
states as an undocumented
immigrant it terrifies me that
me or my family could be thrown
into the private detentions just
for the sake to increase
shareholders profit I ask you to
vote yes and thank you for your
time.
Next we have marked the Kumble.
Hello I'm gonna talk on behave
of our more lean.
more to comply from a lady I'm
you want me to speak in Spanish
so here I go when is that listen
you would obviously then say you
member does that give me that
number is marlin Martinez so it
member they'll let your for your
late it has to be what impact
just as I'm about to sing a lot
is there to be I to make what
into the set up of what I say
okay prone does say Senator you
guys discuss it is the same and
throws up in levels open at in
restaurants that'll can only
cook it because that is so
Fremantle indications yet is so
that the new also pronounces the
the fed into my made us
mentality Negin semikhah connect
comment this and I have it been
legal is that the also but a
simple LOC that then you those
northwest okay so send this
through LOC an opinion though
and that's yes of course that
election day in regards to the
latter that all that they need
to England and you look at those
satellite use of them yeah those
when we left because we what was
that if you see those I'm gonna
let them use our competence with
don't innocent that early enough
of teleported us with those
phones that is my most medicines
that are a cut those gone the
need that is to assume political
incentive but I lose that they
need.
spoken to the ethical and legal
issues around.
Trafficking essentially in in
humans to to to make profits and
and how that's been
institutionalized very much
certainly over the last four
years but for well over a decade
as these.
As these corporations have seat
have sought to increase their
profits at the expense of humans
who are who are incarcerated I
think it's incumbent on us as
New Mexicans and certainly as
legislators for you to to think
about how we help these local
communities diversify their
economic development
opportunities and private
prisons not be one of those
opportunities.
There are lots of other
opportunities green jobs solar
wind tourism that make a lot
more sense it will help
communities without trafficking
in humans thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Madam chair today and every day
House Judiciary next we have
marked on a tally thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee just because support
of HB forty having represented
people in New Mexico prisons and
jails since nineteen seventy six
as well as families whose loved
ones have died in custody I've
witnessed the disastrous effects
of prison and jail privatization
in addition to creating
dangerous conditions
privatization jeopardizes public
safety agency allocates criminal
justice resources.
I saw the introduction of
privatization in New Mexico
corrections department which
resulted in the loss of over one
half of the medical staff which
in turn prompted court
intervention to restore adequate
care then we witnessed the
nineteen ninety nine second
worst prison ride in New Mexico
history.
I think the transition can be
made just like Santa Fe County
can this is a public safety
issue of corrections use
community corrections and put
low level offenders in state
owned local security of
facilities we would reduce
recidivism and protect the
public thank you very much.
Next we have Barbara Schroeder.
The afternoon madam chair.
Committee members my name is
Barbara Schroeder I'm a member
of the Santa Fe face that work
for immigrant justice for all
the reasons that have been
outlined we stroll of already we
strongly.
Support H. B. forty choose to
give it a do pass I simply want
to add that I have been inside
the ice detention facility.
Run by CoreCivic in Cibola and
can.
Personally attest.
To the NMAA inhumane conditions
that others have spoken about
their.
We can do better in New Mexico
and we must thank you very much.
Thank you next we have August
teal Mullu.
Yes.
Yes we can.
Hi my name is August two model
of work for CoreCivic on
northwest New Mexico for
nineteen years.
My wife and my two children are
from the Pueblo go now.
And
I have worked here through as a
correctional officer I want to
say Academy and the now on the
training manager so I can tell
you that you know CoreCivic Inc
of the employment of these
programs for these inmates to
come out.
Come out as productive citizens
I have
This company you know instill
what they call pride
professionalism respect
integrity duty in excellence you
know and all that they do so
during the the people earlier
about.
You know the other president I
can't speak for them I can speak
for the president I work for for
nineteen years for the state of
New Mexico and on opposing this
on this movie.
Thank you.
Thank you for your comments next
we have Francis Gonzalez.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Frances Gonzalez and from
there New Mexico the CD to chair
from the land to progressive
caucus which covers all that
part of New Mexico where a lot
of the private prisons are I'm
retired from the department of
corrections and one of the
things I wanted to bring up that
nobody has discussed your is the
fact that a lot of the same
regulations are not have to be
followed in private prisons
including the safety and
security of the community the
staff and all the different
folks it's really important to
understand that the regulations
are so different and that they
don't have to adhere to them in
the system the one reason that
we should definitely support HB
forty so that private prisons
can and with all the money spent
we can actually go back to
building better state prisons
thank you.
Next we have Allegra love.
Hi.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
I'm and integration journey and
I've been representing
immigrants living in New Mexico
detained in New Mexico for over
a decade.
I actually work inside of these
private detention centers for
years and I
How do we suffering I honestly.
What wish any members of this
committee had to see it would
make you sick I've had help
people's hands banks their lives
to be released from these
places.
And what I don't even a minute
isn't enough to describe this
and every single one of those
people is a person who matters
to me and our state.
We have to find a way to create
jobs in New Mexico that don't
torture humans I know we're more
creative in New Mexico and we
have to do better thank you.
Next we have a friend see and I
am.
Right now let's.
And I and I six northwest New
Mexico correctional center in
grants New Mexico I am a program
coordinator and I oversee this
facilities reentry program we
are not your typical facility
and we are not what society sees
on TV and northwest New Mexico
correctional center we take
pride in our work and we have
values and principles that we
are guided by two core said it
in two thousand and sixteen
CoreCivic implemented that go
further reentry process this
reentry program is not in any
other state correctional
facility and as a person it's
kind if we only look at the
number of reentry program
completions the northwest New
Mexico was in the number one
position I'm on the state of New
Mexico New Mexico correctional
facilities and what number of
hours inmates put into their
class time for themselves the
northwest New Mexico is in the
number one position.
Focuses more on assisting our
population to help themselves we
have enhanced bait it evidence
based programs that allow our
residents to work on their
individual change processes I am
against this house bill forty.
With that madam chair it looks
like we're done with public
comment right thank you very
much you madam chair I
appreciate it let's go back to
the sponsor of the bill and we
can deal with your amendment
now.
Okay thank you madam chair do
you want us to just read it read
it out or I can have a that we
have it let me just remind
everybody how to
To.
So why don't you give us the two
oh two number again please.
sorry about that I did you have
the two oh two number sorry.
I'm not totally sure with the
total number is is that I'm.
I don't okay and madam chair
here's what I think it is.
Go ahead.
It's point two one nine five to
five point three right that's
what's in the Here file.
Okay.
So I'm.
Let's let's look at that.
Six one.
I don't think you need to read
every word but I think you
probably should go through
on page one line thirteen insert
the word private after with.
For.
Can you do that Representative.
For us.
You want me to go line by line
it would that be helpful.
I'm losing my it is thank you.
shoot.
I have a constituents in the.
The federal bureau of prisons
evaluation of a private press.
Down on my screen and I need to
get that off my screen right
now.
Thank you okay.
You madam chair would help this
is Christina Travis Kelly what
it help if I summarize the
amendments on the bill analysis.
I think that's a good idea yeah
okay and that way I could help
Representative Rubio and save
the committee some time.
Sure.
Thank you the amendments are in
paragraphs one eleven thirteen
twenty two twenty six twenty
seven and twenty eight and
insert the word private before
each reference to independent
contractor.
That this clarifies that private
independent contractors are
being prohibited from operating
jails prisons or detention
facilities.
On paragraphs three and six of
the amendment it inserts
language that clarifies existing
contracts with private
independent contractors are
allowed to run for the duration
of the contract but cannot be
expanded renewed or modified.
Paragraphs four point four and
thirteen insert the same type of
language and say that the
existing contracts are allowed
to run for the duration but
cannot be extended renewed or
modified.
Paragraph five strikes the word
owned to allow government
entities to engage in conduct
that may be needed to transition
away from privately operated
prisons.
Looting leasing and purchase
purchasing privately owned
detention facilities.
Paragraph nine is no longer
needed so it is deleted.
Paragraphs ten and twelve men's
language to clarify that a jail
administrator must be an
individual hired by the relevant
government entity and cannot be
a private entity or actor.
Paragraph seventeen eighteen
nineteen twenty and twenty four
I'm and oversight of the private
detention facilities inspection
reports from the department of
corrections to the wrist
Management Division the local
government division of DFA and
the office of the Attorney
General.
Paragraphs twenty three amends
contract agreement to create
consistency within the section.
Paragraph twenty nine inserts
and use subsection section
thirty three dash three dash
twenty seven.
To clarify that they agreements
reference are subject to the pro
hit basins created in the new
act.
And that basically summarizes
the amendments.
Okay I'll move the amendment for
discussion purposes and make a
second on that.
Representative night chair okay
thank you we've second
Representative Armstrong so
discussion of the amendment.
Representative night groups hand
up is not on the amendment
Representative.
Madam chair yes it is okay
Because I'm I'm familiar with
some of the private contracts
would it be possible for me to
as Michael Ashman that'll
Carroll County attorney a couple
questions that deal with
The amendment.
And it's a fact on an existing
contract.
If we can maybe
bring him up to a palace for
couple questions it would
certainly help we are understand
their contractors are not ready.
Is he still with us.
Michael if you if yes that's
fine Georgia can you remote into
panelists.
There is with us now
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for extending the courtesy
the so let me ask him a couple
questions because it does bear
on on the amendment because it
looks like the amendment is
trying to get away get around
what I identified as a potential
takings issue
so that the existing contracts
if I understand the member
correctly existing contracts
could continue for their
existing term and and the
question I have a Mr.
Are some of the Otero county
attorney is does the contract
between Otero County and it's
the tension of provider are have
terms that the.
Can be extended and our those
terms are at the sole option of
the private entity or at the
joint option of both the
governmental and the private
entity or only have the option
of the governmental entity.
Madam chair.
this is Michael actually.
The contract was originally
entered into in two thousand
eight for a five year term that
ran in twenty thirteen it also
provided for I two year renewal
terms beginning at that point
the current term it's the fourth
renewal term will expire in June
of this year it automatically
renews unless either party has
the option to give I believe
it's ninety days notice that
they want to discontinue the
contract if not notice is not
given it would renew so unless
in DC or the county
commissioners objected in the
next month or two it would renew
in June assuming this bill
didn't pass for one final term
to run out in twenty twenty
three you unfortunately the ball
and we were expecting in the
next two years to go out for bid
and seek a new operator to run
the facilities because as I said
the outstanding bonds will not
be paid off until twenty twenty
eight at the moment.
So madam chair and mistrust
among the the.
Their current contract that
you're under does provide for
automatic renewals which under
the terms of this amendment if I
read it right would not be
allowed.
And that you have a a fairly
significant.
Our commitment in terms of
bonding I believe it's
approaching sixty billion
dollars is that correct.
madam chair yes there is
currently approximately of fifty
eight million dollars in bonds
outstanding combined in the two
facilities we are expecting to
make a bomb payment on April
first of I believe.
Two million dollars three
million dollars but as it stands
right now it's a partially fifty
eight million dollars.
And so if if this are amendment.
Prohibits extensions.
Madam chair and mistrust among
what would be the source of the
revenue to pay off the bond if
it's for you cannot
interim to.
An extension of this agreement
or any future agreement with
with the same or another company
to house your detention of
inmates.
Madam chair representative
neighbor the sole source of
funding for these bonds is the
revenues coming in from the
contracts to operate the two
facilities
if we did not have that revenue
we would potentially have to
default these are not general
obligation bonds also we
couldn't be pursued but it would
be very bad for our credit
rating to borrow on our other
debt for other projects so we
and there's also the potential
for litigation I can refer you
to Missouri K. right now that's
being very aggressively pursued
by the bond trustee even though
they were simply revenue bonds
so there's nothing no other
source of revenue to pay these
funds.
So madam chair and instruction
then if if there's no money
coming in from the detention
center.
Rations then the county would
not be are generating a revenue
to pay the bonds you would be at
the fault of those bonds and may
not be any recourse are but
there would be some adverse
effects on the county if I heard
you correctly.
Madam chair representative
that's correct we we can't
proceed if there would be
litigation from the trustee or
individual bondholders as I said
I'm aware of cases where even
though revenue bonds were not
generally obligation bonds bond
trustees pursued the issuers
anyway so there's that affect in
addition we derive about a
million of one hundred thousand
in revenues ago indoor General
Fund from the operations
facilities that would be a
significant blow to our county
budget as I said earlier we have
a very limited tax base here
ninety percent of our land does
not pay property taxes and most
of the federal government's land
does not help money because it's
owned by the department of
defense so we have very limited
resources down here.
Madam chair and this questions
directed to the representative
I'm wondering.
I understand why you don't want
and then limited our ability to
extend these private contracts
you you you.
It appears that the incentives
to put an end to are these
private detention facilities I I
understand that but our it seems
that the amendment.
Does not allow for existing
contractual arrangements to be
fully are.
And here to and in the case of
Otero County.
The limitations in the amendment
would not allow Carroll County
to fully R. O..
Comply with its obligations
under its bond which runs to
twenty twenty day and I'm
wondering if there would be any
effort to our specifically deal
with the Otero county situation
number one and number two look
at the other private contracts
that currently exist and
determine what extension
provisions are contained there
and whether the private entity
has the ability to extend those
contracts are without approval
from the governmental entity so
that we are not faced with
contractual default litigation
over are over those issues and
still accomplish your the
results that I believe you're
trying to accomplish.
Thank you are there any yes
thank you thank you
representative I think part of
the discussion that we have had
in the past around that issue
has been
We haven't been given a clear I
guess answer in terms of what.
Those extensions would look like
I mean for me early on
the right unlimited renewals was
was a nonstarter but happy what
I mentioned to some legislators
who have concerns about this as
well as I could my conversations
with the secretary corrections
is
I think with our bill it
provides a three to five year
transition
up it allows for three to five
years for transition I've also
propose I also asked for
whether five years or up to ten
years would be ideal but it's
not been it's not been clear of
whether or not that's.
Enough time.
Madam chair representative
I believe there's an emergency
clause on this test
If this bill made its way
quickly through the house and
Senate and got signed into law.
It would potentially prohibit
Otero County from even having
the two year extension to twenty
twenty three
and we're expanding that address
the the bond issue and and I
think that there are.
You ought to be incumbent upon
us to know what the extension
provisions are and all of those
contracts and to try to work
around those because I do not
think that it would be good for
us to.
Enact a law that would simply be
the source of significant
litigation against the county
for breach of contract and and
so
you know having a provision that
says it shall not include
extensions tells me that even if
there's an extension provision
in the contract that this law
says you can't recognize that
extension renewal of
modification and that the
contractual relationship are
will be over at the conclusion
of the current existing term and
and so I have some some concerns
with that and and I think the
department of corrections I
didn't catch the name of the
person who are provided comment
but
Indicated that there's some need
for some transition time but in
the amendment
Why are you maybe address the
abrupt taking issue that I
spotted it does not
provide maybe for that the
transition but maybe the
department of corrections needs
and certainly are gives Otero
County at least in this one
instance the ability to deal
with its current contractual
obligations entered into with a
private.
Our facility and with
bondholders so are with that I
would I would hope that the the
amendment may need to be further
amended based upon the actual
contracts that exist around the
state
Madam chair representative do we
know how many
private are.
Contracts exist statewide are is
this a handful as several dozen
do we have any idea of how many
contracts are are involved.
Madam chair representative I
believe there are seven
total right now in the state of
New Mexico.
Some Madam chair representative.
Looking at seven contracts would
not be a tremendous burden
One on anyone to to just double
check those terms to see what
all is involved and then
crafting some language that
we're.
Allow our those contracts to
come to their.
Natural fruition and still
accomplish the results that I
believe you're trying to
accomplish here and I think that
would be time well spent Madam
chair representative are that's
the only questions I had with
respect to the amendment.
Representative.
I'm sorry.
If if Representative struggle
school could add a little bit
too that because I think he has
some.
Better explanations and an idea
on that.
Going
with this total school.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rubio and thank
you Representative never for
your questions we in fact have
reviewed the contracts
and so all the contracts well.
Most of the contracts I'll say
it again I can refer to them
specifically if you like me to
refer to the specifically
are actually entered into under
section thirty three dash three
dash twenty seven of the New
Mexico statutes which require
which actually establishes that
parties may extend those
contracts so our understanding
is that
are actually looking at the
Otero contract right now it
actually says that the agreement
may be renewed and so there are
options for both parties to
extend renew these contracts but
they're not requirements so we
don't actually believe that it
is any contractual breach to
actually prevent the extensions
because all parties are
given the opportunity to renew
it and they're not required to
renew so it's not a breach of
contract issue.
We get anyway so I I can print I
can find the contracts if you'd
like I will tell you that there
are three contracts right now
that run from twenty nineteen to
twenty twenty for their and
their initial five year period
so if you look at section thirty
three test three test twenty
seven the first initial period
is is five years thereafter they
can be renewed and one two or
three here increments
I will tell you that the Otero
county contract with MTC is a
little bit higher because.
If that extensions went up to
the point that the contract
actually asks for it would
actually go up to seventeen
years but statutory they're only
allowed to go up to fifteen
years total
I will tell you that you are
correct so that the next and and
discussion is correct at the
next renewal period ends in June
twenty third twenty twenty one
so that there is that issue but
there I I just want to bring up
that there isn't a preacher
contract issue simply because
all these contracts and to
provide for a possible extension
I will tell you that the
CoreCivic contract with the
Cibola county correctional
center it's term runs in
connection to the
intergovernmental service
agreement that has with
immigration customs enforcement
of the department of homeland
security as others have
mentioned the federal government
is moving away from private
detention facilities with
international context in
addition context so that one is
dependent on federal policy.
as well seven having as many
questions as well thank you so
so madam chair of Mr Roscoe the
the.
You look at all the contracts
and each extension provision
allows the county to decide
whether or not it wishes to or
the county or the whatever the
entity as to not agree to an
extension
the Otero county situation has
Google on top of that agreement
outside of that contract that I
think still cause us some
problems.
And and so are we we may want to
look at the Otero County
specifically there may be other
counties of have some unique
circumstances but I would
I would suggest that that.
We we.
Provided this amendment.
Sufficient
Language to deal with existing
contractual obligations and that
those bonds are paid off until
twenty twenty eight and Jarrell
county that we are
if we do this amendment we need
to allow Otero County to need
its bonding obligations and
allow them to extend those
contracts out to twenty twenty
eight you still get your your
endpoint but I think you're
desiring but you also don't put
this the people on Otero County
under some
potential
breaching obligations under
under existing bonds thank you
madam chair.
So let me just see if I
understood what you said
Representative I bet you think
some of the amendments meant to
cure the problem that you
identified that it that in your
view it's not completely.
Solving.
Well I I mean I'm I'm conjecture
in that the intent of the
representative is to not I'm in
the original bill.
This all my pages to take you
across the okay right I got for
and and so I was prepared to
discuss taking bookings
amendment takes out off the tape
and I think in the the effort to
to deal with that they've come
up with some language that says.
You can continue your current
obligation but we don't want
these extensions and Mr Roscoe
identified the maybe the
counties or other entities have
the ability not to expand so
they're not in breach of their
contractual obligation but at
least with respect Otero County
we have another contractual
relationship that is outside of
this is that still affects the
issue am I think that we ought
to we're gonna addresses I think
we need to to give Otero County
and there may be some other
unique situations elsewhere that
I'm not aware of that the Otero
county situation I think we need
to give them sufficient language
in the bill so that they can not
only meet their the tension
contract obligations but that
they can also meet their
repayment of the pond
obligations that the county has
entered into so thank you are
Carroll County to two thousand
twenty eight were to accomplish
that thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much and I have
several people on the amendment
next time Representative
Townsend Representative created
Representative about going.
Representative Townsend.
Yes ma'am my questions are on
the bill itself okay now come
back to that Representative
please.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative.
But when I first read the bill I
talked to the a correction
secretary I think the amendment
takes care of my concern I just
want to confirm that
in particular I I'm thinking
about the so the in my backyard
in Torrance County
it's privately owned it's
operated.
pursuant to a contract that
never fully understand between
CoreCivic the county and the
federal government
I would like to see that
facility.
Become a state facility so since
it since it's privately owned
though under your amendment
could if the parties were
willing and everything call the
place and there's a lot of
contingencies but could the
state lease that facility from
CoreCivic as long as the state
or a political subdivision of
the state was operating the
facility.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative the I the
answer simply would be yes I
mean I could provided let Mr
Orozco explain more details on
that but under this legislation
yes.
We have the.
Yes yes yes we did we were made
aware of that and we this
amendment does take out section
three believe it is the word
owned so that that is a
possibility.
Thank you Representative Rubio a
I appreciate that thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative about
going on the amendment.
Thank you madam chair yes on the
amendment.
So if.
Great to see the need to extend
the contract with one of these
private facilities.
Before was legislation takes
effect and extending contract
for a longer period of time and
they have right now.
Madam chair representative
I can have Mr all school help
with that question.
Madam chair representative you I
just to confirm the question is
whether if there was a need for
an extension of this bill would
allow the extension.
He was saying what if somebody
entered into a contract right
now before the law is in effect
if this were to go into effect.
So under section three that.
Did I get that right
Representative lock on yes.
But madam chair that's really
simple question what is the
department of corrections madam
chair and representative to
Rubio what is the department of
corrections season need to
extend one of these contracts
before this legislation takes
effect Jan.
If.
Rubio
it depends on where we're at
when the contract ends but they
can so the law right now allows
extension from one to two to
three years so I just say for
example one contract had been
extended by one year they could
theoretically under current law
extended by three years I will
tell you that
at least four if not five of the
contracts from I remember
correctly are in their initial
period so a few of them still
have for years and during that
initial period so they're not
allowed to extend them at this
moment and then there's one for
four years which is the Cibola
in civil County I would would
end in twenty twenty four so
really there only a few a
handful of the ones in Ontario
that can be extended at this
moment so not many actually this
doesn't really apply to many of
those.
Share madam chair and the
Representative Rubio a.
You're telling me.
That a contract amendment of the
consumer since you mentioned
Cibola which ends in twenty
twenty four.
This is the secretary of
corrections can not go ahead and
extend that contract tomorrow
for another three years.
Madam chair representative Rubio
the current contract is for a
four year term
it was extended from a previous
four year term at the.
Maybe they could extend that one
in the northwest New Mexico
correctional facility the other
obviously not contracted with
the department of corrections
secretary contracted with thanks
that one is runs in connection
to the contract with ice so
there's no extensions there is
just dependent on federal policy
so okay well we'll get back to I
cause and all of my questions
all about basically so can you
show me madam chair Hans Harry
can you show me where it says
that the contract cannot be
extended until a certain date.
Madam chair representative Rubio
I'm I can look at that contracts
specifically for you but if I
can refer you to section thirty
three test three test twenty
seven which allows for up to
five year initial care units and
it in the current version of
version of HB forty if you would
look at page twelve.
Subsection a.
That agreement indicates that
the the person that the initial
period shall be made for up to
five years and that any
extensions may be entered into.
And so.
So just basically madam chair in
the.
Mr Roscoe.
Thank you you're at my question
is basically the same.
If tomorrow's secretary of
corrections executive one
to extend the contract they can.
Before this legislation takes
effect and there is nothing in
this legislation that says
otherwise.
Thank you madam chair that's the
only question I had.
Simon mute do I have any other
members to all who have
questions about the amendment.
Right I will move the job.
And the amendment at this time.
Somebody want to second that.
Madam chair I'm getting their
second.
Thank you very much okay
appreciate it.
Let's take a vote on adopting
the amendment we don't seem to
have any more discussion on the
amendment.
Would you do there Raul help
please.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker.
Thank you have to step out for a
moment.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative.
Right now.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Lewis.
A second.
Yes.
Madam chair K..
Madam chair.
We have a.
Representative notice yes.
I'm I'd like to vote yes place
okay.
Thank you and I will also vote
yes this is on the amendment.
The amendment what is the roll
call vote on the amendment seven
yes for now.
Okay so that amendment is
adopted and for discussion on
the amended bill first I have
Representative Townsend.
Yes thank you madam chair
Representative I have a.
She questions I many charities
would be affected.
by this piece of legislation.
Madam chair representative did
you say counties yes ma'am.
I'm I don't have the exact
number and in do you happen to
know is it for.
Madam chair representative it is
is it's for total counties.
Okay Representative programs for
instance I can.
I can't I can't.
Always defer to our experts
thank you if if you can name
those counties that might be
helpful.
Thank you.
Can you go ahead madam chair
Madam chair representative yes
whether the county the county
Pateros County Cibola County and
Torrance County.
Just just to know that Cibola
County county in Torrance County
are the ones with the creation
of construction.
Thank you Sir
Madam chair and representative
and our in the the counties
supporting this piece of
legislation.
I'm Madam chair representative
and I think Representative
number just to I think he's he's
and the counties were of that
what I'll bet Lisa Boland for
and so it's a total of five we
have not heard from all of the
counties one that has
specifically spoke in against
this legislation was that roll
out we heard from them last week
during C. pack and then again
today.
And madam chair and
representative of but because of
the emergency clause that is
included in your video.
Have you looked at.
What their combined.
risk financial risk is
associated with your bill.
Madam chair representative I can
let Mr wrote all school answer
that just for clarification but
just to your previous question I
will say at a Torrance County
did
passed a resolution this morning
opposing this legislation.
Okay thanks for that.
Thank.
Other end could you answer that
question please.
Madam chair representative I
think it's about financial
impacts and the need and
probably would be a better
expert on that.
So in in turn this is a Nathan
in terms of of that.
There are only two facilities
are not owned by the contractors
and they're both in Otero county
and we heard today that it's
twenty two and a half million
for the president and thirty six
million for the ice facility in
terms of outstanding revenue
bonds.
So
Representative and madam chair
that's about fifty eight fifty
nine million dollars of
encouraged.
financial risks associated with
this it that laws passed was an
emergency clause.
In this session is that correct.
Madam chair representative
anything could you
where.
Well there's so I think the
answer is is yes right so those
that would be a facilities in a
chat or the ones where there's
an outstanding our revenue bond
the other facilities are all
owned by the contractors sure
thank you and I I agree.
madam chair and and
Representative
I heard today.
A number of comments by the
public.
Of the what thank you.
As a lack of equitable
performance by these private
facilities would you agree with
that.
Madam chair representative I I
mean I certainly think that
there are some challenges that
exist within these institutions
yes.
And.
Madam chair representative.
Do you believe that is the fault
of the contractor.
Or is that the fault of the
state or their oversight in
managing the facility.
Madam chair representative
I I certainly can defer to my
experts on this but what I will
say is that
I think.
I would say it's mostly the
latter
I I think that when contracts
are written up
Usually they're very specific in
terms of technical aspects but
when it comes to the communities
themselves that are being
incarcerated in these
institutions
I think it's it's really the
culture within the facility and
what that's created over not
necessarily just here in the
state in New Mexico but across
the country
the result of one not having not
really addressing our criminal
justice system overall
and then also not taking into
consideration some of the the
the
The systemic issues that exist
within
some of these institutions to
really address
issues like rehabilitation and
and and things like that.
Madam chair and representative I
I I agree with the it's a the
latter and my point is that we
are taking.
Facility that we have both
agreed.
has has not had.
At it but oversight.
Or supervision and we're taking
that facility and putting it in
the hands of those that we have
just agreed to have failed
reform and we think it's going
to be better off and I think
that's a real problem with me
I remember madam chair and
records and to.
Senator.
Four years ago I guess when I
was on probation.
Of a dispute in L. FC may be an
appropriations where the state
had miserably failed miserably
failed to provide those New
Mexicans working at these
facilities.
Hey increases.
And it was totally out the fault
of the state because the
contract.
with that provider said yes
funds were available.
And the position of the
administration laws that's an
easy out I'll just say the funds
aren't available so the state
again.
Knowingly.
Prevented that contractor from
increasing the wages to those in
M. employs those New Mexicans
which probably.
systemically.
Cost some of the problems that
are troubling you and I both
today on on president New
Mexico.
Madam chair and representative.
Do you
how many of these facility how
many employees are employed by
these contract facilities.
In.
Madam chair representative I can
lead Mr crag see if you can
answer that but to address your
previous question really quickly
are your comments is that I I
think do we you and I both agree
I think what's what's happening
within our private institutions
is that there are no there is no
oversight and what we did was we
brought in private prisons into
the state to handle an already
problematic system way back in
the eighties because we thought
that the president private
prison system was going to
actually fix everything but
instead what it did is it
resulted in even greater
problems within our system which
and and unfortunately with our
private institution with the
private institutions there's
very little accountability a lot
very little oversight and and
and that is one of the the
things that
I certainly find problematic in
terms of as a state legislature
and as an administration we can
do very little to do to address
some of those issues on a
private institution whereas we
have much greater responsibility
say over the the department of
corrections and and the
facilities that it oversees
there but in terms of how many
people is are employed by these
institutions Representative
Nathan not sure if if you have
that that data madam chair
that's that's actually quite
difficult information to obtain
and part of it is because the
private contractors are not very
forthcoming with disclosing
information we understand there
are about two hundred jobs
Senator but we also know that
the majority of those jobs are
actually going to employees in
el Paso.
In terms of concerns about the
facility I think lack of
performance maybe one madam but
it certainly is not the entire
picture I think it's it's deeply
concerning to have a situation
in which there entities that are
make money off this this solemn
issue of depriving an individual
of their liberty.
That serve the server with
respect to that.
And madam chair I think we have
to be very honest with that
because if you look at this
date.
Pharmaceutical process.
They do it to the lowest
provider.
If you look at counties in their
in their
provisions of many services many
services from.
From the.
Medical facilities for inmates
to building a road.
They all ways bit those projects
out that is that process that
has been used for years my point
to you Sir and Representative Ms
madam chair is the failure.
Lies was not.
Demanding performance and within
a contract not to the contractor
so what we're doing is we're
saying that those people that
were responsible for a contract.
And for the performance of that
we are taking the eighty eight.
Job away from a.
Eight entity.
That has proven capacity and
we're going to move it to the
facility the state we have just
agreed has failed to perform and
outline the performance of a
contract.
And that to me just tells me.
That we're.
You know I I understand that
we're trying to address an issue
I get that but the problem lies
that the state the corrections
department failed.
To instead.
Performance.
Measures within the contract to
prevent the issues that the
representative in your concern
about so that's my issue with
what we're trying to do
Representative I think the
numbers that I have is about a
hundred and fifty one in four
acts about two hundred.
And Otero.
I think it's about the same and
so about I'm sure Representative
Akan can can correct that and
Lee is not much different so
round numbers I think we're
talking about.
A thousand give or take New
Mexicans that
That their jobs would be
eliminated I I yes contract and
that's that's pretty troubling
I have a
I understand what you're trying
to do and I am not I am not
opposed.
All.
Treatment.
Transpires within the penal
system whether they are house in
a private facility or a state
facility.
I think that falls within law.
That.
When I look at.
A fifty eight million dollar yet
to Otero County.
I also remember during madam
chair and representative back in
my appropriations dates I think
that was about a fifty one or
fifty seven dollar per day per
inmate difference in the cost
most of that was but because of
overhead not because of hourly
wage paid to the.
A person working in the
facility.
What we should.
Yes yes it is in your in your.
Thank you.
That's correct the problem not
make it worse and I'm afraid
that just taking a contract.
That has the M..
Maybe not properly managed maybe
wasn't properly written in the
beginning.
And give it to people.
You may have been responsible
for that.
Make.
The state.
Yes yes yes point after make the
problem that that you have and
and.
It's gonna make it worse the
other thing that I heard over
and over madam chair and
representative us yes there have
been a number of lawsuits in the
private prisons for a number of
things is that correct.
Madam chair representative yes
and have there been lawsuits in
the state prisons as well.
I'm Madam chair representative I
wouldn't be able to tell you
that off the top of my head
I we can certainly look into
that.
And madam chair and
representative do you know have
there been claims to state or
private prisons and what the
total of those two is so we
could try to ascertain that may
be the one was.
more riskier to the states and
the other do we know that.
Representative Townsend
Representative.
Representative Townsend
Representative refused to say
didn't know about the state one
so she can't compare them for
you.
Well madam chair and
representative I think that
would be critical for me to
know.
I want to know in order to make
a decision I think
I think there's just a lot that
we just don't know but
madam chair I.
I am not I am not at all are
you.
As I said Representative about
the share.
I think this one is very green
we don't know of many of the
risks associated to the county
to the counties for the state as
a whole and so I can't support
it but I have one last question
this the title of this bill is a
much more toria is that for a
specific period of time or is it
really
not a moratorium but
eliminating any potential for
these services and private
detention facilities point four.
Madam chair representative I'm
it's a moratorium in the sense
that we believe that based on
how all the current contracts
have been established which is
what Representative what about
the stroke also mentioned
earlier with Representative
night work is that we believe
it'll take between it'll be
between three to five year
transition
the current contracts to expire
and not be renewed and then this
bill also provides for no new
contracts so we believe that
there's three to five years that
we have to be able to manage a
transition and and to support of
communities on the ground to to
make that that that process
happen.
Okay.
Madam chair I appreciate it
Representative I just I think
you I see the implications need
to be cleaned up
and
it's not something that is
impossible to do but would be a
lot of work I can be I think
this bill needs real clean up
just to services not to provide
some thank you very much.
Thank you next I have
Representative Cook.
If you're on mute.
Hi.
Better.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative thank you for
bringing this I know one of the
counties that I represent is on
that list to five counties
mentioned earlier the other
county is also interested just
in in general terms so I don't
have any questions I think I I
get it and I appreciate all the
comments on both sides of the
issue I do have a an amendment
I'd like to propose
madam chair.
And I got it to the to the.
To the committee in time I
believe to get into the file
share and the number six one six
point one Madam chair
representative have you seen
that movie.
Madam chair representative cook
yes I have seen the amendment.
Okay are you do you consider
that a friendly amendment.
I'm Madam chair representative
I I do I think one of the things
that
we have been working on for the
last few years especially when
it comes to this legislation is
to commit to legislators
specifically about how we could
be supportive with communities
who would be impacted from an
economic standpoint I I'm I'm
I'm I'd be interested to hear
what other legislators on the
committee have to say about it
but I I will say that as soon as
when I did read it yesterday I I
was intrigued to so I I do think
that it would be it would be
considered a friendly amendment.
Thank you madam chair and
representative in.
That is about three pages long
and.
It Mike my the purpose for
bringing it was to to be able to
consider that the communities
that will be affected by the
spill as well as the individual
employees and their families so
madam chair
I didn't can I move the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
Yes you certainly then I'll
seconded.
Your amendment Representative
Kerr okay so the first part just
removes the penalty section from
the the title and then it
includes or it adds creating the
detention facility economic
development assistance fund and
the detention facility displace
workers system Fund.
And then it adds a new section
that would create a detention
facility economic development
assistance fund.
And the detention facility
displace workers systems fund
and the community advisory
board.
And and the purpose of that is
just to study the effects to the
communities as well as the
employees and and the that their
families
should this bill go forward.
So madam chair if that's
sufficient.
Description of the mimic.
I'm for those members who are
accessing their share file I
think what you might want to do
is talk about that you have the
displace workers and you have
the
It's a fund for the community
and the displace workers.
Yeah but that the fund would.
Right.
In the funds for community
advisory committee that all that
that needs and and works with
the communities that are
affected to.
To to figure out how they can
Offset the economic impact and
and.
Look for other ways for economic
development in those
communities.
And you would have the workforce
solutions are.
Hello working with the community
that's correct sure.
The workforce solutions
from initial development
displaced worker development
plan to assistance place workers
in affected community that
she'll find for disbursement of
money in the detention facility
displace workers assistance
fund.
Madam chair on that point of
course.
Madam chair representative so
I'm looking at the amendment but
I'm trying to figure out so it's
just a detention facility
displace workers assistance fund
shall consist of appropriations
guest grants donations and
bequests made to the fund I
guess I'm trying to figure out
where is the money coming from
and how much is.
Yeah I noticed that in in
another bill I think the chairs
deal on the the violence
prevention bill had that same
language and I don't remember
seeing that in past years
myself.
We we have a ten million dollars
appropriation with that bill
let.
It do you remember madam chair I
believe it it did include that
language so this well
appropriations gets requests.
I do think there was the fund
language but we did have an
appropriation right and this one
does not have an at dollar
amount appropriated this
amendment like like that built
it so.
I guess the answer Madam chair
representative is I don't know
where the money comes from
except that it comes from
describes the nation's and
quests okay thank you madam
chair thank you representative.
Next I have Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair sent cook I
appreciate your budget yes for
your movie
I think.
It if this bill is for you know
what we're gonna do for these
communities is of great
importance
it might only.
Issue with your amendment is
geographical.
And that's the definition of
affected community.
So the affected community means
that County.
Which I suppose is okay.
Within a hundred miles of the
facility.
If you look at the facility in
estancia in Torrance County.
miles of that facility is at
least seven counties.
And depending on how you measure
it could be ten or eleven
depending on whether it's driven
miles or it as the crow flies.
And that would include Santa Fe
County early account.
In I I really appreciate what
you're what you're trying to do
for the communities that would
be impacted but I think we need
to focus a little tighter on
those communities.
and not have quite that radius.
I think that's a very good point
Madam chair representative I'm
not I'm not sure how.
To deal with that here on the.
That would be open to the chairs
suggestions.
We just want.
I.
Madam chair and mileage it might
be more of a description of who
works there.
Because that's what you're after
right right Representative Cook
Representative Gleim.
Well madam chair I think we're
also.
In addition to being weird about
the individuals who work there
but the community as a whole.
Mentors in we've we've heard
some testimony about.
Commuting.
To these jobs.
but you know I I think that that
may be true but I I do think
we're trying to.
focus on the peonies it would be
great if people do have a
hundred mile commute I suppose
it's possible I I you know
without having done any research
I would suggest we cut down a
hundred miles to fifty miles.
you know that's maybe an hour
commute.
You know even that might be too
big because over I do think what
we're trying to do is is help
the community.
I think the definition of
workers can cover those workers
regardless of where they live.
And I'm fine with that.
but I really you know.
We are concerned about the tax
base.
In these communities that have
these private facilities.
Madam chair.
How about just saying affected
community means the county in
which a New Mexico privately
operated to tension facility
that closes.
And not talk about mileage at
all just leave that out without
those words correct.
Would that be a good idea for
you I I I think that's a fair
idea.
That suggestion Representative
Akan.
Madam chair in my in my youth my
thing is that no matter what we
do it just seems to me like we
the state are not doing anything
we're looking for donations from
somebody else to take care of
the state.
Wait a on this one the.
First eight.
Okay.
I thought you turn your light on
because you're on that point so
I'll come back to your next.
Okay I'm.
Representative Kirkland
Representative queen.
If you just removed that
language after closes the COVID.
Just make sure that
Start the rest of the that costs
resulting in no way.
Mexico.
And then strike located within
one hundred earlier.
Stricter located within one
hundred miles.
I think you have to read why
don't you work on the language
for that
This Kelly and then we can come
back to that we can fix it.
Thank you community means a
county New Mexico.
With a privately operated
tensions facility that closes.
It and madam chair if I may.
Your.
I I'm familiar with one of these
facilities are not familiar with
the others I didn't know if any
were you know just crossed
county lines you know something
like that
but but in in in my case and my
County of the county is really
the appropriate
geographic reference for this
assistance Madam chair how about
affected community means a New
Mexico County in which a
privately operated detention
facility that closes resulting
in at least forty displaced
workers so in front of County
you would insert the words New
Mexico.
After N. you would answer which
a and then you would delete the
words New Mexico located within
one hundred miles of a New
Mexico.
Is that how Representative Cook
yes ma'am I'm sure.
And Representative Quinn are you
finished and.
Yes ma'am okay thank you so much
okay on that particular point
Representative number.
Yes ma'am okay I'm just
concerned about the number of
individuals employed because I
want to counties I represent
has a facility we can County I
don't know what the employment
is that there are a detention
center but it's likely to be on
the lower end and yet.
A few jobs in Carrizozo New
Mexico has a drastic impact on
the economy and so forty.
Forty may not be the correct
number I don't know why we would
Limit that because in a in
Lincoln County and I think it's
one of the challenges of the the
they're not putting in their
list but that county detention
center is run by a private.
Operation with a contract from
the county commissioners and
it's employment.
I don't know what it is but I it
may not rise to forty but.
Even if it's ten jobs and in
carousel so that's a significant
portion of its employment base.
Sh.
Representative could respond
Representative number.
Representative and I represent
the same county so I'm I agree
with them and the way I
understood the change that we
made did that.
Language resulting in at least
forty displace workers get
stricken.
Now no say in their I'd like to
change it if the if the.
That's the committees will if
not then that is what is.
It was the only thing that it's
still a hundred miles but it
doesn't have the hundred miles
but it has a forty workers right
right.
Madam chair on that we make it
might we make it an and so I'm
gonna give my example of being
farther home in southern New
Mexico where my County than Ana
County borders it'll County so
might it might be addressed
something that offered either
you were the county that house
the facility like with that
a county or a neighboring county
that had a job loss of more than
twenty employees or something
like that like always include
the home County and included the
adjacent counties out of base
level of jobs lost potentially.
To make sure we're holding safe
the very smaller facilities
likely operated by the counties
in a in a jail setting.
Just maybe just.
Representative Cook.
Actually it was Representative
who raised the issue one eight
Representative I will go ahead
and.
Thank you madam chair
I I think of.
In Lincoln County situation I I
got a text from the county
manager and if we can drop that
down to maybe twenty employees I
think that we're would capture
us in Lincoln County but that
forty I think it is on the high
side particularly
like I said there's also New
Mexico doesn't have very many
people to begin with and forty
jobs.
Or even twenty jobs is is a
substantial portion of its
employment.
So I would I would just
Representative maybe consider
dropping that the number of to
to to a number that will capture
the Lincoln County facilities.
And I would ask the committee
to.
Agree with that as well.
So where are we can we have
language proposed or not did or
did Representative.
Stop with the vice chair
suggested.
I would change the number forty
which is what I believe I heard
and I would change that two
twenty.
Employees yes ma'am.
Twenty displaced workers.
That's a substantial number.
So Representative.
Absolutely okay and we're doing
it here on the fly you.
Something to work off that.
To capture madam chair
Representative convenience.
Concern I don't know if she
still has a different change the
twenty but.
Maybe to do in order to include
hers we would strictly come
after closes and put something
along the lines of.
And the order in which county
such closing results in at least
twenty displace workers.
And I'll let miss Kelly.
Check the grammar on that.
I think that would be okay but
what do you think vice chair.
And madam chair representative
cook up that sounds reasonable
to me if that makes sense again
we're doing a bit of this on the
fly I'm most familiar with the
corrections facilities in the
state system and understand the
the scope of staffing
infrastructure there but yes my
intention would be to make sure
that we're considering the
displaced workers in the county
where the facility exist no
matter what and also
understanding that in so many
rural communities where folks
are driving in we also have this
provision that if there were
more than twenty displace
workers like madam chair said is
is it is a significant amount
they would also be considered
and whatever kind of relief came
from this fund.
So I I think that's appropriate
madam chair representative.
So
Let me just say that I'm getting
the word the sponsor and I have
been
I'm sorry my dogs barking.
For
more.
So I'm the what I'm.
This is also going to be the
appropriations committee is
going to be added to review this
spell the sponsor and I are
having a conversation about that
this was you know.
Our results currently on the
fiscal analysis and partly of
Representative ****
Addition which made a lot of
sense and that it will probably
go to appropriations so we can
get it as right as we want but
we can also hi.
Just.
Further as the bill progresses
so just to let you know that.
Representative Rubio that I made
that statement for you.
Sure that's fine Madam okay Sir.
Representative chairs Madam
chair of this is some language
and I'd like Jody to pipe bands
that's affected community means
a New Mexico County in which a
privately operated detention
facility that closes for a
neighboring county which results
in at least twenty displaced
workers.
What's going.
I mean I think that's what I'm
hearing.
Madam chair would you ever read
that again because of the
twenties tied to.
The adjacent county that's not
what we're trying to do with the
twenty.
True.
Thank you just.
Disinterested if I could just
hear the language again make
sure.
Appreciated.
It's true Representative my part
I I am at so the language that
I'd written was affected
community means.
A New Mexico County in which a
privately operated detention
facility that closes.
Resulting in at least twenty
displaced workers.
Or a County.
the privately operated detention
facility.
We're gonna need a bill
drafters.
Yeah I think what we can do is
get that.
Get the
Where we understand it and then
probably have the council
service perfect it for us as
long as we all know what we need
and Christian account I can talk
to them afterwards.
And then if it's not right we
can fix it before procreation.
Chair.
Yes you can fix all the miles
and everything madam chair and
everything but I want
Representative Cook constrained
to me how this amendment is
going to take care of the
displaced employees
were done about the county I
want to know what they're going
to do about that employee's job.
I was going to help the
employee.
Madam chair representative I
don't.
Know how to help.
The employees that are going to
be affected by the closures.
So.
One of this amendment is to.
Develop a committee or a.
What's it called.
By three committee to help.
Help people figure out what
they're gonna do after they lose
their job I don't know how to do
that.
If you use your
disproportionally here in the in
requests okay
two thousand twenty.
Salaries for the.
For the president on northwest
New Mexico.
Was forty seven million dollars.
So we should New Mexico.
Cibola County.
The people that much money we
have lost just one minute alone.
And if you wanted to hear the
county okay they're going to
four hundred fifty one thousand
dollars in taxes.
Care about what I'm worried
about is these seven point seven
million dollars in salaries that
are going to walk out the door
and I'm going to have a lot more
people without a job so how is
it going to help.
Well it's going to help the
people that are losing their
jobs.
Ali.
What the hell to people.
Madam chair I believe already
answered the question I'm I
wouldn't be so brazen as to say
learn to code I just don't know
how to help people that are that
are going to be affected by
this.
Thank you madam chair and
representative going to making
is trying to help the county.
I'm trying to help the county in
the individual employees I don't
know how to take every
individual employee and help in
getting a job that's why this
man is here to develop.
Assistance that help that they
will need.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair and I don't know if
I can't can't if I can address
why I thought this was a
friendly amendment in the first
place and.
Was it was maybe to answer
Representative cones comments
and concerns is that.
For me this mechanism that
Representative Cook has proposed
has been you will has been used
in other pieces of legislation
that we as a legislature have
passed and I think part of the
council that is within this this
this mechanism that we're
thinking about is to provide
added and and added supports to
help the communities that are
directly impacted to figure out
next steps because.
I mean I'm gonna be absolutely
Frank in that whether it's house
bill forty or not private
prisons are going to leave New
Mexico I mean right now they
have a ninety they can they can
they can leave within ninety
days even without house bill
forty and so I think it's up to
us and and and the legislature
to have to to have some
responsibility in terms of how
we support these communities
through this transition if and
when it occurs this is why I
felt that this amendment was a
friendly one because it at least
allows us not only the time
within the bill which is the
three to five years that we
believe a lot of these contracts
will well in but also provide an
added mechanism.
To to help communities figure
out what happened and and this
is why the department workforce
solutions is included is that
and and I know them the money
situation and all that is is is
a piece of that conversation
that you're that you're
describing and we're we're gonna
get it I think
it's it's our responsibility to
figure out how to support these
communities who who become
heavily reliant on these
institutions to try to
I guess lessen the blow if and
when these prisons leave these
communities.
Could you have
Representative general I didn't
realize that okay.
Responding to something I did
not ask.
I was trying to elaborate on
Representative **** response.
I'm Representative Nibert do you
have your hand up again I I'm
sorry I've lost track I know
what was up for the amendment
did you wish to speak again on
the bill are you.
I want to speak on the bill not
on the amendment okay sure that
my concerns perfect all righty
India.
Okay are there are there for the
questions on the amendment.
Okay I'm.
You tell me where we are
if we have a motion to adopt the
amendment yet.
Discussion is been long enough
that I've last.
We do too adopted we're
discussing.
Yes you have a motion made by
Representative Cook and seconded
by the chair okay discussion I
thought do we are you a motion
to adopt let's just do that make
sure they want.
Representative could you make
the motion.
I'm move to adopt the amendment
and I'll second that.
Let's call the roll please.
Welcome.
Thanks.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Mr.
Representative you are yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative maverick.
Yes that includes the financing
of the language that Miss Vigil
is going to come up with.
Representative rain yes.
Representative Townsend.
Representative all court.
Before I will.
We will need an amendment that
we are not completely complete
on.
I'm actually Representative
local we have the words what
we're thinking that the council
service might change them around
to perfect our intent.
Thank you madam chair you're
asking me to vote on something
that is probably not good
business it is or could not
happen as it is.
The way I would describe it is
that we.
Trying.
No I will not I just can't do
this.
Well.
Madam chair this is Brian Egolf.
I was needed when we went thank
you yes.
Okay.
Yes.
And madam chair.
Yes to.
So for the amendment we have a
vote of ten to to.
Okay.
Right and I think I believe
that.
The only thing.
That's up in the air is whether
we have the exact I is dotted
tease crossed and this county
will deal with the council
service to make sure we get that
right okay so we have a second
amendment on the house bill
forty and back to discussion on
the amended bill I have
Representative all court.
Yes before me earlier this
Representative thousand fell
asleep anyway up so.
Madam chair and and course.
The real are you aware of the
and decreasing the Dustin.
Corrections still falls under.
madam chair representative I
believe I have heard about it
but I wouldn't be able to to
explain it in detail.
Any of your Madam chair
and Representative Rubio of
maybe our expert witnesses
where's your and the committee.
Madam chair representative I I I
mean I'm happy to ask mistral
school if if he does or not I
don't know if there's a question
that you want to ask about it
no they're aware of it does
which is there are one of the
land a hundred dollars already
I'm sorry madam chair.
Jim Trujillo.
Then if you want to answer them.
Or not.
Madam chair representative Rubio
I am aware of it I'm I don't
have in front of me if you want
to get into details but I also
want to procrastinate in case he
knows specific details as all.
Madam chair yes I'm aware of the
Duran decree and and just want
to mention that LSE's
projections in terms of the
eighty six percent of the budget
that will be needed by fiscal
year twenty four take into an
account adjustments in the
prison capacity based on based
on the Duran decree.
Madam chair and representative
Rubio and.
Mr Craig so you're basing your
your assumption.
On the fact that you're thinking
that a lot less people are going
to end up in prison in future
and therefore we won't need
these bids that is or at at this
time right.
Madam chair representative if
the legislature's courageous
enough to pass some strong
criminal justice reforms are
absolutely.
The
only thing that is that okay.
One of the questions madam chair
and I Roadrunner the Rubio I
hear over and over again about
how.
The challenges in the private
prisons are towards thank you
and the prisoners.
Can you explain to me.
How.
Can you compare the challenges
in the state run institution
versus a private institution can
you tell me that that state run
institution.
Is a better place to keep one of
the inmates than a private
institution and if so can you
tell me how and why.
Madam chair representative as I
mentioned as we mentioned
earlier with Representative
minority leader Townsend who
asked similar questions it's
really challenging to be able to
provide exact details and
comparisons between the state
and private I'm happy to
so let Representative Mr crank
share a little bit about that
but that's certainly something
that that we have information
about as as much as we can
anyway in terms of what the
private industry has been able
to find.
Madam chair with your
permission.
I I would like to Mr corrected.
I'm sorry briefly but we had
testimony on that Representative
Auckland it's not just the
experts here we had a lot of
public comment on that
particular issue.
I just don't want.
Representative hold on a minute
I just don't want Mister Craig
to give you a thirty minute
answer.
Mr one minute.
Thank you madam chair so the
department of justice has found
that there are largely because
of of lower staffing levels
which is also the case compared
to public facilities and in the
state of New Mexico there are
higher rates of assault higher
rates of contraband weapons that
are present in the facilities so
they they are in fact not just
say for staff nor for the
incarcerated population that's
one of several factors at play.
Thank you thank you madam.
Madam chair and because you
remember madam chair and well we
said that I spent two years in
prison.
And there's no way I want to go
back to.
presenting in the.
Well you.
In the prison that I worked in
we had a president that was
built for approximately seven
hundred inmates.
And we were holding from twelve
to thirteen hundred.
Inmates in the prison at that
time.
Not only that.
Yes specially during the Friday
and Saturday night where there
was.
Two twelve officers supervising
twelve to thirteen hundred
inmates.
Know what I'm looking at here as
I am the issues.
The fact that we are going to
have to move if we knew this
we're gonna have to move this
image that we have that are
illustrated some of these into a
state old facility.
I honestly and I can almost
almost with the.
Choose an I mean we don't pay
our we don't pay our state
employees are state correctional
officers are not being that
great.
We do not do that we have the
money really into car accidents
even in the thirteen years that
I've been here.
So we're going to do we're gonna
shut down these Christians we're
going to thank all of them into
a state run facilities but we
don't have any room for.
And the we have we is the
senator and the priest.
And
We are going to create another
hazard animation job a lot
rougher was a grace and people
that are first right now we're
building for us the people in
New Mexico how do you respond to
that.
Madam chair representative I
think for I think what's
important is that one I as I
mentioned with up my questioning
around Representative minority
leader Townsend is that I don't
I agree that there are issues on
both ends like there's no doubt
about it but there are there are
there are.
Opportunities the private
facilities could be re purposed
they there's there's there's
ways that we can think around a
lot of these these issues and
I I just I I don't think that we
find ourselves with enough
opportunity to be able to think
beyond and and that's what this
bill does it allows us to look
at what a transition plan could
look like for many of these not
only just the communities but
the department of corrections
which is
which I believe should also be
involved in in in making sure
that we.
Not only prioritize this issue
but make sure that that we do it
right.
Thank you.
Chair at the end of the third
you instead of federal does
thirteen the residents in the
twelve years plus a few months
that'll started as a legislator.
Reform in corrections and
everything else.
And I can almost guarantee you
that we still and zero.
So.
So what would be easier.
We would start working on the
way.
To make sure that we had rules
for these prisoners that we paid
our correctional officers.
And that we the.
Yes madam chair I don't care
what we knew the signs that
order setting that person to
that person that person belongs
to us.
In the long executive and the
legislative branch of this
government the minute that judge
signs that order it is our
responsibility no matter what
make sure that person yes
through whatever says send them
to.
And then out on the streets.
And we got into this the best
and safest way possible and I'm
having a real problem of
throwing five hundred some
people.
In a few months to do so we
don't have room for so madam
chair I'll leave it at the thank
you.
Members is there further
discussion yes Representative
line for.
Thank you madam chair
I do have several questions some
of them will probably try and to
the discussion that we have on
the the amendment and then
Senator will try to the
a line of questioning that
Representative Representative
Akan just the pursuit.
But.
Earlier we we heard from Mr
Eisele then the Otero county
attorney telling us that we are
that Otero County.
As a a contract that.
Can be extended maybe later in
this year but it has bonding
obligations and revenues that
are dedicated from that the
tension facility are obligated
to repay that bond through the
year twenty twenty eight.
And the amendment that was
adopted there's not address the
ability of Otero county to
deal with that and and I just
like to point out that the our
constitution.
Provides that that we are not
supposed to pass laws impact
will not to pass laws that will
impair the obligation of
contracts M. it seems to me that
we need to to provide a
mechanism in this bill to
address the bonding obligations
of Otero County
and I I just won't say anything
more about it but I think we
need to do that I think we need
of amendment
to accomplish that results
before we pass this piece of
legislation that and send it on
its way the second the second
thing which ties in to what
Representative dot com was
pursuing as is I'm looking on
the original bill pages two and
three.
It's that the section three B.
M. I'm may not quite have my
A copy marked up correctly to
capture all of the words in the
and the amendment but basically
what what the section three B.
says is that the state.
And the county will not enter
into an agreement of any time
for the detention of individuals
in a to tension facility owned
by a private entity.
No M. M. further all.
Hey.
in any way cost related to the
sale of a detention center Madam
operated by a private entity
except those under a currently
valid right.
So if I read that correctly in
our I just want paraphrase but
if I read that correctly.
I am turning on what
Representative October just
said.
We have produce here but it.
The correction department or
county governments from entering
into contracts to secure the
very budget that may be needed
by the correction department or
via County to continue to house
inmates and I think he's exactly
right we have three thousand
budget eliminated and no place
to put them in the existing
system and so we are trying to
hands in this section three B.
from allowing any potential for
our.
Allowing the correction
department or the counties to.
Purchase to lease to otherwise
deal with those existing
facilities and I I I think that
that the.
That that provision needs to be
substantially modified because I
think we ought to
You know encourage.
For fun and then to the private
detention center business same
to me if they already have
facilities the state ought to be
trying to acquire those so that
we don't have the overcrowding
situation and subject to the
brand agree that that
Representative not calling
already pointed out so Madam
chair representative why would
we have a provision that would
prohibit the state or a county
from acquiring existing
facilities that are potentially
going to be up for cell because
we're.
We're going to be removing
private detention center from
New Mexico.
Madam chair representative I can
certainly hand that off to my
experts are in I don't know if
you were making.
Madam chair representative of
your I thank you Representative
members at your correcting your
reading of the average P. forty
as it currently is going through
an amendment to remove the word
owned there for any facility
that's owned by a private the
operated contractor can now be
leased it can be constructed
or it could also be the
I'm sorry I'm looking they look
at it again.
Then Mr operated.
Right so so anyway so because of
the facilities are currently
owned by private contractors
they can be taken over by the
state or they can just be
released if you want to just
have that facility continued to
exist.
Okay Mister Roscoe of madam
chair let's look at the
language.
It says the state.
Yes shall not or or neither the
state nor and I'll just
paraphrase County so enter into.
An agreement of any kind for the
detection of individuals in a
detention facility manager
operated in whole or in part by
a private entity so whether its
own they're currently manage you
can't use those facilities.
They're currently managed or
operated by a private entity
therefore there are off limits
am I reading that incorrectly.
Madam chair representative
member are you referring to line
twenty five on page two yes Sir.
Madam chair on that point.
Absolutely.
Madam chair said that word that
language was stricken by the
first amendment without that.
Yeah we we we struck part of it
but I think the rest of it
remains the fire I read the.
That's what I'm asking the
representative Mr Roscoe's is am
I reading that correctly.
Madam chair representative never
yes if you look at the
amendments I don't for
the word owned and I'm sorry I
just need to confirm to make
sure that it remember
incorrectly the word owned was
removed there as well.
But the but the words managed
and operated are still there
correct.
Yes.
Okay he's really concerned about
the language on line nineteen on
page two.
I'm concerned about the whole
thing to tell you the truth.
We.
I can call up that number again
I think the words.
Managed or operated are still M.
in the bill as amended.
Madam chair representative
neighbors.
I just want to be clear and
understanding the question
around it is around being able
to purchase lease or construct a
facility SO section B. section
three B. one deals with the
detention to our.
Until a creamy.
particularly around housing
you're detaining individuals if
you look at section B. two on
page three that would be the
section that really is
concerning leasing constructing
Or purchasing a building and in
that one as well online I the
word owned was stricken which
means that for example of the
state of New Mexico decided to
purchase a facility that was
previously owned by a private
contractor it could if it wanted
to lease a facility that is
owned and operated by I'm sorry
it's owned by a private
contractor you can do that as
well because I also work with a
private company to construct a
facility by removing the word
owned.
Madam chair and mistrust or I
don't mean to argue with you but
I don't think that's what the
language says it says.
The the words Madam operated is
in the present tense facility
that is right now Madam
operated.
By private entities those
facilities.
I'm suggesting that I think I
read it right those facilities
are off limits now.
Completely off limits those
facilities can't be utilized.
If they're off limits then.
Representative al cone
statements.
Our.
All come in the come into play
very acutely because we have
three thousand budget of I wrote
it down correctly seven
facilities of three thousand
budget eliminated and we have.
It mades who are going to need
to find a place to
be incarcerated and it's not
going to be in those facilities
and so we have limited the
ability of the correction
department or of the counties
to.
You already built a cell of
to accommodate in the future
needs of.
That's that's my point.
Madam chair on that point again.
Yes.
If you look at item for on the
first amendment we adopted.
It strikes lines twenty three
through twenty five of page two.
The the first amendment's fairly
substantial it can be difficult
the first three.
with that being committee so but
that language has been stricken
already.
And it has not stricken the
language in to at the top of
page three.
What the words chair operated
are still.
In the bill.
Chair and Representative
neighborhood I think the point
is a little bit of completed the
amendments if you look at item
six it doesn't matter Page three
line six.
So we did remove the word owned
line item I and I and six we
also added to that section an
exception for those operating
pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into prior to the
enactment of this act so the
facilities that exist currently
there's an exception for those
essentially what we're trying to
do is limit any new facilities
but we do next we do understand
that there is currently there
are currently seven facilities
and so we did create this
exception and I think that's
part of part of the amendment
process
realizing that people have to
refer back and forth and so I
totally agree with
Representative McQueen this is a
it we we you have to see this
thing which together
but if we did make an exception
for those currently operating
facilities if you look at
insects.
At the thought that your
testimony earlier madam chair
and of Mr Roscoe on.
That was to allow the existing
contracts to be fulfilled so we
don't have a.
Takings issue but I would.
I'll get off of it but I just
think you better look carefully
at that issue because IFIP
procurements the utilization of
those existing facilities we
will be doing the state and the
counties a grave disservice and
our communities a great
disservice because you're going
to have a facilities who have a
single purpose and they're going
to be a long term I swore on on
the the landscape because
there's no other purpose for
those types of facilities for
the most part.
And you you certainly won't have
other people wanting to to
acquire those
Let me see what else.
All on the line.
M..
The the language got changed but
I think we use the same words of
the amendment there it it just
as a independent contractors
with whom those entities have
entered into contracts I think
now it says private contractors
With whom those entities
whatever what what's being
modified by those entities that
referred to the independent
contractor or whatever we
changed it to or somebody else.
Madam chair and and
Representative members if you're
asking what those entities
referring to it's referring to
the previous subsection one.
The respective shares of drop
our respective shares our job
distributors or other local body
or a combination thereof.
Okay.
I thought that maybe the case I
I think you may want to look at
at that language make a little
clearer and then.
Up above you have the sheriff's
and then jail administrators
employed by the board of county
commissioners for and then you
have the new three
it seems that that one ought to
be the chair arms to ought to be
the jail administrators employed
by the board of county
commissioners because share of
store not employed by the board
of county commissioners and then
three would be the
third category and that would
basically fall in line with
our section B. one on page ten
we're it's it's clear there that
you have the three categories
of their so I just
stylistically make that change.
Later on we it looks like we're
trying to limit the ability of
county commissioners maybe of
municipalities to to contract
for.
Some of these detention services
and.
Over on the side of the state
there are a number of political
entities that have and may even
be continuing to Sam
People to various places in the
state of Texas for serving our
their time in in a detention
center because I found it more
cost effective and even setting
up to the county detention
center down the street
With this procurement.
Counties and municipalities from
contracting with out of state
detention facilities for the
housing of New Mexico are
detainees.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative
I.
Are in do you have.
Madam chair representative you
know in the neighborhood
The definition of detention
facility private private
detention facility means one is
operated by non governmental
entity so it depends on whether
that instead of contracting out
with if they're entering into a
new agreement course if there
are existing agreements there's
there's exceptions for those but
if it's a new agreement and it
is a privately operated facility
than this law would prevent them
from being able to contract out
with that.
So madam chair I understand the
testimony if it's a
governmental entity that's
operating the detention center
out of state it would be
appropriate for a New Mexico
county or municipality to
contract with them but they
would not be able to contract
with a private.
detention facility located out
of state did I get that correct.
Madam chair Mister Oscar.
Representative this.
In terms of numbers yes.
Thank you very much
I I would encourage.
Madam chair of the river
the representative for experts
to to look at the language make
sure it it captures your and and
and I really agree with
Representative Akan that we need
to make it easy not difficult to
deal with the potential for
having the to move inmates out
of these facilities to other
facilities
the this.
Choice would be of some of these
existing facilities may need to
change hands and am allow the
corrections department to
do with those with those
facilities and then again I feel
very strongly that the.
We need to look at some language
to carve out an exception for
Otero County
And we need to we need to take
into consideration not only its
existing contract with the
detention center but the revenue
stream that's provided to pay
off of the fifty eight million
dollars outstanding on its bond
obligations so that madam chair.
All.
You for.
Okay Representative right.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair and representative what
was the subject matter of the
verandas Center creek.
Representative Rehm.
Does that is that important to
the this bill are you just
giving them a quiz.
No I think it's important
because it was overcrowded.
In order to move all.
So anyway that's that was the
purpose of the Durand descent
the Cree so.
There's been a question about
the the state budget and
my understanding and madam chair
and Representative Rubio is by
our current statutes they have
to go with the lowest bidder
unless they can justify another
bitter is that correct.
Madam chair representative I can
hand it off to my experts but
the I I would say the answer is
no.
I'm here I think you're talking
about procurement code.
Correct and in the procurement
code I mean there may be.
Some more this dealing with.
The lives of human beings that
may be different than buying
staplers so there may be it may
not just be the lowest bidder
but we don't have the state
bidding against private prisons
right.
Madam chair.
If I may wrist Representative
Rehm up my understanding is that
the the corrections department
is is currently
working to move individuals from
private facilities to public
facilities and the legislative
finance committee is found that
there are significant cost
savings in doing that.
All
the other questions I had were
already asked.
Thank you.
Thank you let me see if I have
anybody else.
With the hand up.
Madam chair I've had my hand up.
you know what it fades away I'm
sorry it's it's not.
I apologize let me see if
there's any other okay don't
Representative had.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Rubio and
committee members I appreciate
the lively conversation we've
had so far and I also just want
to appreciate madam chair that
I've had a chance to check in
with our sponsor here
Representative Rubio about some
of the complexities in this
legislation I just want to
appreciate Representative Rubio
for being they responsive and
thoughtful to hear my
significant concerns and also my
expressions of support for the
fundamental intention of this
legislation I just wanna also
appreciate it so much public
comment that was a respectful
and thoughtful and clearly
across a diverse spectrum of
insight and opinions on this
issue as you all may know how
don't think I said it yet this
year but like Representative
uncle and I also spend sometime
in the New Mexico corrections
department not quite two years
more like a year and a half but
I did services the bureau chief
of recidivism reduction for the
agency under the previous
administration so in that
capacity I oversaw the
educational academic and
vocational programming across
New Mexico's eleven present at
the time I'll be at the make up
between private and public
facilities has shifted some
since that.
In that capacity and with my
badge in support of Secretary
market till the time I had
permanent thirty to walk in any
president any day no questions
asked and I kid roam around to
each facility learning what I
wanted happy having
conversations for me that we're
always basic curiosity and an
intention to positively impact
the system overall with that I
would continue to say just like
I did before I took that
position that incarcerating
human being is a gigantic
responsibility and being
incarcerated is just
fundamentally terrible for the
human condition I think for me
that's that's the important
basis that informs a lot of my
criminal justice reform work as
such and as I shared madam chair
representative review earlier I
believe that our body has much
more to do and specifically our
judiciary committees and others
to reduce the number of people
that are being incarcerated they
did did through the New Mexico
court system and eventually the
New Mexico corrections
department I do want to just
pause the name of course this
bill is pretty
pretty expensive and encompasses
detention facilities that the
fed may operate that counties
may operate as jails so where
people get held while they
potentially facing charges
before conviction and then the
prisons that we operate as a
state through the New Mexico
corrections department so again
my expertise is focused on that
pretty significant but part part
of the pie in corrections so
what I shared with
Representative Rubio is that I
do fundamentally believe that
there should have never been a
profit involved in incarcerating
humans or anyone really but The
New Mexico made this deal with
the devil a long time ago and
primarily under the leadership
of governor Johnson at the time
when I got to the corrections
department it was my priority to
look closely at the ways we were
show.
Going up to protect and uphold
the constitutional rights of all
the people we Kerr stated across
the system as others have name
today.
That isn't always have that's
what's happening sometimes
there's mistakes made on the
private side sometimes there's
mistakes made in the public side
what's important for me to name
today is that the entire system
is chronically underfunded and
that means that in New Mexico
when we lock people up we
basically throw away the key.
And I was overseeing recidivism
reduction.
I think I had no programming
space I had no evidence based
programming I had I had
literally to get head counts
about how many spaces I might
have in an adult education class
by teachers who would send me
excel sheet so that we can add
them up together we don't have
I. T. to measure the impact of
what our efforts were or to
track unique identifiers to see
if what we were doing was
actually impacting the lives of
folks when they were coming out
of our presence back into our
communities so as.
I very much appreciate the
intention of this but I I still
have some significant concerns I
appreciate in the amendments
that we made offered by
Representative Cook we're going
to pay more attention to what
would happen to these workers
but I also want to name and
color attention to the F. I. R.
that was shared today it is real
as others have names that we
currently have more inmates
assigned to the supervision of
the New Mexico corrections
department then bed space that
would be left behind if we set
the private down and as others
have expressed I have real
concern about how we would
safely house those inmates
without
The impetus of sentencing reform
that would maybe allow us to
safely let some people out of
prison but we haven't done that
we haven't we haven't completed
that executed that implemented
that yet as a body so my worry
is that we have more inmates
than prison beds and we
potentially are giving the
corrections department an
impossible problem to continue
housing these folks without
anywhere to put them
I do appreciate that we're going
to appropriations I I would like
to say that as a support the
intention of this that
eventually and if we have to
work on this again and and I I'd
love to be part of those
conversations that we come in
with a plan and a budget that we
all can commit to and support
and invested so that we can buy
that facility in Santa Rosa and
then if needed we by the
facility in requests and and and
as such we potentially are
protecting the jobs of those
workers we're bringing the ends
the inmates under the oversight
of our our public facilities but
that is going to cost a lot so I
want to make sure I'll fight for
that budget like if we're to
place ready to do that and ready
to buy those facilities and
bring them in I'll be part of
that conversation but we're not
quite there yet so just lastly
with F. I. R. our analysts put
together a couple of options
like what would it be if we had
to build new prisons what might
it be if we.
Build new housing units at
existing prisons or possibly
take over these facilities at
the private zone with that the
last piece that I just really
want to highlight because eight
it was so apparent to me when I
was at corrections.
The private facilities.
Amenities that we don't have on
the state side so when we look
at the remaining prisons that
were built on the state side
they were mostly built in the
eighties and nineties and they
were built in response to the
horrific right to happen in New
Mexico in turn they were built
to keep it makes quite an
inmate's lockdown when I tried
to imagine how to make those
systems more trauma informed and
and build evidence based
practices into those places
there literally wasn't room
inside those Max security
prisons like the one I have just
outside my district at southern
or the one here it PNM to
actually do present differently
in a way that might affect
recidivism so just as another
reminder we have some state
budget they're not
built in the area of corrections
that states and governments are
reasonably moving to now so
that's just another cost to
consider as we move forward but
with that madam chair
representative I just wanted to
ask Rubio Representative Rubio
one more time just to help us
understand what you all might
imagine as that transition plan
and this will be my only
question like if if this were to
be successful how might we as a
government and you all be able
to pull these budgets together
really invest in the agency so
that they could handle the
immense responsibility of
figuring out how to safely house
these inmates.
Madam chair representative I
mean I think it's it's a really
important question and the the
folks that I have been working
with on this legislation I mean
it really is years in the making
in terms of how we got here
I know for myself as a
legislator working on this issue
I mean I am certainly committed
to making sure that not only are
we addressing this issue around
private prisons and and what our
path forward is to eliminate our
our state's reliance in and and
profiting off of of of this of
these types of institutions but
also in the same way that you're
thinking about criminal justice
reforms and and really making
sure that we're addressing all
of that I mean I think for
the pathway forward with this
with this piece of legislation I
there is a number of
Opportunities I think in in in
my opinion that we can address
the budgetary issues if we.
When we as a state and as a
legislature mmhm make those
investments if we work to make
those investments
I I know that with my
conversations with the secretary
of corrections
I think for the for her it's
it's a both end in in terms of.
Ending our reliance on private
prisons but also looking to
lower the the the amount of
folks that we
incarcerate and so I think this
is the route that we need to be
taking as as a legislature and
and and and that is a commitment
that I certainly have moving
forward.
Thank you madam chair
representative Rubio I share
that commitment when I worked at
the corrections department one
of my proudest professional
accomplishments to date was
putting everything I had into
moving the women out of a
privately operated facility at
CCA and into to state facilities
as it happens in wouldn't be a
surprise to you I imagine madam
chair representative Rubio when
we got into the still at the
private the women were the first
people sent to the private and
they were there for almost
thirty years so I'm grateful now
that again we have a lot of work
in front of us to actually
create systems of accountability
for people that are in our
systems but also reform and
rehabilitation so I look forward
to partnering you with any with
you in these efforts like I said
I have serious concerns about
this bill today if I vote for it
it's with the understanding that
it's going to get a much deeper
look and either get a big
appropriations from HFC or not
and if not continue to work
together thank you madam chair
and representative.
Representative the line.
Madam chair on thank you I've
been listening to Representative
Cadena I and I and I'm not
trying to characterize with
another representative said but
I I see a huge difference.
Of the twenty private prisons.
And public persons sorry.
I get I get Syrian my year
Hi the the facilities are
private prisons generally look
nicer.
but I will tell you from really
horrible one particularly
horrible experience that private
prisons or something that at
least as a tool for
incarceration we have got to get
away from I Representative well
Garcia who was a prisoner this
was a hundred years ago
Wackenhut facility now geo
facility in
Santa Rosa and it was nice
looking facility really what's
the problem was
private prisons make their money
by not paying their people well
not training their people well
not worrying about safety.
And so no surprise
Representative Garcia of them
self in a position on a lovely
man apparently are very
compassionate guard but of the
prisoners who were loaded up in
one pot sixty three dangerous
prisoners decided to make a
statement against and Gary
Johnson.
And stab the first guard they
could find and the staff of
sixty three times until.
And it's been since that time
that I really have gotten to a
point where I just it's not just
the kind of general principle of
we can't make you know we can't
have businesses making money off
locking people up there's a real
component to this that affects
New Mexicans and I do appreciate
the concerns that have been
expressed about what do we do
about these jobs that are going
to be lost and I think the
answer we're gonna find isn't
quite is that those jobs were
replaced by state jobs for
people got paid better their
budget their better trained and
they're safer facilities and so
I don't agree that this is
something that we can put off
till next year the year after
that we have kind of a grand
plan I really do think we gotta
move on this right now.
And what I'd like to do and I'd
like to suggest to
Representative Rubio is we roll
this over that we see what we
can work out I know that we
spend a lot of time in this I've
listened all the discussion but
I really think it is too
critical that we continue to put
not just prisoners in these
positions but guards into these
places the people that you know
I I Representative no juries are
rightly concerned about I can
tell you right now those guards
are unsafe places because they
have been properly trained
they're not properly paid they
don't have proper benefits
they're not doing anybody any
good and while they are economic
engines for the community we can
do better we can replace that
and so what we could do is and I
want to talk to representative
review about it I I texted her
to see she might be willing to
roll this over that we can at
least go starting moving in the
direction of getting away from
private facilities and frankly
we should be doing that.
So I'm asking Representative
Rubio should roll this over so
we can come back and start to
work on to pass this session to
I if not to get ourselves away
from private prisons entirely at
least develop a moratorium and
start to work on a different
modeling or maybe we could have
private prisons but instead of
being paid to lock people up
they could keep people out of
jail that's something we could
work for of that might be
somewhere rebuilding our
behavioral health care system of
the state there's lots of things
we can do but I really strongly
suggest to the committee this is
something that can wait I don't
think we come back with a grand
plan are for what that's that's
great for a later time but right
now we've got to get something
out and so I'm asking
Representative Rubio one
question which you're willing to
roll this over let's see if we
can work on this over the next
couple of days to get some back
to this committee that maybe the
committee I want to take a look
at.
I'm.
I'm just interject here because
this isn't the last stop for
this bill.
Remember it's going to go to
appropriations and quite frankly
I think it needs to committee
stop at that point with this
expensive amendments from
Both the
Representative.
Rubio and Representative Cook.
So.
I mean I think the only thing
we're missing at this point
Unless this apprehended some of
that statements by members the
only thing we're missing at this
point is whether we got the A.
twenty employees in the counties
described as precisely as we
wanted to because does not not
Representative Ely band give us.
The tools to move forward.
Madam chair here's what I'm
worried about I think he gets to
appropriations and it's gonna
stop right there I don't think
we're gonna have the kind of fun
so we're talking about to be
able to do this and that's what
I'm worried about I'm worried
that once it leaves this
committee leases committee that
dying appropriations and then we
will have not accomplished
anything this session and that
may be the will of the committee
but at least it's not it's not
my current concern I'd like to
see some movement towards
getting New Mexico away from
private prisons.
And I I probably should
Representative Rubio answer by I
wanted to interject that.
you know we've now spent our
entire afternoon we started at
one thirty we have done nothing
but this and we have we have ten
bills that have been referred to
us.
Since
February second February first
that haven't been scheduled yet.
And I just worry this committee
can't spend another four and a
half hours.
On this and we've we've got
other bills to hear it yep
tonight so
I think you know the speaker I'm
not sure if the speaker is back
with us we're not but
I am here madam chair at this
rate you are about
appropriations if you'd like to
weigh in although Representative
Rubio I'm I'm just I should give
you a chance to answer and madam
speaker way and.
Madam chair representative a I
recognize that a lot of work has
been put in
to into into the work that we've
done today
I am certain I mean I I am I'm
in agreement with Representative
Ely in terms of what our fate
might be like in appropriations
and
and I know that folks like
Representative neighbor and
others have raised some language
issues but
but I also I I I also feel
confident in and and what
decisions you all
how you all decide to proceed so
again for me this is a really
important bill it is my priority
bill this session and so any any
way that we can work on it to
make it better
whether it's rolled over we move
on to appropriations I mean I'm
certainly committed to making
sure that we do what we need to
do before those discussions are
are had in HFC.
Mr speaker do you want to.
Recreation thank you madam chair
yeah I do think based certainly
based on the amendment is
adopted today.
And we're that the bill will
need to go to the Appropriations
Committee we do see here.
A fairly substantial fiscal
impact to the FY twenty two
general fund even before the
amendments I'm sorry I do think
that.
It's going to have I don't I
don't know how we've waited
given given what we've got on
the S. R..
So.
Thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate that I wanted to ask
a few questions before we just
decide we're throwing up our
hands here in or that we're
we're all gonna go work
overnight on this but
I I wondered about the a past
history when I that facility is
closed has not.
Resulted in the
State the facility over.
And
I'd like to know if there is
somebody who could answer that
question.
Madam chair representative
of madam chair
yes the state has taken over
facilities before
I know the one specifically in
Clayton was there were
but.
the guards that work there
employees that worked in that
facility who ended up working
for the state and then weren't
Floyd by the state and then the
the folks who are incarcerated
in that facility were also
transferred under the state your
station.
And so my information is that
when we play for our private.
Facility close state
workers went to work for the
state and they got a three
dollar an hour range.
And so it's not like we are
actually displacing all of the
of prisoners.
Six zero eight five
what we're doing is actually
improving the services.
At the facility Representative
Armstrong wants to make a short
suggestion.
For consideration as you
continue working on this but
first let me let me suggest some
other solutions here that.
That will actually.
Yes that will addressed I'm.
What Representative Cadena
talked about is we haven't done
we haven't done really well
Justice Reform Act.
We have people serving.
Probate preserving provoke in
prison because we don't have.
Exit community corrections
programs to take care of the
community corrections programs
are far less expensive.
But we don't spend the money
there so but we do have existing
community corrections.
Who which could house some of
these people and move them out
and it will require more
probation parole officers but
nonviolent offenders could be
released right now to community
corrections right now.
the LFC report said many of the
medium security
Classify prisoners could be
safely housed in the state level
two if an.
Actions department would
finished.
The overhaul of its
classification system.
So it's like we're in tangled
into a very bad way out of.
Thanks for we haven't properly
funded we have been properly
trained and so forth.
Representative Armstrong you
want to make your suggestion
thank thank you madam chair up
I'll be brief as I've been
listening in on the the dollar
dilemma of what to do kind of in
this transition as we try and do
reforms and get the prison
population down but just
something to consider it might
be a month moratorium due in a
year certain that we have no
more contracts for private
prisons whether that's five
years eight years three years I
don't know what it but rather
than just stop at the end of a
current contract
Do occur at do a year certain to
give us enough time to
work on probation but also work
on our prison reforms and
corrections reforms to a
decrease the prison population.
Just a suggestion thank you
madam chair.
Well that would be something for
Representative Cadena and her
Are the cuts to talk about.
Although it seems like maybe
trying to solve some of the
problems as we go along.
So it really it really
appreciate it very much all the
work that representative on
Rubio has done what
Representative Cook was trying
to do without having all of the
answers.
Representative.
I see.
Hello I'm trying to read text
messages from analysts and and
committee members so I
apologize.
for any.
Current lack of flow in my
thinking here I'm.
So.
Sure we have the belt it is
definitely going to
appropriations it probably
should become a committee set up
for its next stop.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair what's the issues
before so I'm I'm I am have no
choice but to move just take.
We have a table in motion
Representative Townsend.
Representative delivered
through.
Not you know you are
and I'd like to take a roll call
vote on that and and we will
continue our work plan.
We received a motion please.
The motion to table thank you.
Representative Akan yes.
Representative Armstrong no.
Yes.
No.
Representative you know.
Okay.
The queen the.
Representative nightmare yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Thank
to
you to table.
Madam chair.
Noted table.
Seven no and I yes.
The table there hello.
I'm I will move it to pass as
amended.
Thank you.
Representative Lawrence.
It's called the rules based.
Representative dot com.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative you want yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative maverick.
No.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Townsend.
I'd like to explain more about.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Yes I.
We have to pass the forty as
amended
Representative Townsend Here
explains.
Yes ma'am chair thank you for
that opportunity I believe this
bill is not directionally wrong
but I believe it is green it is
not ready to go forward and
putting something forward out of
Judiciary that we all agree is
problematic is struggling to
make thank you very much.
Thank you so much yes okay.
So.
Hi.
You're on mute.
I'm sorry money yet I'd like to
take about a ten minute break
and
from back at our.
Five thirty five.
And then we will get started on
our next item okay.
I really want to thank all of
the participants we had a huge
audience today want to thank the
translators and I want to.
All of those who work so hard on
this bill we've had hundreds of
people participating thank you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you all I really appreciate it.
So are we ready to begin.
Madam chair.
Give me your all the committee
but I think I'm asking you
because.
You're on the next one
you H. B. ninety one I have to
experts with me today Matthew
Corey and marked on a tally
they're both currently.
In the zoo so if we can have
those two promoted as panelists.
Are your co sponsor
Representative my SS you just
appeared with us as well as the
very good and
Let's see
I've got the attention of the
other folks I was actually back
one minute early.
I it was more than ten minutes I
was just.
Not County correctly.
All right let's resume now with
our agenda.
On our second item.
Actually our third but we didn't
do the first one so let's begin
with Representative Cadena house
bill one ninety one.
It.
Madam chair members of the
Judiciary Committee we're in for
another long night it seems I
thankfully over the break got to
face time with my kids for a
minute so that's given me a
second wind I hope I'm grateful
today to be concisely presenting
house bill one eighty one which
it its essence establishes the
office of the corrections but
it's meant to be held within the
legislative finance committee I
just want to explain my promise
and commitment to this bill will
then go to my co sponsor
representative I just us to talk
about some of the history and
impetus for this legislation we
also have with us today Matthew
Kuwait and Donatelli that will
briefly introduce themselves and
then service experts for
questions that come up from the
committee generally as I
expanded upon in the previous
bill presentation and and
conversation I've been paying
attention to the correctional
system for many many years now
first as an advocate done in an
opportunity to serve within
state government and now is
someone pushing for reforms from
the legislative body that we get
to take votes in every day I
fundamentally believe that when
we incarcerate someone we need
to hold that responsibility with
the utmost integrity and that
those incarcerated people their
families their loved ones and
advocates I always need a means
to pass through confidential
information and to make sure
we're understanding and
upholding policies and
procedures and to make sure that
in any administration the
administration I was honored to
work for in twenty fifteen or
the administration in place now
or whoever comes next that that
we always make sure beyond what
that window of of responsibility
is that we as the Legislature
who frankly create passed and
passed laws that that sentence
that that connects to and and
relate to the sentencing of
people.
And our constituents that we
should also hold the
responsibility of of this kind
of oversight so and and a basic
sense again we're we're
establishing an abundant and but
for the corrections department
and we're hosting it within the
legislative finance committee so
that we as a body can have more
engagement and interplate with
the system that is charged with
holding people that have a
sentence in our state point
based on on the loss that we're
creating every day so with that
madam chair and representatives
I would ask that we can go next
to my co sponsor representative
all my Estes.
Yes.
Welcome back to Judiciary good
to see a great to be here thank
you madam chair honorable
members
For listing the house bill one
ninety one I just so happen
chair in my office have a old
copy of the
Pleadings the pleadings from
nineteen seventy nine Dwight
Duran verses just Jared up aka
governor say in Mexico that that
in which there was a stipulated
agreement to a consent decree.
Unfortunately two months after
that document was signed that
would the worst a prison rate in
history of our nation occurred.
Are there was you know we have a
tremendous respect for the
leadership of of DO see and
obviously the governor's office
but D. O. C. is huge it's huge
tremendous aspect of state
government that doesn't really
have a relationship with the
legislature
You know we we we going to a
motor vehicle department as low
as citizen legislators but we're
not prisoners you know we
so anyway chair one of one of
the last states in the country
not to have some type of
independent oversight to assist
and and ensuring that public
safety is not sacrificed but
that we lower recidivism that we
modernize our corrections
department and that we we do
what do it the right way there's
many many ways to house inmates
and and and we're just stuck
we're just stuck we're stuck in
in in past decades I think this
will move us forward thanks will
list will lower recidivism I
think this will increase public
safety and make us a better
functioning state government
thank you madam chair.
If we made you introduce
themselves.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair all right
to will start with Matthew quite
go ahead Matthew.
Yes thank you madam chair thank
you members representatives of
the committee my name is Matthew
courts I am a former president
of the New Mexico criminal
defense lawyers association I'm
a civil rights lawyer and have
been litigating prison cases for
twenty years and I'm also
fortunate to have the honor of
being invited to the United
Nations in Vienna in New invites
to to help create a in Hamburg
on prisons and jails in an anti
corruption in prisons and jails
with United Nations offices off
drugs and crime and in that
capacity learn to and
contributed to the concept of
prison oversight which is of
course one of the most
intercooled pieces of prevention
of corruption in any
governmental entity but
especially in the prison system.
Resin systems tend to be at the
best of times pake and the worst
of times secretive so oversight
is a margin.
Trend that we start to PS into
the violent world of presence
out of sight out of mind is no
longer an acceptable situation
to be in prisons the states so
but before you you get questions
in about this bill I think it's
important to know what kind of
oversight we have available to
us both in the United States and
across the world and in
particular what we have here in
New Mexico currently and then
you can understand what this
bill seeks to achieve and
whether you would like to do it
so not so
firm from the perspective of New
Mexico which we're all familiar
is representative my S. as
mention of certain types of
oversight we have hit.
Excuse me under the colt.
What's in for service site is
one of the ways you can oversee
prisons and jails and it's
probably that last resort is
oversight of the last resort
it's when something is gone
terribly wrong like a a riot or
death and the court gets
involved through lawsuit we do
have two of these lawsuits
currently New Mexico to Duran
consent decree that for our
prisons and of course the
McClendon lawsuit from lodges
jail out what what's known as a
super general this particular
bill doesn't affect jails it's
just affecting prisons but the
same principles apply so within
the prison system if you have a
courts have a side you have the
budget all what I would describe
as a steak and enforcement
aspect of the oversight you must
do certain things or else and
it's perhaps the only form of us
are really has a meaningful
stick it does close governments
to have to jump through hoops
and do things to coming caught
to compliance with a court but
the downside of course is it is
very expensive and and it goes
on for long periods of time
lawyers are expensive courts are
expensive and indeed
the process is cumbersome adds
another layer of management into
the prison system you otherwise
might not want to have and that
is what you want to avoid any of
the sites frankly you want to
avoid all extra management so.
So it does exist in New Mexico
and and it's not the best place
to be but we do have it another
form of of a site that exists as
an option and we do have this as
well is the oversight for
policies and procedures through
the American correctional
association or ACA and therein
accrediting agency that that
sets minimum standards for
policies and procedures and then
periodically.
Investigates the prisons that
that to see if they're in
compliance and this is good it's
a thing that you need to have to
set minimum standards but it is
in some ways floor in that they
are just minimum standards the
they don't strive for highest so
you you'd get a minimum standard
that is also flawed in some
respects because.
There's a financial incentive to
keep of an institution certified
because we pay money the state
pays money to the ACA at at and
that institutions are certified
periodically but if you're not
certified in your cake have the
ACLU not on to pay any money and
so that's sort of a financial
aspect is a bit corrosive in the
process it also is only limited
to pop as I said policies and
procedures where is this bill
this proposed today is not
limited in any such fashion can
go in other directions then just
policies but it but you do need
the limited type of policy
procedure type oversight we do
have is just not good enough.
Another third wave oversight
that we do have a New Mexico as
well it's cold.
Provided by this site and this
one is perhaps the worst we have
here because it allows the
legislature such as yourselves
representatives can go and
inspect the president but it
doesn't you with any details of
what you meant to do or how you
meant to do it and you're not
really particularly.
Digging hard into it it's a it's
a service snapshot.
Of oversight that gives an
impression of oversight when
really not exists a toll so it
in in many people's opinion
seven seven at the legislative
oversight such as the type we
have here in New Mexico's fairly
ineffective
so the final form of this site
you might choose would be
civilian oversight that is
independent independent and with
a mandate that it seeks to
achieve more than just policy so
policies or procedures or more
than just what the lawsuit might
have a subject matter interested
and and that is the kind of bill
that we have here today it is a
civilian independent oversight
is often called an ombudsman it
doesn't have to be coated
ombudsman there are others in
the world that do similar things
that aren't called that
but it it but it seeks to
achieve certain goals and what's
what's actually the goals aside
I say what it in order to be
effective.
It has to have certain
characteristics the first thing
it has to have is access you
have to have access to the
president in order to do the
oversight it seems sensible but
it needs to be written in the
bill that you have access not
only to staff.
Inmates.
Facilities.
But documents as well and and
this bill seeks to accomplish
that form of access if you have
some form of of a site that
doesn't have access it's
meaningless and kind of a waste
of time.
it has to be independent that's
the other thing you can't have
it politically constrained in
what it does so usually civilian
type oversight.
Mr is as independent as it can
possibly be
let housing in the legislature
of the committee of what we this
one is House I believe in
finance committees one option
you could choose other options
but it whatever you choose would
like it to be independent.
That has to be transparent and
this goes back to the stick that
I mentioned earlier the only
stick or effective enforcement
that you might get with a bill
like this is the fact that it is
public and transparent in what
it does shining a light into
this pake or secretive weld is
the only way to affect change
you can the department
corrections can ignore
everything that is said by an
ombudsman.
In this bill this bill doesn't
provide any stick of any kind
other than transparency so when
they ignore all the report the
ombudsman they do so at their
own political peril but they
can't ignore it.
But if there was no transparency
than the thing would again be
fairly few top because they
could ignore secrets which would
change the status quo enough to
know who to no degree a toll so
it has to be transparent it has
also focus in this is somewhat
is it in my opinion has to focus
also on anti corruption measures
because in any prison or jail as
a around the world if left
unattended oil House corruption
and if you shine lights on that
your correct this your
correction is minimized you can
never replicate it entirely it
would exist in any system as
vast as a prison system you can
minimize it and that will
ultimately affect abuses on
prisoners abuses on staf abuses
of taxpayer money abuse is also
the whole call central theme of
the prison system which is to
rehabilitate someone.
If you get a tackle corruption
you can improve those outcomes
dramatically and so your bill
needs to have that power to seek
out and destroy correction and
finally eight it needs to be
funded it cannot be a volunteer
organization although they do
exist around the world and they
out they dues play their roles
volunteer is we're doing this
I'm prisons are very helpful but
they are you need to make this
one professional especially in
New Mexico where the distances
between facilities also large
and the time consumed in
visiting places is so long and
so that's essentially might
pitch of the types of oversight
that you might choose and
I promise it over to Mr
Donatelli whose whose expert in
in the Duran and other aspects
far more than I am.
Thank you madam vice chair and
matters of members of the
committee
that is covered the waterfront
on this and I'll be very short I
just want to explain my
background involves having been
involved in New Mexico
corrections department issues
since nineteen seventy six
Representative the families of
loved ones who have lost their
lives in New Mexico prisons I
was appointed to the as one of
the attorneys and the Duran
litigation nineteen eighty three
remain involved in that case I
help the of establish the pre of
procedures and.
And matters of monitoring that
the Congress imposed on the
states and internet connection
with.
Became aware of a number of ways
that other states have manage
the kind of oversight that
Mattis talked about.
I think the most important thing
I can say in support of this is
that because corrections is not
the most popular agency for
funding when it comes to
electorate support it is
critical that there be some
independent observation of
activities and into supported
what I I came to New Mexico in
nineteen seventy six we had
statutes in place that allowed
the local grand juries to
conduct.
Thank refusing inspections of
the of the prison here in New
Mexico it is Representative my
Estes is well aware that the
Santa Fe County grand jury prior
to the nineteen eighty right it
issued several reports warning
of the about the conditions the
point is that if you have a a
body like that going in with
just the kind of expertise that
Matt is describing to evaluate
procedures and conditions and
make recommendations it's for
the rest of the people of who
are reading these reports to
react if you don't have a
transparency you don't get that
kind of information out to
people who can react we have the
kind of circumstances that have
led to the problems that lead to
litigation and the seriousness
uses of of funds I just want to
say that I think what's often
overlooked is the effect this
has on.
Public safety those we heard
vice chair of contingent talk in
talking and in support of HB
forty with ninety percent of the
people in prison being released
to our communities it's critical
that we make sure that prisons
don't make people worse than
when they went in when they come
out and rejoin their communities
and the way that prisons often
operate without transparency
oversight they actually create a
public safety danger by making
people more likely to recidivism
when they went in so based on
the the experience ahead of
watching various approaches to
monitoring conditions in New
Mexico prisons is described by
met various formats I think this
bill is an excellent first step
making sure that it has the
funding and the expertise
necessary to go in and give you
the expert recommendations for
what it takes to make sure the
taxpayers get what they're
paying for and public safety is
protected.
Thank you madam vice chair.
Thank you madam chair and with
that we're ready I thank you for
the opportunity to present our
bill.
Okay I'm I'm I'm I'm going to
open it for public comment but
I'm going to let the secretary
of corrections I'm a little bit
longer to respond we I talked to
the our sponsors of the bill and
we think it'll be a good idea to
have
Clear understanding of any
CERN's at the department house
so I think what I'm going to do
is we will go ahead and take the
the whole just all those in
favor and all those in in
opposition and then I'm gonna go
to secretary
two four eight zero and then we
will go to
Madam where we limit the time
okay so let's begin with the
first let everybody way and
there dealings about the
legislation.
We'll we'll go about twenty more
seconds.
I think we haven't changed
anything yet so we're going to
stop here there's primarily
those in the audience register
their support hundred percent
voted okay so I'm first I want
to go to secretary.
There we go secretary.
Alisha Tafoya Lucero and she
said she needed about five or
six minutes number let her do
that.
So go ahead madam secretary.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and I
appreciate the the consideration
to speak at before you today
also as as madam chair said I am
Alisha Tafoya loose Errol I
service the cabinet secretary
for the New Mexico corrections
department and I respectfully
oppose house bill one ninety one
in its current form in principle
I understand and respect the
intent of this bill and I would
be happy to spend some time
working through the issues with
the Sanchez.
But having reviewed ombudsman
systems in other states and
speaking with my colleagues
throughout the nation house bill
one ninety one does not appear
to encompass the role of a true
ombudsman which is an objective
party that investigates concerns
and works to resolve them this
bill creates a position and an
entire office of staff and
volunteers and is housed within
a government entity that
determines funding for the
agency.
This is a conflict and would
fully negate the possibility of
objectivity.
A more appropriate place to
house an ombudsman would be in
an independent office aimed at
investigations and
accountability such as the state
auditor's office or the office
of the Attorney General.
This bill defines the ombudsman
as the individual the staff and
any volunteers with in this
office this broad definition
it's the same level of authority
to the ombudsman as to the many
individuals with in that
person's office the ombudsman as
stated in house bill one nine
one is not is responsible not
only for investigations but is
able to dictate actions to write
policies and essentially has the
same level of oversight and
management of the agency as the
executive and the cabinet
secretary but without the
accountability.
Given that house bill one nine
one provides a full office staff
and volunteers and does not
limit that that number of
volunteers and it also gives
them the same level of authority
to investigate oversee review
right policies and request
information on anything at any
time I believe this bill as
written will create an extensive
burden sensually requiring a
continuous production of
discovery in perpetuity.
The potential volume of data and
document production would likely
require an entire office of
staff to manage the extreme
reach of this group.
This bill provides an
appropriation for the buds men
and their staff but does not
provide the same or the agency.
It is also concerning that this
legislation does not include
qualifications for the role it
is not cap the number of times
that this person and their staff
and volunteers can be appointed
and while this bill notes that
it would minimize litigation
throughout the document language
exists indicating that the bill
would more likely increase
litigation and provide
opportunities potentially for
volunteer attorneys to seek
information acting as ombudsmen
in the role of volunteer in
preparation to initiate
additional litigation.
Overall.
The reach of this bill many
people with the authority of the
ombudsman and the reporting
structure appear to replace the
executive and the secretary
within office of people that
would be under the management of
the legislative finance
committee director.
Thank you madam chair for the
opportunity and and and and
that's all I have thank you.
Thank you very much now I'm
going to go to
those who would like to speak is
there anyone in opposition to
the bill would like to speak.
I got anybody.
The.
All right let's get have those
who wish to speak in favor of
the bill.
Okay they're starting to show up
here first I'm going to.
Well
did she go I am the cash.
I am just I'm get yourself.
Okay thank you I just have a
works.
I just wanted to say I really
support this bill I feel so much
more comfortable if there wasn't
an oversight others EOC I just
like what else is just shared
and I hope vote for it thank you
so much.
Thank you next Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico from
all defense lawyers association
one I think the sponsor and her
advocate I'm sorry the sponsors
and their advocates for the
significant amount of time.
This bill as you heard Mr quite
elaborate on all of the
different options that are out
there and I do think that this
group put together their best
ideas and put together an idea I
apologize it's witching hour at
the Chavez house again
they put together a great set of
ideas for you in this bill I
think that they really look at
all of the options and we
encourage you to support this
bill and we appreciate again the
work of the sponsors and
advocates thank you so much.
Thank you next I have Jones
there in which you just make
yourself.
Yes
you madam chair members of the
committee my name is regards
although with the ACLU of New
Mexico we stand in strong
support of AC ninety one and we
really appreciate Sanchez of
Representative Dan and my
assistant bringing this some
important common sense piece of
legislation I'm also you know at
I'm really excited about this
bill from a personal reason we
they feel you support for the
reasons just tap the stated and
and and and and for the reasons
that the experts outline but I I
I enjoy this bill and I'm really
happy to be able to work on this
reform and speak in favor of it
because I spent a approximately
ten years in prison last name
first and the abuses that go on
inside of a our corrections
facilities including you know
amounts you meant by officials
I've seen on folks leave on with
education credentials that they
can use in the public and this
would and all that I heard you
all the support I got totally
off track but thank you very
much.
Thank you next Francis Gonzales.
Good afternoon madam chair
committee member's name is
Frances the dollars most former
employee of many many years of
the Arizona department of
juvenile and adult corrections
we're under two consent decrees
for both juvenile and adult the
position should be hired not
appointed so it's not a
political position and be
transparent make sure the
position can make suggestions
for change and has miliardy with
corrections this seems of the
Attorney General should have
position and staff in no wall in
two years the advisory committee
procedure needs to be set up
along with of the first quarter
tentative date for public
meetings and concerns on page
seventy eliminating corrections
especially due to over use of
solitary confinement which needs
an overhaul in New Mexico much
of this falls under the job of
the secretary corrections agency
director anyway I'm available
for consultation in this
position needs every right to
continue even after the two
rounds and sent you pre thank
you.
Thank you Margarita at Santiago.
madam chair members of the
committee I am Margarita study
on all I'm an organizer with the
ACLU but I'm on my own.
More.
And.
I strongly support no one ninety
one.
One.
That works.
Work for with
fire and it.
We to be discovered also one
ninety one answers a continual
flow of accurate.
The chairman of people
incarcerated for independent
monitoring these are mines.
Watching.
And in two thousand eight the
American Bar Association called
for independent as an oversight
for all government levels
I'm taking the concerns spoken
earlier I really urge you to
support this bill thank you so
much basically Sanchez have a
good night everyone.
Thank you very much I don't have
any with right right right we
see this anymore hands raised I
don't know I have no further
public comment.
Go to
Representative content
Representative lance just would
you like to respond before we of
the committee.
Madam chair and ready to go to
the committee.
Thank.
No thank you will stand for
questions.
Let me because I'm a co sponsor
let me just say something before
we go to the committee and that
is that
I was really pleased with
Representative my asked.
brought this up in the criminal
justice reform subcommittee in
the interim because I have
actually tried to do this myself
working with the number of
people in two thousand seven
eight nine I think over those
years I actually had with
l'oreal first and
It grew out of the work of the
bipartisan commission on prison
rape elimination.
That was born during the George
W. bush administration and so it
was a bipartisan commission
that.
Came up with the prison rape
elimination policies that were
recommended
across the country.
One of the.
Recommendations on this
commission.
Why is
That every state in.
States should have independent
oversight of corrections and
when I brought it up it was not
intended.
As.
As it is a criticism necessarily
of the corrections department.
In fact what the the commission
recommended is that states
implement independent oversight
when they're not in crisis.
So
That was that was our argument
the corrections department at
that time it was it was a
completely different
administration many years ago
now was very adamant that they
had sufficient oversight what I
felt at the time was that the.
Legislature having.
That.
And interim committee described
as corrections oversight is
really very misleading to the
public to the people who work
worked at corrections to the
people who are incarcerated
there to the families of people
who incarcerated there.
Because we don't really have the
time or the resources.
Or the professionalism of the
numbers to be an oversight
committee the best we can do is
this it and we did have turn key
access.
Posted late during.
Richard Senate distribution and
secretary market child was very
good about letting us come in
when when we were able to of
course not all know when to go
visit a prison because of the
pandemic.
Not
I think we give I'm very false.
Russian to the public that we
are that we serve and an
oversight role I really do and
I get letters from prisoners I
don't have any staff I feel just
terrible when I don't get those
answered when I hear from
families so there's there's a
great deal
That warrants that could be done
and just listening to our
testimony and the agony we all.
Experienced over the house bill
forty certainly brings home the
the idea that we
Do need independent oversight so
and all of when we when we did
have the bill back in two
thousand eight two thousand nine
Attorney General Gary king
volunteered to
Have it placed in his office.
But we never really decided that
even with Attorney General
paying that that was the best
place for it we have we thought
about the auditor we thought
about the Attorney General and I
was not able to see.
The time working on this
particular
Brainstorming about this year's
mechanism and it really does
seem like.
Kind of an elegant solution.
It's not to say that it can.
Could be improved but I I think
this is a very good starting
point so that I'm ready to go to
the committee and let me see who
had hands up first thanks first
it was Representative.
I
yes you're at the top of the
list Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
I approach this
issue.
Waving that.
It's our responsibility to to
conduct.
More oversight of what we do on
a number of things
And certainly corrections is is
a department of that.
Probably first and foremost.
Presents significant risk.
to the state in terms of
Lawsuits so what have you impact
when I was a county commissioner
the detention
the head of our detention
department always said that the.
He was in charge of the
department that have the most
risk associated with it even
more so than the chair out and
There's a lot of truth to that
so providing
or or.
Calling for so why just light of
oversight.
It is something that I reveille
support the line that that I'm
concerned with is if where where
do we end oversight and began
Getting and operations and I
think if I heard of the the
secretary correctly I think
that's the concern that that she
express.
And.
Just looking at some of the
things you know the the
budgetary matters that that
certainly not oversight that's
for the you know we will the the
power of the pen and we're and
we can appropriate or not
appropriate but but putting
someone in the role of of maybe
determining budgets and maybe
that was overstated but being
involved in that.
In my opinion goes beyond just
just oversight
and so I think we need to be
careful that we don't create a
position where the correction
department now has two bosses to
to answer number one the
governor number two
the ombudsman
that and I think there's a role
for for oversight but for if we
draw that line to for them.
We began.
Are you of.
I think going beyond what what
the real purpose of the but bugs
then as I look at some of the
language in the bill of this
short but
On page one wind twenty.
It says that those persons to
assessed less then the
possibility of a actions
occurring within the corrections
department actions that that's
pretty broad it's not the very
specific I don't know if that
means lawsuits but
pretty broad line region then
our turnover rate seven one
thirteen.
This person is responsible to
eliminate corruption including
all these things and I look at
that list and I just I I say.
Should be all ombudsman the
be the one responsible for
eliminating those things or
should be simply overseeing
or or providing oversight and
reporting back to our the
legislature as to problems that
may be identified.
The so that we can work with the
executive and and trying to
address those those issues with
this really gives this ombudsman
What I consider real power
shallow lemonade of those things
and the I'm not sure that was
the intent but that's what it
says and then the of this we
have an investigation process
allies are presumed complaints
would be elected to the bugs by
making they can do the
investigation but I I I'm I'm
somewhat sympathetic to to the
secretaries.
Statements that may be this
piece of legislation is getting
a little too far then just
simply of oversight and having a
full and ready access all
records or what have you are
we've dealt a lot with the bills
that are are saying state
agencies should do this and that
with respect to records of this
bill basically allows E.
ombudsman for you.
We access to everything in the
department and and so
I don't know that I have any
specific recommendations
regarding language but I would
encourage the Sanchez to baby
sit down with the secretary take
to heart some of her concerns
and see if there's some.
What we need in here that needs
to be tweaked so that that line
reflects a proper oversight role
but does not get em to the.
What I consider the day the
operations of
you very risky and a very
important function of state
government
I don't have any further
questions that's that's just my
statement but I I hope that the
sponsors will we'll take the
secretary up on on our offers
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative thank
you Representative would you
like to respond just to say that
I appreciate the questions also
appreciated the time the
secretary took with myself and
others to begin these
conversations as the session got
going in and I look forward to
furthering them as well thank
you madam chair and
representative thank you next I
have Representative Armstrong
thank you madam chair and thank
you representative for for
bringing this forward
it reminds me of the ombudsman
program that I'm of the familiar
with is the long term care
ombudsman.
It's also an independent
and by federal law even has to
be independent
investigates complaints looks
for
it systems issues administrative
issues
Legislative fixes all sorts of
things and and the lightness is
also it's residential facilities
and corrections as residential
and if there are issues going on
or complaints to be made to have
a safe place to take those
outside of the facility I think
is is critical.
No long term care ombudsman also
works with volunteers
I I would say probably my one
suggestion might be that there's
some kind of a.
a prohibition of
defense attorneys or what what
is being going on a fishing
expedition as a volunteer to
find information so you might
wanna consider that and because
it's attached LFC it doesn't
appear that there's rulemaking
authority and and I don't know
if that's possible when it's
attached LFC but rulemaking
authority so you can clarify.
qualifications training
required.
Who can and can't be a volunteer
ombudsman
you know things like that that
would be my only suggestion as
you move forward but I do think
it's in the long term care
ombudsman couldn't do their job
without volunteers they can't be
everywhere but they are the eyes
and ears of individuals who have
no place to air those complaints
safely.
And
I might add in the long term
care world that also means that
we have taken and pursued action
legislation and or up the chain
to the governor whatever I'll
bet against.
Sister agencies.
So department of health to
regulates
facilities and operates some
state owned facilities long term
care facilities the ombudsman
has raised.
Thank and some of those
facilities including.
Previous day's going undercover
in state owned facilities to
and I'm not suggesting that here
but I mean it but the point is
sometimes it's really looking at
yourself to and so while I
appreciate an ombudsman a long
term care ombudsman have access
to all the records and they have
access to all the facilities.
and and so I think those are
critical components and
you know it it.
So I I think but but to doing
some regulation about how that
happens or reasonableness of
access and so forth might be
helpful but I think this is a
lot in many ways so as long term
care ombudsman goes one step
further and they advocate for
those residents and and I
noticed your specifically saying
they're not doing that in this
but
I do think I'd like to say they
don't have any place else to go.
to be able to get away from more
resolves issues that are going
on yeah and and take.
Those complaints a safely
somewhere so I applaud you for
bringing us I think it's a long
overdue and the those are my
only suggestions if there's a
way when as you move forward to
think about those thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
representative Representative
green your next.
You madam chair and
representative one of the things
I did is I looked on the website
and I saw that the corrections
has an office of inspector
general and I was kind of
thinking this might be a good
fit under the but that's my only
comment I sure a lot of the
concerns that I saw in the FIR
from the corrections department
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
We see you.
I don't have any more members
who wish to speak.
What is the pleasure of the
committee moving to pass.
You for your state to have to
representative Armstrong.
I will second that motion.
Is there further discussion.
Overall.
Representative are all gone yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative.
All voted yes hoping that
there's further discussion with
the secretary.
Yes with the same conditions as
Representative Nibert I don't
think it's prime time yet thank
you.
Representative Townsend.
The.
Representative Cook.
I second.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes yes and one no.
It is.
Good luck to you all it
appropriations and I hope you
continue the conversations as
you go thank you very much.
And thank you all for your time
this evening I know you through
another line hearing.
And
members I have told you we were
going to hear house bill twenty
seven but actually we have
gotten a hold of the Majority
Leader and I'm going to text her
right now.
Let her know we're ready for her
and I think the
Speakers going to help out if
because there's yes if for
because for judges and here with
her today so we have a committee
substitute right our house bill
twenty seven.
I'll give everybody a minute to
locate that it was in the share
files today.
Representative Stapleton are you
ready to go.
Yes I am madam chair okay.
Would you explain the committee
sent to.
Madam chair
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill twenty
seven.
I'm separates Hazen I'm the
difference from the house bill
twenty seven is to the committee
sub is that it separates Hazen
from aggravated hazing in the
following ways Hazen consists of
one unlawful act intentionally
or negligently competed against
a student all a prospective
student of a public or private.
And every educational
institution madam chair members
of the committee this kind of
creates a substantial risk of
physical or mental injury
whoever commits the act of
hazing as defined is guilty of a
petty misdemeanor and then madam
chair in this committee
substitute we have aggravated
hazing consist of on on lawful
Act intentionally committed
against a personal was a student
all prospective student of a
public or private post secondary
educational institution this
conduct causes painful temporary
disfigurement though temporary
loss impairment of the functions
of any member all of the body of
the students are prospective
students all causes mental
injury to the students are
prospective student whoever
commits staff baited Hazen is
guilty of a misdemeanor and
those are the differences madam
chair members of the committee
and I now stand for questions.
I will the committee set up for
this.
Purposes second.
Representative Armstrong and for
questions of the committee first
I have Representative McQueen.
Thank you thank you madam chair
to did you want to recognize or
to do a check of the public
working at all thank you all you
know what it's really late sorry
thank you so much what the it is
but I coach right now.
I'm let's go to the audience and
see if there are it's because.
If there folks here in favor of
the legislation and if there are
any opposed would you put them
the call up please Georgia.
We're talking about hospital
twenty three.
Twenty seven twenty seven.
Okay twenty seven.
Twenty three in mind for.
Thank you.
So we just have one person in
the audience and here she likes
it so let's let's go to the
public comment.
And.
Is there anyone who wishes to
speak.
I don't see any hands raised.
Now we'll go to Representative
queen in the committee.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair Representative
Stapleton.
So it is a read the bill it's.
One the predicates of it being
unlawful hazing is the.
Commission on lawful Act.
Is that correct so.
For the crime mystery triggered.
Another crime has to occur.
Madam chair in your
well I don't want to.
Madam chair you can probably see
I'm so eager to try to act in
any way they could be considered
acting as an expert witness I
hope I'm not jumping the gun.
But I I I I'm happy to either
answer that question or to have
made to make.
That making Dorsey
who drafted it into that
question because we I just the
same question that
Representative McQueen I just
asked and I had the same study
did that make Mr C. was able to
explain why and the doesn't need
to be a predicate crime would be
all right madam chair to
recognize Dorsey to answer the
question.
The short answer Madam chair
representative we ask that is
that the.
this this this way drafting is
found in your across the
criminal code and the unlawful
act is the act being committed
but Mr Burciaga explained in in
better detail.
And she joins us she is here yes
okay good deal I see Medicaid.
Good
evening madam chair
Representative McQueen I thank
you for that question as speaker
Egolf indicated that is
something that we contemplated
carefully when crafting this
language and I think it is
important first to note that the
statutory language included in
this committee set up does very
closely tracked the language
that we already have in statute
in our New Mexico assault and
battery statute which if you're
looking at west law or amendment
source right now can be found at
thirty dash three dash two or
thirty dash three dash five you
can see Representative madam
chair and both of those statutes
that the unlawful languages
included in the definition of
both of those crimes and so in
order to comply with language of
the Courts already used to
seeing in interpreting I
included it here in addition to
that Representative and madam
chair it incorporates a purpose
to intrude on the bodily
integrity of the other person as
opposed to the purpose of of
some other purpose and so it's
not the specific intent is to
cost the harbor to humiliate so
I'm often this is more basic
than that and just covers the
underlying purpose of the Act so
if done with that purpose it
makes it unlawful and when I
speak to that purpose you can
see it Sir in both hazing
aggravated hazing that purpose
in section two of the
description.
Thank you for that Madam chair
So that that wasn't my reading
of the bill so I guess I have to
serve it just my thinking I was
actually.
I considered maybe that was a
good thing that it didn't it
wasn't so broad as to include.
It was limiting language because
it is had someone to commit a
crime for this to be a crime.
Which would make this a crime
less often but if someone
doesn't have to commit a crime
for this to be a crime then it's
back.
Broader.
So that's a concern and the the
the main difference between.
using and.
However be did he sing is
appears to be that the
aggregated using risks causing
Physical or mental injury and
the aggravated hazing actually
causes physical or mental injury
is that correct.
Madam chair leader Stapleton
then respond to that question
yes you may.
Thank you madam chair
representative McQueen that is
correct in part there are two
main distinctions between what I
would call simple hazing
aggravated hazing the first one
you've correctly identified is
the actual harm costs and that
can be found in section three of
each one I'm in in a hazing a
person in simple petty
misdemeanor hazing a contact at
the conduct must create a
substantial risk of physical or
mental injury to the student or
prospective student however for
aggravated hazing in C. three
there must actually be it
physical harm and section see
three it that's a complicated
legal way of saying an actual
harm it is the exact identical
language that you can see in our
battery statutes describing
misdemeanor aggravated battery
harm so we pulled from that
however a Madam chair
representative there is also the
additional distinction between
the men's right elements in for
a Sir you madam chair answer if
you look at simple hazing in
section eight you can see that
it can be committed either
intentionally or negligently
however if you look to
aggravated hazing in section C.
it can only be committed
intentionally so there is both a
distinction in the men's raha in
that the mental state required
to substantiate the create the
crime as well as the outcome of
the crime whether we're just
creating a risk or a physical
harm physical or mental harm.
Thank you for that and Madam
chair and representative in
experts
So the negligent
language again is an expansion
That's that's concern a mental
injury can you explain why
mental injury is is that.
Is that.
Comparison or is that something
more substantial.
Madam chair little Stapleton
more respond to that question
yes thank you madam chair
representative McQueen it's my
understanding that that is a
Not statutorily defined however
it is language that is used
often the criminal code and it
would be up to the prosecutor to
prove what that mental harm is
and potentially at I will admit
up to the court to distinguish
what it means and the specific
factual context generally
speaking factual increase like
this are analyze on a totality
of the circumstances basis
meaning that the prosecutor
would have any number of ways to
attempt to prove that and the
defense would of course have the
opportunity to rebut it it can
happen through expert testimony
through a psychologist or
forensic evaluation it can also
happen through anecdotal
evidence from lay witnesses
speaking to the ways in which a
student or prospective student
demonstrated mental instability
following a detriment that they
suffered.
Madam chair representative
expert I find some of my most
persistent memories things I
would like to forget and can't
are we live in Paris myself.
it is that a mental injury.
Chair may I can maybe take a
crack at that because it's it's
similar madam chair in the civil
context and it's a classic Law
School answer which is it
depends and it depends what the
jury fix.
And it it's up to the prosecutor
to look at the totality of the
circumstances and then it's up
to the jury to decide if that's
a mental injury.
Okay madam
president expert
I believe this is my last
question on page three of the
bill
The section II using shell not
included.
Level are provided that the
goals are approved by the
educational institution.
Which seems like a.
Further substantial upfront
paperwork issue.
That.
In order to determine what is
not hazing.
The our academic institutions
will need to approve goals of
returnees an athletic teams and
social clubs at the time.
So that.
They need the money which is
that am I misreading that.
I'm.
Shared and Representative can I
you know again that would go to.
This is an element of proof for
the crime you know as you go up
the scale and severity of
potential punishment going from
petty misdemeanor to a full
misdemeanor crime the
prosecutors get to look at that
is going to have to decide
whether or not they'll be able
to take testimony from that
school that would be basically
what you do is you would need a
witness from the educational
institution to testify to the
jury.
that the.
With the hazing did not further
of an approved goal of the.
of the community college of the
university I don't think would
be that hard to Tate you need to
do to students or some
administrative for university
simply to testify to the jury
that that the conduct that led
to the charge was not approved
by or in furtherance of the
schools schools.
Madam chair representative.
Representative speaker expert I
I guess.
I guess the question might be
one of timing like this activity
happened and then the
educational institution look at
it and say well yes that's a
goal we approve of.
Or do they need a.
You know policy like the goals
of you know the softball team
are such and such.
I I mean you could probably be
fairly generic
language about building
character and teamwork and stuff
like that but.
But just the phrase the approved
goals.
It.
Was incredible what we're we
were referring to at and madam
chair Representative clean and
and make please correct me if
I'm wrong that I think that
issue you would simply.
I have to have a witness from
the educational institution that
would testify that conduct that
led to the charge was not in
furtherance of the goals and
then that defense counsel would
attempt to cross examine to
determine whether it was an
explicit activity termination of
the contacted Lee to the goals
may could you could you know be
an area of cross examination but
as it's written I thank you.
Yeah I think it needs
flexibility and madam chair
interest if miss North if Mister
sea might have some so maybe add
to that.
Madam chair with the permission
of so thank you.
Thanks leader Stapleton
Representative McQueen at eight
absolutely understand appreciate
that question and where you're
coming from and I think it is
very important to win drafting
any sort of criminal on
particularly when we're
describing what I would call
exceptions are are about think
we have here that they're that
they're clear I do agree in all
honesty that this language has
not been seen elsewhere in New
Mexico statutes that I am
personally aware of however this
exact or very similar language
is present in most of the other
hazing statutes throughout our
country and just to back up a
little bit I know that at
believe leader Stapleton
reference this in her initial
presentation of this bill but
New Mexico is actually only one
of six states that doesn't have
a specific law either
prohibiting or defining hazing
and so in crafting this bill I
did review the forty four laws
that are present across our
country either defining or
prohibiting varying degrees of
hazing and this or similar
language that you see in section
II on page three is present in
most of those statutes I think
the intention behind it is to
say that for example if you're
someone who participates in
competitive sports there are
often and training exercises
that are required of students in
order to be at the top of their
game that are extremely
strenuous and require extended
physical insurance and can cause
pain and so we certainly don't
want to make those types of
situations subject to criminal
penalty and so that this type of
languages to design is designed
to prevent
Criminal charges being filed
against individuals who are
doing what they're schools
believe is right to further
their goals in education
and Representative McQueen madam
chair directly on point to your
question in terms of timing I
think it's going to be a fact by
fact basically that the court is
going to need to determine that
based upon the individual
institution and the activity in
question but I certainly do
believe that any sort of
documents that the organization
whether twelve with your the
institutional or the educational
institution or not could
certainly lend weight either for
or against an argument that
conduct constitutes hazing but
it doesn't necessarily need to
pre date the bat Act itself
and I I don't know if any case
law that would interpret that
language otherwise.
Thank you for that madam chair
sensible to and I've voted for
versions of this bill at least
twice before but is my
understanding and appreciation
of criminal justice issues
continues to develop I am
hesitant to create a new crime
of primarily directed at young
people for activity that I I
look I personally love.
but activity that I think can
and should be addressed by the
act making stations and I was a
little taken aback to the one
the primary proponents of the
bill was backing University of
New Mexico you said that there
is a system of student justice
wasn't panel and adequately I
was disappointed by that and I
was somewhat chill by some of
the the public support for the
bill that advocated which I
recognize is not in this bill
but advocated expanding it to
high schools in New upping the
the the crime to being a four
three tell.
but but as it stands I just
I think we have to be careful
about criminalizing conduct
which can and should be
addressed through administrative
means so thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative McQueen
madam chair.
Representative divert.
Thank you madam chair.
madam chair and madam Majority
Leader of just a couple
questions the yes Sir committee
substitute is.
Two prong approach where you're
Original Bill just have
basically one prong are are you
are you satisfied with the
outcome of the committee
substitute.
Madam chair Representative night
but the committee subsea to.
We
tional that.
If you have substantial
substantial risk okay hello
mental injury then.
A petty misdemeanor so it
separates
the bodily harm from something
that may be considered are not
bodily harm and so it makes a
difference fall whatever the
action is that took place yes.
Right and madam chair and madam
Majority Leader of the initial
of bill just basically didn't
worry about the aggravated harm
portion because I suspect if you
get to that point of actual
damage your have other laws that
already are on the books that
would take care of battery
assault.
And what have you
so I I I'm not the meeting to
argue with you but.
I see one word that that does
because we are a little bit of
hesitation and and generally we
don't.
Criminalize negligent acts and
we say the word negligently
committed and the the first
poll portion of this this bill
and maybe
Mr Dorsey can can explain all on
her research.
Why there's a negligent it's
our.
standard imposed here where
generally negligent acts are not
criminalized.
Madam chair and miss.
And then please.
Thank you later Stapleton and
madam chair representative line
for thank you for that question
that.
Is absolutely something that we
have discussed in terms of
developing the language around
this the intent behind
separating the two separate
crimes that the petty
misdemeanor in the full
misdemeanor hazing was to show
an understanding of the
different ways in which this
crime could be committed and to
make sure that crime that we
would consider more culpable is
punished more severely and so in
raising the language of
aggravated he's in to include an
actual physical harm as well as
to eliminate any possibility
that it could be conducted
negligently we are ensuring that
the full misdemeanor crime of
aggravated hazing is only
attributed to the ones that are
to those that are the most
deserving of such a penalty
however more directly on point
your question around negligence
it is true that generally
speaking negligent behavior is
not criminalized however there
are versions of homicide that
can be conducted in a negligent
manner and I believe that the
specific word negligent went
back and forth among myself and
some analysts that we're working
together to craft the most
careful version of this bill
that we could and and it was an
attempt to make sure that the
the requisite mens ray at
indicated that people who are
engaged in a hazing behavior but
may not be able to show immense
rail lot rising to the level of
aggregate to an intentional act
but some but acted in a way that
still created an extremely
unsafe situation for students
are prospective students are
still potentially subject to
penalty under the petty
misdemeanor statute.
M. Madam chairman and Mr Garcia
but both the original words in
the bill were recklessly or
intentionally endangers
endangered and and you know as
of non criminal lawyer I of the
the language.
Made more sense the words
intentionally or negligently
committed and for me the
recklessly or intentionally
language one of them my
preference of.
Just because I I have a natural
reaction to to negligence are
and are formal contacts but what
was the word recklessly of not a
word that that you're maybe the
analyst the thought was
appropriate for this our first
level of of hazing.
Madam chair leader Stapleton
would you like me to respond to
that yes please thank you madam
chair representative my part.
Unfortunately I have to give you
the very annoying answer from
law school that it depends I
think that in crafting this bill
the goal is to try to make sure
that we're capturing like I said
two different categories of
activity one more severe for
aggravated one less severe for
simple hazing and the term
recklessly and intentionally at
the both of those are very
carefully defined in case law
and in statute having very
specific terms that it was our
understanding didn't quite
capture the type of behavior
that leader Stapleton and
advocates of this bill we're
trying to to make sure we're
subject to a potential penalty
if however that was a
misunderstanding on our part it
certainly wouldn't be the first
time and I would have to defer
to to leader Stapleton on that
policy decision.
All let madam chair and Mr
Garcia
I I've had some pretty
significant discussions with the
settlement Majority Leader on
this this concept maybe not this
bill but this concept and the
the thought was to try to get
something on the books that
we're that could be utilized to
show college students
specifically that such behavior
is not only frowned upon but
that it's against the law and to
to try to get their attention
with not just don't do that but
it it's against the law you know
it's a really bad idea for you
to do this because it's against
the law and so the words
recklessly or intentionally in
dangers of I think you grant
that concept and and now we go
to intentionally or negligently
committed M. M. like I said I
just have a preference for the
the word recklessly over the
word negligently because in my
mind.
I can.
Visualize reckless conduct a lot
better than I can visualize
negligent conduct an act
criminal sense if if if that
makes any sense anybody but but
in my mind it's more vivid for
me and I think those words did
accomplish the goals of the.
Majority Leader and and
There was great discussion over
over those words but it's now
been changed and I just want to
make sure that we're comfortable
in putting that go gently in
this context which to me is more
nebulous them that recklessly
and madam Majority Leader or or
Mister sea if you care to
comment on that I I would
appreciate some clarity.
I would have missed I don't see
respond but let me say
Representative and I but I was
told that that was language that
was used across in other states
that already have the hazing.
And madam chair representative
neighbor leader Stapleton that
is my understanding as well.
And
I want to make sure I'm not
misstating the law to this
honorable Committee but I think
that I'm not aware if any other
petty misdemeanor statutes off
the top of my head that employee
a standard of recklessness for
that I could be wrong but I
think that recklessness is a
standard that's usually reserved
for at least for for
misdemeanors if not in some
cases for felonies but again
some trepidation with that and
perhaps the and now enter the
analyst listening in may have
additional input
but I think that to one of the
hypotheticals of the speaker and
I discussed at great length in
trying to determine how best to
craft this language was one of
and I don't mean to say this
Wheatley but basically over
hydration if you think of a
situation where forcing where
one student is forcing another
prospective student to drink
twenty glasses of water in a
very short time period that's
not necessarily reckless but it
is certainly something that can
cause very serious harm to an
individual in the wrong
circumstances and so we just
wanted to make sure that we were
able to capture the full now PO
of contact that should be
subject to to punishment or at
least potential punishment
potential charging because of
course just because someone is
charged with the crime certainly
doesn't mean they'll be
convicted of it again however
Madam chair representative
neighbor leader Stapleton that
is certainly a policy decision
that they leave to those of you
who are voting.
Madam chair and the store see
the the over hydration issue
that my mind would be reckless
not negligent but that's how I
would would view it I'm I I I
support the bill either way but
I I just wanted to kind of flesh
that out of I'm glad to hear the
matter Majority Leader that
she's comfortable with the with
the changes that were made thank
thank you madam chair thank you
madam Majority Leader thank you
Mr Garcia.
Representative thank you
representative Representative
Eli.
Madam chair yes I it's funny
because I am have almost exactly
the same comments as
Representative Nighbor had I I.
I I'm not a criminal lawyer I am
a civil lawyer and I know what
negligent means negative means
on reasonable but it doesn't
mean that there's any men's
right attached to it there's no
chance attached to it and so
we're going to now criminalize
behavior by young people.
That an adult jury is going to
decide is unreasonable.
And that makes me incredibly
uncomfortable I don't mind the
men's raha.
But the idea of criminalizing on
reasonable behavior
a negligence standard even if
it's a misdemeanor strikes me as
a powerful tool in the authority
chance that I would not be
comfortable with and I mean I
support the bill but not without
language in it I I I can't vote
for a bill that's going to
criminalize negligent behavior I
don't get it and I'm sorry
because I like the idea of you
know sending a message to people
that hazing is not appropriate
and it should be an H. and an
intentional conduct should be
are criminalized on a problem
that I do have a problem with
making on reasonable
decisions which I think young
people do all the time criminal
and I just think that's that's
that's eight that that's a step
too far for me so on madam chair
K. point of one one thing in
response Representative Eli I
think we're over focusing on.
That man's right because that is
only one element.
Is negligent behavior combined
with all the other elements in
the statute.
The purpose Madam chair for
which they conduct is being done
has to be done as part of an
initiation or as part of a you
know it organizations activities
and if you if you up the we're
talking about a petty
misdemeanor first of all it's
second Madam chair in in in in
Representative Eli.
If you if you go above
negligence you are that you're
gonna be shoehorning a standard
into a petty misdemeanor that
doesn't exist for any other
petty misdemeanor.
And in simple negligence can be
to predicate Madam chair
representative Ely for homicide
charge.
So I ate if you this is not a
departure from other areas of
the law as I understand it.
You know but you know I can
imagine madam chair this may be
somewhat frustrating to miss
Dorsey.
She's got for civil lawyers who
never do anything it touches
criminal on myself
Representative Ely Nighbor in
the queen talking about this but
I I madam chair I am relying on
his Dorsey statements to me that
this is not a departure human
from the way other states
approach this work from the we
petty misdemeanors are handled
elsewhere in the in New Mexico.
Madam chair and Mr speaker
response that okay let's go
through it so we got on number I
in a hazing just unlawful act
intentional or negligent so it's
like I know what that means so
now we're gonna have an unlawful
act this on reasonable I thought
that stopped the call I don't
get that there we go into sort
of yours the elements engine
action with initiation into
affiliation with all in office
in the gym membership in student
organizations student body or
private athletic club regardless
of whether the organization body
or club is officially recognize
that's the first element you got
to be a member of the club the
second one Dan Harris when an
act intentionally or negligently
endangers the physical health
ridicules or humiliates the
students are you on re your
partner club and you on
reasonably humiliate someone
causing them to the risk of
substantial risk of not fiscal
are but you can get me but our
our that's it Zacks higher pre
requisition yes it's a minor
crime it's still a crime whether
it's a misdemeanor or felony
you're still charging young
person with a crime that could
really not be a crime and I'm
not against the bill but I sure
like the language negligent
nothing about this is changing
my mind I agree with
Representative Nibert view of
the language reckless
endangerment fine but I'm
regional conduct in the us to
cross that behavior whether
you're talking about a
misdemeanor felony I'm sorry I
just don't get that and and
frankly it just wouldn't be that
hard to meet these elements
because the only two other
elements we're talking about is
your member of the club and you
have created a rest of mental
injury or physical injuries
mostly only two other elements
New.
That's not much protection from
somebody being prosecuted for
acting what Mr and I I want I
want I want to criminalizes
behavioral problems that let's
criminalize behavior that's
criminal let's let's make it's
on its intentional or some other
language whether it's reckless
but negligent is not a standard
I like animal statute sorry I
don't your shows up and we
statute mereka I hate the idea
from watching that kind of
behavior whether it's mine or
not so.
Madam chair and Representative
Eli
when I presented a bill.
last week and
I was told with the speaker
brought up the differences of
what was what legislation had
been passed in different states.
And and I'm.
The idea that analysts and the
lawyers some say that my bill
was too soft I'm on the activity
of the about crime being
committed and so then I'm it was
sent to have
Committee sub and the languages
would change in regards to I was
told what was already in in law
in other states I my objective
my objective is exactly what
Representative night but stated
and my goal is that I wants
young people students to be
aware of the fact that it is a
crime if you do these things so
I've been noted the haze in us
placed right now there's not one
but if I can place these young
students will participate in
clubs and fraternities and
sororities will say Hey I can't
do that because there's a haze
in law and I don't want to be.
In get to being guilty of our.
Misdemeanor and gives you have a
misdemeanor I'm not a lawyer but
I'm an educated and I'm
concerned about young people
and.
I have a son who wants to be in
a fraternity I'm
high school towards getting into
the funds
I want to make sure that when
the EDD's in college now and I
don't want that to happen to him
when he could end up being a
petty misdemeanor for something
that he thought was okay I'm not
able so you guys ought to
lawyers and I'm not and Mr
speaker is helping me he said we
need to do these things and make
it is supposed to help me.
Would sign onto my bill so he he
he he
the last time these these funds
right now I just need the right
thing what.
madam chair we're getting there
I try to kill bill.
Hi I'm I'm trying to get us
there can I just ask.
Madam chair and.
Mr Garcia I want to know if I I
know Representative Nighbor
asked this question but I'm
curious is recklessness is data
standard is recognized in and
criminal law because it if it is
then the eight even though this
is a committee substitute would
seem to me that the change would
be simple we would just change
the word negligently for
recklessly but I I don't know
that that's meaningful in a
criminal context.
Madam chair representative Ely
leader Stapleton yes there is a
standard for recklessness in the
criminals statutory structure so
madam chair what I would suggest
then as I would propose an
amendment that we would it
change where the word
negligently ups years so for
example on page one our line
nineteen the word negligently be
substituted for the word
recklessly the same on page two
line three where it says
negligently and then we change
it to recklessly I think it's
something that Representative
night bridge already suggested
I'm not seeing the word anywhere
else in the bill in the
committee substitute but if it
did that I I would have any
problems with the bill as for
it.
Madam chair I would.
And I would second the amendment
and those are the only two
places at.
So I'm you know we don't
actually amended committee that
we would get a point three
version drafted
so what you're saying is on page
one line nineteen instead of
negligently you would say
recklessly correct.
Here and then again madam chair
on page two
line sorry three correct line
three same same change from
negligently or recklessly.
And you just
need to kind of ask you it is
our discussion is coming we have
negligent homicide.
We do.
Would you just say it I I and I
get that I don't know what
negligently means in the statute
I get would negligently means
manager I think I do want a
homicide I don't understand what
it means in this connection I
mean it really literally it
means somebody could be a think
about what we're doing we're
we're these these could be.
Very differently judged by
adults these are these are
basically young people we want
to get rid of we we we want to
criminalize the really bad
behavior but this victory on
these kind of misdemeanors
really troubles me and I get
that the word negligence is used
on the site I I'm not a criminal
or I don't know that this I know
this makes me uncomfortable.
And let me just ask I know
Representative Stapleton just
wants to get this right and I'm
wondering if Mister speaker in
New Mexico if that
because we you know we would
still have to do that point
three but.
Do you see a problem with that.
Miss
madam chair I.
The I'm I'm not in a position to
save his friendly or unfriendly
I'm I'm I'm serving as wing man
to leadership will send that I
can imagine that.
Mr C. might have something to
say.
I thank you madam chair
Representative.
I don't see any issue with that
and then in terms of statutory
structure as stated recklessness
is a standard that exists in the
criminal code in can very easily
be supplanted here I certainly
understand the concerns voiced
both by Representative neighbor
and representative Ely I also do
agree that negligence is a
standard that's used both in our
criminal code and in others
hazing statutes in some other
states though not all and and
really do believe it's a bit of
a policy decision I do think
that I have heard it in previous
leader stable ten correct me if
I'm misstating anything but I
have often heard a leader stable
ten.
For rent desire to protect
students and I think that that's
the intent behind this bill I
believe that the capacity for
that protection extends both to
people that are in the wrong and
those that are in the right I
think that adding that extra
level of recklessness to the
statute would ensure that there
is less criminalization where
it's not necessary but at the
end of the day as I said that's
a policy decision for the rest
of you to make thank you for
letting me contributes to the
discussion okay what we really
appreciate your work on it.
So.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Yes Representative.
Madam chair
Representative McQueen.
I'm made the same statement this
time as he made the last time.
I'm.
I'm I don't know if he's a
criminal lawyer also but there's
lots of lawyers in that room
right now.
And I'm.
Did he I can't recall I'm trying
to recall did he spoke about.
The.
Negligently committed all
recklessly committed do you
recall that madam chair.
He's here you could answer for
himself.
Madam chair representative and I
I was concerned that negligent
negligently included included a
breadth of activity that concern
me I was not sophisticated
enough to seize on the term of
negligently committing a crime
because I'm not a criminal
attorney.
Okay thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay.
So.
You know usually where the
capital and we consistently
upstairs together forty three.
So that we can act on it we have
to point three do
Christina Kelly R. Ellen you
have a ninety.
What how fast we can get that
done Mr changing two words.
I'll defer to Alan.
Okay I'm not seeing now and on
here but Allen's.
I'm here okay there you are okay
your I needed to I don't have
your camber on it's just started
right that's right that's going
out
You wanna know how fast LCS
could get this for us.
We.
We know who the director is
besides maybe.
It was I'd make that we could
call our get to certainly by
morning we could do it is that
would that be satisfactory.
We can vote on it you can note
on the committee report is a
point three version.
I'm actually thinking that's
probably if there's
there's no confusion we're
talking about changing two words
in it we're not looking at a
very complicated thing we're all
gonna need to review again so
let's do that let's do it that
way and then try to get it we
will submit the committee report
into we have it.
So what's the pleasure of the
committee.
And madam chair on my that we
have done that in the past so
it's consistent with some things
we done in prior years.
We've done it would it's not.
Did I know is that.
Council service but yeah I know
seriously when we know what what
what it's really simple we have
done that so I'd like a motion
for do not pass on hospital.
Twenty seven added to pass on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill twenty
seven point three version.
Madam chair I will make that
motion you want me to restate
what you just said I will
otherwise I'm happy with your
state out here and I'll second
second that motion okay so all
right we have a motion and a
second.
To pass the committee stop wait
three version of house bill
twenty seven.
Well the court please call the
roll.
Representative Okonkwo yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Snyder yes.
Representative rain.
Representative rain.
Representative Townsend.
Not.
Representative Rehm.
Thanks.
Stricken.
All I said yes.
Yes.
Yes three now.
Okay so yeah we do pass.
In your point three version
major stable there thank you for
showing up in the middle of our
hello bills.
Thank you I'm.
Bye bye okay.
Next in line we have.
Representative okay house bill
one eighteen.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I have
soon but as my.
Witness in this in this case.
I'm
here right.
I think it's fine it's just yeah
Mr speaker.
We can reasons but and that's
expert witness in this case
this.
On this legislation.
We're we're you're over now.
I think she's here okay.
Thank you madam chair a
this bill and
And and and the interim has
built at one nineteen basically
changes that president say days
on.
Losses by having all traffic
citations filed with the court
is the lady in the say days is
between the courts and the legal
division
This doesn't make life simpler
for a lot of New Mexicans and
with that I'll let the agency
budget go and do.
And then we can go to questions.
Welcome Mr Czecho.
Thank you madam chair committee
I'll just back very quickly that
that the purpose of this bill is
to eliminate that are confusing
system that we have now that
result in increased penalties.
For drivers to get confused it
to the driver nothing will
change it's all the the work
that's done processing the
citation thank you very much.
Questions all right let me go to
the audience Nancy
Let me give the folks in the
audience a chance those in favor
of house bill one nineteen
please vote yes on the pool will
put that out for about fifteen
seconds.
Okay we're finished with the
full.
May I say by
Is is there anyone who wishes to
speak.
In the.
This either of in favor or
against.
First I have Jason Clarke.
Just yourself and begin speaking
thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jason I
am the director of the
court operations division for
the administrative office of the
courts and I'm here to show my
support for this bill as part of
the unified budget for the
judiciary.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Judge because autos.
Yes.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is judge pack
asada's on from the loss almost
magistrate court I am the
president of the magistrate
judge's Association we are in
support of house bill one one
nine I want to thank
Representative out cold for
bringing up this bill many times
driver makes decisions right on
this the road side and they want
to change them and this bill
will the for them that choice
and the opportunity to
understand all the issues and
pass that they can take and I
had one come to my window today
she wanted so much to change
that and I said I hope this bill
goes through that so the if you
ever get another ticket you can
do some thank you very much
thank you.
Artie Pepin hello RT.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I reiterate what was
ari sanitation said it's a this
is a unified budget bill it's
long past time for us to clarify
this and just make life easier
for law enforcement on the road
and for the people get citations
to not give them a decision to
make in the heat of the moment
let them come to us and pay or
fight it however they want we
really appreciate the support
thank you to Representative
outcome.
Thank you pretty good to see you
and give each other.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
couple defense lawyers
association
I don't want to stand in support
or opposition but I do want to
note for the committee that we
do appreciate that sponsor and
his advocate.
I'm sorry.
I accidentally.
No problem that our is late and
I very much appreciate all of
the work that you and the
committee have done
but I'll just start over
Rikki Lee Chavez on behalf of
the New Mexico from all defense
lawyers association we don't
stand and often for position or
in support of this measure we
appreciate what the sponsor and
has advocates are trying to do
however there are some other
similar measures making their
way through the legislature I
would direct your attention to
Senate bill seven which is what
I think and our members can get
a more comprehensive reform I
also would note for the
committee that on page fourteen
there is that we do have an
issue with the fact that you
know in traffic court you don't
typically you're not
granted the
the approval of the public
defender because there's
typically not you jail time
attached to these crimes
however with the language that's
on that page we're concerned
that then someone is being sent
to jail for failure to appear
for a traffic citation that
they're also not afforded a
public defender for and so then
there they are at the risk of
being sent to jail and so that's
something we'd like to see
clarified again we do support
what the sponsor is trying to do
but I do think that there are
some clarifications that could
be made in this in this bill
thank you.
Thank you very much.
We have no further public
comment so let me go back to
Representative all clone do you
want stated before I go to the
committee.
Madam chair I think we're in the
committee.
First representative.
You madam chair and thank you
representative I do remember
hearing this before and seems
that this will make things
easier I do have out one
question or or yeah and I'm in
amendment
to propose looking at the our
committee analysis it seems that
there may be a technical issue
on page twelve.
Line twenty four to twenty five.
What refers to a law enforcement
officer and I think
to make it consistent with the
rest of the with the title and
other provisions that should be
arresting officer.
I don't have any problem with
the I think it was brought to my
attention earlier.
And I think it is the right way
to do this.
So we place that it appears
Representative Armstrong.
I believe so madam chair that's
the only place that was pointed
out in the analysis that we just
have used the wrong term there
that's not consistent with the
rest so Representative all
commits a friendly amendment and
would share law proposed and
then Representative Armstrong
yes I propose that line twelve I
mean page twelve line twenty
four twenty five we strike law
enforcement and insert in lieu
of arresting.
Okay.
Third question on the amendment.
Sure Representative night on the
amendment.
Thank you Mr chains a word
eighty two and if you make that
change.
By and arresting officer instead
of a R. S..
Grammar yes.
I need to open.
So you're you're correct
Representative Iver and
Representative arresting officer
the strike a and certainly there
on in yes strong.
So it it would law enforcement
yes there on rest right it would
be re done a penalty assessment
citation issued by an arresting
officer shall be submitted to
the appropriate from there.
So it's is there discussion on
the amendment.
Second the.
New.
Is there any objection to that
amendment.
That
will be a doctor.
That's all I have thank you okay
I'm excited Representative
nighter.
Thank you madam chair for just
drop down three more lines so
it's on page thirteen line three
The word may is years of armed I
I my my only question is should
it be.
Discretionary does muscle or
should it be a mandatory
dismissal madam chair
representative welcome.
Can you give me the same thing
is we just page page thirteen
line three.
Don't care which way it is I
just want to make sure it
comports with your attention
should that be a discretionary
dismissal or should it be a
mandatory dismissal for failure
to meet the deadline.
You madam chair and
representative I would I think
this the discretion to the judge
was going to be handling the
cases that are proceed with that
I that's all I have madam chair.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
Two passed as amended.
Most of representative Armstrong
produce passes imagine.
Second from our vice chair.
New York is there for the
discussion.
Thank you for the discussion
let's call roll please.
Representative welcome yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative Snyder yes.
Representative rain.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
One of the leading yes one
excuse.
To pass.
House bill one nineteen as
amended Representative Akan.
Thank you members of the
committee.
Thank you all very much
Representative Miguel Garcia.
We're closing the gender folks.
Madam chair quickly I've got a
couple of text asking what
remains might we just announced
that really quick I'm sorry we
have the house bill forty one
and house bill sixty eight okay
thank you madam chair.
I.
Representative Miguel Garcia
welcome.
There we go madam chair here we
are you may okay.
Senator a I have to to.
To print to presenting experts
and one technical expert the two
presenting experts are kind from
frontier communities and they're
coming in by phone the first run
out that his number is five oh
five six seven zero four eight
four five.
And the other is Joseph Claudia.
is coming in on phone five oh
five four five four.
Zero seven three five.
And then lastly we have a the
technical expert are too large
to that then I see him on the
screen.
I don't see my phone guys up
there yet I'm not sure how that
works is that does that work
have you tried it with does
a political person to panelist
yes the Georgia she's.
It doesn't seem to allow them
but I can talk we can have the
talk isn't it attendee I can do
that for you Representative okay
good for madam chair okay I'll
I'll start The presentation.
madam chair members of the
committee.
House bill forty one includes
new language in chapter forty
nine which is our our land
grants that use.
At eighteen the final criteria
of a partition Land Grant.
And the most forty one also adds
qualifying criteria in what
constitutes a partition Land
Grant and chair these two
elements need to be up to the
objective of house bill forty
one which is establishing
partition land grants as
bonafide units of government
political subdivisions of the
state and join their twenty six
sister land grants and that
undertaking.
Madam chair the the two thousand
and four milestones Land Grant
reform legislation created in
partnership with the Land Grant
communities and the newly formed
Land Grant interim committee.
Twenty six land grants covered
under the general provision of
chapter forty nine automatically
became political subdivisions of
the state in that two thousand
and four miles the legislation.
After that madam chair.
I land grants not under the
article one general provision
but under the article two and
article three.
After bringing specific
legislation to the legislature.
To become
a political subdivisions and
these land grants were Madam.
Please go to needy
thank in just a couple years ago
Monsanto.
Forty one well as the same
protocols as the existing land
grants as political subdivisions
but exclusively targeting are
partitioned land grants and
these partition land grants
madam chair are in our frontier
communities we have a New Mexico
man which is some of the motor
we have the lower than us which
is west of the Montezuma castle.
Inside of a permit speak both
when he less which is between
story lake and just make us we
have someone who's dean which is
south of Las Vegas we have some
get only more which is south of
Las Vegas and we have our oil
under the law which is north of
the house on the road to the
Taos ski valley.
And that.
Madam chair and I would like to
recognize
Run or dead.
One of my experts from the lord
saying US partition grant and
he's on phone number five oh
five six seven zero four eight
four five.
Good evening.
did I get through this time your
own.
Madam chairman committee members
thank you Representative
Representative Garcia thank
thank you it's a pleasure to
have an opportunity is that with
each and everyone of you this
evening in our to take just a
few minutes of your very busy
schedule to update you on the
need the need that exists for
how House Bill forty one to
finally reach its cold that the
and pass
I represent the low Davis Land
Grant that representative Garcia
just mentioned and the
representation that I bring to
the committee is that of the
lower grade notes of act up
president of the land grant and
office that I've had on and off
for the last the
Twenty years seems like fourteen
to fifteen years has been more
on the knocked up before I get
started of in the previous here
in.
Actually it took place here in
Las Vegas New Mexico by the year
ago the question came up as to
what qualified immunity as hoped
on quote an expert witness.
And I would like to start my
presentation by identify and who
I am and why the information and
the questions that I will stand
for if you choose to address
those questions to me what is I
foundation.
If you will if you will thank
eighteen eighty four to nineteen
seventy seven ninety three
years.
The amendment or terra.
The Daily Telegraph was my
grandfather.
Do that'll Ortega was the third
generation four K. to us here
and the guy in this canyon that
utilize the land grant third so
that meant it was to report him.
We are talking now of his H. O.
Justice lifespan eighteen eighty
four to nineteen ninety seven
ninety three years old of.
That we're still
introduction to the indigenous
knowledge of what a land grant.
Was about moving forward in
nineteen.
Twenty eighteen ninety six
unfortunately at sixty eight
year old mile Ruben Ortega
felt.
Two cancers cancer.
But none the less my second
mentor and information source of
what was going on with the lower
paying us Land Grant have been
me nineteen fifty six to present
our young happy sixty four year
old.
So respectfully I would like to
set the record the the the
information that I'm going to
share with you and it was
questions I will repeat that it
was questioned as to what is my
knowledge of it well mine is
terrible history money is the
actual indigenous knowledge of
the three generations myself
being the third generation that
has worked with land grants.
With that and
time concerned it was in the
early nineteen fifties that my
grandfather few Democrat served
as precinct judge for president
number twelve here in this area.
He was summoned along with the
Mr Tony PPO of Martinez and the
lead lay out to a meeting in
with the then head of the porch
additional district judge judge
army home to appear in Las Vegas
at the courthouse.
You I just at approximately two
thousand acres of the lower
grade this land grant had been
do that through the power of the
district judge judge economy
fell to a gentleman by the name
of model home.
This would be a shock I clearly
remember my grandfather.
Telling me this is a total
surprise to of course not only
the three that I mentioned but
to the neighbors and people of
the greatness can be more that
utilize Land Grant.
Upon arriving at that needed I
don't have the specific date hi
and this is on arriving at that
me and my grandfather made it
very clear yet almost side we
arrived there the I come from
most we encountered of trance
americanos three angle people
in both include what house with
highs you know the here on and
they told us committees on a
keypad those simples mas photo
submitted this excuse me those
made Oct this administaff that
they were going to take two
thousand acres of the land
grant.
And
Fast forward what we've been
recognized or at least what he
recognized was that the the land
grant that people had used for
years service
a situation that it was up for
grabs this is a simple way of
saying that and the for lack of
knowledge for lack of
communication for lack of
resource all of which my
grandfather in my dad explain to
me it happened it happened the
eight produced gone so that
in a nut shell is the history
that I would bring to your table
of course I will stand for
questions on any of that but I
think the better part of time is
to address the present and the
future.
Currently lower Land Grant the
login this Land Grant overseas
three thousand acres yes in
relation to this situation
making fifty two resulted in a
the that was issued by the
fourth judicial district judge
judge that may help to the
precinct judge which happened to
be by grandfather but he was
only the caretaker if you will
it was really to the people.
Over the years there's never
really been in a clearer of
definition or distinction for
lack of a better word
of explanation as to just what
control indoor Authority the
local people had with the land
grant none the less the local
people of through the lower
guidance of band grant
association stepped forward to
charge and started to of the
governing programme of the duly
elected officers were put in
place members were of of.
Registered
membership fees were required
of.
Guidelines bylaws what can you
do what can't you do basically
the people stepped forward and
took charge of the
responsibility of
responsibly manage in those
acres that remained that
continues to exist to date that
is the way we operate.
Back about twenty thirty years
ago we had
a resident challenge the land
grant in attempted to claim
acreage we step forward as
association and challenged turn
to the Las Vegas board for help
and we see none and that's where
the real real question surfaced.
The lower gayness Land Grant.
Las Vegas land grant board
claims that when it's to their
convenience as we say in Spanish
posso Competencia.
But when it actually came to
Haiti we have somebody that is
wanted to take our land do we
have the authority to protect or
the Las Vegas board.
It was real quick to see the Las
Vegas Land Grant board was very
quick to shun the responsibility
and put it upon us I think in
the later of testimony and or
conversation with my fellow
mostly he less Land Grant of
board president Mr Joseph idea
you're going to hear a similar
situation
the problem.
Surfaced.
We have a land grant that
belongs to everybody but nobody
wants to take responsibility and
house bill forty one.
The way it is been written the
way representative Garcia
Representative selesai to have
worked with us actually
addresses the question that
needs to be answered.
Who's in charge.
Really really is in charge who
really really is responsible who
really really has the interest
of the land grant.
We feel through
time time prove an effort that
we the members of the lower
again this Land Grant stepped
forward back in the nineteen
fifties thank you at this the
seventies eighties nineties and
two.
The president we are not gonna
Representative the land grant we
work with the intention but
produk to keep it up valuable to
members we still maintain our
membership rosters we still
maintain our by laws we do road
improvements we've attempted to
do water improvements timber
management resources for those
type of projects all we use is
lacking.
Today the president the lower
giving us land grant as well as
the most ridiculous Land Grant
lie smack dab in the middle of
the.
Watershed.
Janus watershed.
Six thousand acres plus timber
that unfortunately is a match
box ready to go up and because
we have not had the authority.
To really take charge with been
in projects with growth
development with any type of
water improvement projects.
It only gets worse.
The two thousand eighteen farm
bill open the door for us.
Open the very big door for us
that resources from the United
States Department culture
natural resource conservation
service and RCS are now
available to assist not only are
Land Grant but the rebate.
Representative.
Yes madam chair.
Maybe we lost everybody but we
didn't talk I think maybe we
could just go to one of your
other presenters at this time we
seem to have lost the gentleman
that was
I'd like to the now go to Joseph
by the R. he's on the I will I
four four zero seven three five.
Josephite you're on and also I
if you could not be repetitive
in terms of what the Mr thing I
just shared.
Maybe limit yourself to two
minutes.
You're on.
You have to I mean it yourself
Sir.
If you wanted yourself we can
hear you.
Madam chair if they're on the
only thing is these are.
Okay okay does require yes
request permission to speak
that's just so fun maximum of
two minutes Joseph.
You got it.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative Garcia
my name is Joseph by the.
I am a retired school teacher
and farmer I have lived in Los
this for seventy three years.
I have been a member of the
mostly he this partition some
grant for fifty years and served
on its board I also serve on the
second level as he this
commission a community of Los
Angeles was established.
Around eighteen thirty five.
Armor's wearer Katie farmlands
before Las Vegas would establish
the a second monitor than those
he this was formally recognized
by the Mexican governor in Santa
Fe in eighteen forty one
eighteen forty one is the
priority date the second one in
the city this the forested area
around the city this was used
this common lands for the
community Los Angeles it was
organized with the governing
structure.
Some of the uses included
grazing timber wood hunting
farming and irrigation at
community level some individuals
actually build homes and settled
within the sub grant move
forward to nineteen fifty one.
This is manage the partition
granted by an elected board of
trustees since nineteen fifty
one.
Regular meetings are held
according to the open meetings
act there's a set of by laws and
regulations are held the
original instigation for a
partitioned unit of government
was because of challenges the
city this experience in
receiving water and shed
restoration and fire prevention
funding from the state.
The forestry division approved
funds to reduce the risk of fire
to the watershed above Las Vegas
but the uncertain status of the
Los eighteen is delayed moving
the funds into action also Los
Angeles successfully defended
itself in court against not a
state landowners who blocked
access on a rope to the penny
more you know sixteen is
prevailed in district and
appellate court.
We received no support from the
Las Vegas land grant for help
from them we strongly support
house bill forty one.
As a summary.
We support list we see this
becoming a unit of government
house bill forty one.
Number two this will enable us
to apply for grants to just
for standing standing improves
habitat for wildlife reduces
force fires and makes fire would
available to the public.
For setting is desperately
needed some areas have four
hundred trees per acre or forty
to fifty is the norm also list
the list is a tributary to the
gayness river basin which is the
drinking water to the city of
Las Vegas and the second water
for finding for farming.
Number three.
Coming of unit of government
means compliance to the open
meetings act number four.
There is fiscal oversight by the
state audits may be required
number five.
For most transparency of our
public officials that includes
regular meetings by loss all
businesses done at regular
public meetings.
This is accountability for
public officials.
Number seven this bill has
passed both houses but is been
pocket vetoed by two governors.
Right the sub grant has been
behaving as a unit of government
since the beginning around
eighteen thirty five.
Finally we will continue to
defend ourselves in court.
And we strongly support house
bill forty one.
Thank you.
Which and madam chair with that
we stand for questions.
Thank you let me see if there's
anyone in the audience on this.
Secular issue.
Anyone who wishes to speak in
favor of this bill.
Address the.
Madam us to hit the right hand.
Well I I I'm calling on raised
hands right now okay.
I I had one draft the DJIA.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee.
Representative Garcia.
Of this is on the ramp of the
president of the New Mexico Land
Grant receptacle Senator and
president of the town of the
amendment that grants.
And I'd like to say that we
stand in full support of this
bill it does anything that would
help land grants the knowledge
and accepted for the for the
local for the government
entities that they are that
they've been running ads is a
great thing this will allow
these the small communities to
gain access to resources that
which will enable them to
provide more for their
communities and we stand in a
hundred percent full support of
HB forty one and we asset to
approve it and move forward
thank you.
Thank you Gilbertine Donna.
Members to keep your keep your
call at no more than.
We have a problem.
Mr king Tana if you're it's not
working.
We have a bad connection sorry.
Leonard Martinez.
Mr Martinez just I'm.
I'm yourself there you go and
I'm sure this is Linda Martinez
president some looking at each
online grant and also a member
of the library council we
strongly support hospital forty
one and we hope you approve it
and move it forward thank you
ma'am.
Thank you so much appreciate
that.
Steve Polanco.
Just under yourself please madam
chair members of the committee.
I had.
Steven you yourself.
I think you muted yourself again
Mr Polanco.
Now yes can you hear me now yes
okay thank you thank you madam
chair the inner SEEA I am the
president of the Representative
pose the committee and the
chairman Land Grant.
And also in the last council
member and are on behalf of the
I think that we struggles or
house bill forty one we hope you
give a big test go for thank you
very much.
Thank you I have a telephone
number five oh five six seven
zero.
Four eight four five.
Madam chair that's run our data.
What we already spoke he spoke
all right.
I'm Gilbert can Tana did you
already speak.
Madam chair this is Gilbert to
done a test on the Apollon there
so it is not the interest a
little bit more about also known
as the more Land Grant we oppose
house bill forty one we have
consistently opposes bill
because the state legislature
does not have the authority to
change the nature of the
character ready Land Grant
confirmed by the US Congress or
to recognize the land grant or
partition that was not confirmed
by the US Congress I'll give you
a fine example the motor Land
Grant good through of the Santa
Fe rating was stripped of all
its land we have no land we are
that this land grants so it's
really concerning to us how can
a lack of the wants to carve out
of the bar land grants get land
and yet this is the land this
land grants this is totally
illegal we have to get the land
grant the mother grant in line
first before we start talking
about these other land grants in
the original confirmation
process the.
That grant and the surveyor
general report recognized I land
grants that were considered for
partitioning but none of them
were recognized so we left the
model Land Grant within our
twenty six thousand plus acres
with restricted please leave
from the people of the land
grant which voters in four
counties it's very important for
us to know that these bills as
they go forward have serious
repercussions not only to do
federal laws but state laws as
well the federal laws and also
the Supreme Court decisions of
the government the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo the quarter
private land claims the server
general's report and of course
we have others as well so this
bill is totally illegal process.
It is unconstitutional and I
must stress of constitutional.
Big and contradictory in its
terminology in the bill so as a
as mentioned how can one give
somebody's land.
In New Mexico through a chapter
forty nine processes when the
land grant is completely less
that's what we're working on
trying to get some of our that
we had some of the most valuable
Reese's resources as you may
know from any Land Grant water
and mountains in December and so
forth so we were stripped
completely of all land similar
to a lot of the other land
grants the template that was
used in water was used to inject
money had other places
throughout New Mexico.
So we're very much concerned
that why would you want to do
this if you know it's
unconstitutional and illegal
that is the bill itself is
ambiguous and contradictory
I am open for questions of for
many of the committee members
because as you know all this
bill has been before you four
times under four different
numbers has been PocketBeagle by
two governors Republican and a
Democrat so they understand the
legalities of this bill it's
important that the legislature
realized the legalities of this
bill.
Thank you very much.
I'm last I have John leave us Mr
leave us we you please limit
your comments to two minutes.
And I'm yourself please yes hi
this is John on the bus aren't I
am the board of directors for
the water Land Grant along with
Mister king Tana he gave some
good information regarding kind
of the land grants regarding
kind of what the situation here
is as far as one of the
Some requests that are being
proposed here is the apartment
land grant which more than
Landen currently as Mr Kitana
mentioned is the land this land
grant here in Morris County we
have a very high resolution of
private land along with some
Santa Fe National Forest that
exist within it and what's going
on here is a sub grant is being
proposed by some private
landowners within and condiment
that is looking to get some
revenue from the state of New
Mexico under the land act claims
so the board of trustees here in
the automatic grantees in
opposition of that specific sub
grant I think there's some
pretty good efforts along other
sub grants and other parts in
New Mexico if you look at the
motor Land Grant mortar land
grant is one of the largest land
grants that was issued in the
state in New Mexico but is is we
currently mentioned we are a a
lot of this land grant so
there's a big effort trying to
organize trying to make sure
that we have a a report of
directors in place to move
forward with what is happening
there is a big opposition by two
governors
so there is potentially an
effort in this third governor to
be able to to veto we would like
to get a veto verses a pocket
veto because this is something
that's coming around year after
year so again more land grants
were in opposition of house bill
forty one.
Thank you very much
Representative
Garcia.
If you would like to respond
before we go to the committee.
Madam chair a not really I know
that the there are some comments
are made by Mister king done on
a particular that are kind of
clarified in your.
Committee analysis.
The Judiciary Committee analysis
really
kind of did a really an
incredible job of kind of of our
dressing those exact points that
Mr Clinton arranged and putting
them in perspective in terms of
what the legislature can or
can't do and in terms of the
role of the legislature in terms
of affording partition land
grants the same opportunity that
we've done with other land
grants that did not become
political subdivisions in that
two thousand and four miles from
legislation madam chair.
So we.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
I want to.
Make sure that I understand the
breadth of of this legislation
our and Madam chair
representative you mentioned six
I believe are you there land
grants or sub divisions of a
land grant is is that all the
this bill is limited to are
those six specific the parcels
of land.
Madam chair Representative I
broke that's correct.
So so that this legislation is
not broader and doesn't affect
the R. I heard somebody
mentioned that Here Ameri a
grant or or other requests of
the state that maybe I'm more
familiar with this only deals
with the six requests that are.
In the calcium loss Bagus area I
I took my notes down correctly
that's correct the manager it's
in the neighborhood and
There is no relevancy in terms
of the comments in regards the
federal money had Land Grant
because they're already an
existing political subdivisions
that became one in that
milestone two thousand for
legislation.
Well more there's still
controversy to Care Act but that
can you will hate.
I don't want to venture too far
to that one
They.
They.
Six land grants to or the six
parcels of land that you
mentioned
Are one hundred percent of the
owners of land within those
areas in agreement with this
legislation.
Madam chair and Representative
and I Berga yes they are.
And that their different points
in the hearing process in the
last
six years maybe going on seven
years different partition grants
that come before the interim
committee and up testified
In the different legislative
committees in terms of moving
that legislation for.
And so there are no people that
own lands within these tracks
that would be objecting to the
effort the that you're engaged
in in house bill forty one is
that correct madam chair person
I believe that's correct.
And.
Madam chair and and
representative
It is that the desire of those
landowners are them to.
Change the status of those lands
so that they're now are there
remove from maybe private
ownership into more of a.
Communal or are common of type
ownership pattern or or what
what actually transpires if this
bill passes and these things are
recognized.
Madam chair representative bird
The communal aspect of these
land grants.
Has been continuous since the
eighteen hundreds.
So that nature is not going to
go away
and in New and these land grants
basically are private property
but they're owned in common.
and so the the only thing that's
changing is kind of the.
inequity.
The inequitable status as a
partition Land Grant.
versus a.
Land Grant that is a political
subdivisions right now as you as
was mentioned madam chair well I
am Mr buddy and also Mr what the
hell is going to probably have
Lou to the if it just but the is
that the some of these are
thinning projects we're
basically discontinued when the
state realize that this was not
a full fledged political
subdivisions they were just
considered any some requests.
So they pull back on the on
those funding on that funding as
a political subdivisions they're
entitled not only to capital
outlay from the state but also
to tie into a tap into those
federal grants that are made
available to political
subdivisions of the state in
this case land grants.
Well so maybe I can visualize it
because of my lack of
understanding let's say one of
these are areas is one thousand
acres.
Is it is it your testimony are
Madam chair representative that
that thousand acres is owned by
sorry.
Hundred different people and
maybe shown in in common the the
the thousand acres or do the the
hundred people own specific
tracks within the thousand acres
what one owns ten acres one owns
fifty acres one six hundred
forty acres of secretary.
Madam chair representative very.
These these are the these a
partition requests have
certainly encourage.
These these requests and in so
many of County have an average
of three thousand acres is owned
and Clemente and I do this to
the land is the partition land
grants.
I would deal to
my technical expert are to let
you let that if you can thank
you kind of elaborate on on this
on the specifics of your
question our food up.
Yes Madam chair representative
Sierra Representative neighbor
so.
What's a question here in terms
of the management of the grant
itself is the common lands and
so although these individual
communities to have private
parcels that are owned and
that's this is the case with
land grants in general where you
might have a practice that
individual parcels within that
grant there there is a specific
set aside of common lands and
that's really what's what is
owned and managed by the grant
in common for the community and
so that's really what we're
talking about and so within
these different six requests
that we're talking about it
varies on in terms of the amount
of property that is owned in
common the in within those Vegas
partitions are up roughly three
thousand acres I believe up in
the all right on the river grant
they still manage around eight
hundred acres and I think in the
case of an apartment community
they may have on.
Maybe a couple hundred acres in
common that that are encompass
like applause on and in the
local cemetery I'm things that
are sort of commonly used on and
managed for the benefit of that
community.
And madam chair and
representative and with was that
the Mr tiger that we're speaking
and madam chair of St I but no
that was R. two door to let the.
The structure letter okay.
That's what our that's what I'm
trying to to to understand so
we're dealing with with lands
individual landowners own
certain lands and that is not
subject to house bill forty one
but that common lands that the
collective group owns yes
subject to house bill forty one
get that I understand that
correctly.
Madam chair I Representative
Nibert that is correct land
grants sort have management
authority over the COVID lands
within a community that are that
is in there.
Management and ownership as the
grant but the private parcels
within that are not affected and
they're not land grants don't
have jurisdiction over the
private parcels on those parcels
would fall under I'd like to
general county jurisdiction or
if it's a municipality what
whatever sort of jurisdiction in
terms of of regulation but the
the common lands as well which
encompassed in the in the
General statutes for land grants
and this would bring those land
grants under forty nine one.
And at the present time.
Madam chair representative I
presume San Miguel County more
County whatever whatever county
that these lands are located and
that the tax assessor and the
treasurer sent out the
tax statements assessing the
apple warm taxes on the COVID
lands.
Is that the.
Is my assumption that are
accurate.
Madam chair representative right
that's correct.
And so madam chair and
representative one of the
effects of this bill could
possibly be a fake if these
common lands are now deemed to
be governmental units would they
be taken out of the county
taxpayers.
Madam chair representative Byrd
No.
Because these properties are
designated he sample ownership.
Private ownership.
And as and aside from that.
because a typical political
subdivisions municipality county
school board conservation
district
local improvement districts.
Do not pay property taxes but in
the case of land grants the land
I community did not want to make
that an issue in terms of moving
last on legislation of two
thousand four Ford because we
knew that we would kind of get
into
a big hole in terms of that
fight with the local assessors
are local treasures so maybe
down the road.
When the time is ripe land
grants might re look at that
aspect of the full political
subdivisions that is not paid
property taxes but at the moment
those taxes are in place on the
comments.
Okay
Madam chair and and
Representative thank you for
that clarification because I was
assuming that one of the
benefits of doing this would be
to try to take those out of the
tax breaks but that is not that
that is not the case so I my
assumption there was was not
accurate.
I'm a little bit concerned about
the some of the.
Issues that were raised but I'm
certainly not in a position to
to argue with those allegations
and it is if these are indeed
land grants that have been
properly recognized at their sub
benefit the that's bestowed by
by.
Enacting this legislation
I'm not I'm not real concerned
with the six I am concerned if
this out for if this is just
another effort toward moving for
some land grants that I'm very
familiar with the title to and
it's impact and effects on.
Private property rights of of
other individuals and so I'm
pleased to hear your testimony
that one hundred percent of the
people that own these common
lands are in agreement.
I'm please that the with your
testimony that this legislation
limited to the sex are requests
that you identified and and
I'm pleased to hear or maybe I
should ask a question about
Madam chair representative this
is not an effort to continue to
expand these concepts and the
some of the other land grants
where there are
a lot of private land grants
that have been cut up over the
years and are held and in the
ownership by.
Hundreds or thousands of people
at this point in time.
Madam chairperson I burn the
that that will not be the case
this is real specific growth
target legislation.
Okay Madam chair representative
thank you for that testimony and
and
our guests are.
We can see what what the
governor does with that if you
have like this.
The the third.
Did to it if they are then to
other efforts that haven't
succeeded but the that would be
beyond my knowledge as to as to
what those intricacies are.
Madam chair representative thank
you for your time.
Thank you madam chair
representative divert it are
there for the questions.
I don't see any other hands up
are there the what's the
pleasure of the committee.
I would pass because I just
Madam wasn't quick enough I'll
second your motion.
Okay we're on a motion for a do
pass on on.
Right.
Excuse me.
In the evening as.
Forty one okay.
With the court please call the
roll.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli yes.
President of blue.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Rehm hello.
Can you hear me yes.
Okay yet I think yes Senator
yes.
And Representative ring.
Yes.
Yes.
We have a.
To.
The past Representative Garcia
thank you very much thank you
madam chair and I wish you folks
are well these service shut are
you what you deserve at that
this the Syrian was really high
level and of the so I I I.
Well appreciated community.
We used to be on it you know
like.
Thank.
Good to have you we've got one
more bill committee members one
of our other former members is
revisiting us tonight
Representative Hochman Vigil.
House Bill sixty eight.
Could you move Representative
Hochman Vigil over there she is
there she goes all right.
Representative Hochman Vigil if
you have experts here.
Bill with you.
We would like to invite them as
well yes thank you madam chair
I. X. my first expert is going
to be Serratia band Law.
Her with different.
Yes yes I'm ready to proceed
when you are madam chair go
right ahead.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of my former committee
my colleague through my mess I
hope all of you are doing well
house bill sixty eight is pretty
short sweet and to the point I
know all of you have had a very
long night it does at two things
it amends the spaceflight
informed consent act revise the
definition of a launch vehicle
which is in section two and it
also eliminates a sunset
provision of the act located in
section four without madam chair
I would like to first introduce
my co sponsor for this
legislation Representative
Rebecca Dow who is with us today
so maybe we need to make sure
she's been moved over as well
Jeez yes yes please will record
dollar.
Senator Dow.
And then also I want to
introduce three show band lot
she's the vice president of
governmental relations of virgin
galactic and she's here to
answer any questions the
committee may have with that
madam chair I want to see if I
Representative Dow wants to add
anything if not we will open up
for questions.
Is there any tensions under
Rebecca.
There's no doubt there's a back.
Yes let's give her a try.
About us.
Okay.
Very thank you guys thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative and you know I
don't really have much to add I
think you guys be more
interested in hearing from
virgin but what I could say is
that my freshman year the space
industry was around two point
four billion a year industry
this year it will exceed over
five hundred billion a year New
Mexico is ahead of the game we
are poised to capitalize and
benefit from spaceport this
helps grow and keep New Mexico
space commercialization jobs in
New Mexico it's necessary for
that not just for virgin and for
the local secondary jobs in New
Mexico the for the entire world
and this gives the signal that
we are open for business.
My dad madam chair will open up
for questions questions I'm do
you want to spend provided
something to explain the bill I
know I met her last summer
right.
The is.
Absolutely madam chair okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Hochman Vigil I
thank you Representative Dow
I'll keep a very short I know
it's been a long committee
meeting I'm and I know it comes
as no surprise that virgin
galactic supports this bill but
I just wanted to say that we
support this bill that only
because it provides the space
flight businesses in the state
certainty but also as well
certainty and transparency with
regards to liability issues with
the five participants but also
supports encourages growth in
New Mexico as Representative Dow
had it just mentioned I'm not a
lawyer I just play one on zoom
an engineer by training I joined
the company because its mission
was to open space for all and I
don't mean just for that you
know humans experiencing space
funding for tourism or economic
development for research science
education many other industries
that are just positively
impacted and we're looking
forward to companies utilizing
the service and others to grow
the space economy and would love
for them to do it here in that
our commercial home New Mexico.
the bill does keep the state
competitive with others that how
similar companies and have
similar provisions of law and I
think it would be really good to
signal to other companies what
we already know so well that New
Mexico is business friendly it's
attractive option for cutting
edge businesses and you know our
next flight to space will be a
huge milestone for New Mexico
but you know I hope it's just
one I analyst of many more to
come from many other companies
that call the city home the
future so this bill is really a
step in that direction thank
you.
Thank you let me go to the
audience and say if there is
anyone in the audience who
wishes to speak.
Okay I'm.
We would like for you to keep
your comments about two minutes
if you can please.
And if you can't we're going to
put the time were up but if you
can you will need Eric what
country you may speak out and
please I need your.
All.
Thank you madam chair I had.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee thank
you to the sponsors of this bill
my name's Eric Montgomery I am
the vice president for business
development within the C. a
valley economic development
alliance and Dona Ana County I'm
here today because I'm the
legislative policy chair for New
Mexico idea the statewide
economic developers association
and I want to say from an
Economic Development stance this
is a very critical and necessary
piece of legislation for the
commercial space industry in New
Mexico I've worked several deals
in partnership with the
spaceport and that without this
legislation we just we have no
competitiveness and it's very
nice to be in a position where
there are seven states listed in
the FY are in which New Mexico
is currently competitive and
we're in the top ten in New
Mexico.
In the US and I'd like to like
to see is continue having this
piece and we encourage you to
support and and give this bill a
do pass thank you very much.
Thank you Secretary Alicia keys.
Yourself based.
Right I thank you very much
your.
We can.
Okay wonderful.
Legislation is about protecting
our.
And a growing State Street bring
more of those jobs.
The New Mexico as valley
corridor related.
Hello Albuquerque.
And what.
The government alright alright
you're for growth in our economy
thank you for your job.
Local.
Three hundred and fifty billion
dollars.
We're
working.
The.
You have.
I
want to work.
New Mexico so.
What you're at.
Yeah liability protection now
and.
We are very much support
economic development of the bill
thank you very much the.
Thank you I'm.
JD Bullington.
Thank you madam chair JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce space exploration
and commercial spaceflight is a
relatively new and highly
competitive industry we want
space job space invasion and the
development of this industry to
current New Mexico therefore the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce supports reasonable
liability protections for space
flight operators we can't make
it harder to be a space space
flight operator here than it is
elsewhere the chamber believes
in the promise and potential
spaceport America and supports
this bill thank you.
Thank you and what kids.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is David
Watkins on the executive board
of ambassadors FOR spaceport
America which was formed five
years ago to promote spaceport
as a key anchor for New Mexico's
growing space industry as both
Representative Dale and
secretary of cases of said
national and international
investment in commercial space
continues to grow exponentially
New Mexico is uniquely
positioned as one of only a few
states with a license spaceport
to attracts significant
investment in this growth
industry this legislation is
important to support those
recruitment efforts and I urge
you to support thank you very
much.
Your needed madam willing to
take a.
Thank you madam chair.
My name is Joe boards in our
projects technology at all yes.
And I'm on the board directors
The Great Los crucis chamber of
commerce.
And what does this bill is a
very important the future
spaceport and economic growth
that is going to bring and so we
the chamber of commerce are very
much in favor of passing this
bill and I want to thank you all
for your time and everyone for
their support of this.
Thank you.
We've got K. Lotta to defraud.
Hello thank you madam chair
committee members Representative
Hochman Vigil and Representative
Dow for letting me speak I am
K. young guided the rod and I
leave new space New Mexico a
nonprofit that is established to
grow the space industry in New
Mexico for the nation we
represent over one hundred space
companies that are working here
in New Mexico and and have their
ear New Mexico has been a leader
in the first space age and
you've heard from the speakers
before me that that space is
growing and expanding rapidly
and New Mexico needs to lead in
this new space age I want to say
spaceport America has done an
excellent job attracting high
calibre companies especially our
partner virgin galactic but many
others such as haps aerospace
been launched exes aerospace and
others this house bill sixty
eight is absolutely imperative
for virgin galactic but also
many of the other companies that
will be our future space
industry in New Mexico we are
excited to lead.
This space vision and we need to
show leadership and we just urge
that the legislators to pass
this bill and thank you very
much.
Thank you we're we're back to
the committee now and I have
first on my list are in less you
want to make some remarks before
I go to the committee
representatives Hochman Vigil or
doubt.
Madam chair I just have one
common it's on behalf of New
Mexico technology council they
have not been able to get a good
enough connection to join in and
tax their support.
Thank you very much
Representative first on my list
I.
Thank you all.
Thank you one question madam
chair and for Representative
Hochman Vigil and if you would
please tell the committee what
is the most interesting fact.
that gives the New Mexico
spaceport of competitive
advantage against other launch
sites in the United States.
Madam chair US speaker Egolf
it's that in New Mexico your
first mile up to your first mile
the spaces free.
Exactly correct thank you madam
chair.
Other questions from anybody.
I would predict Bill
Representative Armstrong.
A second by Representative
neither.
Let's call roll I've been
surprised all evening.
Representative about yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
My star yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
I'm waiting on instructions.
Yes.
The bill in just second the
motion Representative.
Yeah but I'm taking instructions
okay.
Representative excuse
Representative Townsend.
A yes and I will inform the
committee has never taken
instructions.
I.
Yes.
All.
Yes I want to explain that I
don't think Representative
Nibert has taken instructions.
You're right.
Madam chair I know we are
talking about space travel and
Representative night bird is
from Roswell so I don't know.
It didn't grow up there.
What my husband's daughter in
Clovis all.
Okay you have to pass house bill
sixty eight so I'm that was a
really nice way to end the
evening with the it's a
understandable bill.
Thank you all really hard
working day.
Yeah our next meeting is on
Saturday afternoon at two.
I.
Hi everyone thank you very much.
