Here's some.
Representative Nibert there.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm.
Representative the Penske here.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair.
Madam vice chair you have a
quorum thank you so I'm caring
today our share is in the and in
another committee with the bill
so we'll start with house bill
one seventy three.
there's a committee set of.
That we all should have
received.
Chair I move has strictly as of
two thousand one seven three.
For discussion purposes thank
you point two to five number I
have here is point two two five
five one seven point two.
That looks like what I have as
well.
So moved.
So we've already done public
comment with this we heard the
substance of the bill last week
so what we'll just talk about
today's really the changes that
we had discussed previously and
so with that Representative go
ahead madam chair members of the
committee we listened
thoughtfully to your questions
and your suggestions from the
committee and incorporated them
into the committee substitute
we're presenting to you today we
remove to the adjudicated adult
witness and focused on the child
witness we added language that a
court may order an additional
forensic interview if it finds
that the forensic interview is
not trustworthy reasonably
complete or if new information
is discovered.
We further defined a forensic
interview as a recorded
interview conducted through the
children's advocacy center
pursuant to the children's
advocacy center act.
James Grayson and didn't Daniel
Smith our our expert witnesses
today and I'll pass it over to
them for more clarification.
Madam chair members of the
committee can you hear me OK.
Thank you.
So my name is Daniel Smith I am
the forensic interviewer
supervisor at all face
children's advocacy center I
have been conducting forensic
interviews for fourteen years I
have been a supervisor over the
forensic interviewers so I'm
responsible for their training
when it comes to conducting
interviews as well as testifying
in court and training for that.
over the fourteen years I've
been doing this I've conducted
over four thousand interviews
forensic interviews hi have been
qualified and in court as an
expert in forensic interviewing
twenty times and that's between
criminal trials as well as civil
trials.
and so I just wanted to go into
a little bit about forensic
interviewing and I'm happy to
answer any questions that that
anyone might have so forensic
interviewing the field of it
came out of the nineteen
eighties really I know a lot of
people have probably heard of
the McMartin preschool trials
and to the interviews that were
conducted during that
investigation
so there were a lot of concerns
there are a lot of poorly done
interviews that
we're very suggestive very
leading as well as traumatizing
to the children there were
multiple interviews and many
issues around the way the
interviews were conducted so
after this happened there
People realize that there was a
need for a standard way of
interviewing children and so
that's how forensic interviewing
came about
So a forensic interview now is
based off of research based
models there are many forensic
interview protocols that are
recognized by the national
children's alliance
can see a is a governing body
that handles the accreditation
of children's advocacy centers
throughout the country
so all states where I'm employed
is an accredited children's
advocacy center we're also a
member of the national.
I apologize The New Mexico
children's alliance and New
Mexico children's alliance also
has bylaws within within their
standards that say that all the
interviews I apologize all of
the advocacy centers in New
Mexico need to be following
national children's alliance
accreditation standards whether
they're credited or not.
and so these standards basically
because they have to be upheld
it ensures the quality of the
forensic interviews that are are
coming out of the CDC's here in
New Mexico.
forensic interview is just a
statement from child when there
are allegations of some sort of
abuse or witnessed a violent
crime.
The interviews are conducted
again based off of these
research based models there
conducted in a way that is child
friendly.
Developmentally appropriate
culturally sensitive as well as
legally sound so they're not
going to be suggestive or
leading or intimidating for
child.
and there are multiple forensic
interview models the one that we
follow here at all faiths is
called NCAC that stands for
national children's advocacy
center.
there are other forensic
interview models that are used
within the state as well so
child first is one apps Act
which is the American
professional society on the
abuse of children is another as
well as NCAC which I just
mentioned.
All the interview models have
the basically the same.
The same
What types of questions that
have to be followed you have to
introduce interview rules which
help.
To.
Reduce this suggest ability of
children and there's different
stages you have to move
throughout the difference
between the models is that
summer more scripted and some
are more flexible the one we use
is a little more flexible.
all the forensic interview
models also allow for second
interviews if need so based on
research we know that disclosure
is a process so children may not
disclose at a first interview or
they may not fully disclosed if
they disclose at all.
And so within these research
based forensic interview models.
It allows for second interviews
and so I believe that has been
written into this bill as well.
And.
I am so.
And then from there I apologize
If a second interview is needed
that still conducted following
the forensic interview models
another
job forensic interviewers do is
testifying in court so.
We obviously cannot testify in
place of the child but we
testifying in court as far as
the interviewing standards that
we followed as well as
As any questions as we answer
any questions and help to
educate the jury as far as the
forensic interview process this
is a standard that's followed
across the country and it's well
in place here in New Mexico as
well
I would be happy to answer any
questions that anyone has.
And then I will give it back
over to you.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I'm gonna turn it over to James
Grayson who will identify the
substitutes that we have
included in this.
Chair members of the committee
thank you again for letting me
speak to you today I want to
talk specifically about the
change to section three this was
in response to comments from
several members of the committee
this adds in addition to the the
flexibility of a judge ordering
additional foreign.
Specifically if there are
concerns about the lack of
trustworthiness a lack of
thoroughness or if it is
additional information comes to
light that would one second.
And madam chair members the
committee I know there were
questions source or concerns
about the process they were
expressed at the last committee
meeting and the intent of this
bill is not to deprive the
defense of the opportunity to
prepare on the intent of this
bill is to provide a balanced
approach between this the state
and the and the defendant and to
protect protect children from
being re traumatized and I think
in terms of due process which is
very broad concept I think it's
important to recognize that in
the federal system which I would
view as being at the other end
of the extreme on the due
process and under the jinx Act
rule twenty six point two the
federal rules of criminal
procedure.
this the government is not
obligated to provide a written
statement of a witness until
that witness has is on the stand
and has undergone direct
examination.
That is vastly different from
what happens in New Mexico in
New Mexico discoveries provided
to all defendants at arraignment
or shortly thereafter so
defendants have any previous
statements that are that are
made by any witness throughout
the course of their case and
that that's that allows them to
prepare for any any pre trial
motions or also please and also
try.
so again that the intent of this
bill was at and think it
captures of a balanced approach
between protecting children and
protect the interests.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you
In the afternoon Representative
do you have anything to stand
for.
I do not thank you madam chair.
Yes.
You madam chair first I just
wanna say thank you the sponsors
are at work on this I think this
is a good example of what the
legislative process is supposed
to look like come with concept.
Questions and concerns new work
rework the legislation I think
which brought back is a much
better piece of legislation so
thank you prevalence to go
through that process.
Page four February
Representative D. as in.
Delta I'm not familiar with
these so onerous when you say
it's conducted through a
children's advocacy center.
Is there one of those in every
judicial district.
madam chair and representative
I'm gonna defer to my expert
witness.
Madam chair members of the
committee so there are eleven
children's advocacy centers in
the state of New Mexico as well
as satellite offices
That covers some of the more
rural areas
Are sorry the national
children's The New Mexico
children's alliance
is always searching for more
funding to help bridge some of
the gaps in the more rural areas
but as of right now there are
eleven within the state of New
Mexico and for example at all
face where I'm from we have
families that travel from state
catching County Torrance County
some of the pueblos between
Albuquerque in here as well as
out west to parts of McKinley
County Cibola.
Thank you I apologize to all
districts are served by a
children's advocacy center that.
Madam chair so that was but
that's helpful because if we're
gonna defined legally friends
again you and tie it to having
to take place through one of the
centers I seven service but we
have to transport child to
another county here another
judicial district and and
further I think confuse a child.
appreciate those changes are
made in section three I think
that's.
That's a better result well so
those are my questions they can
enter.
Thank you Representative the
speaker Martinez thank you madam
chair when would appropriate
like to move a do not pass on
house bill one seventy three but
it to pass and House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
bill one seventy three.
The.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair of.
Madam chair a like to express my
appreciation for the changes
that you made I think they're
not only.
Warranted that probably were
essential to get this bill.
Moving through so I'd like to
focus on couple items number one
on page five lines for
The additional interviews would
only be done with courts prior
approval is that correct.
The Madam chair representative
that is the case.
And then Madam chair
representative prior to that
time there would just be one
forensic interview that the
defense counsel would have
access to and I suppose would be
the defense counsel that would
request maybe this further
interfere maybe suggest some
some other areas of need to be
explored with that the act Madam
chair representative that would
be accurate and then my last the
my last.
Question well I two more
questions next question would be
on on page seven.
Line six talk about the.
Presiding officer
There is a presiding officer the
the judges a presiding officer
some other person.
Madam chair representative
Nibert a presiding officers the
judge of the supplies table from
a proceedings and civil
proceeding serve be the judge
and I that would be the judge
then my last question I think
it's our this but there's no
provision in here dealing with
the issue of thank yes as of the
bills Sir Madam chair
representative no there's not
thank you madam chair that's all
I have.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair just a
really quick question.
I realize this wouldn't be in
the bill but I guess what I'm
wondering and I.
I think probably the deputy AG
should answer this
So.
As far as evidence that
potentially presented to the
court.
The prosecutor.
Still.
Try to get in and I know that to
try because you don't always
other testimony like by school
counselors of under excited
utterances or something like
that.
Madam chair representative
Chasey that is correct under
section four subsection C.
service to reach.
I.
excuse me on the previous day
which subsection do page six
line ten
great need any evidence that is
otherwise admissible would would
remain in the school so that is
correct Madam chair
representative thank you very
much.
Anyone else with questions or
comments.
So I apologize for being a
little late I was presenting and
another Committee so if this is
redundant again I apologize so
the forensic interview occurs in
a safe place.
I train professional.
And who all is watching.
Madam chair and members of the
committee so the for the
forensic interview you have it
conducted at a children's
advocacy center.
And then for trained
professionals that are viewing
it is generally law enforcement
child protective services if
they're involved and sometimes a
member of the district
attorney's office.
And madam chair if I could
follow up with that prosecutors
and law enforcement officers are
present
they can speak to the forensic
interviewer they don't speak
directly to the child and even
if they suggests a questions
that are to be asked those
questions are filtered through
the forensic interviewer based
on their process based on their
training and and the
requirements that they have the
best practice okay and at this
point.
Is there usually somebody who
has been charged.
Madam chair no at that point
this is this would be a pre
charge interview okay so there's
a pre charge interview
and then after the pre charge
interview presumably
substantially someone is
charged.
What happens is there a second
interview.
Madam chair the the committee
substitute in section three
provides on page I.
Starting at line excuse me.
Four the court may order an
additional forensic interview if
there are concerns about
thoroughness trustworthiness or
if there is new information that
has come to light okay so there
may or may not be a second
interview.
And it's recorded I assume video
recorded.
And the defense gets to look at
that is that correct
yes madam chair that's correct.
And if the have questions they
have to wait till trial.
To address any issues they might
have with the for intake
interview.
Is that right madam chair they
are three to file a pre trial
motion if they have concerns
about the trustworthiness of the
interview or anything like that
they could file a motion for
even an additional interview
under this provision but
otherwise they would wait to
trial wait until trial to cross
examine the child okay and they
could ask for a second interview
of the potentially in a motion
and so would they be permitted
to sit in on the interview at
that point.
Madam chair my understanding of
the best practices procedures
that they would not sit in on
the interview
and so that that that would not
be the case but they would have
access to the internet would
they be allowed to submit
questions in advance and with
those questions be
utilized using the appropriate
methodology and madam chair this
not address specifically in here
but I think a judge would have
that discretion.
Or not.
Okay it would be up to the judge
madam chair.
Madam chair I can just add a
little bit to that so it's up to
the discretion of the forensic
interviewer to decide what
questions are asked
and whether that comes from a
defense attorney or law
enforcement or approach a
prosecutor.
So and the reason for that is
because questions may not always
be appropriate for the child's
developmental level it may not
be appropriate and as far as the
child's disclosure
in it the biggest thing really
that was it may not be
appropriate for their
developmental level.
This isn't sound intended to
sound flip but.
What if those questions are
appropriate for developing a
case or defense.
So there's madam chair there's
for example.
The first example I can think of
is
it's something that people ask
for quite often is a time frame
from say a young child like a
three year old
and I understand that's
important for developing a case
but developmentally three
yearolds or four year olds even
children younger than around ten
to twelve maybe even a little
older are just not great at
giving time frames and so if you
ask a child for a time frame
even if it's in the most
developmentally appropriate way
possible you still may just be
asking them to give you a gas
which is something that goes
against forensic interview
models it's we tell the children
in forensic interviews it's very
important to guess.
Thank you so Mr Grayson if you
know I understand what's said
there but if the questions that
are being used are deemed by the
forensic interviewer to be
questions that you as a
prosecutor might think is are
essential to developing a case
or their questions that the
defense might think are
essential but deemed by the
forensic interviewer to not be
appropriate I'm a little
perplexed about how this works
in a in a court system.
Madam chair then it works like
this
Basically every day prosecutors
attend safehouse interviews on a
daily basis they may suggest
questions that are to be posed
to the child often those
questions are not posed to the
child even though would help the
development of the case
because it they're not.
They're they're not appropriate
for the forensic interview
setting and so to the extent
those questions need to be
developed a defense attorney
under this provision could
submit questions to a judge and
suggest that those questions be
be submitted to the forensic
interviewer but again they're
going to go through their best
practices to determine whether
those questions are appropriate
for the child and if the
forensic interview determines
are not appropriate and those
are matters that would be
addressed at trial basically at
either in direct examination
from the prosecution or cross
examination from the defense
okay thank you I find it a
little concerning
Because I mean I you know I I
appreciate we're all coming from
but I do find it concerning that
we're not able to get questions
answered that are kind of maybe
critical to the case either by
the prosecution or the defense
and you have to wait to trial to
try to sort that out if I were
prosecuting I would not feel
comfortable with that thank you.
For.
Yes to do a do not pass of House
Judiciary Committee to do a do
not pass of house bill one
seventy three but I do pass of
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
seventy three.
We call the roll thank you madam
chair calling rules
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes Mr
speaker yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Is a yes no pass he's a pass is
what you can do is go back to.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative semansky yes
madam vice chair.
Madam chair no.
And representative
We need to go back to
Representative McQueen the.
Thank you have a new path as we
give the folks I'm sorry we just
can't get it.
At madam chair you have eight
yeses and to nose for a do not
pass on house bill one seventy
three and a do pass on health
tradition airy Committee
substitute house bill one
seventy three thank you.
All right I as I understand that
there's a little amendment
that's being worked on for house
bill two thirty four so I
thought we're waiting for the
council service apparently to
work on that and hopefully we'll
get it down here promptly.
But in the interim why don't we
move to that is are the folks
here for house bill one to
seventy one I thought I saw
Representative Sweetser here you
for yeah.
And I know I saw a Franklin from
the.
Department.
And madam chair I get that you
could okay well let's see I
because.
I know that the Department want
to see this bill.
All right.
Hi Representative.
I and I believe
Franklin was in the room.
Okay.
Give me one sure.
L..
Representative Matthews appeared
of with.
a pass that the issues.
Thanks.
There's gonna be another side of
the sorry hold on to them
I yeah there's a point five
coming out so.
Yes.
Of the five.
Okay very got it
the floor is yours
Representative Sanchez thank you
madam chair members of the
committee I just told my
expertise fired.
I bet I bet he thank you for
that.
Thank you madam chair this is a
DOT bills currently
Such as that result in injury or
death of a person or damage to
property of five hundred dollars
or more are entered into related
for publication in a manual
crash statistics for the state
this bill will amend the
threshold I know it's a five
hundred it's to raise it to a
thousand dollars on average
there's about forty four
thousand motor vehicle crash
report submitted by law
enforcement to duty.
These include property damage
personal injury and fatality
reports this change would reduce
the number of cash reports
submitted by approximately
fourteen percent which will
allow duty to compile data to to
provide reports in a more timely
fashion the five hundred dollar
threshold has been the same
since nineteen ninety six we all
know the five hundred dollars is
very low and the minor
incidental be above five hundred
dollars the current version of
the federal model anymore
uniform cost criteria recommends
the following special for all
crashes to be set up to a
thousand dollars or more so
madam chair
that's what we're doing with
this bill we're just trying to
be more efficient we're trying
to that's we're trying to do
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative trying to do want
to want to add anything frankly
just briefly madam chairman the
committee Franklin Garcia with
New Mexico department
transportation our traffic
safety division well as
oversight of our traffic records
area so we received as a
the process Sanchez said we
receive over forty four thousand
crash reports every year we put
those in a in a usable format so
we could do queries people could
request data we work with law
enforcement on a data reports I
have a sample of a police report
of Representative remained at
the history of the of the length
and the information that goes in
there so we're just trying to be
more efficient and responsive.
Thank you well let's go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand.
Online those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
No one those in the audience
wishing to speak in favor of the
bill please raise your hand if
you could keep it to one minute
I'd really appreciate it.
Okay and those online wishing to
speak in favor of the bill
please raise your hand.
No one to raise their hand all
right so anything you'd like to
say to conclude before I go to
the committee madam chair I
don't think so I think it's a
pretty straightforward bill but
you never know so.
That's right we're here to see
whether that's true.
So thank you Representative
Rehm.
Two seven.
That okay.
we'll see we'll see we have a
motion for do pass by
Representative Rehm seconded by
Representative lanes any
questions or comments from
committee members I have a
quorum.
Chair representative for more
thank you madam chair I was
unfamiliar with this area of
reporting so just so I'm clear
is the the threshold about the
damage done in the accident
Madam chair representative can
you just describe what what the
aggregate amount is is equal to
when a crash happens
so madam chair and members the
committee and Representative
Romero so on the form itself
that the property damage.
Amount is is currently set at
five hundred so we're just try
to increase that to a thousand
we don't want to put that law
enforcement is in a situation
where they're having to estimate
the cost of damage because the
damage to a vehicle but as a I
to I spoke to Russian ream we
all know just getting an
antennae fender Bender there's
going to be at least a thousand
dollars of but it it no damage
to the vehicle so we're trying
to make that threshold will hire
so we don't have to track every
single one of those five hundred
dollar damage claims so Madam
chair representative this once
the report is done it goes
typically to like an insurance
agency or something just what
happens when the report is
written and so madam chair
members of the restaurant Romero
so law enforcement will submit
of crash reports to our traffic
safety division as required
pursuant to statute we also have
individuals that submit because
there's a specific crash report
number given so they need that
for their insurance claim so we
get those reports and like I
said we put those we collect
them we get the information put
in usable format so we could
identify time of day when Christ
occurred when of the you know
the driver the the weather what
was the leading cause of that
crash so we take all that
information put in a usable
format but property damage is
one area that we're having to
track and this is creating so
many the volume of of crashes so
so madam chair Representative if
we so today if it's like a who I
guess on the front and the
accident happens.
It looks like it's eight hundred
dollars worth of damage it
wouldn't even be reported any
longer so that we don't have to
worry about it so what happens
to that kind of.
The way situation or do you
receive that assess it and then
decide no report madam chair
members the committee
Representative Romero we would
still receive those reports you
need to have the specific report
to make insurance claims so
either law enforcement will hand
you the form and they'll you
have to self fill it out or bill
creating they'll do the.
Report themselves and then you
get it from your your local
police agency and then you take
that to your insurance company
we would still neglect reports
we just would have to process
and clean and manage all the
five hundred.
Level crashes would be a
thousand dollars or more so that
would eliminate a huge amount
for us thank you madam chair.
Thank you we have a motion on
the table is there anyone else
this question we have a two
passed motion on the table would
you call the roll thank you
madam chair calling role
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes Mr
speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am
Representative Sapan ski yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes madam chair with
a vote of ten yes is you have a
do pass on house bill two seven
one the pass thank you Mr chair
thank you committee.
I'm looking to Representative
night how are we doing on the
amendment that madam chair I got
an email from the song double
that it's on the way right now
okay all right so when we try to
see if we can have one short
bill before we do that is
Representative Harper around
there okay I'm hoping this won't
be a.
He wanted to distribute.
So we are on house bill two
eighty six motor vehicle
sunscreen.
Thank you madam chair and you
should have a letter to handle
one page letter those.
Yes thank you thank you for it
so madam chair and members of
judiciary this is my frontier
bill of the session I try to
carry bill that I have fun with.
And what this bill does just in
a nutshell is it aligns New
Mexico law with federal law when
it comes to tenting of front
windshields on cars right now
federal lawsuits you content up
to thirty percent light meaning
seventy percent white has to be
transmitted through.
New Mexico law says you can only
ten that first three or four
inches down from the windshield.
Okay now why is this important
why should we care this was
first brought to my attention by
some audience
automobile enthusiasts who spent
a lot of time after restoring
their vehicles.
And
some of them right now actually
tend to
using a special ceramic tent
illegally.
To protect the weather dashes
that they've invested to protect
the enter the cars.
but more importantly and and why
I think this is fun is.
there is actually a technology
of the bills at Sandia labs
that's been spun out by small
business recovery grants.
And this technology is it's
incredible for use an ATM now
particles.
And a film of these
nanoparticles.
Creates what's called the
transition material and
tradition transition materials
are amazing they're fine but
this is a transparent film.
And depending on what the
temperature is outside the
temperature of the film's
exposed to delete the what he in
will keep it out.
Right it's it's incredible and
so you can imagine if you have
this film on like your your your
office windows in the winter
they would let the heat in
because it's cold outside and
with the heat in and in the
summer when the when the
tensions rise these this film
which would keep the heat out so
this has huge implications for
energy savings
You know use of energy etcetera
Now how many of you have gone to
your car in in the summer and
burn your hands on the steering
wheel like I have.
Right or how many of you got in
your car in the winter and it's
nice and warm you go how.
Right so.
I personally would love to get
my car tented with some of these
materials.
Right so that's the
William curry who is the
present ordinance actually
presented to the revenue for the
science and technology tell
patients to committee over the
summer.
And was it was a fun
presentation I asked if you
could be here to help us but
they they actually just had a
breakthrough in the production
of this technology the the
valley of death is you can make
this a lab scale but we try to
do like industrial scale it
breaks down we figured it out
and so the right now in the
middle of their a round raise
they're looking to raise about
seven million dollars and so he
said how about I Rachel letter
instead as I really want to be
there but I just can't get it
right in the middle of this so
anyway madam chair just to give
you an idea of what we're
talking about here I've some
samples.
In all close this is a ninety
percent visual light
transmission this is actually
a clear phone if you put a clear
film on glass just do it he said
in the film itself blocks the
light so this is a ninety
percent.
White transmission.
Actually one of these on my
windshield to protect because
rock chips for awhile.
Which is great.
This.
Forty percent.
So this is what you put on your
driver and passenger side
windows.
This is twenty percent which is
what you put on your rear
windows.
This is.
Seventy percent this would be
the maximum that you could do if
we align with federal law since
there's not really.
Not much of a difference
between.
These two.
So with that madam chair.
Questions.
First let's go to the audience
those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Online those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those wishing to speak in favor
of the bill in the audience
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
favor of the bill please.
Okay.
Anything you'd like to anything
you'd like to add before we go
to the committee thank.
Thank you Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair mentor
resent her for you answered all
my questions about Senator
windows as one about that
Madam Representative Harper my
remaining question is how this
is enforced.
So madam chair and risen between
great question so I've never
seen this in practice but they
do sell devices that law
enforcement can use that
actually you can actually touch
to the window and it will
measure why transmission
so that it that is one way to do
it also you can sometimes tell
of some a computer because like
you know Black Widow tentang you
know it's clearly breaking the
law you know they can
no.
But to.
Madam chair and and
Representative queen you're
you're exactly right less the
law enforcement is one of those
little.
Measuring devices might be a
little hard to in force.
Committee chairperson Harper
does the measuring device for
from the outside or do you have
to put on the inside of the.
So the.
You're you're right there's two
parts to the device from the
outside it shines right through
the total sense on the other
side and and and it measures how
much of the white that's
provided actually makes it
through to the sensor.
The committee Representative
Harper
I think that will make sense
when my concern is
It's a potential excuse to stop
someone
I I grew up with guys who like
spell their time and money work
on their cars and they get
pulled over routinely and the
law enforcement together you
know a tape measure and you know
how far the wheels to get him
just sort of heard Assam.
and.
I think they probably got off
fairly easy I think there are a
lot of the people the
They get stopped our projects
and I I have some concerns about
that that so to Chairman
representative of I would just
hope that this would give them
one less reason they could pull
them over since now you could
find a light tent on the
windshield.
True madam chair representative
Harper but.
It does.
Give them something to pull them
over and check to.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative anyone
else with a question or comment
on the bill.
Representative Romero.
Madam chair representative how
much is higher dynamics no
kidding no.
I move too fast on house bill
two eighty six seconds.
The right do passed motion made
by Representative Romero
seconded by Representative I
just have a question with with
these amendments preclude any
other currently legal.
Tinting you know you see what I
don't want to have an unintended
consequence of us bumping off
something that sorry yes ma'am
sure great question and the
direct answer is no all
currently tinted windows would
would still remain currently we
tend to under this okay all
right anyone else
we so we have a motion
before us would you call the
roll thank you madam chair
taking role Representative
Oaklawn.
Representative Chasey.
To repeat the Representative
Chasey is yes Representative
Lane yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read.
Representative green yes.
Representative the Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes.
Madam chair with eleven yeses
you have a do pass on house bill
two eighty six thank you
Representative you have a do
pass thank you all thank you.
just touching base so we
received the amendment we have.
It's a committee so and
Representative nine point all
right so
I would like to get to that bill
so I wonder where
Representative and we have
enough to hand out to everyone
so.
It's a good because she agreed
to your staff.
I don't think she's okay
everybody else on it okay still
okay more.
Marks.
With the speaker okay so it
sounds like we're not risk okay
maybe we can get an update from
the Representative I know we
want to get through this we can
get a okay so Austin would you
hand out I think it's a point
four version yeah exactly is
that what.
What.
There should be a we handout for
yes.
So let me one from
Representative.
Let me just talk.
Representative I think I
understand what's going on so
would you hand out the some of
that we got for the committee
and that's two two five six four
four point four that is
Representative Matthews sub then
we can hand out I understand
that Representative Nibert has
us of that I hope he has
consulted with Representative
Matthews about but maybe not and
we will have a conversation
about that so we're ready to do.
House Bill two thirty four is
our attention submitted okay
Mexico sure of course.
So do we have
Hello neighbor we can do you
next to fifty Representative
Nibert.
You to the.
It's called Chris Chris Coleman
C. you L. O. V. E..
Representative Nibert you have
the floor thank you madam chair
madam chair before your house
bill two fifty sorry house bill
two five zero.
It's a bill that originated with
the.
The title industry here in New
Mexico wanted to change our
existing statutes slightly to.
Clarify and add some some of the
individuals who could sign
what's called the Scribner's
error affidavit and when when
the request was made to me by.
Said well if we're going to do
this we need to add some other
people who traditionally deal
with legal descriptions and
prepare legal descriptions for
documents to get reported of
record.
After having gone through that
exercise I then met with the
Legislative Council Service up
stairs and the drafters told me
that the statute itself was kind
of audition that provided for
several different categories.
And so we tried to simplify it
and just have a couple
categories.
This primarily deals with
instruments.
Containing legal descriptions
with respect to real property
transactions the other portion
of the Scribner's error bill or
statute is dealing with powers
of attorney I did not touch that
aspect of the life.
Have some
concerns whether that should
should even be allowed that
anyway house bill two fifty
deals with real property
descriptions and it allows.
Modeling
lawyers who've been involved in
the transaction the title
company Madam was involved in
the transaction and then with
respect to a lot of things that
are going on now with with
minerals and also renewable
energy projects lamb and to
Place the record an affidavit
that describes what we see as
minor errors and recorded
instruments Sir could be
existing statute has many of
these minor errors
The significant difference here
it deals with me to bounce
descriptions and then
governmental of subsections if
you will need to balance the
script shins are often linked
the I have I did the total
opinion number mail park branch.
That description is almost one
hundred pages and let.
There are many courses and
distances and for someone to
perfectly type that is virtually
impossible so.
It allows when those fares are
discovered allows of scripture
affidavit to be recorded to to
reflect that the mistake was
made and what it should be
in in the things I do every day
And I made the example you you
could have a description south
south half southwest quarter.
The one instrument there's a
comma in between the two.
Which is obviously an error
because a southwest quarters
naturally part of the south half
so that was probably intended to
be the south south southwest
quarter not south south and
southwest border so the the
eighty acre tract instead of a
You know three hundred twenty
plus if you have the other
quarter section that really
doesn't exist for twenty acres
but we see those errors all the
time and so this is a method of
trying to place of record
something that reflects an error
was made and what it should have
been.
People said well what if that
wasn't the deal.
An affidavit cannot change the
legal instrument the legal
instruments still the one with
the error and that this is
simply warning the public that
there was an error made and that
it you know which should be
something different than what it
says
It doesn't make it so but it it
identifies and highlights what
the problem is so Senator
helpful the title companies
they're helpful to
title lawyers are helpful to
lamb and they're helpful to to
the public generally because
somebody does recognize where
the areas and allows at least of
record something to reflect that
and there was made and if
there's ever a quiet title suit
it's easily handle I do have a
couple of experts
ran lobbyist for the cattle
industry and Chris called and
who's with first American I'm
with W. G. national title.
WFG national title insurance
company and.
We have before you of a bill to
just deal with these minor
errors that we see and hear
their you have anything that.
Will added then we'll go to the
committee.
Madam chair learn rent rich
lobbyists New Mexico land title
association the only thing I'll
say is we appreciate working
Representative Nibert because
I've been on at this table when
he we've been discussing these
issues and has a really great
knowledge and understanding of
this industry so it's been very
helpful to have him come in and
help us we passed a statute few
years ago to deal those minor
errors and we think this is
probably a much better way to do
it.
So I guess I can blame myself
for that one.
Okay.
Anyone else okay very good.
Representative I may
The existing statute in its
current form sounds like a great
idea but with regard to the
title insurance industry it's so
narrow in its drafting we are
always be at asked to submit
such an affidavit but we can
plug into it so the attempt with
this bill is to broaden it a bit
to do with other minor errors
and I would point out that
probably the question I get the
most as an underwriting counsel
is why didn't they put Meryl
status on mortgage which holds
up a tree a transaction for
sometimes months waiting for
people to find those people get
documents back from the east
coast so that this kind of bill
would allow us to deal with
these minor issues and allow
transactions to move forward.
Thank you.
This those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Of those online wishing to speak
in opposition please raise your
hand.
You will now go to in favor of
those wishing to speak in favor
of the bill in the audience
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
favor of the bill please raise
your hand.
There is no one wishing to speak
on this bill.
So anything you wish to save
Representative it must before we
go to committee madam chair I
just point out one other thing
that it did the the original
statute says that you can't
change the air to increase land
and to me that made no sense
because.
Every time you change a.
Description.
The angle so to speak you
possibly at a group.
If you.
At a comma white south of
northwest quarter yet the comma
you've increased it from eighty
acres to four hundred twenty
acres so we took that provision
out one seven eight on page two
so that's the other change
because it made no sense if
there was maybe the error was
made it's not technically adding
property just recognizing that
that Scribner's error occurred
and that if you look at the
chain of title and see that it's
south south northwest quarter
with the COVID between the two
in the interchange of title
then.
The parties.
you know we're trying to convey
their property there should be a
common that
it didn't really add titles just
recognizes that there was a
mistake made so again it doesn't
make it so we're trying to
clarify the record what the
parties at least ten to.
So that will stand for questions
thank you Representative
McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
chairs and they were
The.
I never read the statute for
Senator something no.
Well as of course have a to
questions because it's something
that I could potentially use it
could potentially used in past.
I will say and the my colleagues
have mentioned this
starting off page one one twenty
the words lane then is
problematic.
I mean that might be what you
call in but we've been really
trying hard to get away from
gender just specific language.
The law because.
From in person
I can tell you that every female
land ma'am that I know will go
to the mat with you if you try
to tell them there anything
other than the last fifteen as a
profession and and madam chair
is a number I I believe you but
you know I also we believe that
maybe
some females don't go into that
business because of the land and
that's not me I mean it's it's
it may seem minor but it really
is is contrary to what.
We've been making a concerted
effort to do and you know I I
often you know all of the bill
to make formal amendment get
back from Legislative Council
Service there's all these
changes in the bill on things
like that I don't want to change
I want to focus on my one more
amendment but you know one of
the things that change are these
references.
I would be happy to amended to
land person if that's what the
pledge of the committee.
What she to places courting to
vice chair remained on the front
page one twenty first for and on
page three line seventeen.
this is them chair
representative Nibert one way
around that issue rather than
using the term land person we
just would not we need to not
use that the defined term.
We just Elaine professional who
certified registered financially
rating recognize professional
organization.
And then the online page three
we could use that same phrase
and we use a dish all separate
words but that might be better
than using a defined term.
I didn't catch you Sir.
The my point being the then
chair representative Nibert we
define the term land then and
then we only use it once.
We could ditch the whole
definition and then just use
what it is in lieu of the word
land and.
Madam chair representative would
claim if I understand what you'd
be saying something like strike
number one online to twenty
twenty two and then insert
language.
The land professional who
certified or registered by
nationally recognized land
professional organization in
place of the word land then on
page three line seventeen is
that yes Madam that's accurate.
I think it is fixes that issue
right.
Okay
I did have Madam did some of the
questions Madam chair
representative Nibert you
mentioned.
You to reason for removing that
does not add or remove land I
get your reason of course if
there is if there was a mistake
like that.
The best resolution would be to
get a quit claim deed one way or
the other either from the grant
or the grantee correcting.
The mistake yeah and can
releasing and claim on that
land.
Would would you agree.
I would agree that the best way
would be to do a correction the.
But
Where we see this.
Often times is a generation
later.
And so it's very difficult to
get those types of instruments
regeneration later the people
don't remember.
Right.
There are available for both
discussed worry
and so that's the difficulty
with.
Trying to get correction
instruments were trying to get
quit claim deeds down the line
but I I would agree that's the
best way that certainly a lot
easier than a quiet title suit.
Mentors and I've heard of on
page two the line fifteen
sixteen the the printer or
grantees address I know our
statutory forms call for
addresses in the sure the
opening paragraph.
I've always been troubled by
that practice because I think
this addresses are incorrect
frequently for soon to be
incorrect this people move in
the so on land
So I often don't include them do
the do you feel we need to
include these addresses are in
what cases to would we need to
file is Scribner's affidavit to
add an address.
In many real estate transaction
the grand tour's addresses not
necessary that the grantees
address is necessary for tax
purposes that's where the
assessors office picks up the
address to send.
The assessment and notices from
that point forward so I think
that's why the statute requires
a grantees to Christian in the
recorded instrument but I would
agree with you and many
transactions involving real
estate addresses are
superfluous.
In Madam chair representative
Nibert the.
I believe at least in Santa Fe
County
the assessor doesn't actually
look at the date that you have
to file a separate form with the
assessors office to change of
address.
I don't know what Santa Fe
counties of practices are no and
the counties in the southeast I
do look at at those instruments
and that's how they pick up on
address you know the address of
the grantees.
Miss madam chair is in the right
on the line seventeen the
marital status
The I'm I'm concerned that it's
the marital status at the time
of the deed like this this isn't
an opportunity if you get
divorced to change your marital
status do we need to make it
clear that that.
That refers back to at the time
the original instrument was
recorded.
The marital status then.
I don't think so because you're
you're correcting and instrument
of record and the.
Zero in that instrument is as of
the date of education so I I
would not.
Clear on page five.
Yes all on page five lines
twenty four twenty five of the.
It provides for everything to
occur as of the effective date
of the.
Madam chair representative
Nibert
The so a missing exhibitor done
them
But I I deal with a lot of
documents with exhibits and and
and hi then the hi I try as best
I can to avoid that because.
They're often missing
look at thirty year old
documents that are missing all
sorts of stuff
So you know that that in
particular is potentially useful
the other thing I see with with
then the dealing with real
property documents is people
have very elaborate
Computer generated.
yes yes kind of boxes and
squares that the overlay on
aerial photographs the gate
record in the come out black.
is there is there any
opportunity to correct something
like that.
I would say that this would be
one mechanism to deal with
poorly recorded instruments and
to reflect maybe of record and
have the county clerk be a
little more attentive to copy in
the types of documents you're
referring to certainly the
technology has changed a lot
since the.
You know the even the nineteen
nineties and so the image Yuri
that we can capture.
In the records today is much
better than what occurred
through photocopy machine
interactive in twenty years ago
so I would think that that would
be an area that you could get
better resolution and taxes
things to the Scribner's their
affidavits to accomplish your
purpose.
Thank you madam chair and
members
On page.
Three.
We talk about the license
attorney you prepare the
instrument.
Which thinking probably ninety
percent of cases we're not gonna
know the employee of the title
insurer who completed the form I
mean like the at the ninety five
or ninety nine percent there.
but then and see we have in
employee of the title company.
And that and could really be
any.
As I read it and there's no even
connection here to a document
transaction which is any
employee can record any.
Scribner's error affidavit that.
Am I reading that correctly you
are and and of course title
insurance companies have to be
bonded and and their employees
would be subject to
For a forty granted to them by
the company and.
If they are doing this
incorrectly I would be some way
to go against the that insurance
company that would.
Be responsible for that
employee.
Here again these are just
affidavits reflecting something
not.
The the legal of effect of it is
one of evidence not one of
making changing the original
document.
Thank you madam chair risen
never I guess I would have some
concern the health committee
would make a mistake and sort of
And the issue a basis file an
affidavit and not notify
landowners or the parties to the
transaction there's no there's
no this provision in here.
There there is no notice
provision there and and
Again most of these things would
be picked up I would think later
in in time and it just try to
put something of record to show
that there was a mistake made in
the original instance
If you know with respect to
powers of attorney I think I
discussed with you I can't
imagine how that would would
ever come into play because I
made the mistake in the power of
attorney document can you have
to get you that the attorney who
prepared it for the principal to
change it seems to me you just
do a new power of attorney
instrument get it get it to
executed but on these things.
These are usually errors that
are discovered.
Way after the transaction occurs
and and like I said for the most
part of minor in scope maybe not
justifying the parties to come
in and and with some real estate
transactions the grand tour is
is out of state for long gone by
the time it gets to school.
In one one last question of
mentors and every with this
allow.
Companies that tell the mortgage
with this facilitate foreclosure
actions the if there was if
there was some mistake maybe
marital status something like
that this is a way for them to.
Make it easier to proceed in
foreclosure.
I don't think it make it easier
to proceed but it might make it
It might make it to where you
have the correct parties
identified.
you know if if.
Has been executed a mortgage in
favor of the mortgage company
you have a lot of hurdles to
overcome.
Legally to foreclose on that
mortgage
Particularly if if or what their
separate property it and madam
madam chair unpaid three I see
were taking out the ability of
of mortgage company employees
and attorneys working for
mortgage.
company employees mortgage
companies.
To to file these is that so the
so that may be actually provide
some protection is that a fair
statement.
I remember providing protection
but it just seemed to me in the
drafter that the separating
needs from mortgages made of
sense and so if you're going to
correct these errors.
Why not have just all of those
types of instruments that deal
with real property.
Subject to the same rules
instead I have special rules for
mortgages that we're not.
In place for deeds and and other
real property instruments so
what we try to do is basically
say look people who should know
of the original document or
people who have studied the
chain of title.
And they come across these
errors that that exist they can
file of record an affidavit that
reflects.
What what they believe it should
have been.
The manager resume neighbor and
again the stink eye from the
chair so I'll stop asking
questions.
True they're at thirty true
there's some things in here to
give you heartburn but I I'm
persuaded by the fact that it's
it's evidentiary it's it's not
labeled as a correct to do
that's just an affidavit that
you like here's what I think is
the case and I actually I I do
in documents we're I recite the
history of the property I I
actually try to call that out in
the recitals you know whether
there your conflicts and
discrepancies and just sort of
lay out the story of a piece of
property in recitals as you know
it's for the bread crumbs you
leave for the next turning so I
think I'm okay with that
although I did we thought that
amendment.
It has not been moved.
They're in a very engaging
conversation though you must
admit.
Representative McQueen did you
want to offer
a motion to amend that we can
madam chair I move that we
strike
page one lines twenty three
twenty two in re Norbert
remembers the succeeding
paragraphs.
The on page three we strike the
word land then and insert Lou in
lieu thereof land professional
who certified or registered by
nationally recognized land
professional organization.
I can tell you it's it's really
it's really just the identical
language that's in on the first
page so correct great.
Okay is that only women all
right very good
so we have a motion to amend the
bill before us we're in on page
one we're eliminating lines
twenty through twenty two three
number ng starting on twenty one
twenty three and following all
the way through and then we are
striking on page three line
seventeen the word landed then
and instead inserting a land
professional who is certified or
registered by a nationally
recognized land professional
organization and then the re the
line will read as it was
originally drafted after that is
that right we agree that's Madam
chair of the number because we
struck number one yes and I did
say that of course no problem
the one that there is no number
two now but I think it's okay
madam chair.
The language certified or
registered are important because
those people have to undergo
some testing and have their
annual were so many continuing
education credits each year to
maintain their certification so
these are not just people are
hold themselves out of them and
they are well they're not land
then anymore because when I am.
We got a train you
Representative night partly.
But it it is people who who have
gone through that trade and get
service well I but we have
ownership for us so the
Representative neighbors point
is a will read as used in this
section.
there's air affidavit means and
then this list of items which
probably become of one through
the end of our rather than the
letter to items yes okay so
I can explain that to my system
but I think we all understand
we're gonna stay we're not gonna
have a number to one or two
we're just going to have an a
and then on the next page
everything B. one through
whatever numbers that it is
so under under a there will be
one two three four five six you
know these other items right we
have those rules sort of step up
to be those numbers exactly okay
yeah thank you Mr I understand
thank you so we have a motion
before us you call the roll
madam chair.
to have a second second by
Representative Romero.
that's a motion it's a friendly
amendment to adopt this
amendment
so would you call the roll thank
you madam chair calling role
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Speaker Martinez yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair of madam chair.
Yes madam chair you have eleven
yeses for an adopted amendments
okay so I'm happy to entertain a
motion to have chair moved to
pass a health bill two fifty a
month.
By Representative.
Second by Representative now so
we have a motion to at the past
motion on house bill two fifty
two.
Thank you madam chair
representative on.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read yes.
Representative read.
I'm sorry Representative Rehm.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yeah.
Madam chair yes madam chair with
eleven yeses you have a do pass
on house bill two fifty is
amended for.
Thank you.
All right so this is what I
propose we have representative
Thompson here I'm assuming it
will be relatively short
conversation and then we can
just spend their full attention
on house bill two thirty of the
four.
So we are now on house bill one
thirty two.
The floor is yours chairwoman.
I'm here.
Birds of the committee so this
is a bill I've been caring for
quite a few years and basically
what the intent is is that
insurers can't can't can't force
our patients to get their
pharmacy items from a mail order
pharmacy and one of the years I
was running it somebody said
they don't do that I said I got
a letter yesterday that says I
must do all my prescriptions via
mail order and the reason this
is an issue there several of
them is that sometimes
particularly in rural areas
pharmacists are the only health
care provider there is around
and if they are.
Locked out of the business by
these monopolies they will go
under and then folks will we'll
have to get their medications
through through the mail and not
be able to consuming they say
you can consult with the
pharmacist online that's very
different than one of our
whenever our oldest member years
ago I won't name names but I
think Representative Chasey
knows who I'm talking about what
I was was feeling really badly
and he ended up going to as
pharmacist and is pharmacists
looked at it and said there's
something wrong so he looked at
estimates he was taking and
realized that they were not good
together but a mail order
pharmacists would not do that we
also have people who are
homeless frequently with H. I.
B. or or hepatitis C. or some of
those things so in order to get
a mail order
prescription you have to have a
mailing address which are it
doesn't work so well and we have
a lot of transient people even
people who live in apartments
frequently move and then we also
have the issue of like out on
the net Navajo reservation where
I grew up nobody has at home
address they have PO boxes and
if the post office is not open
for three days and your your
medication your your insulin is
sitting there needing to be
refrigerated wallet sitting in
the post office for three days
it's no good by the time you can
get to it so what this bill does
madam chair members is basically
say if the local pharmacy can
meet the price of the big mail
order pharmacy that the patient
be allowed to make that choice.
Thank.
Thank you Representative did you
want to say anything expert sure
R. madam chair members of the
committee my name is Breanna
here and I'm a pharmacist and
pharmacist for about fourteen
years and I've been working in
community pharmacy for about
nineteen years
this bill is intended to you
know.
Upset anyone currently using
mail order pharmacy mail order
pharmacy utilization is
increased by over thirty five
percent since twenty sixteen
it's projected to continue to
grow this is really just a bill
so that you know patients can
have access if they're
experiencing challenges with me
mail order in particular to some
of the situations that
representative Thompson
mentioned so
I just ask that you support this
bill and and help support our
community pharmacies as well
thank you before we go to the
committee will go to the
audience those wishing ins to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
Okay microphone around all right
we'll get a microphone available
okay so let's start with over
here and if you can keep it to
about one minute I really
appreciate it.
I.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Roy Moore
I'm a registered lobbyist for
America's health insurance plans
and we stand and respectful
opposition to the bill the
reason why we stand in
opposition to the bill is mail
order is one of the key ways
that are health plans control
drug costs because everyone
knows drug costs are continuing
to rise they're very expensive
in mail order is a key way that
we try to control those costs
the difficulty is drug
manufacturers continue to raise
their prices and raise their
prices the bill as you'll note
in the FIR will add significant
costs into the system you can
see for the retiree health care
thirty the the cost there you
can see what it does in other
areas as indeterminate but
substantial the difficulty here
is that patients are the ones
who will ultimately bear the
cost either through premiums or
through cost sharing and mail
order is a necessary component
for us to try to provide quality
health care to our members thank
you very much.
What else.
The good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee and Pat
block with a terror consulting
registered lobbyist for prime
therapeutics and we rise in
respectful opposition to house
bill one thirty two often the
legislature deals with issues
like these trying to balance
multiple interests in this case
we're looking at the interests
of consumers pharmacies health
plans plan sponsors
manufacturers and a host of
others mail order saves money as
Brett said and the savings keep
costs down including at the
pharmacy counter when you go in
person I use both mail order and
in person pharmacy depending on
the situation had longer than a
minute to talk I'd tell you all
about that but I won't so.
What I will say is that one of
the reasons I prefer these mail
order when it's appropriate as
for the cost savings to me and
my plan sponsor the retiree
health care authority.
And speaking of them I would ask
you to look at the fiscal
impacts portion of the FIR
shifting the balances this bill
seeks to do would be extremely
expensive to the health plans
and the plan sponsors and
ultimately the consumers so so
much so that are H. CA expressed
concerns about their overall
financial viability that they're
struggling with now that this
would make something potentially
get worse than it is now so with
that I would encourage you to
oppose the bill thank you thank
you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee Rikki
Lee Chavez on behalf of CVS
health we to also rising
respectful opposition to house
bill one thirty two we believe
that it will take choices away
from patients but barring their
employers from selecting certain
pharmacies such as those that
offer home delivery or percent
of prescriptions we I agree with
what my colleague said is one I
believe there are some other
people here to make some points
but for that reason and others
that are stated we're in
opposition thank you thank you.
Thank you madam chair members
committee my name is Keith
Gardner racial this for cigna
healthcare we're also the parent
company of express scripts
mention I think is important
based on the issues that
everybody's race but there's one
other part buying in bulk
obviously saves money but
there's also programs that are
attached to those both bright
buying programs where the PBMs
in the other entities who who
provide these mail order
services are able to provide
additional assistance to that
patient using the cost savings
that they have through ball
price purchasing and so if you
take away that bulk purchasing
and you take away those savings
you also at the same time take
away a program that many of our
insured enjoyed and so it's it's
becomes it's just not just about
the that this the costs but it's
also about some of the
additional programs are actually
enjoyed by the insured
individuals as a result of these
programs with that we stand
respectful opposition thank
mentor thank you anyone else
wishing to speak in opposition
in the audience.
Marla.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marla show to
registered lobbyist for Blue
Cross blue shield of New Mexico
we also stand in opposition to
this piece of legislation we
just want to emphasize that we
do not have a mandatory
requirement for members to use
mail order that may be a
solution to part of this piece
of legislation is to prohibit
that practice we also believe
that this is not necessary when
it comes to reimbursement of
currently existing New Mexico
statute fifty nine A. dash sixty
one dash four dash be requires
PBMs to reimburse pharmacies an
amount no less than the amount
reimbursed to PPM affiliate
pharmacies in the same network
for providing the same or
equivalent services for these
reasons and those previously
stated we also stand in
respectful opposition thank you
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Allison
Riley I'm here on behalf of the
pharmaceutical care management
association PCMA they represent
the pharmacy benefit specialist
that manage the pharmacy
benefits are two hundred seventy
five million people in the
United States unfortunately
residence backdrop addition of
hostile won thirty two since it
limits the options we use to
make drugs more affordable and
when you remove the plan
sponsor's ability to leverage
buying power for specially
medications or maintenance
medications this will result in
a higher cost while I understand
the intent to provide parity
between mail order pharmacies
and retail pharmacies the
current language of the bill
will drive up costs for
essential medications and those
costs will be passed on to the
most vulnerable patients we
would welcome further dialogue
with the proponents of this bill
and pursuit of our shared goal
to me Mexico healthier we cannot
support this current version of
the bill thank you.
Thank you
those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
I don't see anyone online
wishing to speak those in the
audience wishing to speak in
support.
I can't see there you go I'm
sorry sure.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is sherry
Dotson I am a volunteer advocate
for a a RP and we stand in
support of house bill one thirty
two because it allows us senior
citizens to obtain their prior
prescriptions where we choose to
in the easiest manner it
eliminates a previous insurance
companies limiting the insured
patients to mandatory mail order
pharmacy as Representative
Thompson mentioned and we like
to have choice and we also are
hoping for eventually here I
know nationally even to have
some parity in the pricing and
lower the cost of our drugs
thank you very much thank you
anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in support of
the bill.
Those online wishing to speak in
support please raise your hand.
Hey I see.
someone it's not a one pharmacy
five seven five.
Graham Committee him my name is
mark holding I'm a pharmacist
and co owner pharmacy five seven
five and Hobbs New Mexico my
support this bill I see it as
the Senate something essential
to help to preserve pharmacy
practice for independent
pharmacies in New Mexico if we
are struggling on many fronts
against the big corporations
like to point out the most of
people speaking against this.
This bill are from corporate
lobbies and from the insurance
companies they stand to lose or
as a people that stand to gain
from this are those that are the
are the citizens of New Mexico
and that and then health care
providers and pharmacists in the
rural areas thank you.
Thank you anyone else wishing to
speak in support of the bill
online.
I don't see anyone else chair
woman do you have any concluding
comments before we go to the
committee you madam chair so one
thing that's always struck me on
this bill is the sky is falling
the sky is falling if we let
small community pharmacies match
the price than the big guys
can't compete that makes the and
if they are negotiating such
rock bottom prices how could a
little community pharmacy meet
the price a bit if it can pull
things can't be true and then
someone I believe said that it
bars mail order this does not
bar mail order madam chair it
allows patients to make the
choice if the local pharmacy can
meet the price and that is on
blinds ten to twelve on page two
and.
Many of you probably don't know
what PBMs are their pharmacy
benefits managers and we on how
the interim health and Human
Services Committee this interim
spent a lot of time and learned
that frequently I the pharmacy
benefit managers are very opaque
eight weeks no one knows how
much drugs really cost by the
time there's rebates said
sometimes the PBMs keep the
rebates that they're supposed to
get back to the patients and you
all know that that our pharmacy
world in the United States is a
mess so with that we will stand
for questions thank you
Of questions comments from
committee.
Members Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
of.
I was a bit skeptical
of where our law firm.
Kind of changed its health plan
and having to do a mail order
prescription but.
If it's worked out pretty well
in hand M..
My my concern is I think we're
all trying to achieve the same
thing and that is lower the cost
to the
patient and so that we don't
have to pay more than we should
Hey with respect to
prescriptions and and I know.
Our law firm one way of trying
to keep the costs down even
though they have not been kept
out of was to was to go to a
mail order pharmacy that could
supply the prescriptions that
were reoccurring.
And and so that was one way I
know are my law firm dealt with
the issue of these continue to
increase in prices and and and
so I think we found that to be a
pretty
pretty good way of trying to
maintain not only the cost for
the the partners of the law firm
that also to keep the costs down
for the employees who have to
contribute to part of their
paychecks to to the health care
plans and and so much my reading
of the bill it it says that.
At the local pharmacy can match
with them down below it if talks
about you can't require.
Such a
recommendation.
You can't require you to go to
the mail order services and and
so my question is if you
prohibit the requirement to go
to the mail order
Prescription.
Does that not.
Counteract.
The ability of the employer to
try to keep.
The costs down because part of
that negotiation as I thought.
Was that if there were enough
people that we're going to the
mail order they could they could
look keep their costs down
because they have a certain
volume so to speak so that's not
a precondition.
I don't know how we get to the
ability to negotiate those lower
rates madam chair and
representative Nibert basically
they're looking for a monopoly
you can't go anywhere else and
it works fine for a law firm
where people have stable housing
where people have relationships
probably with their health care
providers that does not work on
the Navajo Nation that doesn't
work when you're homeless so
that this is not saying all this
is saying is that you can't be
forced to do the mail order if
the local pharmacy can meet the
price and as many of them said
they do all this negotiating to
keep the prices low then if
that's the case that no no local
pharmacy is going to be able to
match those prices so I'm I
think they talk out of both
sides of their mouth
respectfully
but it it it's I mean we're not
all the same mail order works
okay for me for my my regular
meds but I mean we have we have
members here who have
diabetes and their their mail
order has been lost for two or
three weeks and their blood
sugar goes up and then health
care costs go up if people are
not able to if you stemming the
cost to treat hepatitis C. it's
down but it's still in the tens
of thousands of dollars if you
start that and your homeless and
then your your prescription is
mail order and you move to you
don't have a home then we you
can't just start from I mean if
you miss a day then it's over
essentially so this is not
trying to protect the people in
the big cities who have regular
housing I mean it would be nice
for them to have a choice but we
have to realize their New
Mexicans who do not have a
permanent address and to force
them to get mail order
essentially ensures that they
will not have their medications.
Well on page two one nineteen
and following the talks about a
group health plan shall not
require in their role we.
To use the.
Mill and surface and and so I'm
wondering how do we.
How does my law firm frankly
keep the costs down if we can't
require.
The employees to utilize those
services for those reoccurring
prescriptions which is what they
really only apply to I get I get
a prescription because I have a
sinus infection I go to I go to
my local pharmacy but on the
ones that come up and I take
every day of the week those go
to the mail order so how have
how do how does my business how
does other businesses in the
state keep those costs down let
me start madam chair first with
you if we don't start protecting
our local pharmacies you will
not have a local pharmacy to go
to if you live in you know if
you're in Roswell probably but
if you live in I don't know
Capitan or something and there's
a pharmacists pharmacy there it
will no longer be there all the
medication so when you get a
sinus infection and needs a mock
Cicilline you're going to have
to go to the closest town with
the pharmacy where I grew up
that sixty miles away over
frequently muddy dirty washed
out roads so it so that's part
of it that we we we're trying to
protect that one healthcare
provider in many areas but I
will let three.
Go on I'm madam chair
Representative Nibert I the your
health plan that you choose as
an employer you could still you
know of in I encourage your
employees to use mail order to
to realize those savings and
ultimately it would realize
savings on your premiums and so
on and so forth and this bill
isn't intended to disrupt that
in in any way it's just saying
that there are certain
vulnerable populations in New
Mexico where requiring mail
order it actually creates an
unintended hardship on them and
so that's where
this bills trying to increase
access to those community
pharmacies and not everybody has
access to cell phones that have
voice equipment or internet
where they can create online
portals to manage their meds
being delivered to their homes
and so on and so forth and so
individuals that that utilize
mail order would continue to be
able to do so like I said mail
order utilization is increased
by over thirty five percent in
the last five years it's it's
working it's a business model
that's working in many people
use it without any problems this
is really for our you know
individuals in New Mexico that
have a hard time using mail
order and then usually have to
come to their local community
pharmacy where I'm on the phone
with their mail order pharmacy
trying to coordinate delivery of
man's I have one patient where
their meds have to come through
mail order no matter what and
then there at thirty three mins
don't so every three months
we're waiting for that mail
order prescription to come to
our local pharmacy so that we
can coordinate all those meds
together for the patient and
also package them impatient and
various packaging because he
can't read or write so they'll
those are the types of
vulnerable patient populations
I'm Tom.
Asking about mail orders
utilization among New Mexicans
is going to continue to grow and
thrive.
It.
Madam chair representative the
the people that.
Thank you described are they on
health care plans that are
generally
Government supported plans
because I mean you're making a
blanket statement his group
health care plan shall not
require and roll leave to to do
this what I hear is a.
You're worried about some
various populations and I'm
wondering if there was a better
way of getting at that providing
an exception if the if the.
The employee or the person
receiving them the the medicine
was in certain.
They have certain parameters
where they live for difficulty
of getting access to to the mail
when we just create an exception
in that regard instead of
putting a blanket
exception the group health plan
shall not required because it
seems to me that for a lot of
employers this was a mechanism
as I stated earlier to keep the
cost to our employees and and to
to to the law firm generally
down and I'm sure we're not the
only business in the state that
that was looking at this Avenue
to to keep those costs down
Madam chair representative
Nibert I would hate to try and
come up with a list of who would
qualify I mean we heard from A.
R. P. seniors frequently need a
little more and and they say all
the mail order folks will do
consultation with you well if
you have a cell phone and if you
have time you know six hours to
be on hold so there's really a
week it's not like it's one
group of people there are many
different people who who would
do better being able to see the
pharmacist if nothing else for
the pharmacist to look at them
and say you're looking a little
jaundiced maybe we need to do
something about this mad or you
know I'm noticing that you have
some ticks those might be the
result of a of a psychotropic
drug if we it I can't imagine a
way to set out a list of who who
could qualify and who wouldn't.
Photos would be
You know my my concerns with
this I'm certainly no expert on
on health issues but the it just
seems to me that.
We're providing for a a rural.
That many employers I think
you've utilize specifically.
To keep the cost not only to
themselves but to their
employees down and this seems to
be moving in another direction
and and I'm wondering if those
who will go up and Madam chair
representative we don't okay I'm
sorry okay.
Thank you thank you
representatives but semansky
Madam chair representative
house.
We have a second.
Motion for do passed by
representative advance second by
speaker Martinez
are there other Representative
Chasey to overcome thank you
very much madam chair.
I really appreciate this when I
first came here which was back
with the earth's crust with
schooling.
We had to pharmacists in the
house.
And they were independent
pharmacists like yourself like
your witness Representative
whose innovative from wagon
mound and representative John
Hayden from Carlsbad and they
were like my independent
pharmacist and my husband's and
kind of pharmacists they're part
of our healthcare team actually
and you know they're really part
of the fabric of our society and
I don't want to lose them.
And this is.
They are impaired by the current
requirement and what I.
Realize when we first went to
managed care is that we created
all of these levels of
bureaucracy between the
expertise of the patient.
That have
Because our costs to rise and I
see this is one of them and
right now.
My husband has
a plan through P. R. A. of the
press the shield I have
But I have well I just bought my
new play and then
Medicare supplement plan but we
each.
Could get mail order but we
don't because we like to use our
community pharmacist but what's
happened with my husband's one
of his prescriptions we always
just be able to get through that
supply from the pharmacist.
And now we can't and I think
it's because of the mail order
availability.
And.
We would have to it the
pharmacist is actually
restricted from giving his
ninety days because we also have
our plans also allow for mail
order that impairs our community
pharmacists so you don't have.
That member of your team.
And we were talking about this
on the floor and I heard folks
from.
I don't know
Both sides of the aisle
expressing concern that they
wanted their
Doctors closer to decisions I I
just think when you attenuated
and you're away in here with the
mail order not that Miller is
bad and sometimes it's going to
be perfect for people in a less
populated area but quite frankly
hi it's important to me to
maintain this type of provider
as a key player in our system so
that's why I'm going to support
the bill thank you madam chair.
I just have one comment and that
is no I really appreciate the
fact that the health care costs
are escalating but what I don't
appreciate is for corporate.
Medical care providers to say
it's on the patient we need to
make the patients adjust to help
the provision of services I
think the corporate medical
provide you know insurance
companies should be looking at
ways for them to save money so
that they can provide lower cost
to patients do not look to the
patients to be inconvenienced or
to not have choices it always
seems to go the wrong way in in
this world and I appreciate your
bill very much Representative so
anyone else.
could you call the roll thank
you madam chair calling role
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Yes.
Representative McQueen this.
Representative Nibert.
Program.
Representative reeve.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative the Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes that I'd
like to explain level.
Madam chair yes yes.
Madam chair with the seven yeses
in three knows you have a do
pass on house bill one thirty
two thank you thank you
committee thank you for chair
on.
I'm sorry explain about real
quickly thank you madam chair
Representative the damage is
already been done in our
district in this way we're
pharmacies have left and has
been a real dearth of access for
many many in particular elderly
patients we don't have that
place and they need any longer
walk it took to access what they
need so I hope this actually
helps reverse some of that trend
so that folks can create that
this point just having that
location like as everyone said
in the communities so thank you
madam chair thank thank you
right.
Representative Matthews.
We are on house bill two thirty
four.
Chair members of the committee
is such a pleasure to be back
judiciary on H. B. two thirty
four.
And today we have I'm sorry.
Just.
The text of a witness okay
We have today.
It just a brief overview of what
happened previously
we presented the bill there was
a feeling that there needed to
be more work done on it and we
have prepared a committee
substitute for H. B. two thirty
four if the number if you're
ready for that.
Yes we are okay point two two
five six four four point four.
HM of the sub for discussion.
Thank you.
You may proceed thank you and
madam chair the this is a result
of additional conversations
between the public defender's
office and law enforcement and
our goal was to craft a bill
that would fill some of the
holes that we have in our
shoplifting laws that are making
it difficult to prosecuted the
appropriate levels are one of
those is one of the changes we
made as a result of the
conversation with the public
defender's office was we of the
leader of the robbery statue
from the bill any change to the
robbery statute and we no longer
subject juveniles to adult
penalties if they are involved
in a shoplifting situation.
Secondly that involves that
would that would involve
violence secondly.
We work very hard to protect
defendants from possible double
jeopardy concerns that have been
raised by the public defender
previously but we worked on them
some more and I think we achieve
that by better defining the
terms that are used in the bill.
And third
we've focused more specifically
on.
On on defining the primary gaps
in our existing statutes that
hamper our ability to
successfully prosecute these
crimes as felonies in the
appropriate circumstances.
And some of those gaps
too frequently shoplifters are
stealing thousands of dollars
worth of goods the only facing
misdemeanor charges we fix gap
if you will in the law by
allowing the aggregate the
aggregating of the value of the
items stolen from different
locations or at different times
by the same individuals.
And we wanted to be very sure
that we address the gaming
aspect of this situation of
shoplifting and we do that by
creating the crime of organized
retail crime aimed directly at
games and allow the aggregation
of the amount stolen over one
year from one or more retailers.
And we have removed the
racketeering provision from the
bill to simplify it and because
quite frankly is so seldom used
in state court that it lacks any
real deterrent effect we think
the read the crime of organized
retail crime will do a better
job of deterring this conduct.
And with me today is
What a lot of people.
Of we have arrival equity
chamber of commerce we have a
Daymon Martinez a former U. S.
attorney we have Sean Sullivan
who is now with the internet
general's office prosecuted
these cases or supervisor
prosecution of these cases the
second judicial district we have
a commander Jones who does these
kinds of cases and we have on
June the district attorney from
The second judicial district as
soon as I let him know we're now
proceeding as Sam Bradford okay
thank you so
Our process here is we have a
moment with we're bringing back
a bill so we're not going to be
doing the whole public comment
that's not our practice will be
just talking about the the
amendments that you're proposing
in the sub that you're proposing
that at this point just to
clarify kind of where we are so
any other concluding comments
before I go to the committee
Representative.
I believe that with give you an
overview of where we are and
what we would like to chief
today right thank you thank you
very much questions comments
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
madam chair Representative
Matthews.
A couple questions first off on
the.
On page two of eight twenty two
and twenty three and twenty four
so this I fly this language last
time
that I thought it should stay
because what I think this
language says is under for I am
for for example someone who.
in a single theft steals three
five thousand dollar watch
watches.
Gets could charged with one
product.
Not three.
And I think that I maybe I'm
wrong but I think that's what
that language.
Is is after and I think that
should still be the case even
under your law.
Madam chair representative
between I I listen to the tape
of the of the preceding of the
of the last lesson we were here
at because I was late coming in
and I realize that the our
situation had.
Senate itself the livestock with
the Representative Ezzell
It is we quite frankly things
other language that we've added
fifteen paragraphs.
Paragraph.
C. D. and E. C. ND particularly
make it very clear that this is
not a situation where you would
charge if somebody took five
candy bars HB five charges state
what you do is you aggregate the
value of those five candy bars
it's one yes and I of the two
just add up the total and that's
what this whole bill is about is
aggregating the value of the
items stolen not activating each
item stolen is a separate
charge.
And I think that we have
addressed your concerns
In the language we've used
specifically of merchandise
shoplifted from a single rate
retailer at a single location
and amount specified this is
pretty precise language but I
would ask my experts at Sean
Sullivan to.
Add to that if you think the.
I just want like that I don't
need to go the extra.
Madam chair sent
Matthew so let's go to page page
three the.
At the top of page three
actually beginning on page two
charges under this section shall
be based on the aggregate
aggregated retail market value
of merchandise shoplifted from a
single retailer at a single
location.
But then in do we talk about
charging people
from force yes that one or more
retailers and then again later
and one fifteen a single charge
based on the aggregated retail
market value merchant
merchandise shoplifted I think
it should say from one or more
retailers it doesn't but I just.
I tried I've been trying to read
those two provisions together
and I don't know how the mesh.
Because one provision clearly
says single retailers single
location that's how you charge
under that section then you have
additional language which TV
seems to deviate from that.
Madam chair representative I
don't I don't think it deviates
from it it.
What what we see happening on
the street is the game for
example will go in and steal
from the target on Montgomery
street and now in Albuquerque
and then it will the same group
will go down the street and
steal from Walmart and then it
may come back around and suits
steal from another target a
different location what we wanna
do is be able to aggregate the
value of all the items that came
has taken.
In those three different
instances of happens to be three
eight this use as an example but
Otherwise what's happening is
they steal just under the felony
amounts or they'll still under
the larger felony amounts and
you're having to do piecemeal
prosecution of what is an
organized effort.
To.
It's still substantial lots of
times thousands of dollars worth
of merchandise with the same
people and I.
At the committee Jones the one
of comment on that and maybe
Sean to.
Absolutely representative madam
chair members of the committee
that's exactly what we're seeing
in Albuquerque the agree of
sophistication varies so madam
chair I I yeah just to keep it
short right I get that I get
that I'm looking at the language
that we're seeing on the street
but I'm trying to understand how
the language reflects that
because I see it one one
instance single retailer at a
single location.
But then the next paragraph
talks about one or more
retailers.
And I think it's a very least
there's tension there there
right there may be a conflict
there and Madam chair
representative.
The changes to subsection C. up
lines twenty five going on to
page three line twenty two I
think we're a specific amendment
to address this committee's
concern about what's considered
a unit a prosecution concern for
double jeopardy purposes which
is up to the way that I think
that is you know for watches at
five hundred dollars apiece or
stolen you wouldn't charge
someone with four different
shoplifting's would aggregate to
be a two thousand dollar single
fourth degree felony charge if
you look at subsection do what
that does is give the state some
prosecutorial discretion if you
look at lines eleven going
forward it states that the
prosecution may charge the
individual under this section
based on either the aggregated
retail market value of
merchandise shoplifted from a
single retailer a single
location.
For a single charge one
shoplifting as it were based on
the aggregated retail market
value so essentially the state
faces a choice do you charge
initially after the first arrest
because then you only have one
bite at the apple that gets back
to what Representative re was
speaking about last week then
you cannot use it to aggregate
or do you wait and try and
aggregate them within that
ninety day period so basically
all that does is provide the
state some prosecutorial
discretion as to how to charge.
Madam chair Representative an
expert when it says on page two
line twenty five charges under
this section does this section
refer to thirty to sixteen
that's twenty four does it refer
to subsection C..
Madam chair representative when
it's talking about under this
section of talking about the
shoplifting statute thirty
sixteen dash twenty so so madam
chair.
Percent of an expert charges
under this section shall be
based on aggregated retail
market value of merchandise
shoplifted from a single
retailer at a single location.
That sentence conflicts with the
language in section D..
Madam chair representative I I
respectfully disagree what
subsection cease talking but
it's a single shoplifting
incident so one day one if I go
in and steal for well not me
someone.
And steals for watches.
Then charges for that incident
are based on the aggregated
retail value of merchandise
shoplifted at that retailer on
that day so five hundred times
doesn't say that the.
It's just a single retailer at a
single location and amount
specified in subsection B. of
this section and so that's
dealing with a single incident
of.
Contrast that with subsection D.
which gives you that ability to
use that single incident and
charge accordingly for charge
based on the aggregated value
over multiple incidents that's
the prosecutorial discretion
subsection do provide so
respectfully I do not believe it
is in conflict.
Madam chair
there's an extra I I disagree is
it for for to be as you
described which I think is the
goal which I'm fine with it
needs to stay in the single
incident or a single day or
something like that that's
probably is similar to that
right because you do in the
morning go back couple hours
later those to be two separate
into the incident.
But we struck in that language
arising out of the same
transaction which is kind of
weird language but you get the
job done that language this
chart of talk about aggregating
the amount.
I retailer and location.
It I I read that to allow you to
aggregate multiple ints
incidents and I think that I
think that's a problem.
But I I will move on I I think
the committee and chair is of
the.
The aggravated shoplifting
I I don't know if this is
permissible but I would add
possession.
Of a deadly weapon.
I think if you have a knife for
gun your pocket you'll pull it
out hi that seems aggravated me
so I something to consider thank
you Mr.
Madam chair I.
I think the the language complex
I'm sorry thank you thank you
representative Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I won't go over
what was.
Just go on over and see in the
but he does pose some additional
problems and and it does not
address what I thought we're
trying to get that that is.
The shoplifter pancake came the
employee at the as a.
Because this requires the deadly
weapon to get that rated so a
shoplifter who.
Runs over an employee.
Is not covered by this
legislation.
There's no enhanced
in harassment for that and I
thought that's what we were
getting with with aggravated
shoplifting was trying to deal
with with the those types of
situations it looks like
unlawfully assaulting or
striking another with a deadly
weapon both the assault for the
battery.
Would have to involve of the
showing for the striking with a
deadly weapon to get aggravated
shoplifting and and there's a
lot of other instances that I
would need to be aggravated that
are not captured in the US and
so I'm concerned about that and
madam chair that's that's my
only additional comment to what
the representative from St face.
Thank you representative madam
chairman we just respond briefly
to that or
There are it's the kind of
conduct that Representative
Nibert is talking about is
essentially assault and battery
and I went Mr Solomon give the
precise words because he's he's
the act prosecutor here Madam
chair representative that that's
correct certainly the conduct
described is criminal there are
statutes that address that if
we're talking about situations
in which there's not a deadly
weapon but there is some
intentional touching or
application of force of course
that would be better if it did
result in great bodily harm then
you have a third degree felony
aggravated battery and then of
course you would have the
underlying value of the
shoplifting I think what we're
seeing on the ground and what
we're really trying to attack
with this legislation is the
shoplifting with weapons that's
really the concern that we're
saying is folks going into
stores either possessing weapons
or point out weapons brandishing
weapons and so what what we
think this does is narrowly
tailor and target those
individuals who are using those
weapons.
Madam chair representative.
You know.
If you see the video footage on
the TV and used you see the the
brazenness of the shoplifters
and rarely do you see the the
the economic and and so
aggravated to me was the.
Just the full run in over the
the the employees of the store.
It seems right when you get the
deadly weapon involved then
you're dealing with robbery and
some other things but that
I thought we for aggravated we
were trying to increase the
penalty to deal with the
brazenness of these individuals
and again I don't think we got
there and madam chair
Representative ordinarily when
an individual goes in and
brandishes a deadly weapon for
example on the way out of a
shoplifting offence that would
generally be charges of fourth
degree aggravated assault along
with shoplifting based on the
value of the merchandise with
this legislation does is insert
some more culpability by making
the aggravated shoplifting a
third degree felony which is
punishable by up to three years
of a basic sentence as opposed
to eighteen months so there is
some additional penalty up to
justify the the use of it at the
economic.
All Madam chair
representative I don't know why
that person would be charged
with proper.
You have a deadly weapon.
Seems to me that you have I
Robert you don't have
Is some sort aggravated thing
but madam chair representative
that that gets back to sort of
the conversation we were having
last Wednesday is that the court
of appeals case state versus
blue restricts our ability to
charge that as a robbery what it
requires is that the use or
threatened use of force or
violence actually be the lever
by which property is taken from
the immediate control of another
and so in situations when you're
only using that deadly force to
escape or to retain property
that doesn't fall within what
the court of appeals allowed for
us to charge interoperate.
Well as you've taken that
completely out of this.
And so you know again I thought
we were.
Word.
Enhancing robbery I thought we
were having aggravated assault
and.
I I just don't see it the.
Yeah that's it.
Madam chair I move when
appropriated do not pass.
On house bill to the floor as
amended in a do pass
recommendation please substitute
for House within thirty four.
Okay Sir second.
Thank.
Motion made a for a do not pass
on house bill two thirty four
but I do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill two thirty four and it made
by speaker Martinez second by
Representative Sapan ski.
For any further discussion on
the bill.
I don't see it to call the roll
thank you madam chair calling
the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Speaker Martinez yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read.
Representative green.
Representative Penske.
Yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with eight yess in
two knows you have a do not pass
on house bill two thirty four
but it do password House
Judiciary Committee so two
thirty four.
Thank you for your hard work and
thanks for the various
stakeholders mission.
