He what
Representative Martinez.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Reeb.
Leader Sapansky.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair
Here
Madam Chair, you have a corm.
Very good. Uh, the first bill we
have on our agenda, House Bill
143 lobbying activity reports,
um, Representative Silva and
Senator Stein.
Good morning, Chair and
committee, um, wondering if
you're ready for me.
Excellent.
Uh, so House Bill 143, um.
Is relating to lobbying and
basically would require a
lobbying activity report for uh
registered lobbyists, uh, that
lobbied during the session, and
it would require uh one report
to say two things, uh, who is a
lobbyist employer and what bills
they are working to pass or to
um or or to not pass. And so,
um,
I don't know if my co-sponsor
wants to add anything my
colleague, Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair, committee, good
morning. Great to be before the
House Judiciary Committee. This
is um
I believe a super important bill
for the um increased
transparency of the legislature.
This is a bill that would
require that all those as
representatives said who are
required to file as a lobbyist
now.
They're being compensated to
lobby. They're trying to
influence legislation would be
required to file a new report
with the Secretary of State, um,
during the session as soon as
practical to the commencement of
lobbying activity. The
legislation that they're
lobbying and the position that
they've taken on the bill for
against it or neutral.
That's what the bill does, Madam
Chair. It would also be required
to have the report linked to the
Secretary of State website, to
the legislation itself. So
Everyone, including us, starting
with us, could have access to
know kind of
Who are the players involved in
trying to shape legislation one
way or another, so that we can
make better decisions, but also
so the public can know.
Who is behind every bell so they
can.
participate and and the media
report on it. So that's what the
bill does and uh I will just say
I think it's, it was designed
through the years to be very
streamlined and efficient even
for the lobbyists, they only
have to report one time unless
their position changes and as
defined by the Secretary of
State is close to practicable as
when the lobbying commences.
for questions. OK, great. Um,
let's go to the audience, and
we're gonna do 5 in the room and
then free online, those in a
minute each, those wishing a
microphone.
I don't see any opposition in
the room, those online and on
hand raised.
Um, those in the room and
support.
They said I'm limiting it to 51
minute each. So you can approach
the gentleman.
You can approach the gentleman
in the microphone I I saw people
raise their more than one person
raised their hand.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Sharon
Arjunbra,
and I'm asking for protection.
For being able to, we need to
hear the other voices, all the
voices.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Sorry.
And OK, no one wishes to speak
in support, OK, those online
wishing to speak in support,
please raise your hand.
Um, OK, I see someone called
admin.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, members of the committee and
sponsors. My name is Natine. I'm
a disability advocate at a
person with multiple
disabilities. It is extremely
helpful when someone states that
they're a lobbyists in the name
the organization they're a
lobbyist for. I have noticed
during this, this session that
many people have said I
represent represent is different
than lobby lobby is different
than what we advocate is
different than advocate. The
clarity is very important.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Mr. Sponsor, members of
the committee.
Thank you. Thank you now.
Um, I see Barbara Cali, Barbara.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Barbara Cali,
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico, based upon the following
league position, we stand in
strong support of HB 143. The
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico believes that methods of
financing, political campaigns,
and public offices should ensure
the public's right to know,
combat corruption, and undue
influence, maximize fiscal
accountability and.
transparency. We want to thank
representative Silva and Senator
Steinborn for strengthening our
lobbying regulations and urge
you to give HB 14 you do pass.
Thank you very much, Barbara.
mental
I
Fennel Rowley.
this is the last person, Fennel.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Can
you hear me? Go ahead Fennel.
Um
Yes, I
Uh, my name is Finnel Riley, and
I am a youth activist.
Who has recently become active
in Mexico.
I urge you to vote and support
of this.
Bill as I believe that it would
be very helpful for those of us
doing work in the state, to know
who is a lobbyist, who is an
activist.
Um, and just have more
transparency.
Thank you.
Thank you. OK, that's.
That concludes our public
comment, um, happy to go back to
the sponsors.
I'm chair of Representative Sil
and I just wanted to share one
important piece of context for
the committee, which is New
Mexico 20 states approximately
require this, and they require
more. They require compensation
paid to but this being really
foundational, uh, many, many
states require this and in New
Mexico has been rated a D
nationally for our lobbying
transparency precisely because
we don't disclose who's involved
in
trying to pass and fight
legislation and so.
Let's join the ranks of the 20
by whom?
Um, I believe the ethics
commission reported this data.
It might have been common cause
or I, I don't want to speak for
common cause, but it was a good
government.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And um
Excuse me, and
Excuse me, representative and
expert. So can you kind of
explain to me what the
requirements are now and what
additional requirement.
Madam Chair Representative Reeb,
uh, right now the requirements
are that a lobbyist must
register, um, as a registered
lobbyist with the Secretary of
State, um, and, um, that's
Basically it, I don't know.
Senator, Madam Chair,
representative, so right now
there is no disclosure
requirement. This, this bill
says if you were required to
file a lobbying report with the
Secretary of State and register.
So when you meet that
requirement, which is basically
a paid lobbyist and you would
trigger having a violation. As
far as reporting which bills
they're involved in, they have
no disclosure requirement other
than, I think when they file,
there's a line that says, what
is the general matter? You are,
you are interested in.
And then they will write
pertaining to
Whatever, but, but there's
nothing specific.
OK. And so Madam Chair, an
expert and representative, so
this is gonna go more towards
lobbying activity versus I guess
money spent that that's correct,
uh, Representative Madam Chair,
so, um, there aren't um.
$1 requirements on this bill or
spending requirements. It, um,
basically says this is who I'm
employed by because um.
Some lobbyists do say, well, I'm
employed by my own LLC and we
want to say, well, who's behind
that? Um, who's who's
bankrolling that, um, so we want
to know who the employer is, um,
that is contracting with that
lobbyist. And then we are also
asking what are the issues, the,
uh, specific pieces of uh bills
and legislation that, uh, a
lobbyist would be working on in
this session.
or in any session that they're
working on. So there aren't any.
Dollar amounts or transactions
that these reports are
requiring.
Senator, thank you.
Ma'am chair representative, if
you're asking like how would
this work? So I want to read for
you under law, we have a
definition of lobbying and it's
when that threshold is met by
the people who are already
required to file that they would
trigger having to file what they
call lobbying activity report,
which is what this bill would
create a new report.
Uh, attempting to influence a
decision related to any matter
to be considered or being
considered by the legislative
branch or state government or
any legislative committee or any
legislative matter requiring
action by the governor awaiting
action by the governor. So,
If you once you cross the line,
it doesn't matter if it's in
here, doesn't matter if it's in
the Riochama, if it's on a phone
call.
Once you attempt to influence
policy and you're being paid to
do so, you have
Cross the line you've lobbied
that piece of legislation. You
are now then required to report
that.
Um, for Bill, but it's only
bills that's pending before the
legislature. So let's say you've
worked on a bill, and that's
also specified here. If you
worked on a bill that never got
introduced, you don't have to
report that. So that work
product really is, but if the
bill's been introduced and you
were a part of helping to craft
that bill, then yeah, that would
be inclusive in this.
And so, and again, you'd only
have to report it one time.
Sometime during the session as
defined by the Secretary of
State, unless your position
changes, so.
Just got to report it once. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair
Representative and an expert,
so.
I understand for transparency,
but what are you?
Right, I mean, who's gonna use
this information? What, what is
this trying to get at so I can
kind of understand, I mean, me
lobbyists, you know, why why
would their positions changed so
much throughout the, let's say a
position of a bill as it gets
amended, things get changed and
so what is it trying to get up
and I'm chair and then what um
what do you do with these
situations where their position
changes and, and how do they
deal with that extra requirement
of reporting.
Yeah,
Chair Representative Reed, uh,
so what we're trying to
accomplish here is just to put
more sunlight on our legislative
process. And um.
And my hopes is that we as a
legislative body would use that
information to make decisions,
uh, and to
Get more wisdom around all the
pieces of legislation that come
before us, uh, which is a new
legislator would be really,
really helpful for me. Um, but
also the general public, um, you
know, I represent a district
that is 4.5 hours away and um
they can't come to the capital
in the roundhouse during
session. And so their ability to
see all the activity that's
happening here. And all of the
people and influences that help
shape legis.
translation is critical for uh
for my constituents, uh, when I
go back and we have
conversations about these
issues. Uh, I want them to be
able to click a link and see all
the players involved, um, and so
I think that makes a stronger
democracy here in New Mexico. I
think it makes a stronger and
more informed electorate, and
so, um, that's, that's my reason
for sponsoring this spill, and
so, um, so I appreciate that
question, and, uh, and then you
ask a second question, but I
want to.
Hand it over to Senator
Steinborn we have um an hour and
a half for this committee
hearing and
Lots of conversation over it, I.
Direct answers to direct
questions would be much
appreciated because we cannot
have long.
Discussion, OK, understood like
one sponsor is good on one
answer, how's that? So what was
the second question? Um, Madam
Chair, it was how will these
lobbies deal with their changing
legislation as amendments and
things happen.
Madam Chair, it would trigger,
uh, representative they would
have to if their position
changes, they would have to find
a curve. I would note in
Colorado where this is law, they
have to file.
weekly.
And so in our case we say one
time unless your position
changes, which, in which case
you probably have to then file a
second report again at an
interval divided by, defined by
them, and it would just show up
online as a ledger of here's
everyone that's, that's lobbied
and if a particular interest
changed their position, that
would probably be reflected
multiple times.
OK, and I just, I think one more
question I'm sure just so I've,
I'm chair, uh, representative
and expert.
You want to see, so if somebody
is lobbying, let's say myself
for a crime bill, um.
And then are you looking to see,
OK, that this lobbyist, you
know, what did, what position
they lobbied for and.
Did they write Representative Re
a check.
Um,
I'm, I'm trying to see what like
is this gonna be something that
we're gonna see, oh, OK, is kind
of an election issue, you know,
used in elections, or is this? I
know it's for more transparency,
but I'm just kind of not
understanding the purpose Madam
Chair, number one, this, this
report does not involve saying
if you donated money, if you
bought a dinner at the bull
ring, it doesn't say that at
all. It just says that it says
nothing other than reblobbing
incorporated.
Lobbied in favor of this bill.
Rebo against this bill. That's
all it'll say. That's all this
legislation requires them to
say. It's really, it's just
about making good decisions and
accountability so that we know
as my first day here through 15
years of serving, I continue to
be stymied.
And
Kind of, it's an opaque world of
where bills are coming from. And
I think it's hard for us to make
good decisions and we don't know
that, then the governor is going
to vote on a bill, then come to
find out there was some other
player behind it. Well, maybe
never would have voted for that.
Then the public is totally
excluded from that and so it's
just to
Make better decision making as
far as electoral accountability,
the chips fall where they may,
and people make the decisions
they make. I think this will
improve the quality of decision
making.
Thank you Ben.
you, I have rip Queen.
The manager Robbie.
on this. You, you made a comment
that
Um
You would vote differently on a
bill if you knew somebody else.
was behind it.
Which is very interesting to me
because I think we should be
voting on bills.
Based on the policy, not
This person lobbied for it and I
don't like.
The cologne, so I'm gonna vote
against it. It just
It kind of goes against my
philosophy, but I'll leave it at
that.
Um
So how many, so if a if a
lobbyist changes their position,
somebody introduces us a
committee sub.
Or introduces an amendment.
Things might change 2 or 3 times
a day.
Are they forced to file.
3 different
works that day.
Madam Chair, uh representative,
no, no, they would have to
report a new their new position
one time.
And not necessarily that day as
defined by the Secretary of
State, it might be a week later
during.
So they just have to change.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
And is there somewhere I, I
tried to
find in the bill.
We it
We defines what a lobbyist
represented,
that's defined in the lobbyist
Disclosure Act that that this
bill is dealing with, and that's
in 2-11-2.
Also that same, that same law uh
deals with who has to file, who
has to file
as a lobbyist.
Senator, so
In that, in that statute that
you referenced, does it?
Is it uh
Does it show the difference
between what a lobbyist is and
what an advocate is.
Um, yes, Madam Chair, it's, it's
basically if you're paid to do
it. So in fact, there are
advocates who are up here being
paid that are lobbyists and they
would have to file they very
much fall into this as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator, 11 last question.
Where did this bill come from?
Who's
this book came from me, um.
Representative, no one else, no
one asked me to carry this bill.
Um, I've been carrying lobbying
transparency bills since 2008,
starting with things much more
extensive, including
compensation. This bill though
really got to the heart of the
matter of
You know, what I thought we were
really struggling with the
forces at work.
And I was struggling with this
legislature.
Legislator. So it was just me.
And then through the years I've
worked with the Secretary of
State to try to make it better
and no one else. And, and I'm
really welcome Representative
Silva now being elected.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Those are 3 questions. So
if this bill passes, you're
all right Representative
McQueen.
The chair representative center
a couple of questions, um.
I would say that
Knowing who's behind the bill is
to me is informative and it
Because you, you know, these
people and who they work for and
it gives you insight into what
someone thinks the bill will do
and what to look for and, you
know, what to be on guard for.
So, so I think that's really
useful. Um, I did, um.
I was concerned about the change
of position. Uh, I will tell
you, uh, yesterday.
Um, I had a lobbyist in my
office, uh.
2 or 3 times.
Uh, with opposition to a bill,
um, uh, the bill got changed. I
got a note last night, uh, that
the lobbyist was no longer in
opposition and, and his clients.
Uh, and then this morning he
stood up in support.
So I, I mean, that's, that's
You know, over the course of 24
hours, he went from opposition
to neutral to support, and I, I
would, I would think that
wouldn't require.
them to file 3 reports in that
time is that
How would that be handled? Well,
Um
Madam Chair, representing Mr.
Chairman, um,
It's a good question. I would
think that they might have to
file that 3 different times,
particularly if there was an
amendment involved. Well, I
mean, 3 would be twice unless
they were neutral.
Um, and that's what the bill
says for or against or no kind
of similar to what Colorado
does.
So you know, what's I think
important there if they're just
having a conversation with you
about it. And they start off
kind of concerned and then the
end of the. If you've amended a
bill, I think, you know, these
are state as well.
But yes, we do want to know when
the position changes,
particularly, is there an
amendment involved that's when
it, uh, but that's what it would
require.
Which is not onerous on them, in
my opinion.
And Madam chair, um, send her
along the same lines, I, you
know, I have.
A couple of bills that are long
and complicated, and I've had
people say I support this part,
but not this part. Um, you know,
I think you might consider
having it just be
Have a lobbyists identify
whether they're in support or
opposition and, and sort of
force them to make that choice.
Because when you start to get
into more nuanced.
Like, can you change this
language kind of stuff. I, I
think that just is really
difficult to report.
And then my other question is,
It says prior to the adjournment
of the legislative session.
So why wouldn't you just wait
till the last day?
Well
Uh, chair and Representative
McQueen, uh,
I think in terms of both of
these uh concerns is we want to
see the life span of a bill.
And so understanding at what
point does a lobbyist support,
uh, or oppose or is neutral on
the bill, um, as soon as
practicable is really important
so that we're seeing a full
picture as uh the life of a bill
is moving through, uh, through
the process and um
And so, again, leaving it up to
the Secretary of State to
determine, uh, those parameters.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah, um
Ma'am, is there a trigger in the
bill for the earliest.
Reporting
Event
Uh, again, Madam Chair,
Representative, as soon as
practicable and as determined by
the Secretary of State. So
there's there's no trigger
besides as soon as the lobbying
activity begins. And so again,
that would be up to the.
Man er representative center.
Does it say that in the bill, or
is that just your intention?
Where's, can you point me to
that language?
Madam Chair, page 4.
Line 7
And then, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative, it comes up
again on page 3.
Um
Well, page page 2, section D.
And again, page 3.
Uh, line one, provided that the
time for filing lobbying
activity reports is consistent
with filing as soon as
practicable after commencement
of the lobbying activity. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
OK, ma'am, sure, um, I, I think
that's great.
I support that. I think the
first sentence on page one line
2.
Is it odds with that?
The
Uh, I A on page one prior to the
adjournment of the legislative
session.
I think you need to think about
how those those time frames
interact because I think
They're they're inconsistent.
Thank you, ma'am, sir.
I imagine some of us will be
interested in how you reconcile,
Madam Chair, I think they are
consistent because we're saying,
we're saying that.
Prior to the adjournment of this
report has to be filed. We
further add to that later in the
bill that that report shall be
filed as soon as practicable to
commencement, but we're saying
on the outset of the bill that
this is a report that gets
filed.
Before the adjournment of the
session. So
The purpose of this is so we
have this information, right,
while we're making decisions.
So I think they're actually
consistent. If you wanted to
add, if we wanted to add to it,
something like that as soon as
practicable, bring that language
into that first sentence,
further dial it in, but I think
actually ma'am here, um.
So because they have the as soon
as practical language, uh, I
think it was on page 3, line 2.
I think that works, you know, we
could just strike uh prior to
the adjournment of the
legislative session.
And then the time frame would be
as soon as practical.
As stated on page 3.
Yeah
Could you page
on page one, I would strike
prior to the adjournment of of a
legislative session.
capitalize the A
Uh-huh.
Yes.
And then I think that would
eliminate that conflict.
I would offer that that's
interesting suggestion, but I
would then say if we do that,
then we would want to add on uh
as soon as practicable that that
was on 32,
we would want to then add there
prior to the adjournment because
as soon as practical, it could
be 2 weeks when we leave, after
we leave.
And that's not what this bill is
designed to do.
I think that's
Senator, why wouldn't it be
practicable for them to file it
sooner?
Well, I share that, as we know,
practicable is is is in the eye
of the beholder and the eye of
the one making the rule.
And
And that is gonna determine who
the Secretary of State is in
part and so setting that
parameter before the adjournment
of session is hugely important.
I mean, that's, it's otherwise
it becomes
Academic and nothing more.
Um, madam chair Senator, so I
I had some concern about the
adjournment of the session. Um.
For example, we had a special
session.
That was adjourned quite
promptly.
Um
You know, so a German can be an
unpredictable date. Uh, we, we
are, we have our sessions are a
maximum of 30 and 60 days. It's
not a minimum.
Um, so potentially we could
adjourn at any time.
Um
So I, I, I'm, I personally am
comfortable with as soon as
practical, Madam Chair.
Represented by here, yeah, I
think that other language is
super important to us. Um, I
would also note though, just to
go a little deeper down the
rabbit hole. There is language
here that specifies that if
someone is brought on after the
adjournment but before a
government, a governor acts on a
bill, then they also were
triggered to file. So there is
that piece of this bill as well,
just to be super clear since
we're talking about adjournment.
Um, but I would add, Madam
Chair, that the Secretary of
State can delineate in their
roles between a special session
and, you know, when maybe if
we're in a special session,
maybe become, I won't say real
time, but
The intervals that would be
during a set 6 McQueen, are you?
woman
I'm sure I would make that
motion.
So the motion is to strike on
page one, line 2.
and line 21.
Prior to the adjournment of a
legislative session.
comma, strike the comma and
capitalize.
Is there discussion of the
proposed amendment.
Madam Madam Chair Representative
McQueen, could you just
Go over again the
As I.
Um
Ma'am, and Skansky, uh.
So, uh, Senator Steinburn has
explained this to some extent.
But I read the
Prior to the adjournment of the
session.
As being, you have to file this
report before the session's
over.
And, you know
He pointed out the language on
page 3 which.
Um, so as soon as practical
after commencement, which I
think is a proper trigger.
I think we, I think in the
interest of transparency, we
want to know is, as soon as
they're working on it.
Not waiting till the end of the
session.
So if it's as soon as practical
after commencement.
That should get filed and I
don't see how we, how the
language about essentially
waiting till the adjournment of
the session.
Um
Adds to that
Thank you, um, thank you, Madam
Chair Chair McQueen, um.
I, I, I worry just a little bit
that it could also be.
Read the other
where as soon as practicable.
A very long time.
I think Madam chair, if I might
ask the sponsors was that?
Your concern about this change.
Thank you, ma'am Chair
Representatives, absolutely, um,
because by rule this would a
month after I, I respect what
the representatives saying this
is practicable to us in good
faith means within, you know,
days, and that would work. The
problem is we've all been around
here and we understand how
If you allow that permissiveness
to undo it, especially when
there are people who want to
live in that opaque world.
They're going to seek to undo
this later. I think that
Before the adjournment is
important, but I think as soon
as practical is also hugely
important. I don't have a
problem.
Connecting those or further
defining what that means as soon
as practicable.
And that would be another way to
do it agenda, but
I would be, we would be happy.
I'm sure to work with the
sponsor to look at.
What as soon as practical means
taking out that first part, but.
Before the accession adjourns is
hugely important language.
Madam
Madam sky, I, I think, um.
I had my druthers would would
sort of massage different areas
of the language, not just to a
limited amendment.
Um
But I, I think we're gonna run
into trouble doing that on the
fly.
Madam Chair, um, I guess my
final comment will be.
It, it seems as though instead
of striking.
Prior to the adjournment of a
legislative session, I would
rather.
Have something like as soon as
practicable, but no later than.
7 days after the commencement of
the lobbying activity or or
something or just that just puts
up, I don't know what that uh
obviously things get crazy and
no one's sleeping and it's very
difficult to put demands on
people to.
Go and and file a report
immediately, but it seems like
we could around it, thank you,
Madam chair.
Representative Romero on the
amendment. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, so I agreed and have
a suggestion as per the
hobbyist, um.
Regulation Act that references
211-6, the threshold for um
lobbyists having to expenditures
incurred during a legislative
session that was $500 or more
was within 48 hours. So it
subsequent to that sort of
threshold, I think if we can say
no later than 48 hours.
Um, somewhere in the bill, um.
I think is accordance with
expenditures being made as well
during session. So, um, after I
would say going back to page 3,
if we did strike the first.
The line prior to adjournment of
the legislative session.
Um
Going back to page 3 line 3, you
can say as soon as practicable
after lobbying activity no later
than 48 hours reading from the.
For each um
Separate.
In ma'am Chaser Romero and if
we're gonna do that, we'll
probably just strike as soon as
practical. I mean we're only
giving them 48 hours, we don't
need to run over.
The Secretary of State's office,
you know, the moment they get
the call.
And I think that's consistent.
Thank you, Madam Chair. What
happens if?
It still, it's still rolling 48
hours.
It's so, so it would be 48 hours
after each time.
Thank you
Right, so, um, we are on
Representative McQueen's
suggestion, which does not.
Madam Chair, can I amend my
amendment to include both.
So, so we're clear that we're
doing both.
So I would, so the
The amendment as previously
stated.
H1 lines 20 and 21 strike.
Prior to the adjournment of a
legislative session, capitalize
the A.
And on page 3.
Lines 2 through 3.
Yeah,
I think I'm trying to figure out
what's a strike.
It would be
Would, would you strike
everything after the semicolon
and just say within 48 hours?
What semicolon
That's the on line one that 10,
OK, yeah, I see what you're
saying, yeah.
Like the semicolon, the rest of
the lines 12, and 3 and and add.
Within 48 hours.
Of the lobby of the
The commencement of the lobbying
activity.
Half of the lobbying activity.
Yes, ma'am.
So, uh let me review that for
everyone and the staff. So on
page one, again, we are striking
prior to the on line 20 and 21
prior to the adjournment of a
legislative session, strike the
comma there.
Just capitalize the letter A.
And then on on page 3.
We will, I think strike the
semicolon, uh line ones and and
then insert within 48 hours.
After the commencement of the
lot.
OK, very good.
Sure.
Um
OK.
So did you get the first one,
that one's pretty
straightforward, um, since I've
said it 3 times on page 3,
we're gonna strike the
semicolon.
And on line one and actually
strike all the way down, so it
would be strike provided that
the time for filing, strike all
of line 2, strike all of line 3
except for the period.
OK, all right, so thank you.
So as suggested by um vice
chair.
We will strike the semicolon.
We will strike, provided that
the time for filing lobbying
activities, reports is
consistent with filing.
Um,
As soon as practicals.
And so we're striking all of the
words online too, except for
after, right?
And we're gonna strike all uh,
oh no, we keep um line 3,
correct?
OK, ma'am Chair, the, the
analyst for one more change to
my attention
on page 2.
Lines 24 and 25 strike at a time
and.
Since we're specifying the time.
Page 2 lines and 25, 24 and 25
we're gonna strike at a time
and.
So we just say loving activity
shall be filed in the format as
prescribed by the rule. OK.
So, um, the 3rd Amendment is
On page 2.
Um, line 24 strike the end.
925.
Um, straight time. The 24 at a
25 harshly. I couldn't.
Alright, so lobbying activity
report shall be filed in a
format as prescribed by rule of
the Secretary of State within 48
hours after the commencement of
the lobbying activity with
everybody on the same page with
that one,
So we're still on the amendment
more amendment.
Made by, oh, we need a second.
Are you OK? Um, you were the 2nd
on the original 2nd.
So it's been seconded, let me
just, I'll get to the whether
it's friendly or not.
Um, made by Representative
McQueen, 2nd.
As my colleague on the other
side of the chamber, um, is it
constructive?
of chair, uh, yes, it's a
friendly amendment. Thank you.
I still like the friendly. It it
sounds nicer. OK, um.
So it is constructive slash
friendly, OK.
Um, any opposition to the
proposed amendment made by
Representative.
I don't see any opposition, so
you have an amended bill now,
um, so we'll be back to the
bill.
do still have 4. Thank you,
ma'am. OK.
Very good, um, representative
Romero and then representative
of Beta.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So
on page 2 line 6,
You have lobbyists and or
lobbyists employer support
opposition, or their position
taken.
Oftentimes we see a lobbyist.
Sitting for multiple um.
clients will say on the same
bill, taking multiple positions.
Um, so I would
Suggests that
It's not just per bill, it's per
um employer support, many of
these records, so I would change
um line 6.
Lobbyists, the or to an ant.
Um, because we do know that
certain, and on certain bills.
Their clients may have multiple.
Um
Madam Chair,
um, vice chair.
Um, I appreciate that suggestion
and on.
Section 3, I wonder if that
specifies further, so page 2
line 10, uh, it also requires
that the name of the lobbyist
employer that lobbied on the
legislation either directly or
through the registered lobbyist,
uh, also be identified, um, and
so we.
I had this issue with the oar
also when we were drafting, um,
vice chair and Madam Chair and
Um
Number 3 on line 10 helped for
me encapsulate, OK, we're asking
for the lobbyists or the
lobbyists employers support or
opposition, but then we're also
asking them to identify the name
of the employer that I felt like
it captured all of that, um, and
I'm open to your opinion too.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. My concern is
that it's not.
If if we keep the oar, it's not
connected to um or position
generally.
If we, if it's not an ant, we
can list the information, but it
doesn't connect to. OK.
So um Madam Cherry I would move
that we change, um, on page 2
line 6,
The or
OK
Madam chair of.
On line on page 2 line 20,
should that
Also be changed.
Unless the lobbyists.
The lobbyists or lobbyist
lawyer's position.
Could that be changed also.
The chair that you could.
So
Um
May we include this in.
So it would be line 2.
Changing the or.
2.
Um
We're online 20 page 2.
Madam Chair, I don't, I don't, I
don't think it's the same. No,
if it's the same statutory
construction I don't either,
because there's not like a.
Claws after worried about so.
I don't think it's the same.
So I think I hear you
representative Romero
withdrawing that additional
amount to stick with, just
sticking with the candle.
OK. It's gonna be um the
amendment is proposed is.
And online 6 page 2, not an oar.
Um
Do I see any opposition
position.
All of us except for
All right, um
We now have.
additional amendment.
one was friendly, I understand.
Um, before I call that, I, um,
so.
The thing that I like about
reporting employers and
positions.
Um
I
A point I have known lobbyists
who have clients that have
opposing positions.
And I find that offensive.
I think it's unethical,
actually, um, and you don't
know.
I'll say, who are you
representing when you're, when
it's that position of that
particular client, that's who
they say, but they might also
have another client.
That has a different position
and frankly, I would like to
know that, um, and frankly, I
think their clients should know
that. That's the big thing
because I, a lot of what happens
here is not transparent to the
public and the clients I care
about the clients too, they
should know what their lobbyists
are doing.
And who there also representing.
Which may be in conflict with
some of their positions, you
know.
And there's all kinds of stuff
like that that goes on.
And I feel this will help.
People start sorting out who's
representing who and who's
taking positions, uh, kind of
both sides out of their mouth
and all this kind of thing. So I
think it would be super helpful
for a lot of people, um, having
said that, let's call it all.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Chavis.
Representative Hall.
Go with an explanation.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No, and I'd like to explain.
Speaker Martinez, Representative
McQueen, yes.
Representative Reeb.
No.
Leader Sapansky. Yes.
Madam Vice Chair
Yes.
Madam chair, yes.
Madam Chair, you have a due pass
on House Bill 143 twice amended.
So, um, Representative Hall and
Martinez.
Yes, ma'am, madam Chair, thank
you.
I am, I just had some concerns
about the 48 hours.
And then
I, I
I appreciate the spirit of this
bill.
It had the maybe the.
Language been a little smoother
from the beginning for me,
follow.
Instead of jumping around, but
I appreciate the spirit of the
bill. I just at this time
couldn't support it as we did
it. So thank you, Madam Chair.
Santa Martinez.
Thank you Madam Chair. um.
I, I love the idea of
transparency, and if it was just
transparency bill, I
you all for it. I'm just not
comfortable. This is going to be
manageable by everybody with the
changes in positions and, and
All that
But I will, I will follow the
debate on the floor and see what
happens.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative.
Um, thank you, Senator, we're on
now on.
Thank you committee.
House Bill 153.
Chech reporters.
From exploitive spying.
And
Um, we have a little bit of
um kind of a procedural
confusion, and I wanna talk
about it so that we can talk
about how to move forward.
It, it might be, we need to talk
about where we're at cuz there
have been.
Amendments and subs and so um uh
represent, I told the
representative we'd hear her
through and we can talk about
whether we want to hear the bill
or roll it.
And I'll tell you we have a very
full schedule on Monday.
Be aware
Um, representative, why don't
you try to walk us through
what's been going on with
amendments and subs and things
like that. Thank you, I wish we
had a a a simpler issue to lead
off after that.
But I appreciate the committee,
um, and your um.
Just your openness and so, uh,
this bill and then I'll
introduce my expert witness, um,
This bill is relating to
journalism and basically updates
New Mexico's press shield law
from 1973. Um, and it updates
definitions of a journalist, um,
since they have not been updated
since '73 and also uh mediums of
communication.
And I'll talk about the
additional wrinkle in that also,
because there's a Supreme Court
ruling, but um, I wanna talk
about the need to hear of the
chronology of the, the
amendments because there may be
members who don't want to hear
it until we get a consolidated
amendment situation and if
that's the case, we're gonna
have to roll the bill. OK. All
right. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So, um, this is, uh, the story
of House Bill 153 and a freshman
legislator. So.
Um.
So I'll start with, uh, and I'll
name the numbers of the bills if
you want to follow along, so uh
230685.1.
Was the committee sub that came
out of consumer, um, and public
affairs.
So I'm gonna, this is really
hard for I'm wondering if how.
it, uh, the committee.
analysis does have.
A number of the 202 numbers. Uh
yeah. OK. Which might make it
easier.
OK, so let's look at the
committee analysis.
And we, and we're gonna be
handing out all of them. OK, so
you've got, we've got a 0.1.
Where's the 0.1 coming from?
This is a sub that was um.
Is it the 231109.1.
No, it's 85.1, so 85.1.
is the bill that was passed out
of consumer and public affairs.
That was the committee sub.
OK, but it has our title on it.
Um, not.
To that was not my.
That was not the intent.
I don't know how that happened,
Madam Chair.
Yeah, I mean, I just point to
fly for everybody, I mean, yeah,
on the on our committee analysis
shows today a judiciary, the
committee substitute point.
So is that what we're
considering for, is that?
Well, in our book is a.
24.
OK, OK, it looks like our book
is what was introduced.
CPAC, according to the committee
report.
Adopted a series of amendments
and not a sub.
That's correct.
So did you take those amendments
and put them into a House
Judiciary sub.
Um, that's what I requested my
drafter to do and maybe as a new
legislator that was not.
The right thing to do, but I'm
not sure. Um, it's not a bad
thing to do.
You know
But it has to be complete, and I
think that's where we got some.
Um
I'm not, can I tell you? Can I
tell the rest of the story? OK.
So
Um, after.
85.1.
was passed out of.
CPAC
Um, there were some other
clarifying amendments that
needed to be made.
And so a committee sub was
created out of 85.1, and then
Um
Between CPAC and judiciary.
Uh, I introduced to the
committee amendments, correcting
and clarifying, uh, two more
parts of the bill, and that is
231109.1.
And those are just the
amendments.
All
Madam Chair.
And then yesterday, Madam Chair,
um, I had a conversation with
Representative McQueen and uh
representative McQueen said, put
those amendments from 09.1 into
The bill to be heard today.
So that bill.
And those amendments that have
not been discussed in any
committee.
are in version 230685.
Madam Chair, may I chime in on
this?
Yes. OK.
My, my understanding is there
were amendments in
CPA?
Those amendments were included
in the 0.1 House Judiciary
Committee sub.
There was an additional
amendment.
The 109.1, which was circulated.
And when I was reading this last
night.
I pointed out to Representative
Silva.
The
We typically don't amend House
Judiciary Committee said.
And so my recommendation since
both the 0.1 sub had been
circulated, and the amendment
had been circulated that she be
ready with a. 2 sub.
that if both of these were
adopted,
We could, we could then
immediately adopt the 02 sub,
which is the combination of
Once in the amendment, both of
which have been circulated in
compliance with the 24 hour
rule.
It's confusing. I'm not, there's
no reason to be sorry, um.
Maybe representing McQueen could
could rearticulate what happened
to it is the 0.1 sub.
Bless the amendment
Equals the 0.2 sub.
0.2 sub is simply these two
documents blended together.
And these two documents have
already been circulated.
Not been adopted.
Yet
is coming from you.
It's coming from.
From CPAC.
Coming from you. Yes.
So
So, um
But
There's another wrinkle.
Cause I saw an email today.
From the drafter, I believe,
saying.
There was some cleanup that
didn't happen.
So there's now a.3 floating
around.
That we haven't
Or there will be 0.3 because
there are.
There were some adjustments.
That should have happened, that
didn't happen.
And that would mean we'll have
to see a 0.3.
Probably on Monday, because I
don't wanna.
You get where we're going with
this. It's um, this is messy.
I think we can all agree.
And we're not going to be
sending a mess down to the
floor. I mean, even if some of
us sort of understand the
chronology we don't want to
spend an hour talking just um.
Although we could probably.
A lot of people like to talk
about stuff like that. Um, so,
Um
So the question is this.
Do we want to hear about the
bill or do we just wanna wait
till Monday.
And be aware we have a full
schedule on Monday.
I'm sure I would like to just
have the 0.3 if ever it all
together, that's my position.
No, I, I, I kind of, you know, I
did talk with rep um.
So about all this, and I wanted
to give her truthfully, I think
you'll have understanding if
everything is one neat pack
representative and incorporated,
which may or may not be
accurate, not that you aren't
accurate, drafter already caught
something that he should have
done correctly. So, um, I agree
with that.
The question is, I know we, Mr.
Purcell, um, you're our expert.
Did you participate remotely, I
mean, I hate to put you through
um.
Traveling from
I'm sorry, I don't have my
calendar for Monday. I, I have
the sense that it's, it's kind
of full, but I will, uh,
Participate in in some form, if
it's if the discussion is
carried over to Monday.
to people.
OK, why don't, is that OK with
you?
OK. Generally I see consensus
that that's made about people
are OK with that, so if you
could just give us the
background and
Just, yeah.
Purcell can the next bill.
Excellent. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee. I
appreciate it. So I am, um, for
clarification sake, working from
230685.2.
And so
Um, this piece of legislation,
again, as, as I was saying
before, um, updates definitions
for, uh, what a covered
journalist is in the state of
New Mexico and defines mediums
of communication, um, because,
uh, the statue is, uh, from
1973 does not include, uh,
communication that includes
internet, email, cell phone,
text messages, and so, uh, given
our climate in this country, I
think it's very important for
the
state of New Mexico to update
its press shield laws. There are
40 other states that also have
re shield laws, um, and this
would just be bringing New
Mexico in line with that.
Um
And so I'm, I wanna introduce uh
my expert witness, Mr. Kit
Purcell, uh, who's an attorney
and, um, the expert, uh, who
has, uh, if there was a book on
it, he would write the book on a
res shield laws for the state of
New Mexico. I'll allow him to
introduce himself.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair and the committee. Um, I
appreciate the opportunity to
appear today, and I apologize
for the confusion about the
different versions of the bill.
I'm as much to blame as anybody
for that. I'm a, a rookie at
this also.
Um
So, I mean the the brief
history, legal history, is that
in 1972, the United States
Supreme Court in Bransburg
versus Hayes decided that there
is no First Amendment right to
um a journalist to protect.
Her sources or confidential
information, but the Supreme
Court said in that case, states
are free to create their own
protections. And in 1973, that's
exactly what New Mexico did.
There are now actually 48 states
plus the District of Columbia
who have such statutes on their
books. In 1976, our Supreme
Court said the statute that
exists on the books today is
unconstitutional to the extent
that it purports to tell courts.
What standards they have to
apply in issuing subpoenas to
journalists. So the court struck
that down but said we're doing
nothing about um the extent to
which this bill applies to
legislative and executive
branches. The court adopted its
own rule of procedure in a rule
of evidence in.
Uh, the res Act, the Federal
Press Act, uh, bill, I should
say, was introduced um at
various times in Congress last
year it got very close to
passage. It passed the United
States House of Representatives
unanimously, it failed in the
Senate.
Uh, that was in December of
2024. This bill is as close as
possible to the federal model
statute.
It is
Different
In that it excludes.
Uh, judicial subpoenas.
Uh, because our Supreme Court
has said that that would be
unconstitutional for a statute
to tackle that problem. But as
uh as uh Representative Silva
said it, uh, the main point of
this bill is to update the
protections in state law. And,
and really what it does, I mean,
the existing statute that is on
the books that again applies
only to executive and
legislative branches, um, define
media in a way that really
includes only mainstream media.
It defines journalists in a way
that makes it necessary to be
paid as a journalist in order to
be protected, um, of course, it
uh as written, it purports to
address the judiciary, it has a
very vague standard of when a
journalist will be compelled to
produce information. It says if
necessary to prevent
Justice, this federal bill is
much more precise in what the
exceptions are. Um, and finally,
it does not the existing bill
does not cover what this one
does with your service
providers, electronic stores of
information and this bill
contemplates the possibility of
subpoenas to those electronic
service providers and and
provide standards for those. So
that in a nutshell is the is
what this bill is in.
To accomplish herself who will
not.
Um
Well, I think it's early um um
representative Hall.
Madam Chair.
Um
When you mean you, you
Brought up the judicial
subpoenas, could you just expand
on that a little in your opening
comments there, sir.
Madam Chair, of course,
Representative Hall, um.
The, the original 1973 press
shield law,
applied to subpoenas issued by
anybody, by a court, by an
administrative agency by the
legislative branch.
In 1976 in Ammerman versus
Hubbard Broadcasting Company,
our Supreme Court took a look at
that statute and said,
This is unconstitutional to the
extent that it tells.
ports
What they can do in issuing
subpoenas to journalists. So for
example, in defamation actions,
that's where courts are where
defamation actions happen. They
don't happen in administrative
agencies, they don't happen in a
legislative bodies. And the
court said, we'll create our own
rules. That is our
constitutional prerogative.
For for issuing subpoenas. You
can have this statute that will
govern legislative and
administrative executive branch.
Proceedings, um, so subpoenas
issued by those bodies are
covered by the statute now.
Madam Chair, so that's just the
separation of not just.
I've not minimizing the
separation of powers, please
don't misinterpret that.
So under the administrative
subpoenas, you're not, you're
not referencing those sent by
the executive branch.
Someone identified as a
journalist.
Should uh in ads, I mean,
We used administrative subpoenas
in emergency or exigent
circumstances quite frequently
in my prior occupation.
Um
Would those be eligible or not
eligible?
Under the executive or the law
enforcement area of this.
issue,
Madam.
Uh,
yes, those.
Those bills would be governed by
this statute. Now, I will say
that um subpoenas that are sent
by law enforcement agencies,
typically have to be issued in
connection with a judicial
proceeding.
Um, and so if there is, for
example, a criminal proceeding.
Happening
Uh, then that's going to be
governed by court rules as to
what subpoenas can be issued.
Investigations, um, there are
some executive branch agencies
that have the power to issue
subpoenas.
Uh, in furtherance of
investigations. Those are
governed by this bill. They've
always been governed by the
press shield law and uh and yes,
so those have to meet the
standard.
And just look Madam Chair and
just real quick and I'll get off
this. So if
A journalist is covering an
event and there is a.
prime of exigency, i.e.,
kidnapping or something like
that, and they were in they were
served in the admin subpoena
from the FBI or law enforcement,
state or local.
Would that have to be reviewed
when that or would that be
accepted or what's the process
just because of the exigency and
involved in the matter, Madam
Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
first of all, uh, subpoenas
issued by the FBI would not be
governed by this bill that says
issued by state entities under
state law. So
Just assume a regular old police
officer,
let's not quibble, you know, you
know,
Santa Fe Police, how's that
I mean if, if the Santa Fe
police, for example, have
subpoena power under state law,
and I don't, I don't know
whether they do, uh, but it
certainly executive branch
agencies have some power in that
regard. The procedure would be
the subpoena is issued by the
executive branch agency.
And it, it will have some force
of law in the sense that.
A journalist who receives it has
to make a decision about whether
to obey it.
But
To get the power of contempt and
the ability to jail.
Someone who does not obey an
administrative subpoena, you
have to go to court. That's
always been true under existing
law, uh, and in fact, there are
a few agencies that have to go
to court before they issue
subpoenas, but very few, most,
most state statutes on this
subject, uh, say that the
administrative agency has its
own power, but to enforce it.
has to go to court. And that's
where the
OK, thank you. And my last
question is,
Is the standard is this bill
force?
If we issue a search warrant.
Um
And we served the search
warrant.
Are these journalists held to
have to hold on to the
information that they've
contained.
In their reporting or that is
stored under their name in an
iCloud or something like that,
will they then be compelled to
turn it over, or can they
destroy it in the meanwhile?
Madam Chair.
Madame Chair representative,
this bill does not address.
Whether the journalist has to
preserve subpoenaed materials. I
think any journalist who
destroyed subpoenaed materials,
knowing that they had been
subpoenaed, uh, would, would be
risking the, the um, the force
of the law, but, but this bill
does not address that issue.
Thank you. That's all.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative expert.
That's kind of my question, that
criminal search warrant process
it. I'm worried that this could
actually hamper that process,
um.
Being that power is generally
only available if there's a case
in controversy that are issued
pursuant to court rules and
required notice and can be
challenged, but a search
warrant.
Um, with search warrants the
language about um telling a
journalist in section 3, I
believe it is requiring a
preponderance of the evidence
and requiring notice and
opportunity to be heard, it kind
of interferes with the search
warrant process.
Um
So in a criminal matter, cover
journalists could claim that in
otherwise valid search warrant
in a criminal matter.
is seeking access to the
protected information under the
act, I think well section 6, it
looks like it's tempting. I
don't know what the.
3. I haven't been able to get
through all these vents are, um,
I think you're trying to
mitigate that concern.
Um
So if the evidence is sought is
is the journalists could claim
it's protected and it could
hamper, um, and it seems to be
some different burdens of proof
in there and so I'm just I I
have some concerns around all
that and I believe I'm sure
representative Hall says.
If uh I think a um.
Uh journalist is covering, let's
say a protest, and he witnesses
a crime, um, how would that
work, um, because it's there's
just different burdens of proof,
and I I think I mean wanna talk
a little bit about more of that
when I see the sub and
everything, but just maybe since
you're here. Madam Chair,
representative, thank you for
that question. I, and I'm not
the criminal law expert, but my
impression is that a search
warrant is always issued by a
judicial officer.
And that means uh and so, for
example, the, the law
enforcement agency itself does
not have subpoena power, either
in the first instance.
Or with permission of the court.
In other words, it is the court
that is issuing that subpoena
and this bill does not address
that situation. It's very
focused on state entities.
That do have subpoena power.
In the executive or legislative
branch, it excludes the judicial
branch. So a search warrant is
always issued by a court.
And this bill does it stays away
from that area.
OK, Madam Chair and
representative, so, so section
6.
It does state nothing in the act
shall prevent the state from
pursuing an investigation, it
does not exempt the seizing of,
let's say, stored data or data
from, let's say a covered
service provider. It simply
states that the state can
conduct an investigation, so,
um, we were talking about this
most egregious example could be
uh to cover a.
Journalists claiming to be
investigating, let's say, child
pornography. Would this claim
require the state to give
notice? Well, the cover
journalists destroys the
evidence?
After hearing uh by clear and
convincing evidence that there
was substantial threat
astigation that would present an
imminent risk, um, it seems as
clearly carving out um.
Kind of a carve out for.
We aren't uh
Preventing the search warrant
process and.
Madame Chair, uh,
representative, I, I understand
your concern. I, I think that um
That it is, as I say, it is
always the judicial branch that
is issuing those kinds of
subpoenas in the first instance
and, and really this bill does
not, um, you know, stays away
from that area because of what
our Supreme Court said in
Ammerman.
Um, and, uh, I mean, to the
extent that an administrative
agency would have.
Its own subpoena power to
investigate child pornography.
Yes, this, this bill has
something to say about that, but
I don't, I don't really think
that that is.
The case ordinarily and uh these
exceptions in any event, um,
would I think accommodate.
Those kinds of investigations. I
know that there was a concern
expressed by the analysts of
this bill for this committee
that specified offenses against
a minor were not specified
anywhere in the bill. What that
means is
If
The proponent of the subpoena
says, here are my concerns. I'm
afraid that this journalist is
going to start.
Uh, or this perpetrator is going
to start committing these
offenses.
These kinds of offenses against
a child, then that is fine.
What this bill requires is some
precision in that regard. But,
but this is again all the only
for administrative and executive
subpoenas.
It has nothing. OK and thank
you, Madam Chair and expert, so
I'm just wondering if you, if
without making a provision.
That search warrants, which
actually require probable cause
or outside of the scope of this
act, if we could just have
unintended consequences and
that's um all around, um, as we
get back to that representative
and expert. Thank you very much.
Anyone else? rep we'll look
forward to getting the various
rules like 24 hours and.
Try to adhere to them as that
would be useful if we could get
it so staff can get it out to
the membership, so.
That's important for the drafter
to know
committee, there, there is a
0.3, um, I believe, um, for
clarity's sake.
I have a witness coming in from
out of state. Bill's gonna go
first cause I want to make sure
he's, you know, we're not
drawing somebody from out of
state.
it doesn't get hurt, so that's
gonna happen. So all right.
So, um, thank you, uh, Mr.
Purcell for that information and
we'll look forward to another
conversation about this bill.
Thank you,
Madam, where is, oh, there's my
vice chair. I was like
disappeared.
Yes
So, um, representative, I'm
hoping we can be relative and
fast.
I think at noon.
Oh, I thought it was 12:30. 0,
OK. Oh.
Well, I don't think we can pass
a bill in 5 minutes.
Uh, what we cannot pass a bill
in 5 minutes, representative.
I appreciate your enthusiasm,
but it's impossible.
Introduction and support at
least well I understand that but
we're gonna start it, we're
gonna you expert can speak in 3
minutes, I and we can get public
comment in in 3 minutes. I don't
see how that would work.
Uh
You're right, but we will break,
so.
Thank you, ma'am. For public
expression Protection Act, um,
which is, it's on free speech.
Um, we would be the thirty-sixth
state to have adopted this, um,
and updated it, um, providing us
the opportunity to protect.
Folks, um, with me is uh Karen
Myers, who will serve as uh.
Support. OK, well, yeah, we'll
go to actually we'll do
opposition first. We'll do our
usual go to the public. I'm a
little Erin Braid, sorry.
Go, go ahead.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'll be very brief
and then just sit for questions,
um, we, New Mexico has an
existing statute, but it's very
narrow. It is not consistent
with the Uniform Act.
And this uh proposal, this bill
would expand it to include not
only communication government
proceedings, but also that.
Uh, statements and freedom of
speech for matters of public
concern and is basically saying
that people are stating their
opinion, people are exercising
their First Amendment rights,
uh, organizations, neighborhood
associations, journalists should
be protected from frivolous
lawsuit by a company or an
individual who wants to
intimidate them and stop. So
let's go to the audience after
our time can have further
discussion.
Um, on another day.
So those wishing in the
audience, wishing to speak,
please approach the gentleman we
don't see anyone.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in opposite. All right.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in.
And support, please stand up.
We're gonna limit comment to 5
people, no more than 1 minute
each and.
And have to regulate yourselves
guys guys.
Keep in mind it's 5.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Marilyn Nasi, um, with New
Energy Economy. I just want to
say that
This bill essentially just
passed Ohio.
Unanimously with Republican and
Democrat support. We urge
everyone on this committee to
support it. Thank you.
Madam Chair, my name is Jeffrey
Has, I've been a civil rights
lawyer for about 50 years. I
think there are two things that
are important here. We are in a
society where there are many
polarized ideas. It's really
important that everybody be
heard and that people not fear
speaking out. The second part is
this litigation, this, this
legislation is about limiting
litigation rather than adding
time and in the courts, it
prevents people from continuing
with
frivolous lawsuits and so it
protects the person who has been
speaking out, and that's its
purpose, both to provide a
remedy, but also to prevent
suits from being filed that are
frivolous. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chairman, members of the
committee, Brian Fennell with
Albuquerque Journal and
Albuquerque Publishing Company.
We urge you to support this bill
as we support anything that
supports and provides First
Amendment rights to our public.
Thank you.
OK
My name is Mitch Friedman. I was
a lawyer in California for
nearly 40 years, I did one of
the first anti-slaps in on the
state when it was passed in
1995, it not only protects
journalists, it protects
individuals. I represented a
person who was sued by a major
gold bug, uh, you know, who was
trying to shut the guy down for
commenting on Yahoo Finance
message board. I represented
people who were protesting a
veterinarian who was very
politically connected because so
many dogs and cats.
died within a 2 year period, so
this is a really important step
for New Mexico to get in with
the other states that followed
what California was the first to
do. It's, it's very important
for free speech for individuals,
not just journalists.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
My name's Norm Gom. I'm a
registered lobbyist and
president of the New Mexico
Water Advocates. I'm
uncompensated.
We support this bill very much.
We advocate against false
solutions.
And we don't wish to be exposed
to
Lawsuits that would try to shut
us down as an NGO.
Go online, those wishing to
speak and support. I'm gonna
So
Sierra
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Sierra Kowalski from
Albuquerque. Um, current New
Mexico anti-slap legislation is
limited to speech in the context
of governmental proceedings,
leaving the public vulnerable to
slap lawsuits, um, in other
contexts. This is important for
all New Mexicans because it will
protect us from lawsuits being
brought by those with more
resources who are attempting to
as to silence dissent through
costly legal proceedings and
will allow for a quick dismissal
of those lawsuits. I ask you to
join the 35 other station.
in protecting free speech by
voting to pass on the public
expression Protection Act. Thank
you.
OK, one more.
Fenel Rowley.
Fennel
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Fennel Rowley, and I'm
speaking on behalf of the AA
today, the statewide youth-led
climate justice campaign
fighting for a livable and just
future for New Mexico.
We strongly support HB 169 as it
presents an opportunity to
protect every New Mexican's
First Amendment rights to
freedom of speech, assembly, and
petition.
As youth advocates and
organizers, we are committed to
speaking out when injustice is
forced in our communities. Slap
suits weaponize our legal system
against the public. This form of
litigation intimidates
communities and individuals from
speaking up. This is a tool that
corporations have abused against
advocates in our movements.
Slapsuits take away resources
and capacity from building a
just and equitable transition.
Now more than ever, we see the
influence of oligarchs and our
on our governmental systems and
the rollbacks on our rights.
HP 169 ensures there's
protection for the First
Amendment rights of every New
Mexican.
We urge you to vote in favor and
protect our systems of democracy
here in New Mexico. Thank you.
OK.
So, um, public comment, uh short
present reschedule it.
Um
talk about one
That's gonna happen.
Um, I just want to visit now.
We're starting on the floor. I
have been scheduling this
meeting a little later, but
We are getting to a place where
the 2nd committee is going to be
and I'm likely to start our
meeting at 9 o'clock time frame
so that we can, and I don't know
what your plans are.
we're working through, so.
And if we're gonna have these
kinds of bump ups with caucuses
and starter because we could
have gotten 12:30.
And I'm all in favor of hearing
bills and moving them along, I
think, uh, we just keep
communication going back and
forth between uh hearing rooms
so we can do that. OK, very
good. So we're likely to start
like around 9 o'clockish now on
Saturday so we can try to get
more accomplished, right?
Um, I really appreciate
everybody's cooperation and
support um and so we're gonna be
adjourned. Thank you.
