In blue.
Here.
Representative McQueen.
Representative night.
Here.
Representative rain.
Representative Townsend.
Thank.
Madam chair.
I am president we have a quorum.
Thank you members wanted to one
little housekeeping
items that
Some of you know what is in the
works it turned out that when we
amended house bill forty the
other night and and we're
sending it on.
H. the let's Appropriations
Committee this Kelly was
drafting an amendment with
Representative **** and
Representative cut Dennis
comments and what we do have
decided to do was conferred with
the Legislative Council Service
that we have the eggs we have
the correct language and in that
case it would go forward it
turns out that one of our
experts of the Legislative
Council Service was monitoring
the meeting and he had a slight.
Difference of opinion and it I
don't think it changed the
meaning that the wording we have
Used his amendment and checked
and believe that Representative
night Representative **** not on
but I know the two of you
reviewed it and I just wanted to
confirm that it not with your
specifications.
Madam chair it it does
As it turns out the language the
Legislative Council Service came
up with the.
I would personally like but it
wasn't what we discussed in the
meeting and so I think we got it
ironed out to where it meets
both are are Legislative Council
services.
Miss Kelly's and then follows
what we discussed.
So what I would once article.
I do need to step on your.
Refinished.
So what I would like to do is to
have that read out I know it's
in I'm sure it's in the Here
file but it could be read out to
the committee and then what
we'll do is
we will just take action on that
we don't have to expunge a
committee report because it's
never been reported out yes we
we held it until we got the
amendment right so I'd like to
actually take action.
The amendment and the
The amended version that and
aposs forty so miss Kelly do you
have the amendment that you
could read to us yes I do madam
chair.
The man that amendment rates as
follows it is point two one nine
two one six point one it is in
the chair file and it pertains
to affected community the
definition and Representative
cooks amendment.
Affected Community mains
subparagraphs a.
A county in New Mexico where it
privately operated detention
facility closes because of that
private detention facility
moratorium act and result in
twenty or more displaced workers
of the detention facility in
that county.
Or subparagraph B..
An adjacent county where twenty
or more disqualified displaced
workers of a closed privately
operated detention facility
reside.
Okay I'm questions.
Is there any objection to
adopting that amendment now.
Seeing the show all members
present voting in the
affirmative and
I know that we.
This bill was not unanimously
approved even with.
We thought we had correct last
time so I'd like to call the
roll on.
Pardon me.
And.
The motion and who did the
second you have that in them.
In the previous committee.
Yes I do madam chair the
Amendment Representative cokes
amendment
was
For
the full amended bill the full
limited elected yes right you
meant you most passage of the
amended bill as amended and
Representative Lewis seconded
the motion.
Okay what will be on that motion
and you will call them.
Representative Akan.
No.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night.
Now.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend.
Thank.
Yes No for council.
Madam chair yes.
And did you get Representative
Townsend.
Yes okay.
So we have six yes and three no.
Okay so with that that's what we
will.
Will report back out to next to
appropriations so members we
will go to the first item on our
agenda and this house bill forty
seven and here's what.
As hello Representative
Armstrong and her experts will.
Introduced the bill.
Then I understand there's some
organizations are professional
organizations that are neutral
on the bill your comments first
then we'll go into that are pro
and con and what take the call
in and have the opponents of the
proponents testified so that's
what the plan is and we'll start
now with representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and I do
have an expert Robert Schwartz
if we can move him over and Dr
Steve Koenig although I don't
see him on the list right now
I'm sure he'll be on by the time
we get to questions and maybe
yes yes on now Steven Cain neck.
And Robert shorts.
And additionally madam chair my
co sponsor it is on here Senator
stuff Stefanics and I have an
additional expert witness Aaron
Armstrong and she's sitting
right here with me so I'm just
going to move my computer screen
over to her when she testifies.
Are or when okay thank you very
much services
welcome.
Welcome Senator Stefanics nice
to have you with us and so on
also then which.
Madam chair I'm so I'm sorry
Representative day Hochman Vigil
is also here as a co sponsor and
could be moved over.
She's actually in the past okay
great I was wondering it shifts
the
just misses so much she was back
in Judiciary yes you guys love
it Armstrong thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee house
bill forty seven is the
Elizabeth white field end of
life options act and.
For those of you who were around
four years ago you heard
Elizabeth white field all a well
respected a judge in the
Albuquerque area.
testify at the time she had I
think it was her eighth
occurrence or recurrence of
cancer had a tracheostomy to
breeze and had to testify by
covering her trait.
she did not live long enough to
see just introduce it the second
time and.
Which is why we why we named it
for her so in case you're
wondering about the Elizabeth
white field it's in reference to
judge white field.
In her advocacy for this bill.
So this bill the end of life
options act.
Provides medical aid in dying.
For individuals adults residents
of New Mexico.
Who have a terminal illness.
and terminal illness being
expected not to survive more
than six months which is the
same a definition as hospice.
Who is mentally capable to make
that decision for themselves.
And able to self administer a
medication.
Can make that request to to
their provider which could be of
physician or a nurse
practitioner or PA physician
assistant.
And upon that request then
there's a process that starts.
There needs to be a second
affirmation of of the
qualifications.
And there needs to be in our in
that mix at least are one of the
either the prescribing or the
consulting provider needs to be
a physician.
And there's and we can get into
a little bit more details of how
that process works as we get
into questions but if there's
any
concern that the individual
might not have the capacity to
make the decision.
Then they have to be referred to
a behavioral health specialist
to is able to
determine whether the
the individual has the capacity
and understands the decision
they're making.
Once all that process is
completed.
Then the request gets put in
writing with the through a form
of a prescribed in the statute
of things that need to be
affirmed including the
prescribing
provider needs to fully inform
the individual of all.
Options for care at the end of
life including palliative care
and hospice.
it needs to be witnessed by to
persons one of which has to be
disinterested party.
And upon completion of all of
that then the prescription can
be written and has a forty eight
hour hold on filling the
prescription all we've got a
mechanism to
expedite that if someone is not
expected to survive those forty
eight hours.
Then the individual can take it
or not take it.
many people we find in other
states actually don't ever take
the prescription are they are
just but by having the option
greatly reduces a lot of anxiety
and suffering in and of itself.
then there are there are
protections in the
in this act.
To make sure that anyone can
alright any providers or
anyone involved can participate
or not.
And are protected for those
decisions to be able to
participate or not in including
protection of family and friends
who might be present in
witnessing.
None
I think I'll stop there Madam
chair for that kind of the
overview of the of of this and
turn it over to
professor rob Schwartz for any
additional comments and then two
and then
to Dr Archana given to them.
Once.
Professor Schwartz would you on
your cell.
We just have to if you're
willing to.
These.
Thanks for often put on a tie to
walk across my my living room to
my.
I appreciate this opportunity
and and again a let let me start
by just saying that I use so
much appreciate your setting
aside the time to talk about
your main and dignified health
care at the end of life I'm rob
towards I am on the faculty at
UNM law school where I taught
for the last forty five years
I've taught health law well and
the for the last thirty years or
so I've also studied end of life
care for the last several years
I've also taught at the
university of California
Hastings Law School and UCSF
medical school in San Francisco
where I've had a chance to study
the implementation of the end of
life options act in California
the constitutional issues
surrounding medical aid in dying
have been fully litigated New
Mexico and as you know the New
Mexico Supreme Court has
determined in the Morris case
that the question of whether
medical aid in dying should be
available to New Mexico
residents is a question for the
legislature medical aid in dying
is not constitutionally required
it is not constitutionally
forbidden The New Mexico courts
will respect whatever decision
the legislature ultimately makes
I'm here to talk about what I
believe is the most carefully
crafted and narrowest medical
aid in dying bill that has been
introduced in any state
legislature in the United States
and let me first just say a word
or two about terminology because
it's so important when we talk
about medical aid in dying as as
you've heard what we're talking
about is medical aid in dying
itself which is a process where
an adult resident of New Mexico
who is both competent and
terminally ill and was fully
informed about the risks
benefits and alternatives and
you can take the medicine
themselves can request a
provider to write a prescription
for a medication that if taken.
Will result in a peaceful that
that's all we're talking about
and advocates on both sides use
highly charged language that I
think sometimes may make it
harder for us to understand the
underlying issues I know that
people on who support medical
aid in dying sometimes call it
death with dignity I sometimes
do that myself but we all
support death with dignity I
think everyone in this room
supports death with dignity and
I I appreciate the fact that we
probably should be using that
term opponents of medical aid in
dying sometimes call it
euthanasia but you the nature
would remain absolutely
prohibited by this bill and as
it would be remain as it would
remain prohibited by every bill
which is come before this
legislature this is not anything
this this bill doesn't have
anything to do with euthanasia
and similarly this bill has
nothing to do with us so with
suicide assisted or otherwise
suicide is where a person year
rationally attempts to solve a
temporary problem with a
permanent solution in medical
aid in dying a competent adult
who is near death attempts to
solve a real problem in the only
dignified way that is available
and instead of leaving family
members be raft and guilt ridden
as is so often the case with
suicide medical aid in dying
allows family members to face
the Ms together supporting each
other's it brings families
together without guilt and
without recrimination when
families needed the most and as
anyone who's ever been touched
with by suicide knows there are
many good reasons to outlaw
assisted suicide but there's not
a single reason that we outlaw
assisted suicide that's also a
reason for outlaw.
Nine eight nine they are just
extraordinarily different kinds
of activities
Representative Armstrong has
given a full explanation of the
of significant factors in
the statute in the way that this
law would be carried into effect
in New Mexico let me just point
out that the drafters of HB
forty seven have learned from
the drafters of the built in
Oregon and Washington and
California and of the other
states and jurisdictions
including the district of
Columbia where medical aid in
dying is now permitted and that
in fact this bill is based on
the statutes in those
jurisdictions but in fact ours
is different from those
jurisdictions in just a few ways
that I thought I would mention
because it is worth pointing out
I have not before our discussion
you for your discussion how in
fact this varies from the
statutes that have worked us so
well in other states first of
the fifteen day waiting period
which is required in other
states is not a requirement in
New Mexico there still is a
require a waiting period it's a
forty eight hour waiting period
not a fifteen day waiting period
because the studies elsewhere
notably in Oregon and California
have shown that the fifteen day
waiting period has had the
primary effect of making it
impossible for people who in
fact should have access state
nine one eight and access state
line from actually getting
access to aid in dying most
people don't request aid in
dying Intel the very end of
their life and in California
many perhaps half of the people
who ask for a dying and qualify
died during the fifteen day
waiting period which in real
life it takes sometimes thirty
or forty days and so in fact the
statute is of Marshall.
S. value to the people who need
it the most because of that
fifteen day waiting period
against the reason that this
statute includes a different
waiting period second the New
Mexico statute would broaden the
scope of providers who can be
involved at least in some
circumstances it provides a role
for physician assistants and for
nurse practitioners and with
regard to some of the psychology
evaluations for licensed mental
health professionals although
the New Mexico statutes like all
the other statutes always
requires the participation of a
physician and finally of the New
Mexico statute the statute the
use the bill that you see in
front of you has a very vigorous
conscience clause that protects
those who don't want to
participate from sanctions not
just sanctions from the state
but sanctions from the state
from the hospital from insurance
companies and from state
licensing boards
Medical aid in dying it's
particularly well within the
established New Mexico health
law traditions that have made
New Mexico a national leader in
healthcare decision making and
health care decision making law
and those traditions rest on two
fundamental principles first
The New Mexico recognizes the
value of cultural diversity and
diversity of religious views
among its citizens and second
the strong libertarian streak
that says each one of us as
human beings each one of us as a
human being gets to decide what
medical care we will get that's
a question for individuals it's
not a question for the
government thank you so much for
considering this legislation.
Chair if if I could before we
get to drive Koenig
Representative Hochman Vigil is
us both be another committee as
well and has asked if she could
quickly make her statement and
then we can finished with the
rest of our presentation.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee madam
chair you're correct thank you
miss all of you a lot I just
keep coming back for more thank
you very much for allowing need
just a short a couple minutes to
make my statement madam chair I
want to first start off by
thanking my co sponsor
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong for bringing this
courageous and very difficult
piece of legislation she is a
hero of mine actually for doing
this and it's it's one of the
greatest honors of my life to be
able to help.
I want to apologize to those of
you who have heard the story
before and the health and Human
Services Committee it's not a
difficult story here but I it's
necessary and I think it really
underscores the importance and
necessity of this bill madam
chair members of the committee
and I'll try and get through it
stay relatively dry eyed when I
was twenty years old my mother
was diagnosed with stage four
adrenal carcinoma of unknown
origin.
What that means is by the time
she got a cancer diagnosis the
cancer was so widespread
throughout her entire body that
they could not even find its
origin when the doctors took a
look at her screenings after
she'd been diagnosed the doctors
were actually flabbergasted that
my mother was still alive.
I'm at that point time I decided
to take a year off from college
and assist my mom and she made
the transition difficultly from
lies to the next round
what happened with my mother's
cancer madam chair members the
committee is that spread
throughout her body and
metastasized into a bone cancer
and it was incredibly painful
for her although she was put on
palliative care because she was
within the last six months of
her life and provided copious
amounts of pain medication it
did very little to call her
pain.
throughout the process she would
be and such pain at times that
she would scream out in the
middle of the night.
For nurses to help hurt for me
to help her and to god to help
stop her pain.
It was the most difficult thing
I've ever been through in my
life.
And about a week before my
mother passed away she actually
was in such pain that she asked
me her only daughter or baby and
I know I'm the only person on
earth that she loved more than
herself to help her in her life.
Because of the great pain that
she had been experiencing
because of her count her cancer.
Is it that point madam chair
members of the committee that I
knew that medical aid in dying
was not about philosophy it's
not about religion it is about
autonomy and compassion and the
ability to live one's life and
in one's life in a manner that
they choose.
Unfortunately that was not my
first experience with this madam
chair members the committee I
had to go through the exact same
thank thank four years later.
With my father.
And neither one of my parents
have the option.
To end their suffering.
And I want to underscore madam
chair members of the committee
that it is an option that many
don't ever end up taking.
But they can if they can either
to send their life or they can
choose to prolong their life and
that's what this.
Piece of legislation is about.
It is one of the best drafted
potential medical aid in dying
built in the country we have
learned from other states that
already implemented this
legislation.
And it is again on the honors of
my life to help feed this
through I'm and I do so in honor
of my mother Daryl in and my
father Joel and I thank you very
much for hearing my story and
I'm gonna go back to act in
water now thank you.
Thank you madam chair the next
if we could hear from a doctor
caning.
Thank you madam chair
representatives and guests good
afternoon and Dr Stephen canning
and I very much appreciate the
opportunity to present a medical
perspective about medical aid in
dying.
New Mexico has been my home for
the past forty five years.
It's where I did all of my post
graduate training as a physician
and we're practice medicine as
in a phrenologist caring for
patients with kidney disease
many home I got to know well
over a period of many years.
I'm now retired but dealing with
death and dying was very much
part of my professional life.
I'd like to tell you a short
story involving medical aid in
dying.
It had a great influence in my
and sitting here today.
If you years ago I came across
an essay written by a fellow
named Greg.
That began with the provocative
title.
Good bye cruel world but not
just yet.
You see Greg had been diagnosed
two years earlier with stage
three lung cancer that was
treated with radiation and
succeeded in getting him into
remission.
Here's what he wrote.
I was hopeful I'd be around
another few years.
Well it was discovered last
month that the cancer has come
back with a vengeance and now
it's stage four.
The consensus of my treating
physicians is that I have four
to six months left on this
mortal coil.
But I am happy I'm shut it from
the rooftop happy as a resident
of Washington state I have the
legal right to look cancer in
the face and say you don't get
to dictate the time and matter
of my death I do.
He then went on to describe the
procedures he would have over
the following several weeks to
allow his lungs to function a
bit longer so that quote I
should remain healthy enough to
enjoy my July going away party
healthy enough to walk in the
garden with dozens of friends
and family.
Healthy enough to share good
food good beer and good memories
and at the end of the evening to
bid farewell to my friends then
retire to the bedroom drink my
cocktail and fall asleep.
The loving embrace of my sons
and their mother.
He added.
I implore you to advocate and
fight for aid in dying
legislation.
Death with dignity should be a
universal fundamental right no
state should have the power to
dictate how much suffering you
and your loved ones must indoor
as you approach the end of life.
We're really got my attention
wasn't attached pull that
although informal and
unscientific reflected the
opinion of the rather large
community reads the blog we're
Greg's essay was posted.
A contentious and thoughtful
community that seldom agrees
overwhelmingly on much of
anything.
Out of one thousand two hundred
and twenty seven votes ninety
seven percent voted that people
with terminal disease should be
able to choose the time and
manner of their death ninety
seven percent.
Medical aid in dying as you
heard earlier from professor
Schwartz is not suicide.
And is not a decision that death
is preferable to life.
Suicide indeed means a choice of
life over death but medical aid
in dying makes no such choice.
Terminally ill patients are not
using death medical aid in dying
only provides a choice of how
death that is imminent will
occur.
Here's the crux of the medical
issue.
Positions of always recognized
to the relief of suffering is a
fundamental part of our calling.
And of course there is the ages
old admonition to do no harm.
In recent years the profession
has been able to use ever
improving tools and treatments
to very successfully alleviate
physical pain in the
overwhelming majority of
patients with severe and
terminal illnesses.
The traditional argument has
been why should be participate
in bringing about death if we
can really suffering isn't that
doing harm.
The problem is that these
assumptions are incomplete and
misunderstand what it means to
do no harm.
Suffering is not only about
physical pain.
A motion no suffering and
emotional pain are just as
important and just as powerful.
The fact is that there are many
patients for whom not being able
to be confident of being in
control of their destiny of how
and when and where and with whom
they will die of their terminal
illness in person motion of
suffering and pain they can be
every bit as decimating as
physical pain.
Simply knowing that they're in
control provides immense relief
in fact data shows that about a
third of the patients who have
received the cocktail never
elect to use it.
But one hundred percent of those
patients are enormously relieved
and much more at peace.
Knowing that they had the
option.
As a physician I am strongly
supportive of HB forty seven I
am convinced that not only is
this in accordance with the most
sacred covenants of our
profession.
But is precisely what it means
to be compassionate at the most
difficult time of a patient's
life thank you very much.
Thank you a doctor Koenig madam
chair I wonder if some Senator
Stefanics wants to make a
statement before we close with
Erin state.
Thank you Representative
Armstrong madam chair members of
the committee thank you for
having me this afternoon I had.
Committee all morning so I'm
glad to listen now
in nineteen ninety five I
introduced a bill that was
similar to this with the help of
professor Robert shorts black
shorts and at that time we still
have the hemlock society and we
worked very hard on this it was
unexpected but I had to
constituents who came to me from
the white rock blue almost area
and the husband was a vice
president of a bank who was
progressing rapidly
and he was going to die and they
wanted that option.
At that time it was a very.
Strange idea for the Legislature
to consider but it did pass
through to the committees or one
committee and a half before it
was tabled I should say and we
never got to the floor but we
introduced the idea and we had
have the kids all over the state
we started to think about this
pay attention and to talk about
it.
As I've said in the Senate and
we did have a Senate vote on the
floor a couple of years ago.
this bill is not for everyone my
parents in their nineties one is
only remaining now but they
wanted chosen to do this but for
other people it is a choice and
that is what we're proposing
here we are in the western
States we are very independent
minded people here in the west
and many people would like to
make their own decisions about
their lives thanks for having me
today and I'll pass it back to
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you US senator and madam
chair I've given lots of
interviews over the years about
and dying medical aid in dying
and the question I'm asked the
most is why.
Did I get involved in this is
why I do it.
I have worked with
terminal.
Patients from the very beginning
of my physical therapy career
forty five years ago I have
worked with
hospice I worked a lot in
geriatrics so dealing with a lot
of people facing death I have
been of the care giver end of
life care giver.
For family and friends.
I'm.
Including a very close friend of
both the chairs and money.
And
always in the back of my mind
was my daughter who you many of
heard me speak of.
But it's closer to home now with
our.
So this is much more personal
this time around.
But I'm gonna let Aaron speak
for herself.
And tell you why this is
important.
I'm gonna shift my computer over
so you can see Aaron and let her
make her presentation on her own
behalf.
Sorry one second.
The last two.
Right.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
Thank you for allowing me the
opportunity and time to speak
with you today about this
important bill.
My name is Erin Armstrong.
And I desperately want to live.
Thank you I want more
uninspiring exhilarating
ordinary boring challenging
heartbreaking life.
I wanted more than anything I've
ever wanted.
And I'm fighting for it every
day with everything that.
And I will keep fighting every
day and so there are no more
options and I've run out of
fate.
In a start by sharing that most
basic foundational truth with
you today.
So that you don't get the wrong
impression even as I beg you to
allow me some small measure of
control in my own death.
I first spoke in favor of this
bill in twenty seventeen.
That year I students spoke as a
member of the audience and as a
survivor of cancer that I'd been
managing for nearly twenty
years.
My support that came from my own
insights as a patient.
Someone you experience
suffering.
Since my teenage years valued
the ability.
To struggle with and make
complex difficult.
Health care decisions of my own
I spoke also then as the chosen
family of other patients.
Friends board of shared battles
M. and experiences with cancer.
France had lost those battles
and I debt food they did not
deserve.
My testimony then in twenty
seventeen was real and heartfelt
and honest and personal.
But I'm here again today this
year with the more immediate
perspective.
In twenty nineteen a rare
genetic mutation in my long
managed cancer took charge.
Because in my old familiar enemy
and teacher to spread
aggressively to my bones.
My lungs spine liver and may
bring.
These two years have been
completely surreal.
Brutally devastatingly all too
real.
All at once.
Three craniotomy is a massive
infection.
Unspeakable pain.
And multiple rounds of radiation
therapy later.
I find myself here with you
alive today thanks only to a
clinical trial drug.
That is being tested on my.
And that is significant physical
cost.
It if this blessed miracle life
extending medicines turns out to
be like the ones that have come
before it.
Its efficacy may very well turn
out to be time limited.
Grateful is too small a word.
To describe the way I feel about
the additional time that I'm
being afforded.
On my optimistic days.
I catch myself hoping for many
more years daydreaming a
dedicated to the future.
But my more realistic and urgent
goal is to eleven forty it's my
fortieth birthday will be later
this year.
Whether year or ten years or six
months left to live this
ordinary beautiful life.
I am coming to terms with the
knowing.
That this disease is likely to
catch up to me much sooner than
I am ready to go.
There are moments when the
heartbreaking reality of it all
is inescapable.
Thank in the air.
Speaker please set.
At the foot of being gone.
Of all that I will miss.
But what scares me is the
potential agony of it.
These last two years of granted
me a few terrifying glimpses
into the potential for physical
suffering.
I'm afraid.
The fact that my final days
could be filled not with loving
good byes and memories shared
with my loved ones but with
wrenching pain and
disorientation.
As a patient with an illness
that is likely terminal.
I want to be able to have the
same level of autonomy and
ability to make choices about my
eventual death as I have always
had in my choices about how to
stay alive.
I've heard earnest and well
intentioned people.
Express their feeling that one
ought to expect except one's own
natural course of death.
And that only god or some other
fate can determine when or
whether one lives or dies.
Respectfully the truth is by
that measure I have already
cheated death.
Without all of the countless in
desperate Medical interventions
in trial drug a without question
would have died of this disease
already.
This is a difficult but
essential truth for me and for
so many other patients with
terminal illness.
We simply wish to benefit from
careful medical intervention
once more in a way that affords
us some small measure of control
and dignity in our final days.
This bill before you is smart.
It's careful.
And it's kind of awful
legislation that this topic and
the people of New Mexico to
serve.
And it will bring me on a
personal level immeasurable peas
as I move forward in my own
journey to live and eventually
die.
Thank you very much for your
careful consideration.
Thank you madam chair he will
stand for questions.
Thank you all as I has announced
earlier I want to just begin not
with people who are opposed or
in favour but those who are
representing professional
organizations that may be
neutral for have a nuanced
position.
So I would like people not to
put their hands up unless they
are in that category at this
time.
I.
I don't know about the others I
know
Let me go I know doctor Carlini
any
She has a statement on behalf of
the New Mexico psychological
association so I'd like to begin
with Dr Dani and
we you please yourself.
Thank you.
There's so many people in this
meeting I'm having trouble
finding.
Thirty eight can you.
Put your hand up.
Did I succeed.
Yes you did thank you you're not
we're not timing you go ahead
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Dr Catalina Gainey.
And I'm.
New Mexico licensed psychologist
and the past president of the
New Mexico psychological
association.
The New Mexico psychological
association board.
Approved the following position
statements with no opposition.
The New Mexico psychological
association supports the dignity
and worth of all people.
We support people's right to
self determination and are aware
of and respect cultural and
individual differences in that
self determination.
Our organization supports the
role of psychologists in the
Elizabeth white field end of
life options act.
NNPA supports house bill forty
seven.
And thank you for your attention
and your work on the behalf on
on our behalf your constituents.
And if people have questions
about psychologist's role I'm
happy to.
Respond thank you very much.
Under are you in this category
of the new on a neutral position
on.
Not person disappeared Jim
Jackson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jim
Jackson on the registered
lobbyists for disability rights
New Mexico.
This is a controversial issue in
the disability community as you
know because of the abuse and
mistreatment that many have
suffered throughout history in
this country and elsewhere and
because the lives of people with
significant disabilities have
often been devalued in our
society.
We know that there are concerns
about inadequate access to
services and fears that people
may be pushed or coerced into
ending their lives.
Disability rights New Mexico
recognizes this troubling
history but we also recognize
and are committed to the
fundamental value of self
determination the ability and
authority to make choices about
one's life and in this case
one's death people with
disabilities are entitled to
this control over their lives as
well.
To be clear the disability
rights New Mexico is needed
promoting or opposing this bill
however it's important for the
committee to know that the
sponsors have worked closely
with us to address concerns that
we have raised and we very much
appreciate that we are confident
now that there are adequate
safeguards in this bill as
described by the sponsor and her
experts that sure that this
option will only be available to
individuals with disabilities
who are truly at the end of
their lives and who have the
capacity to fully understand the
issues and are making this
decision voluntarily so again
our position is neutral on this
but we appreciate the work that
the sponsorship done to
accommodate our concerns and we
think the committee for its
thoughtful consideration of this
bill.
Thank you very much Mr Jackson
now I don't see other hands
raised for this category so at
this time I would like to ask
Miss misstatements to put up the
call.
I would like to show up we would
usually do a show of hands if we
run the.
The your where would you gather
so in place of a show of hands
if you favor house bill forty
seven please vote yes if you
oppose house bill forty seven
please vote now and if you will
do that now then we will go to
the opposition or comments
first.
Ten more seconds.
Okay thanks close the poll now
it was
Eighty five percent in support
and fifteen percent in
opposition I'd like to give the
opponents first an opportunity
to speak we are going to limit
the comments
both sides to amend it used for
individuals if you're right in
the middle of the sentence will
try really hard not to.
You off at that time but we want
to try to give everyone an
opportunity to speak okay let's
see first shot this kind of this
kind.
If you on your cell.
Hello.
Can you yes we can hear you you
can use.
I thank you very much for
Holding this.
Meeting and.
Considering.
What I and everyone else has to
say.
I've worked in hospice for many
years I actually was in the very
first hospice training institute
that happened right here.
And.
New Mexico Elizabeth Kubler Ross
hospice training instant to.
back in the eighties.
And I worked in hospice for.
Volunteered and worked because
one time.
There were no jobs available.
So I have been with many people.
During the latter parts of their
lives.
And I have been privy to.
Sharing that aspect ten time of
their lives with them.
And I feel honored to have gone
so.
I very much support this bill I
have been supporting this bill
from the beginning.
Because of what I've seen.
Okay.
I would like to take the
testimony from those who aren't
opposition first I have one here
at the top of the list and
there's no name but that screen
name is Adnan.
Are you in opposition to the
bill.
It's
it yourself can go ahead.
Next to Catherine and Glenday.
Present yourself thank you madam
chairman.
My name is Katherine Glenday.
I am a psychotherapist and the
public health educator I'm also
a person with the disability I
am in a wheelchair in a below
knee amputees.
In my personal in my experience
both personal and professional
almost all people with the new
physical or sensory disability
contemplate death or suicide at
some point in the person's
career as disabled.
Appropriate mental health care
and support social support not
been dying the appropriate
response.
Newly disabled individuals often
meet the terminal definition
either because of medical status
is uncertain or because of the
potential impact of non.
A poor quality non treatment.
New Mexico lacks health care
providers.
I'll stop there.
Thank you very much.
Alex should work.
Thank you very much one talking
both to issues around assisted
suicide I think it's important
to talk about that the drugs and
how people die and not always
effective means of dying and
there was an article published
in the medical express on
September eighth twenty twenty
explained that there's a little
known secret that's not
published by the the aid in
dying advocates and that is that
some of these deaths take a very
long time and some of them have
taken up to three days in fact
the Oregon data shows that that
the last year show that one
death took forty seven hours so
assisted suicide is not always
what it appears to be many
people who support assisted
suicide do so based on a fear of
dying about death so one
assisted suicide because about
death this is a serious problem
then obviously so I'm just gonna
tell you this the the assisted
suicide groups are working on
these new drugs for assisted
suicide and they have resulted
in some horrific deaths such as
the burning of throats and the
long long lasting deaths so this
is not necessarily what you're
thinking.
Thank you apple my hard.
Yes.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee thank you for letting
me speak about the more
executive director right to life
committee and I want to say all
those that are suffering to know
that I pray you in your
suffering I walk along with my
mom and my mother was a past.
Since the passage of assisted
suicide or aid in dying bills
become on organs to size
increased forty percent wording
number one in the country and
suicide we'll be open to having
more people are having commit
suicide during rough time the
light concerning protections
over physicians nineteen states
then join in a lawsuit to block
H. H. F..
Actions for health care
providers and New Mexico is one
of the state the lawsuit also
alleges that the provide local
hinder a patient's access to
physician assisted suicide so
they're not gonna be protected
tens of thousands of New
Mexicans called opposes measure
yet they're not being heard
please Representative us we're
begging you all of us thousands
of people that are calling and
you know the numbers we are more
than two three or four to one
thank you.
Pallister.
Thank you Dr Brian Carlstrom a
professor of medicine and I'm
here to let you know that
assisted suicide actually limits
your choice and access to
healthcare.
The major problem is that
insurance companies have an
incentive to restrict Care I've
had several patients who have
had.
While saving treatments denied
by insurance medical directors
where physician assisted suicide
was operated staff and they were
told it would be covered these
were patients that would not
have been considered terminal
with treatment and the bills are
written it's terminal with or
without trade so really a
diabetic without insulin would
technically qualify.
Assisted suicide in this realm
is not about a freedom it's not
a bad economy it's not about
shorts it actually limits
Jordan's and reduces your access
to health care and health care
options.
Because of this perverse
negative incentive this suppose
insurance will adversely affect
the public and those that want
treatment I making that the
cheaper option it's a lot easier
to prescribe you a budget perils
concoction to cure you rather
than trying to talk about
throwing out the baby with the
bathwater this should be opposed
adamantly thank you.
Please send me your cell.
Go ahead.
I think you're on mute for a
moment.
Okay can you hear me now yes.
All right I apologize about this
I'm John Paul with family policy
alliance on behalf of thousand
The New Mexicans we also forty
seven because of the undermining
impact it would have.
I'm not hearing Sir Paul to.
Is
is that just me.
I can't hear me either.
Mr Bolton.
Let's go to the next person and
will give Mr called in other
opportunity the next person is
Chris Kelly.
Just done it yourself please.
Whole hi my name's Chris Kelly
an emergency department nurse
and I I for people's lives every
day and I will not violate
letting go of by
killing my patients Furthermore
I lost one way fifteen months
ago the metastatic cancer to the
brain she died leaving life she
knew they can answer did not
control her life she also knew
that she was not charged for
life he died believing life love
in I'm.
And I happily I'm also going to
mention that yes other states
have been pushing to include
this aid in dying as an
alternative cancer treatment and
also to on alternative to
complete hospice care.
So I ask you all to reconsider
and vote against the bill thank
you.
Thank you I'm.
Mr Hagaman.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes.
I'm madam chair representative
thank you for giving us the
chance to speak
I would like to ask everyone to
think about why it is that they
believe that.
All kill is a better way to die.
Rather than working on more
compassionate care we have seen
that even on the bill itself it
says it can take up to three
hours to die why do we think
that that's less painful why do
we think that it's better.
One of the reasons again was
invented several centuries ago
was try to find a better way to
die and more compassionate way
to die
but I think we can all agree
that it it did not accomplish
what was looking for we should
be looking for ways to comfort
people rather than killing them
killing people is not a
compassionate options to help
them to deal with what they're
going through and I ask you all
please to think about why signed
a form saying three taking three
hours to die by an unknown drug
which has been found in some
states to be too painful for
inmates.
The hill.
Good afternoon madam chair
committee members and yes I'm a
general surgeon practicing in
New Mexico since nineteen ninety
eight and a professor of surgery
UNM school of medicine the
largest medical association in
the United States is the
American medical association
their code of medical ethics
opinion five point seven remains
unchanged I quote position
assisted suicide is incompatible
with the physician's role as
healer.
Position assisted suicide is
incompatible with the
physician's role as healer.
Suicide is actually defined as
the voluntary and intentional
taking of one's life aid in
dying is what Mother Teresa did.
It is a conflict of interest to
place oneself of the sealer one
day and as an and of life the
next day the AMA is very wise to
recognize the hospice palliative
care route has many more options
HB forty seven reduces options.
Thank you John Kelly.
Thank you I am paralyzed below
the shoulders many people would
say I would be better off that.
Bill proponents say that it's
all about choice but there's no
real choice when two doctors
misdiagnosed US terminal when
you have years to live twelve to
fifteen percent of people
diagnosed terminal or not.
When you become terminal because
your insurance won't cover your
medical treatment when there is
no home care option unless you
pop rest yourself.
When your choices between a
nursing home and feeling like a
burden at all.
When you are poor Latino
American Indian are black and
you already receive inferior
care and doctors don't value
your life one of the use is
rampant because of COVID
nineteen and you are persuaded
or coerced when your family
wants you to die and you feel it
your duty.
To make.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Dominique Davis and I'm
asking you to vote no on house
bill forty seven a six month
prognosis for death is extremely
difficult to predict accurately
with many patients living far
beyond six months a major study
imposition prognosis and Chicago
rebuild that four hundred and
sixty eight predictions only
twenty percent were accurate at
predicting when death would
occur another study quote no
group accurately predicted the
length of patient survival more
than fifty percent of the time
ago we have heard testimony this
legislative session of women and
men who have lived years beyond
six months of terminal
diagnoses.
I am worried that persons
diagnosed with terminal
illnesses as defined by this
bill will be pressured by time
constraints and internal
pressure to make such as vision
almost sixty percent of people
seeking end of life treatment
stated that they're feeling of
being a burden on family friends
or caregivers is a reason they
want to partake in assisted
suicide I was a caregiver for my
great grandmother for almost
five years not be heartbroken if
she felt she had to make a
decision such as this for any
reason.
Thank you I'm I have that
I don't have a name it just says
admin.
Please introduce yourself hello
can you hear me yes hello thank
you for your work my name is ana
Reinhardt I was a registered
nurse for nineteen years in
California Oregon and New Mexico
and I watched and worked with
use and while children youth
young adults and adults and
seniors during terminal
illnesses and I will never
forget the suffering that they
went through
with.
Pain medications that really
didn't quite even go near the
death of the pain that they were
going through and they're
pleading for some kind of relief
I've always thought that the
term assisted suicide was to the
support of it's just and it's
just sort of and intense way of
describing what we're trying to
do here in providing relief to
those that are dynamic stream
paying a I really still continue
to think about supporting
dignity on death and dying with
compassion after all we do have
a lot of legal drugs that
provide us with anesthesia for
surgery would you like to have
surgery if you have major
surgery without drug.
Three one.
England foster with Americans
United for life as a lawyer I
worked on the legal and human
impact of this issue for a
decade and Representative New
Mexico lawmakers and more
speaking and I faced this in my
own family so often we're told
people consider that because of
pain or fear of pain that's
wrong in the last fifteen years
neither is ever been in the top
five reasons in Oregon why then
study shows depression
hopelessness fear of loss of
autonomy and control a prominent
bioethicist says in this light
this looks less like a good
death in the face of unremitting
pain there are concerns about
impaired judgment and ninety
four percent of doctors say they
can't assess that in a single
session and in this time of
COVID the Kaiser family
foundation says more than ever
people with physical mental and
substance abuse needs and older
adults deserve care and support
Dr Kevin Fitzpatrick who is
paraplegic and died of cancer
said when non disabled people
say they despair suicide
prevention as the default
disabled people by contrast
you're well you've done enough
no one could blame you and
isolation provide supports
continue to protect the lives of
all New Mexicans.
Thank you I think that concludes
the opposition and the sponsor
has some folks lined out who
Are planning to testify in favor
of the the bill and
what I'm supposed to try to go
in order right Representative
arms.
Among.
I'm at yes ma'am sure that would
be a great if you're can't if
you can and I think they'll all
raise their hands
That you can okay good I'm gonna
just call on them to call on and
in order first I have levy
Harkins.
Thank you madam chair.
Members of the committee I'm
Libby Hopkins I'm a hospice
nurse and I'm very proud to have
to have an to continue to
alleviate suffering at the end
of many people's lives but I'd
like to tell you about a
patient.
Of Medicaid for number years ago
with prostate cancer who because
of the cancer metastasizing or
spreading to debate brain had
very severe seizures that became
longer and more frequent and and
more smart what longer more
frequent more severe and despite
the very best care he knew that
there's a possibility of him
dying in the throes of a seizure
one day he said Libby how I wish
I could die like they do in
origin unfortunately less than a
week later this patient died in
the throes of a it's called
status epilepticus very very
prolonged seizure in the
presence of his family who
continues to that stay as do I
do have that picture of his
death I encourage you to vote
for H. B. forty seven thank you.
Thank you next I have learned
Buckland.
Can you hear me now.
Yes okay thank you.
Madam chair and members of this
committee I'm going Buckland
from Rio Rancho New Mexico here
to speak in support of house
bill forty seven we've all seen
a movie where a character is
mortally wounded in pain dying
begging for someone to take
their life because the
experiences too much.
Their wishes granted what we
feel as we watch compassion and
relief we feel compassion for a
fictitious life ended to stop
their suffering compassion is
our nature should we show any
less compassion for real human
beings.
I have terminal cancer my time
is short I don't know how harsh
the pain of my dying will be my
life is shriveled to a fraction
of what it was this disease has
made my life very small and
uncomfortable house bill forty
seven gives me choices to decide
how my life spans medical aid in
dying is empowering for most
vulnerable citizens it's the
most compassionate thing we can
do thank you.
Thank you next I have Dr Adrian.
So do all.
We'll do our.
Madam chair I don't see her on
the list okay.
Okay.
Okay next not dean.
Not go ahead.
Sorry didn't on mute thank you
madam chair members of the
committee my name is that team I
live in Santa Fe I'm sixty five
years old and I've lived thirty
seven years of my life with the
traumatic brain injury I am
disabled.
Living well and dying well are
inseparable the ingredients are
the same and with courage and
intention a well lived life can
flow naturally into a death that
honors it and reflects the
values and beliefs of a
lifetime.
There are layers of protection
in tact in the house bill forty
seven Elizabeth white field end
of life options at that create
protections for all parties most
of all for the patient is not
assisted suicide it is not
suicide it is an end of life
optional choice.
Most recently I was at the
bedside of someone I helped
advance directive for.
And her life ending would have
been different if she had had an
option I think this is an option
that safe that's carefully and
well thought out thank you very
much.
Thank you next I have okay
Otero.
A good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is for kids that and I am a
software engineer living in
Albuquerque and lifelong New
Mexican.
In twenty eighteen my father
Pueblo hard working honorable
man and devout Catholic passed
away from metastatic cancer in
his bones the last months of his
life he experienced extreme pain
weakness in his arms and legs
nausea vomiting painful
constipation and incontinence.
While in hospice we had
conversations where he would say
that this is not living or I
wish there was something I could
do.
Just make this and.
As a Catholic I was raised
through spect others will say
and not judge others.
Until one walks in others shoes.
We should not stand in the way
of this compassionate option
available for someone else.
I therefore ask you madam chair
and committee members to
support.
HB forty seven and give New
Mexicans the option to have a
compassionate and dignified
death.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Dr Judith ronin.
And.
Madam chair some of the list
don't have their hands raised so
if I can just remind the
speakers who know Hey are with
compassion choices to raise your
hand it's easier to find you
thank you.
Hello I am.
Go ahead.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am Judith Perlman
and do I am a retired emergency
physician the professor emeritus
from UNM and a hospice
volunteer.
in the E. R. sum many terminally
ill people suffering including
those on hospice both my parents
died on hospice my father said
it was worse than the battle of
the bulge my terminally ill
mother died four weeks later
spending every one of those last
four weeks misery the cutely
lonely missing my father's arms
around her waiting to die the
nursing home she fell off the
toilet to in later own feces
overnight then diapers and she
couldn't eat or drink all the by
confusion hallucinations
agitation leading to physical
restraints and escalating Metz
spent her last few days sedated
and unconscious it was
excruciating I wish my mother
had options please support this
bill.
Next to my own zero.
Hi can you hear me yes.
Hi good afternoon I'm sure and
committee members thank you for
your service service my name is
Maya to Stasio I'm here in
support of house bill forty
seven my grandfather Vincent
just Osseo was diagnosed with
acute myeloid leukemia a highly
aggressive cancer doctors that
he would die within a month he
wanted eight and dying in
suffered indescribable pain my
grandfather made the brave
choice to end his suffering by
slitting his wrists and Achilles
tendons alone in his bathtub but
my other grandfather Thomas
monks found himself in the
hospital with renal failure and
because he had a living will
asking not to be kept on life
support he was able to rally for
himself to be taken off of life
support he too made the brave
choice of ending his suffering
but instead got to die
surrounded by all of his loved
ones myself included until his
very last breath with drugs Tom
I witnessed death as it should
be humane and surrounded by love
I've seen both sides of the
fence this is what my grandpa
Vince's death should have looks
like **** that we support house
bill forty seven thank you.
Thank you doctor Catherine
Morris.
Thank you for hearing this
testimony I'm an associate
professor of surgery and I
support this bill by the time I
met my patient is Curtis I've
worked with thousands of cancer
patients as a surgical
oncologist she was the first
asked me for medical aid in
dying in Oregon I had cared for
her and her remarkable family
for over a year when the cancer
recurred and she asked me for
this privilege.
It was the most difficult
decision I've ever made in the
career challenging choices and
yet I am thankful I said yes
because of the peace are
overcome her when she received
that answer she said now I have
a door I can open if I need to.
In the following months she
lived with an immense joy and
tell her condition worsened
suddenly.
She called the ones that we sent
December and sent Dr Jim I'm
suffering I'm going to use as
medication on Monday will you be
there.
I was with her and her family
that cold December evening and I
witnessed a fierce determination
to celebrate her life and her
family to have a peaceful
passing by exercising our agency
under this law.
It was transcendent this is the
grace you can extend terminally
ill mentally competent patients
in New Mexico thank you.
Thank you next.
Adriano there.
Madam chair and committee
members can you hear me.
My name is Adrian there from
Silvercity I have a story about
a good death in two thousand two
my mother was dying
unfortunately her pain could not
be controlled but because she
lived in Oregon she could
request a medication to enter
suffering for like became
intolerable the day she chose to
die she was handed the medicine
when she finished drinking it
she had a little smile on her
face.
She then died peacefully
surrounded by family this is a
profound and she wanted what she
wanted for herself because it
was legal it was not so lonely
or scary the beauty of this laws
that when a dying person get the
prescriptions they have peace of
mind because they have control
of the end of their life one
third of the people who get this
precious gift prescription do
not take it but have been
comforted because my mom had
this option I have been
comforted for over eighteen
years please vote yes for house
bill forty seven this can bring
great comfort to the dying
person as well as a family.
Thank you doctor Sandra can.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is Sam and I'm
a retired family physician and
I'm a fellow of the American
academy of family medicine I've
delivered babies and I've been
present at the death of some of
my patients I'm called to heal
when possible and to care always
in caring must identify with the
patients need to make important
decisions in caring I don't want
to leave my patient payment
desperation.
Elizabeth white field end of
life options allows the patient
who's qualified to request
medication with which to and
like when it becomes
intolerable.
To be qualified the patient must
be certified to have six months
or less this is not assisted
suicide the patient is afforded
hospice payments to relate and
all available modalities to make
life bearable.
When we do not care the patients
sometimes does resort to painful
suicide this legislation is
called to allow each of us
Tanami to make our own decisions
thank you.
Thank you.
In general.
Honorable madam chair chasing.
Vice chair cannot.
Representatives of the committee
my name is Zach regained that
all and I serve as the state
ombudsman to you and over twelve
thousand New Mexicans.
Living in long term care
facilities is a difficult life
and it is one where I have to
listen and focus clearly on what
is being requested from these
residents from their family
members from the powers of
attorney.
The end of life option act
provides dignity it provides a
Tanami and it provides legal
safeguards for focused
requirements of protection and
residents safety this is a bill
that we support because our
office believes that the
decision over an individual's
health care remains a
fundamental right to their
medical privacy and the right to
make their own medical decisions
this is something our office
supports and strong we ask you
pass thank you so much.
Thank you Tracy Nicholson.
On the list.
Okay Joyce powers.
My name is madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Doris powers I'm a nurse
practitioner here representing
the New Mexico nurse
practitioner council in support
of house bill forty seven.
I have the multiple personal and
professional examples of this
but I would just like to
reiterate some of the points of
this bill.
are very strict.
So the thank
you there is a very humane
waiting on two days instead of.
Two weeks.
It provides a Tanami for the
patient.
It is not a mandate of for the
provider one four.
The patient.
I'm practitioners during a very
specific
To.
Find this I.
Your patience with their close
relationships thank you so much.
Thank you.
Once all.
Hello can you hear me we can.
Hello.
Thank you sorry thank you all
right thank you madam chair my
name is poems one full I'm from
Santa Clara pueblo while working
as a hospice social worker in
Santa Fe there are few patients
including my mother read us with
full we talked about it in dying
New Mexicans have the same
rights at the end of life as
people in other states have
those who desired aid in dying
we're not in the majority of
prop they should have the choice
they were not depressed or
suicidal but knew their lives
were coming to an end they were
receiving very good hospice
palliative care but wanted to
have a choice.
They were not interested in how
many more days they could live
but rather the quality of days
they could share with their
loved ones.
We do not know how many folks on
hospice actually user comfort
care medicines in the middle of
the night all alone or choose to
stop eating and drinking in
order to hasten their deaths
this bill is not about forcing
anyone to do something maybe
you're not wanted to it is about
choice the ability to make a
personal decision that each of
us can only make for ourselves I
urge this body to pass this bill
thank you.
Thank you doctor Lara.
Great.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I'm a
pulmonary and I see you position
and I'm among the majority of
physicians who support giving
patients the option for medical
aid in dying in those rare cases
when good palliative care is not
enough it is true that in
general position should be
healers but when death is
imminent and killing no longer
possible to positions role
should ship from extending life
to relieving suffering in
accord  with their patients
wishes.
Most medical schools today have
supplanted the Hippocratic oath
with more modern ones almost all
of which center on compassion
and putting the patients
interests first together with my
Harvard Medical School class of
nineteen ninety seven I swore to
my future patients that I would
quote uphold your dignity treat
you with kindness empathy and
humility in power you give your
voice and offer you choices cure
when possible and comfort you
always nothing could be more
consistent with medical aid in
dying.
Thank you next I have Nancy a
bell.
Can you hear me Madam.
We can thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Nancy a doctor I am a retired
social worker and have lived in
Santa Fe for thirty years in
twenty twelve my brother in law
Ron was diagnosed with the
galloping leukemia my husband
and I were on the speaker phone
when we heard his oncologist in
Oregon tell him he had only days
or weeks to live and that he
might hemorrhaged to death but
Ron had an option that none of
us here in New Mexico yet have
and he chose that option a
gifted writer Ron got to ride
the last page of his life story
rather than hemorrhaged to death
in an ambulance or an ER or an
icy you wrong you got to die
peacefully on its own terms in
his own bed surrounded by those
he loved what a gift the state
of Oregon again our family thank
you.
Thank you next random again.
Many making here okay reading
begins not here okay all right.
On.
Stephanie Packer.
Yes.
Packer and Eric here in
California and something that is
not talked about enough and what
we need to is that when
California passed this law.
Shortly after notice right it
may insurance company what are
you covering my life extended.
Eradication but I chose to I
could hope for the dollar and
twenty cents and choose to take
that.
It
to make choices for anybody else
but my family children.
Deserve to keep our boys.
Not.
Required to.
Option in order to give someone
else.
Twice and how they want to and
our life.
Thank you please consider also
I.
Next I have a lot of chances.
Hello can you hear me yes.
Okay.
hang on one second.
Sorry.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is a lot of
dances I am an adult in
gerontology primary care nurse
practitioner I work in a clinic
that primarily serves adults
seventy five years and older as
clinicians our role is to
preserve life but it is also to
walk alongside our patients as
their health declines as they
suffer and as they die although
rare there are times when pain
control and palliative care
aren't enough there are times
when the diseases so cruel and
devastating that we as a medical
community don't have the tools
yet to alleviate suffering I am
in favor of any bill or
legislation that gives patients
more agency and control over
their own body used infrequently
medical aid in dying would be
one more tool clinicians have to
support patients live their life
on their terms with dignity
thank you for your time.
Thank you very much we are at
the end of public comment.
Except that I I had a text
message from the representative
for the Catholic bishops and he
was having technical
difficulties I'm going it will
speak in opposition and he will
be the last one to speak you can
say right now.
Madam chair can you.
Okay madam chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
public comment my name is Dick
and Steve Rangel associate
director of New Mexico
conference of Catholic bishops
and the bishop aren't opposition
to house bill forty seven doctor
assisted suicide opens the
possibility of human error just
as it did for the death penalty
if there's a chance the person
would be killed we didn't choose
to take their own life and its
called murder that is clear that
we have health care and hospice
to deal with pain if we're not
willing to provide health care
policy care and hospice for
everyone and we have no business
writing prescription drugs to
kill elderly abuse is consider
major health problem the United
States with federal estimates
that one in ten elder people are
views place illegal drugs into
the hands of abuse Jenner's
additional major risks to the
elderly the church believes in a
consistent F. of the life from
conception to natural death and
my own personal note I've my mom
was placed on hospice four years
ago issue still with us today by
the grace of god we ask you to
vote no to house bill forty
seven.
Thank you.
Going to go back to the sponsors
that we finish the public
comment and
I will.
Let Representative Armstrong
Senator Stefanics Representative
Hochman Vigil let us know if
they're ready for questions from
the committee.
Thank you madam chair and I want
to give a sincere thanks to
everyone that
testified.
Today and I know this is a a
difficult subject and.
I just want to note that as we
go through questions I think
that we have protections in this
law that address some of the
issues that came up in public
comment so I look forward to
answering those questions.
I do want to say that
This.
Measure has been endorsed by
both Albuquerque journal and the
Santa Fe New Mexican the last
time around we had unanimous bi
bipartisan all resolutions from
the City of Albuquerque in the
city of Los crucis in support to
in in Santa Fe not a unanimous
but bipartisan support.
Between suffering and facing
facing death and.
with that madam chair I think
we'll just go to the questions I
think Representative Hochman
Vigil went back to her other
committee if there's anything
else Senator Stefano X.
semantics wants to say in
closing.
I would just like to thank the
committee.
I would like to thank the
committee for their
consideration I think this is an
important measure for
individuals in our state.
Have the option to make
decisions about their lives
thank you very much.
Thank you the first one I have
on my list as Representative
Townsend.
Thank you madam chair
Probably.
Like everyone else on this
committee we hate this bill.
We hated that Debbie has to.
And and day and have to bring it
forward.
I hate so.
Aaron Hass by.
But I am glad she get.
I have a few questions just so I
understand.
What's before us.
Representative Armstrong you
mentioned that.
There was a process so that if
someone had a concern for.
That maybe the person.
It wasn't right thank there was
and I'm trying to figure out how
does that person have standing
and who is that who they go to
how does that work.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I will trying
to explain and and may have a
professor chair it's
way in as you can imagine it's a
it's a difficult day for me and
I I'm not always thinking
exactly clearly but I'm gonna
try
So you have to have to providers
a firm your a terminal illness.
At least one of those has to be
a position.
the other factors that have to
be affirmed our the capacity to
make the decision and the
abilities to self administer and
and the prescribing of our
provider has to feel like
there's no coercion which is
part of witnessing process
cetera.
If the prescribing is and I've I
apologize with this kind of gets
in the weeds and technical if
the prescribing provider is a
nurse practitioner or physician
assistant that a physician must
also a firm capacity and and
terminal illness and that the
short cut is terminal illnesses
that are there in hospice
because that's already been
determined by physician.
If in any of those
providers whether they're
prescribing or consulting has
any concerns that the individual
might not have decisional
capacity or if they have a a
recent history recent or current
history of of
of mental illness or disability
that could affect their ability
to make a decision for
themselves then they must be
referred to a mental health
our provider and we've listed in
the bill of rights if providers
on a routine basis help and
decision making a determination
of capacity in normal medical
practice
It and to determine if they have
that capacity and understand the
decision they're making and if
there's been a referral to that
mental health provider.
You can't move forward until
there's been clearance from that
provider that they feel that
they understand the issue the
decision they're making and and
have the capacity to make that
decision.
I'm.
In in decision making capacity
is our routine in a lot of
health care in is usually in the
built in if you will with
informed consent and the ability
to make decisions about your
health care whether to accept
treatment to not accept
treatment to withdraw treatment.
And I and in this case
at hi this is specific to this
a decision about
taking the medication to control
the time of your of your death
and if I could ask professor
Schwartz if I.
Left out a point that's
important along that line.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee I don't think
there's anything left and I
think that's a the complete
description of the provision in
the New Mexico statute which is
I think one of the more thorough
description federal statutory
provisions are a bill provisions
in any of the bills that have
been introduced in the United
States and it's in section four
of the bill the process that
Representative Armstrong just
described.
And madam chair and
representative Dr Schwartz
It.
Does Dr drive be forced into
participating in this process.
Madam chair and representative
no no one that is forced into it
to participate we're very
specific in the in the bill that
no one is has to participate in
anywhere along the the chain of
our provider or facility.
what what we also have is that
no one can be
disciplined in any way for
choosing to participate.
And I'm madam chair and
representative
These medications that are
available in some states today
or and
Others.
Is there and then that those can
be prescribed for a choir a
resident of New Mexico other
than through a local physician.
I'm.
Madam chair and
Representative the only way
resident of new equipment of New
Mexico could acquire the your
compound of our prescriptions in
this is if we legalize this or
if they move to another state
and establish residency
elsewhere.
Thank you madam chair as you all
know this is this.
I completely get it
helping my parents go through
and a live I get.
I can't hurt I cannot.
Vote for this but my heart
breaks for you so
so with that thank you.
Thank you representative.
Thank you madam chair my
freshman year.
Was the first time that we heard
this bill.
And.
I made the statement that.
And I think I will make the
statement when I go home this
time.
That there will be no bill.
That is more gut wrenching and
difficult to make.
Then the bill we're discussing
right now.
And so that's why first time
appearing this.
I'd like to have.
Got to experience
My mother's death.
Within three months of
Our first time appearing this
six months ago I got to
experience another family
member's death.
So we all right if we live long
enough we all get the.
Have our stories of both life
and death.
The.
The the the the issue of before
us is certainly one that that
tugs our heartstrings we don't
want to see anyone.
Suffering.
And that squarely places this
so.
Issue.
In the.
In our hearts and it is.
Most difficult.
And.
Madam chair and representative
The only reason I can't come
around to supporting the bill.
And it's just pretty simple for
me is that it brings them third
parties.
And that creates a real dilemma
for me a.
And bringing in the third party
actors
is a horrible the.
I just can't.
Get get over and so.
Hi.
Express my.
Deepest sympathies for the
terminal patients my deepest
sympathies for the families that
go through this I walked in
those shoes.
And I know how.
Difficult it is to see a lot of
one vanish before your very
eyes.
But we're dealing with
legislation.
And seven public policy that's
going to.
Affect a lot of people and
while.
I'm sympathetic toward the the
patients I am concerned about
bringing them the third parties
of for that reason
I won't be supported the
legislation thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative night
very
are there other members with
questions.
Madam chair if I could just make
a closing statement we're ready
right now I just say something
and then I I I was waiting to
see if anybody else want to
speak on Representative Quinn is
in the act committee have.
And so he's going to be excused
at this time.
I appreciate so much.
First of all the years of work
that people like Senator
Stefanics to put into this.
And
incredible work of this.
Answer Representative Armstrong.
And the legal perspective that
rob Schwartz has provided in
such such data the biggest
hearings.
And Steve Chaves experience
we're not just talking about
training because I'm very highly
regarded now retired physician
but his experience with patients
and their stories I'm.
And.
The Representative Armstrong.
Mentioned our mutual dear friend
whom she helped.
Die.
Patty Jennings who has been does
Tim Jennings.
And
I think that.
This law was not in effect then
but I know representative
Armstrong.
Again how do a lot of comfort
she gave me a lot of for what
she did for Patty.
And
It is just it's really
it is a very difficult subject
and I just want to thank.
Both representatives who have
indicated they now are going to
vote for the bill that thank.
They feel the pain that has
brought us to this point and
I I just.
I was thank you one Erin
Armstrong was speaking that.
If she has her testimony is
written somewhere it should be
preserved.
It was compassionate it was.
It was so life affirming.
And yet it was a plea for us to
do this to enact this so I I do
think everyone who testified
from the public to proponents
and opponents and with that if
you'd like to your closing now
Representative Armstrong before
we take about.
Madam chair are you able to hear
me.
Okay my hat my internet is a
little unstable so costs and
sure I also want to thank
everyone who testified in I was
gonna you know I keep biting my
tongue to say I apologize for
this.
On bringing this before you but
I'm not going to apologize
the only thing harder about
hearing this is living at and
and you all know that.
And I'm not going to apologize
for sharing our story or for
asking the audience to share
their first and I appreciate
of the representatives and I
Burt and Townsend.
I I do want to just point out
that.
Under current law.
And has been in existence for
more than a quarter of a
century.
We allow and we encourage.
On fact hospitals are mandated
to ask do you have a health care
decision maker for yourself.
And durable powers of attorney
allow those decision makers to
make decisions step in and make
this life and death decisions
for people when they when the
individual lacks capacity our
state law doesn't even require
that you have a durable power of
attorney it has a hierarchy of
individuals who can make
decisions for you.
When you lack capacity.
And those life and death
decisions include accepting
treatment life sustaining
treatment withdrawing life
sustaining treatment.
In in this case.
In in this circumstance we are
not allowing.
Someone else to make the
decision for you.
And we are not allowing someone
without capacity to make that
decision.
We are not allowing someone else
to do it for you.
So I I implore you I think that
this is on a continuum of
honoring the autonomy of
someone's decision about
accepting life sustaining
treatment or not.
And in this case they're already
facing imminent death.
More than ninety percent of
people in other states are on
hospice and palliative care this
is for the few for whom that is
insufficient to control their
pain and suffering.
And so with that madam chair and
and committee members I urge I
plea.
To pass house bill forty seven
oh madam chair almost forgot I
had an amendment she.
It's not substantive but it's
clarifying an important to drive
can make.
and I think everyone is had it I
don't know if it's if we can
just do that quickly.
And your muted madam chair.
Yes let's do that I'd rather not
vote on it before we have the
amendment yeah.
In the two two number is point
two one nine five one one point
one.
I'm it and it is on page five
line eleven after determined
insert after conducting an
appropriate examination if you
read through the bill different
paragraphs important all
together it's obvious that the
consulting provider has to
examine the patient however it's
you have to read here and then
over there and then back here to
put that together this is just
putting the language in in one
place to make sure that that's
clear also it's clear that both
the prescribing in the
consulting have examined the
patient appropriately so were
you repeat that it's on page
five one eleven insert after
determine insert after
conducting an appropriate
examination.
After okay so it would probably
be
Comma after conducting an
appropriate examination com.
Correct that's what would be
inserted there I'll do that and
then I moved to adopt them.
Second.
Is the discussion of that
amendment.
Is there any objection to that
amendment.
Raise your hand if you're
getting to the amendment.
Okay seeing no objection please
show all members present voting
in the affirmative on the
amendment.
And now here your bill is
amended Representative morning
thank you madam chair I
apologize for not doing that
sooner.
So I'm.
Representative Eli have a motion
madam chair I move to pass of
house bill forty seven as
amended.
Madam chair.
We have a lot of second tier the
state
is that it had and I'm
Representative so this.
so we have a motion and a second
for two passed in house bill
forty seven as amended is there
any further discussion.
Seeing her to call the roll.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook no.
Representative you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Louis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Quinn is putting
out of the bill.
Representative night.
Now.
Representative rain.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
By a vote of seven to three we
have a two passed as amended.
Thank you very much thank thank
you all for.
For this.
Very difficult and important
piece of legislation thank you
all.
Okay next on our agenda.
You madam chair members of the
committee okay and thank you for
joining us
This works and State Caidic.
Thank you very much.
Okay.
We're doing house bill fifty six
next right.
Just
a little.
Okay and.
Just.
To clarify to will be rolling
house bill fifty we're looking
at proposed amendments to that
so I just want to let folks know
right and I had actually been
specific about that when I knew
this meeting yesterday because
of virtually fifty what's on the
agenda but we knew by.
It.
Good afternoon that there were
amendments that would be ready
some.
Right okay so.
So we need to move on to that
bill and I think that your
cosponsors during consumer
public affairs right now so you
proceed to proceed without her
yes madam chair I do have expert
witness art provocateur he can
races and and the panelists in
the attendees to event analysts
place yes.
Okay.
And Dr J. needed Roch words
thank you for joining us we're
gonna think about you.
You can visit the committee but
want to move out of the panel.
Okay.
Is.
Yes there is okay.
Go ahead Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members to house
bill fifty six is a bill that
we've seen before and twenty
twenty it was House Bill to
thirty seven as amended by this
Judiciary Committee it passed
the house unanimously but it
died in the Senate the the
primary purpose of the bill is
to Amanda various laws and
dressing sexual crimes in order
to reduce human traffic and
We do have an amendment madam
chair that was provided to the
committee but let me talk about
the bill first and then let me
know how you like to proceed.
this bill has various proposed
changes to the sex offender
registration and notification
act it amends the definition of
connection and start add to
include people who are subject
to imposition of applying
probation and community control
her role conditional release
controller lease incarceration
and deferred sentences it also
makes are not applicable to
certain out of state convictions
and to people outside of New
Mexico who own property in New
Mexico increases our
registration term for sexual
exploitation of children by
prostitution.
It also has proposed changes to
sexual exploitation of children
by prostitution.
Bear the
The applicability of sexual
exploitation of children by
prostitution to children below
the age of eighteen which is
increase from the age of sixteen
it makes several proposed
changes to human trafficking
laws and
other provisions there.
Madam chair if we could have
Mr professed go.
There you are.
at any additions to house bill
fifty six.
Chair may I address the
committee.
Yes sorry I I needed myself
please go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee is
Representative Louis indicated
this is substantially similar to
the as amended version of house
bill two thirty seven from last
year's session which passed
unanimously.
It's important to note just in
terms of the the over arching
history of the treatment of
issues like the modern form of
slavery where new act New Mexico
statutes with its and Moul it
was originally enacted in two
thousand eight and it has a
long.
Resident dating back to federal
efforts in dealing with PNH and
involuntary servitude which
dates back to the.
On our country
one of the more shocking facts
that I think I've learned in the
time since the the unanimous
passage of of substantially
similar bill and last year
section.
Is just that you know we're
we're Representative this point
of realization of recognizing
how the most vulnerable members
of society have been exploited
and abused throughout history
lost prohibiting things like
slavery and peonage.
That is a break from the
historical more of ensuring that
lives are given all the need
dignity and justice that they
are entitled to we're all
members of the same community
and New Mexico is not immune to
the current dialogues regarding
how the most exploited are
treated by the law one of the
more shocking things I think
I've learned to just presenting
on this topic at the human
trafficking conferences that yes
some of the earliest territorial
decisions of the New Mexico
territorial Supreme Court
involved in the legal status of
peonage and our state what I'm
our state that is the the
reduction of the human being to
the involuntary a service of
debts and that contracts and
dealing with questions of how
children can absorb the deaths
of their parents and service of
this species of involuntary
servitude one of the more
ignominious mentions of New
Mexico just the point New Mexico
is actually and one of the first
post thirteenth amendment
statutes that being the eighteen
sixty seven a statue abolishing
peonage in the territory of New
Mexico.
In terms of the exploitation of
people problems that are faced
by survivors of modern day forms
of slavery have changed over
time and HB fifty six this year
addresses some of the challenges
that survivors faced by doing
things like increasing and
expanding the safe harbor
survivors both in relation to
arrests and making sure that you
know the instrumentality of
traffickers are running their
victims with arrest for engaging
in things like commercial sex
that that is no longer a threat
that will be recognized by the
law by taking a look at things
like the statute of limitations
you know if one work a US
foreign national television
undocumented in the United
States who's can help to work
under the threat of deportation
well under federal law it's
under it radiated system of five
ten and twenty years that
someone would be prohibited from
re entering the United States
and so we address the fact that
we want to make sure that the
law itself does not become an
instrumentality of this crime by
allowing traffickers to be
treated differently depending on
whether they're successful or
not following through on their
threats the the through line of
all the amendments that are
proposed in existing law and
this bill is in making sure that
the law is more effective at
breaking the bonds between
traffickers and survivors of
making sure that the aspirations
of the two thousand act more of
a reality of the treatment of
survivors focuses on the trauma
that they go through when
experiencing this offense and
that we recognize to the
interstate nature of abuse and
trauma the survivors experience
and we make sure that New Mexico
as a forum for providing an
Avenue for justice is more
successful in its efforts
partnering with other
jurisdictions in making that a
reality it goes almost without
saying that a New Mexico some
highest proportion of land so
that it's under the control of
the federal government or our
partners.
Let's tribal governments and
that many of the changes here
are to increase conformity
between the two thousand eight
act and the federal trafficking
victims of the TVPA trafficking
victims protection act that was
enacted federally.
In terms of the the overall big
picture I think that's a fair
summary of the bill madam chair
thank you for providing me an
opportunity to speak along with
the other members of this
committee.
Representative did you want to
just briefly describe the
amendment before we go out for
public comment and then we can
amend the bill after the public
comment sure thank you madam
chair
and and thanks to the office of
the Attorney General who who has
been involved a lot and and
making this bill a top priority
actually I think the office and
the analysts that we refer to
the brains of the operation had
been working together on getting
the amendments drafted so if I
could just ask market to explain
those placed.
Your.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
One of the features of the
amended version of the prior
version of this bill is
increasing judicial discretion
to ensure the public safety is
enhanced with store at this
particular amendment was after
consultation with with the loss
of public defender and can cook
Travis and sort of identifying
you know certainly different
agencies will come at this issue
and approach it from different
perspectives some of those
different perspectives become
sort of a values questions of
what is prioritized over over
other things however this was a
situation where we wanted to
make sure that in reference to a
judicial discretion for those
that complete things like
conditional discharges that we
do make sure that courts are
able to properly evaluate the
risk of those that are convicted
of a sex offense in New Mexico
and so what we've done is we've
clarified with this section all
of the language regarding
judicial discretion of first in
regards to completion of the
conditions of the conditional
discharge and providing an
exemption from registration
there what we're we're the
second is and clarifying the
reciprocity provision and also
clarifying what good cost means
and that good because means that
registration would not advance
public safety in New Mexico now
there's two points and the use
of judicial discretion for them
are both designed to strike a
balance between the needs for
public safety and also the needs
for clearing up ambiguities for
potential registrants currently
the the the primary mechanism by
which clarifications are made
regarding whether someone should
register not New Mexico after
moving here is through the
fourth degree felony and
prosecution of that fourth
element for failure to register
with this mechanism the hope and
aspirations providing a formal
petition mechanism that rather
than treating it strictly as a
criminal issue for non
registration we actually
affirmatively a permit a
District Court to reach a
decision regard.
And whether public safety in
fact will be advance for it and
that was a proposed an amended
as a result of that that
consultation with the LAPD.
Thank you very much so that
probably will affect public.
So are you ready for me to go to
the audience now.
Yes madam chair thank you.
Okay.
For those of you who are
participating with us today this
is what I usually ask folks in
the room to let raise your hand
if you're in favor of the bill
or or if you're in opposition
but what we have now is that I a
call and so you can vote yes if
you
Are in favor of house bill fifty
sixty could not now if you're
not in favor and and if you
happen to be neutral
You'll get your chance to speak
so the whole is open now if you
will please register your views.
Five more seconds.
Okay all right we're finished we
had seventy eight in support and
twenty two percent in opposition
thank you let me go to the I'd
like to give an opportunity for
the the.
Those who are in opposition to
speak so we if we're you please
raise your hand if you oppose
the bill.
Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee Kim
Chavez Cook with the law offices
of the public defender and Mr
provides go accurately
characterized our discussion we
talked about a great many issues
and I was grateful that the AG's
office was responsive to some of
our concerns and we are grateful
for this minute we do think that
it improves and it nearly
addresses two of our concerns so
thank you for that and as I did
warn marking advance it does not
address all of our our concerns
I will start first by saying we
definitely support the safe
harbor provision we don't think
that victims of human
trafficking should be charged
with crimes and the threat of
that charge is definitely
something that reduces their
ability to get to safety and
seek assistance so we fully
support that provision of the
bell as written
our primary concerns are sort of
in a related which are with the
increasing of penalties at the
same time that we are expanding
the definition and scope of
human trafficking human
trafficking is a crime that as
written in New Mexico's statute
is already a bit broad and blurs
sometimes the line between what
we think of as an actual human
trafficker and what is the more
sort of prototypical Penford
wrap lack of a better word that
is a fourth degree felony under
law promoting prostitution and
so did the jump in penalty from
two to human trafficking we
think really does need to be
limited to the type of conduct
that
that were actually concerned
with and we do feel that this is
overly broad and defining it to
include patrons and things like
that so there's that piece and
then the penalty piece I will
very quickly say you know that
that it does include the
addition of new first degree
felonies which carry an eighteen
year mandatory sentence the
judge has no discretion on and
so I do think it that the
committee should use caution
whenever you're looking at new
first degree felony crimes and.
Make sure that we're we're sort
of copy careful with that and
then just to point out the
reality that the penalty for
someone who has who is an actual
human trafficker is likely to
become extremely high because of
the fact that there are so many
applicable crimes and they would
can Staten the each other and I
think last year I also
highlighted a case that we had
in our office where the there
was a fifty six year sentence
because of the fact that there
were so many different charges
involved in not just in charge
of human trafficking so we don't
believe that penalties deter
criminal behavior and we believe
that there are enough crimes on
the books to allow for like the
penalties already for those
reasons we do oppose but we are
grateful to the sponsor into the
AG's office for working with us
on the issues we've already
addressed thank you so much.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
legislative coordinator for the
New Mexico will defense lawyers
association we also respectfully
oppose I appreciate the.
And to advocate and appreciate
the work that has been done.
For for the same reasons as
stated by Mr Thomas cook we are
still in opposition.
Thank you very much.
This job is this guy.
out at her house okay look
that's looks like all the
opposition let's go to with
those in favor please raise your
hands.
Who would like to speak I should
say.
Begin with Kyle hard drive.
Going.
Madam chair is because he has an
older version of whom he cannot
speak.
to brand okay
I'm in Burke.
I had.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair members of the committee
thank you Kathleen Burke
Albuquerque member of the New
Mexico human trafficking task
force and the southeast area
community policing Council.
Madam chair representative Lewis
thank you for your sponsorship
of this bill HB fifty six sex
offender and human trafficking
changes thank you for the expert
witness in favor of this
legislation our system New
Mexico Attorney General mark
Basco.
To the committee and audience I
need to warn that I will be
addressing explicit topics and
using explicit words please
protect as necessary anyone in
your immediate environment.
I have advocated for sex
trafficking victims for eight
years formally as the streets
street level and as the
associate director of street
safe New Mexico.
As former associate director I
have known and heard shocking
and overwhelmingly heart
wrenching stories from scores of
sex trafficking victims and
survivors.
What I'm going to share is not
hearsay nor is it
sensationalized.
In twenty nineteen a member of
the New Mexico legislature
courts corrections and justice
committee stated that sex
trafficking in some of the worst
crime in America today.
Yes correct.
Sex trafficking is never as
simple as the sale of forced
labor law enforcement reports
the co occurrence of these
following crimes multiple right
forced abortions kidnapping
forced drug addiction physical
abuse including beating with
implements and branding of
victims the same type of
branding used in livestock
management.
As well as starvation emotional
abuse and removal of victims
from her or his support system.
The state of New Mexico there
are an estimated eleven thousand
plus individual incidences of
illegal sex trafficking daily.
Which is considered to be a very
conservative estimate.
It's eleven thousand plus
incidences of sex trafficking
crimes include children teens
and adults these crimes commonly
occur at the street level at
truck stops online at motels and
casinos and at massage parlors
and then camps of the oil and
gas industry.
Sex trafficking is happening
commonly in numerous places in
our communities.
New Mexico has notoriously and I
will add egregiously light
sentencing for sex traffickers.
All of the state's surrounding
New Mexico have much stronger
sentencing for human trafficking
crimes.
Each and every state boarding
bordering New Mexico has
stronger penalties for sex
trafficking offenses.
The fear of those us those of us
monitoring sex trafficking crime
is that New Mexico without
increases to sentencing is very
much at risk for becoming a
haven for sex traffickers who
are aware of low penalties and
therefore low risk of committing
sex trafficking crimes in our
state.
After eight years of working
with sex trafficking victims
research and my experience bear
out that only a fortunate very
few sex trafficking victims
survive five years beyond having
been trafficked.
I will repeat that very few sex
trafficking victims survive five
years beyond having been
trafficked.
Even fewer reach a level which
would qualify as rehabilitated.
Similarly as we have found that
it is incredibly difficult and
rare to rehabilitate victims I
know it's no rehabilitation
program anywhere in the world
which rehabilitates sex
traffickers and fenders.
I strongly support HB fifty six
ladies and gentlemen of the
committee and I urge you to pass
thank you.
Thank you very much.
Okay.
Has a new device so let me go
ahead Kyle.
Okay thank you guys so much my
name's Kyle Hartzog from a law
enforcement officer and I worked
in investigating human
trafficking cases for seven
years in Albuquerque in that
time I spend a lot of time
researching how these victims
get to that point the first
thing I want to say is I'm in
love with the early childhood
Department announces to New
Mexico because if we really want
to stop we have to help these
kids when they're between the
ages of zero one five so I'm
excited about that in the
meantime in my research just in
Albuquerque area close to a
thousand juveniles year and I
get that number from police
reports are run aways kids are
running away from emergency
crisis shelters and foster homes
between the ages of eleven and
seventeen about a thousand
juveniles are introduced into
sex trafficking just in the
Albuquerque area that and the
same time I can tell you there
is a painfully small amount of
arrests and even smaller amount
of prosecutions in these cases
due to the difficulty of
grounding these victims building
enough evidence and keeping them
and pocket all the way to trial
on top of that my seven years of
doing these cases as the
previous person just testified
to if my trafficker did anything
out of state almost every time
and advocating another state
takes my offender so they can
prosecute them the penalties in
New Mexico are in comparison to
federal and other states very
very light this crime is not one
of drug abuse of offenders are
alcohol abuse it is just
straight up person abuse there
are very very difficult on the
victims I completely support the
bill and how it's right and
anything that can help shut down
the market place that is sex
trafficking by allowing law
enforcement to be
you know more creative and
targeting Sanders who are
victimizing these persons and to
get them to stop doing this
behavior I'm all I'm all on
board for.
Or so again thank you for
letting me talk and that's all.
Thanks for getting an upgraded
device that Kyle thank you very
much all righty okay we're ready
to go back to the committee now
Would you like to
I'll move the discussion for
many purposes which excuse me
home improvement for discussion
purposes.
Would you like to explained a
little further Representative
that the and let us.
I'm.
I think we.
We
are any questions yeah and the
committee does have it I know
the analysts updated the the
reports as well so I noticed our
committee analysis there were
there was concern that with the
total right there appeared not
to be any judicial discretion
earlier and now you have some
and.
But it's not to the full extent
that the public defender.
Because there's some determinate
sentences well right.
So.
If you want to let mark address
that on the amendment.
Sure thank you madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee the reason why this
particular part of sort of was
addressed was in relation to to
publish cases that our state has
had regarding formerly it was
referred to as the equivalents
attached for out of state
conduct and whether one would
have to register when they come
to New Mexico in terms of the
big picture of those to publish
cases the the first one was a
New Mexico but you'll decision
stating when the involved
someone who was convicted in the
state of Colorado for right who
then moved to New Mexico and he
was do not have to register here
because there is deemed to be an
insufficient record of
equivalents and it was read that
in many of these cases and as
indicated in the literature I'm
referring specifically to
A. R..
National Institute of justice a
research study regarding the
effects of sort out on eight and
that in fact we resolutions
increase upon states enacting so
we're not.
Because of that sometimes the
only evidence of once or whether
the out of state right
convictions and say we when we
went to Mexico conduct will
either be because the we will
outline specifically the use of
violence in the previous
document itself or alternatively
there will be something like an
allocution or a sworn statements
by the defendant at sentencing
to show this equivalence now in
the absence of that even if
you're convicted of something
like right out of state you will
not have to register in New
Mexico and in fact that's the
very specific issue with sort of
that was highlighted by our own
Supreme Court in the case of the
state in the hall and I'm
referring to paragraph twenty
four of the and there was I
believe an invitation by the
Supreme Court to address the
into account for the fact that
when someone is convicted of at
times.
Horrific sexual abuse out of
state to give you the example
for all it was molestation of a
child I believe out of
California that.
The state ought not to be in a
position of re traumatizing
victims in the state in order to
establish a record for someone
who lacks to maintain contacts
with the state of New Mexico
either by moving here or by
acquiring property here and so
in terms of considering the
balance that this provision was
very much in response to the
case law on the public case law
on our state to help make sure
that survivors of sexual
violence are treated fairly and
with dignity that they deserve
but also that if they are not
threat to public safety if we're
dealing with the extreme
scenario I think there's three
cases published nationally
efforts some states that you
know require registration for
something like public urination
that this safety valve is
designed to ensure that
determinations regarding
reciprocity with these those
other states rather than
occurring at different sheriffs
offices around the state of New
Mexico it gets before a judge so
the judge can reach
determination and a judge can
determine whether there's good
cause or not and so this
provision is an expansion of
that and also making sure that
the public is safe.
Thank you very much so the
amendment number is point two
one nine eight oh seven point
one.
Is that correct.
Yeah hi.
So they.
Representative must have the
right number.
News.
Very madam chair
Yes the number is point two one
nine eight zero seven point one
eight is there discussion about
the amendment.
Needs.
All on the amendment
Representative Nighbor okay I
did know your hands up sorry.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative it
may be that the Attorney General
already said this and I just
didn't catch it but it looks
like the amendment.
Puts the burden on the
individual to seek.
Of.
seek.
The implementation of the
exception.
And I'm wondering if the person
didn't know or the person knew
that they weren't subject to
registration under New Mexico
law for whatever crime they
committed elsewhere.
And then they get arrested.
Walk me through how this
provision.
Would be applicables that that
individual and protect that
individual from prosecution for
failure to register.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative neighbor and I
will defer to mark Lasko to
answer.
Thank you madam chair a
Representative Nighbor so in
that situation the way the law
currently is is that there is
potential for ambiguity
regarding acquittal wants and
looking at the underlying
conduct of the out of state
conviction what not just this
amendment but what H. B. fifty
six does in total is it
completely clarifies that
ambiguity if one has to register
in in the wind example for an
offence like rape and Colorado
and one chooses to move to New
Mexico rather than living in the
ambiguous situation of well does
Colorado's requirements of let's
say.
Fund or one is convicted of rape
does that come with went to the
New Mexico statute for criminal
sexual penetration criminal
sexual contact.
This bill will clarify that
ambiguity and setting a default
of you have to register if a
Colorado court determines that
you were right to public safety
and that you need to register
for being convicted of a sex
offense you have to register if
you're coming to New Mexico if
after coming to New Mexico
ending subject to that that now
unambiguous provision of New
Mexico law you believe that in
fact your offense is not
something that truly jeopardizes
public safety in the state of
New Mexico rather than doing
what they ordinarily would do
now which is consult with the
local sheriff regarding you know
do I have to register is this
equipment is that's not
registered instead of what this
amendment does is it puts it
before what this bill does with
the amendment is put this before
a District Court judge in
particular to highlight one of
the failures of the prior
version of storm that I consider
cases like the trajectory
obscene case where he comes to
New Mexico he's generated
contacts with our state yes
various get least one ranch that
was located within state bounced
and the determination regarding
his registration requirements
rather than being something
decided by New Mexico District
Court judge where there's a
presumption that because he
isn't enticing minors to have
sex without conditions out of
Florida thank you have to
register here in him really show
that he's not a threat to public
safety instead of the sheriff
reach the determination that he
did not have to register and he
was in fact in the state New
Mexico that was the only state
that he had contacts with that
you do not have to register and
since both New York and Florida
required you know this
billionaire rapist for lack of a
better description of them to
not register here in New Mexico
so this particular portion is to
address that shortcoming not
just from that episode also from
the public case law about your a
statement madam chair and
representative Albert regarding
you know the presumption is on
the person who elects to
maintain those contacts in New
Mexico that is correct that it
does shift to that approve.
Some did say to the registrant
to show that they're not a risk
to public safety.
Under cross tender however which
is that a low standard but an
adequate one for reaching this
determination and part of the
District Court.
Okay I'm madam chair and
representative I'm I'm really
focused on an individual.
Who's convicted elsewhere.
And in that state they have to
register as a sex offender but
that same conduct would not have
required them to register under
New Mexico law and so that
person is now in New Mexico they
did not register even though.
As I understand the the
testimony they were required to
register New Mexico because of
other provisions they did not
now they're arrested and.
They can I I guess the
subsection F. two so that they
can show that they would not
have been required to register
New Mexico and the court finds
good cause but they're already
they failed to register and what
I wanted to know what.
What.
Do you anticipate the court
would do to that individual for
their failure to register or if
it finds that they're not add it
would not advance the public
safety do they then get to
basically.
Not have to pay whatever
consequences there are as a
result of their failure to
register.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative member will
continue to lead to Mr progress
co.
Address the committee.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so the default
state for that out of state
registrant let's say for example
we have a person who moved here
from the state of Virginia is
convicted under one of the
Commonwealth statutes of taking
indecent liberties with a child
now this is something that's
taken obviously analyzed from
actual case that we had were
someone moved to New Mexico
after having been convicted of
taking indecent liberties with a
child which is a Virginia fans
and he proceeded to engage and
it needs the term it's to
anonymize it even further
because it is more relations
into actual cases that we have
the misfortune of review and
proceeded to rape his
grandchildren and to generate
child sexual.
Use materials right here within
the state of New Mexico so that
was under the prior version of
the law there is ambiguity
because there was nothing in the
record that we can permanently
point to showing.
So for that out of state
registrant would be required to
do is Hey upon moving to New
Mexico he would have to register
until and unless the court
reaches a determination under
this provision that they are not
a risk to public safety further
what this bill and it's
amendment will do is that
there's going to be two stages
of analysis the first stage of
analysis is is it strictly due
to reciprocity that this out of
state registrant asked register
the answer is yes let's say you
know under the current law for
example many states require
registration for those that
force children to have sex for
money now New Mexico is not one
of the state's child sex
trafficking is not a registrable
offence in the state of New
Mexico so that out of state
registrant when they moved to
New Mexico after having been
convicted of child sex
trafficking.
They would have to have a
presumptive state of you
register because that other
jurisdiction as teams that you
have to register pursuant to
your state so we're not and the
only way for you to be excused
from registration is a you are
only having to register under
this reciprocity provision and
so there is no equivalent to an
enumerated Defense weapons or
not and be the court has to
provide good because that this
child sex traffickers should not
have to register within the
state of New Mexico which
appears to be a pretty unlikely
determination given the nature
of that offense I hope it's
illustrative of some of the
constraints that are not
currently poses now and to the
resolution of making sure that
it is a court that reaches this
determination of registration
versus non right registration
verses you know best case
scenario a local sheriff who is
asking consulted like we saw on
the upstream K. or even worse
than that I H. very in setting
out whether the state control
beyond a reasonable doubt
whether in fact someone is
legally obligated to register
and effectively has to be a
criminal resolution of that
issue I hope that answers that
question madam madam chair and
representative.
Madam chair I don't think that I
don't think it answered my
question or at least.
Maybe maybe I'm not making
myself clear so let let's do
this.
Madam chair and and
Representative Mr professed go.
The person that we're talking
about from a foreign
jurisdiction committed a crime
that under those state laws
required them to register the
state.
As a sex offender.
For whatever reason New Mexico
does not require that type of
registration under our laws
maybe the other jurisdiction
went overboard and and that's it
in its walls in this regard.
The person moves to New Mexico.
The person looks at our laws and
say oh I don't have to register
here or.
Neglects to or whatever the
reason is they don't register.
They're now arrested.
Probably for something else.
But now they're determined to
have failed to register New
Mexico and if I read the
language right.
The court in FY two can can
allow.
That individual to show that.
The.
He wouldn't have to register New
Mexico and the court finds good
cause of the individual
registration would not advance
public safety of New Mexico the
bears a burden but he's failed
to register he's he he has
already committed the crime he
hasn't he hasn't asked the court
to get exempted he is arrested
and I all right my question is
what happens to that individual
under F. to do the the court let
me.
Now excuse his failure to
register or does it go ahead and
make those findings are that
individual just the out a lot
because they failed to register
even though New Mexico would not
have required that registration.
Thank you representative thank
you madam chair of mark.
Yes madam chair and
representative so under this
specific factual scenario where
someone who is required to
register fails to seek a court
order exempting them from store
not not only can they be charge
what they can be convicted the
toothpaste is out of the bottle
if someone fails to seek court
review the way the H. B. fifty
six resolves ambiguities for all
out of state registrants is it
sets out a very clear and simple
rule for out of state
registrants to follow and abide
by in this specific fact
patterns where someone has
already been charged for failure
to register because they are
because they do not follow the
provision of the the provisions
of subsection half as Amanda
that does not constitute a
defense that does not constitute
a defense one must petition the
court before it becomes a
criminal issue under the
provisions of this bill does not
provide a legal excuse in a
criminal proceeding what it
hopes to do is to avoid a
criminal proceeding altogether
us that there is no ambiguity
and sorna and that there are not
potentially different answers
depending on which you know
locality you seek advice from
your your local sheriff's office
and again it places it before
the judge you madam chair
representative thank you for the
question I hope that that that
answers this particular concern
in question.
Madam chair and and Mr Bosco
that doesn't answer my question
and yet it Madam raises a
concern that I would have in
that it may not go far enough I
I think that if New Mexico law
does not require the
registration.
But the.
The way this thing's working
across state lines are we.
Technically require them to
register New Mexico because they
were convicted elsewhere I I I
think they ought to be given so
I'm sort of chance be
particularly if the court would
find that their registration
would not advance public safety
in New Mexico because I
anticipate and I don't know what
I mean everybody on this
committee knows about all
practice anywhere close to
criminal law but I would
anticipate that there are some
states who have.
What we might consider draconian
laws on this issue and may
require somebody register as a
sex offender for something that
we in New Mexico do not consider
it to be a sex crime and I don't
know whether it's true or not
I'm just.
Thank you and for that
individual if they were required
to register New Mexico and their
only crime is coming to New
Mexico and failing to register
because they were required to in
the other state but they are
required to in New Mexico it
just seems like the.
It's a little harsh and that we
ought to give the courts a
little bit of room to deal with
that and we're not doing it in
the us and them.
Representative that's my only
comment on the amendment madam
chair thank you.
Representative Conklin were you
on the amendment.
As reclamation.
What is the four Representative
neighbor to attention to the
normally used in in New Mexico
when somebody is charged with
the failing to register.
being a misdemeanor which staff
to the magistrate or mental
level and then if there is a
petition.
Then that person and then after
the chair of the file should
charge the person can they go to
the District Court and we're
hearing as to the status.
Wanted to bring that up thank
you madam chair.
Thank you.
Okay.
Any other questions on the.
And.
Madam chair movie option.
We have a motion for
Representative you like to adopt
and that meant and I will second
that motion is there for the
discussion of the amendment.
Is there any objection to the
amendment which you raise your
hand if you object.
Okay it looks like there is not
an so please show all members
present voting in the
affirmative to adopt the
amendment to hospital.
G. six so I want to see if we
have questions on the amended
bill from committee members and
I see the co sponsors with us
Representative Thomson welcomed.
Use thank you thank you madam
chair I'm sharing state tax so
I'm just kind of listening in
with.
So so I'm gonna let my expert
and my wonderful co sponsor.
Carry it from here but I'm
trying to keep one year on you
thank you madam thank you.
Representative nighters.
The.
Thank you madam chair looking at
the at the bill and some of my
comments go to the existing
statute and my suggestion might
be that you may want to look at
that some of these listing
language to see a further
Further issues need to be
amended but on page four.
Line seventeen through nineteen.
It says a does you know someone
enrolled full time or part time
you know the.
Higher education institution in
New Mexico.
This would apply in my my
question is what what happens if
they're just simply enrolled
online they're not present in
the state of New Mexico they're
taking courses online I don't
know about the lot of the
universities around the around
the state but I believe eastern
New Mexico university has a
pretty substantial number of
people attending class online
who never set foot in the state
of New Mexico and and so should
we limit that to.
Those students who are actually
present in the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative I would
imagine that you would have to
be physically present I don't
know if that's addressed
somewhere else
just and and you know my my
small knowledge of start up but
Mr Basco.
Yes thank you madam chair and
representative for that question
one thing to be to be absolutely
clear on this provision as this
is stored as it currently exists
so this is not something that's
amended by this bill at all this
is currently requirements or not
and just following the plain
language of this provision it is
enrollment on a full time or
part time basis in school this
provision does not require on
its face physical presence
within the state of New Mexico
and this is the law as it is
right now.
And the laws exist right now
thank you madam chair and and
Representative and madam chair
that was my precise point we we
did were ordered a number of
amendments to clean this up and
one of all loopholes that I see
as of this paragraph four B..
The only.
The only it says a
a sex offender means a person
who.
This is a resident of another
state who has been convicted of
a sex offense pursuant to state
federal tribal or military law
but who is enrolled full time or
part time.
Meaning that that person would
be subjected to our registration
laws and I'm just asking the
question if they are only
registered thanking all online
courses from ten but to.
Sure we put a a requirement that
there are not only and Raul but
they're present in the state of
New Mexico the so that we
exempt.
The people that are here.
Thank you at the rate had
announced about Mr Bosco.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so first in
regards to the hypothetical
someone from Timbuktu they would
not have to register just
because other provisions or not
but also this provision does
require that conviction be a
conviction out of the United
States where we have things like
guarantees of due process
and so that is why for example
if you're a US citizen who's
convicted of a sex offense and
in the Virgin Islands Virgin
Islands pursuant to the organic
Act with the Virgin Islands does
have due process states like
Virginia Texas etcetera they all
of the process also it would
have to be instead of Timbuktu
maybe somewhere in Texas for
purposes of this hypothetical
that within that and if one
looks at the reasoning behind
provisions like this someone
who's enrolled in a classroom
with New Mexico students
virtually that's an incredible
opportunity to be interacting
with other children and to be
interacting with students in
that classroom setting I and if
I had to infer intent as to why.
You know what the wisdom of the
legislature was on a provision
like this it would be that those
who choose to interact with New
Mexico children even if not
physically present but through
something like registering for
courses in the state of New
Mexico at UNM NMSU that children
in New Mexico enrolled in those
programs ought to be protected
from a convicted out of state
sex offender and I I think
that's probably if I had to and
for just the plain language of
that the reason why that
requirement or already existing
law and why this bill that
addresses human trafficking does
not change or abrogate that
requirement it wouldn't appear
that any amendment in that
regard I would do anything to
advance the safety of survivors
of trafficking especially if the
survivor of trafficking were
enrolled in the courts thank you
Sir New Mexico universe State
University thank you madam chair
and Representative.
Madam chair.
You will see how Representative
welcome.
Madam chair
I presume that sense that is the
definition of sex offender that
somewhere else in the in the
statute it basically says sex
offenders have to register New
Mexico.
And so you're forcing someone
who just simply is taking a.
Course.
At one of our universities
online never physically present
in New Mexico to.
Register in New Mexico at and it
just seems so the it it just
seems to maybe be a little.
It seems to me that that
requirement.
Person would not characterize
their registration for an online
course to trigger the
registration requirements of
that person and and I'm just
suggesting that you take a hard
look at that maybe the office of
the public defender might want
to weigh in a little bit on that
at some point
because it it just seems to me
to start some people up for a
fall when it when those are the
folks were really concerned with
were concerned with the folks in
this state
who can.
Do the things that
the Attorney General was talking
about and and I realize.
Thank you all online course may
it may
develop some relationships by
the if they're not here
I'm not sure how far for a law
should go to do that
Madam chair Representative.
As you know I'm I'm not the the.
Two way near on on criminal
behavior and I certainly applaud
you for
increasing the.
Of.
Increasing the penalties for
this what my question there is
If you commit.
Human trafficking with a person
under eighteen years of age it's
a first degree felony but yet
committing human trafficking of
someone over that age is a
second degree felony and my
question is why were we not make
of both first degree felonies.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative neighbored
I think that was actually the
intent to doing that
So it's more
Mr Marasco do want expand on
that.
Yes madam chair and and
Representative so it is a first
degree felony for trafficking in
persons if someone is under the
age of eighteen it's a second
degree felony if someone's over
the age of eighteen the reason
why there is a gradation there
is just because if we look at as
a reference point and other
crimes for example in criminal
sexual penetration and the the
mandatory.
Incarceration I can apply
depending on the age of the
victim.
That part and that distinction
is intended to reflect to be
uniquely vulnerable status of
children certainly all forms of
human trafficking absolutely a
warrant but in terms of making
sure that the treatment of
children is given something that
is greater than the treatment of
adults that's why there's a
difference in the sentence in
that regard in terms of why at a
minimum of this bill insurers
but it's a second degree felony
for trafficking in adults you
know one of the gross
disparities in our criminal law
is how crimes called trafficking
are treated and punished to give
you an example madam chair and
and Representative Nighbor if
one traffics in an inanimate
substance they controlled
substances like cocaine or
heroin under New Mexico law for
the the first offense one is
subject to a second degree
felony so that's nine years
incarceration however current
under current law a person who
traffics in a human being has
dreams ambitions a sense of
destiny is punished currently is
only a third degree felony one
third the amount between
trafficking a substance verses.
Trafficking a human being and so
that is why it was put up to a
second degree felony it's the
fault state for trafficking in
persons and then it is because
of the uniquely vulnerable
situation and status of children
inability to outcry just as a
basic fact that children are
given a preferential position in
terms of that being a first
degree felony we did have to
operate within a sort of the the
constraints that we have in
regards to how R. Peroni all
code is organized a first degree
felony is just about the most
serious thing a person can be
sentenced for second degree
felony is in general just about
the second most important thing
that someone can be sensitive
you know not including things
like murder which obviously
would be for murder in the first
degree would be subject to a
lifetime son's incarceration
that was the intent behind it
and I I hope that answers the
question Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair and and
Representative and.
Mr provides go the the.
When I look at the array of
crimes that one can commit
against their fellow person.
The crime of in slaving one and
forcing them to commit sex acts
with people that they do not
wish to engage in and to secure
of the profits from that
activity and.
Use those profits for their own
desires.
To me that is.
That is almost as bad as taking
their life.
And.
To me.
In slaving someone for this type
of activity.
And controlling them and to.
Your allies them as a good.
It is reprehensible but.
It's my opinion that.
That ought to be a first degree
felony as well and and the age
are it's reprehensible whether
there.
Thirteen years old or whether
they're twenty five years old or
sixty years old taking another
person and trafficking them.
In slavery ma'am.
It is reprehensible conduct and
so I would encourage the.
The representative to maybe look
at that and and I would
certainly be one that would
would support having at first
degree across the board for
trafficking individuals
particularly for conducting
sexual
activities and and.
There's no other word enslaving
them.
so that that's just a COVID
there no question Madam chair
of.
I see on page eighteen.
Line seven through.
Of fourteen.
We we see the idea that the
person convicted of they have to
make restitution.
For the gross income and value
of the victims labor.
And then I have a madam moments
thank you at minimum wage but
it's.
It just seems to me that that
the people engaged in this
activity are forcing these
people to do
Things that are are unimaginable
and that they are profiting
substantially from that activity
and so to make restitution to
the victim for the gross income
hi madam chair and
Representative how do we
determine what the gross income
is in a case like this.
Madam chair and and
Representative this provision is
substantially similar to what's
currently required under the
trafficking victims protection
act specifically not the
elemental statute which is a
fifteen eighty nine and fifteen
ninety one fifteen eighty nine
for labor trafficking fifteen
ninety one is for sex
trafficking rather what I'm
referring to is eighteen USC I
believe it's fifteen ninety five
which sets out that restitution
in cases like this where
someone's being exported to do
something that they're not
choosing to do out of their own
volition has to pay essentially
the greater of what's
essentially undressed in
Richmond so the amount that
someone benefit it benefited the
trafficker benefited from the
labor services or commercial sex
of the victim or alternatively
the at a bare minimum whatever
the opportunity cost of their
time is basically and so if for
example one had a commercial sex
trafficking case where a person
is compelled to engage in you
know fundamentally unlawful
activity for one week working an
eight hour day let's say just
for purposes of simplicity
adding up to about forty hours
so the way that this is written
is substantially similar in
results to that federal
restitution statute and that it
would end up being the greater
of at a minimum if you're
working a forty hour day you'll
be getting that state minimum
wage plus whatever over time
depending on hours worked or
alternatively if the state has
evidence of receipts
transactions advertisements for
those sex acts or it would be
that amount of money which could
end up being substantially more
because that's how much the
trafficker benefited from the
unlawful activity and so we
actually did a training this
year I'm uncertain whether it's
recorded and if you're
interested Madam chair
representative we can try to get
you a copy of that is on the
topic of restitution how it
works under the federal statute
hundred state statute and that
is essentially how it.
Would end up under this proposed
bill so yes.
We undressed in Richmond is the
preferred route if you have
evidence of the specific acts
that one was compelled to do the
cost of those access center
under that unjust enrichment but
provided that it will be no less
than even in the absence of that
sort of evidence the value of
the time back active the value
of the time that survivor to
help make sure that the
restitution order reflects the
dignity of that victims life but
it did have value and to the
fullest extent possible it could
be made whole and so that was
the intent behind that
modification there I thank you
again for the question Madam
chair representative.
M. and madam chair and and
Representative Mr.
Find the the next word is or
value of the victims labor and.
You know it seems to me that
that the.
Gross income in a trade like
this is going to be hard to.
Ascertain because they're
probably not paying taxes are
there's they're not keeping
regular books that you can
ascertain what the gross income
as but the value of those
victims labor and services
That's also going to be hard to
hard to figure out I suspect as
well
and that of course is existing
language but it says provided
that at a minimum it shall be no
less than the
victims labor's guarantee by
federal minimum wage or overtime
labor laws and a half you know
to me in slavery in one and
forcing them to commit these
acts.
I frankly find that to be a slap
in the face so hi I I think the
the
you know the restitution lot of
the
much greater than that
particularly if somebody has
you can slide them for any
period of time and force and to
commit such atrocities
Over on page nineteen of.
The definition of harm line
seven through thirteen.
And I may not be accurate in the
state but but
My concern is that.
We say this at least a stereo
types in the movies that the.
You have these people that go
out of the gate.
There are victims whether
they're under age or not hooked
on on drugs and yet I don't see
anything in here that that talks
about the ability of manipulate
one by getting them addicted to
of drugs have been manipulating
their
behavior and maybe it's covered
in the broad scope of things but
could you comment on whether or
not we need to focus on that
specific issue Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair and and
Representative.
So this language regarding harm
that that was taken from the
trafficking victims protection
act just to help make sure that
what collusion means what harm
means is defined we believe that
this harm definition does
include things like manipulation
of of of addiction to controlled
substances just because that is
a a medical condition that is
one of those.
Physiological and physical
dependencies that can cause
grievous arms for those that are
forced into a situation of going
through withdrawals
just to be absolutely clear with
the committee the attorney
general's office has already
convicted at least one offender
under substantially similar
theory of what madam chair
representative Nighbor indicated
regarding controlling substance
abuse that was a large part of
the Wallace Carsen conviction
was the fact that for the first
victim he was manipulating
things like controlled
substances the reason why we
provide clarification here Hey
is to ensure an education for
those that are operating because
as indicated earlier in my
comments there is so much
federal land there is so much
trouble in our state we wanted
to ensure that just looking at
the statute one will have
incorporated what harm needs to
clarify any ambiguities at the
outset and that for other
offices that have concurrent
jurisdiction with the New Mexico
attorney general's office of
like district attorney's office
that they know and that they are
confident in their charging
strategies for trafficking under
that series without reference to
the specialized expertise The
New Mexico office of the
Attorney General can offer to
them and so this was as much
about educating courts and other
justice partners regarding what
state of the law is is it was
about making sure that when they
are being investigated by a
member of law enforcement can
just look with referenced one
statute and say well this is
what our meets that is the type
of situation of controlling
someone's dependence and really
threatening that physical harm
of drug and substance
withdrawals that will satisfy
the statute thank you madam
chair and representative.
Madam chair Mister provides co
it I I guess would be your
opinion that we don't need to
further flesh out that specific
it is year I understand your
testimony right.
Cover.
And madam chair representative
that that is accurate one of the
the large intense behind this
was building and some conformity
with the trafficking victims
protection act that there's no
gaps that survivors of this
crime can potentially fall
through just because you know
the flag is not alerted of harm
definition is the same under the
state statute so for example the
other case investigated by the
FBI where you know there's a
state nexus they know that they
can bring those cases to the
state to help make sure that
that survivor gets.
Madam chair my next question
Concerns.
Section thirty to fifty two dash
one human trafficking that
starts on page sixteen in line
twenty.
My question is.
Do we need to.
What with them that section of
statute.
The definition of conviction.
we we see a number definitions
in the section but but the word
conviction is not defined
although it is to provide up
above in other portions of the.
Of these acts and I'll just
throw out there that I'm
wondering if the conviction
needs to be defined in the.
Thirty dash fifty two dash one
statute
you might take a look at that
and see if that makes if that
would add are you anything to
that particular portion of the
statute the.
a lot of the definitions are are
provided elsewhere.
Madam chair of I have no further
questions but I would like to
make the the statement that.
I can't think of anything.
More important.
That we need to do in this time
to.
Make sure.
The people in this country
people coming to this country
are not subjected to the very
things were trying to preclude
here and that it's essential up
on us.
To to make sure that the people
engaged in in trafficking
whether it's sex trafficking or
just trafficking of people for
their labor.
Of that we have an ability to
deal with them and in my opinion
deal with them harshly and to
try to prevent.
A lot of the things that are
going on in this part of the
part of the world
with respect to not only
sexual trafficking but just
trafficking of individuals for
exploitation of their labor and
you know we talk a lot about
the.
How bad slavery is and and
that's long term effects on this
nation that we're still dealing
with today
and yet right under our noses we
see people being enslaved being
in slave for
Making profits for the people
that are are are trafficking
them and selling them and using
their the sweat on their back of
for their own purposes and I
think we need to come down as
hard and heavy on these folks as
we possibly can and I thank you
for bringing this legislation
thank you madam chair.
Thank you it looks like I don't
have any other committee members
to have their hands raised I I
just wanted to make one
statement before we act on this
and that is that I have.
I have always questioned whether
it has a no penalty deters crime
but to me this crime is like
despite its the horrible
violence and.
It you manage it's very very
much thought out in advance so
in that way it takes the place
of a white collar crime and
that's where you get deterrence
in white collar crimes so I
don't have a problem with
enhancing the sentence for this
crime as as a potential
deterrent because I think it
actually
it fits into the.
Came.
With the violent and
reprehensible crime not just to
get money it's it's very
destructive of human beings it
really fits into that this game
of a white collar crime requires
so much for thought and planning
so with that I'm happy to
support your your bill
Representative Lewis and
Thompson thank you so much with
the pleasure of the committee
madam chair would you pass all
sorry sorry sorry.
Okay.
I have Representative Ely with
the motion Representative
Armstrong with the second is
there further discussion I have
a quorum call the role then
please.
Representative Akan yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative nightmare yes.
Representative green.
Representative Townsend.
Yeah yes.
Did you get Representative
claim.
I was needed.
Here yes I am yes.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
We have nine yes votes.
Nine zero you have to pass
Representative Louis Thompson
thank you all for your time
today.
We appreciate you madam chair
thank you committee members.
We're on our last bill for the
day Representative Sierra
already in our panel so welcome
Representative study on it and
we are taking at.
Going thank you madam chair I do
have a two expert witnesses.
Elena ribbon held and lieutenant
colonel Chung.
Can you hear me OK.
I can hear you we just need to
get them on the panel.
Working on that.
Okay and I also have an
amendment.
Okay looks like we have a Linda
Reuven Feldman the paddle.
Lieutenant colonel Chung.
Yes.
I don't see I don't see
lieutenant Colonel John L..
We have.
Madam chair I allowed him in but
he's not on the attendees
anyone.
Are you sure let tenants pro
trump is.
And I don't see him on either
side.
Right I don't either.
Okay you just.
I know you was trying to get in
or he was madam chair he was
attempting to.
I'm looking okay let me check
the attendees.
Perhaps you could begin and.
Thanks madam chair he's in the.
Very good very good.
Thank you all right here got.
I'm leaving madam chair and
members of the committee I am
Representative Debbie sari ana
and I'm here to represent house
Representative house bill thirty
one and I do have an amendments
in that two two number is two
one nine
eight seven seven two point one.
Why don't you tell us about the
bill and I'll briefly describe
the amended if substantive and
you and your and your experts
can talk and then we can go to
the audience our.
Then we'll act on the amendment
we're back with the.
Okay just strikes the death
penalty in other punishments is
not I'm all right I'm thank you
madam chair this bill is to
modernize the current New Mexico
statute chapter twenty military
affairs article twenty code of
military justice and section
fifty one right been cardinal
moderate.
And I'd like to review the
statute real quick that's
current it's only three three
paragraphs just so you know why
we need this bill so eight it is
any person subject to chapter
twenty NMSA nineteen seventy
eight commits an act of sexual
intercourse with the female not
his wife by force without our
consent is guilty of rape and
shall be punished by death or
other punishment are Marshall my
direct.
B. any person subject to chapter
twenty NMSA nineteen seventy
eight who under circumstances
not amounting to rape commits an
act of sexual intercourse with
the female not his wife who is
not a teenager sixteen is guilty
of carnal knowledge and shall be
punished as a court martial may
direct and see penetration
however slight is sufficient to
complete either of these
offenses so that is the total
actually and as you can tell the
statute is outdated has outdated
language we need to modernize
it.
So madam chair we go to the
bill.
It's more than three paragraphs
as you can tell first thing we
change is the title is now right
in others sex crimes I'm section
a is specifically for right
right.
Section B. is sexual so.
Section see is aggravated sexual
contact.
Section G. is abuse extra
contact uses section is proof of
Iraq's.
Section is defense and this is
where it says states marriage is
not a defense for any conduct at
issue in any prosecution under
this section.
Section G. is consent and
section eight H. just elaborates
on the definitions so we've gone
from three paragraphs to a very
significant bill
and this bill modernizes in
detail The New Mexico Mexico
twenty test or twenty fifty one
so that it aligns with the
federal military code of use and
J..
The intent is to send a strong
signal that the New Mexico
National Guard does not tolerate
sexual assault.
And pursuant to twenty dash
twelve dash three the changes
would apply to all men all
members of the New Mexico
National Guard when not in
federal service.
To be in federal services when
the president calls into active
duty other western states
service when the governor called
to active duty.
Major General not the adjutant
general New Mexico National
Guard is in full support of this
bill.
And it is endorsed it's it's it
wasn't endorsed go by the
military and Veterans Affairs
Committee.
I'm and with that madam chair I
would like to turn it over to my
expert witness Elena Rubin
failed for additional comments.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is Elena Rubin
felt and I'm the legal director
for the New Mexico coalition
sexual probe at this excuse me
sexual assault programs the
coalition's leads the state's
efforts to reduce sexual abuse
and sexual violence through
training and technical
assistance to service providers
throughout the state I have.
The coalition also collects and
analyzes state sexual assault
and domestic violence data and
produces annual reports of the
findings through our work we aim
to ensure that all New Mexicans
survivors can access services
justice and healing they want
and need we are here today to
support HB thirty one
as advocates for sexual assault
survivors we know that this bill
would help to ensure that all
survivors in New Mexico have a
road to justice and healing.
I'm as you've heard the New
Mexico code of military justice
contains outdated language that
prevents some who commit rape
and sexual assault from being
prosecuted and it term limits
survivors access to justice more
specifically to code currently
states that whites cannot be
raped or sexually assaulted by
their husbands the code also
commonly refers to survivors and
females the coalition knows and
I'm sure you all know that
anyone can be rates regardless
of their marital status sex or
gender identity it's time to
modernize this language on
behalf of the coalition madam
chair members the committee I
ask you to you please let me
know if you have any questions
about this bill lieutenant
colonel John is also here as
well to talk more specifically
about military laws that comes
up thank you so much.
Thank you John.
Madam chairman members of the
committee can you hear me.
We can.
Okay great
so this bill has been a long
time coming the military's been
updating and radicalizing its
approach to eliminating sexual
assault the ranks for quite some
time now unfortunately the last
time The New Mexico code of
military justice was amended
seriously was around nineteen
eighty nine and at that time
this was a long under the UCMJ
we have a long way since then
and we're strong supported this
welcome any questions from the
committee members yourself
chair.
I'm sure.
Okay let me go to the audience.
And I would like to ask those
who are in favor of I'm we need
to fix a new poll Georgia.
Okay so if those if there are
people here in favor of house
bill thirty one please vote yes
and those who are in opposition
please vote now.
Will be open for twenty seconds.
It looks like we have poor
people they're all here in favor
so we'll close the Paul and let
me go to the audience and see if
there's anyone who would like to
speak briefly in favor of the
bill.
During the state.
Madam chair members of the
committee
Representative Sariñana my
sister Veterans I am a military
veteran of twenty one year
service and I was actually
actively serving on active duty
under the before nineteen eighty
nine.
So I'm a relic now but I've
lived a lot of experience and I
were on a volunteer with the
veterans caucus of the
Democratic Party of New Mexico.
So I'm first one state that
we're in total support of this
bill and I would personally want
to say that.
Reading the updating and
modernizing the bill will help
victims it will help.
Military commanders and staffs
that have to investigate.
Offenses it will help.
Legal people who have to
prosecute offenses so all the
way around I see this is a win
win thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much.
Next.
Like to speak in the support
okay I guess that was the only
public comment let's go back to
the committee.
Let's put the amendment on first
if you want to.
I'm going to do that I will move
the amendment for discussion
purposes.
I thank you madam chair current
with they just want to pay one
point twenty two the strike by
death or other punishment that's
it thank you madam chair.
Still to be consistent with New
Mexico law correct yes thank
you.
Okay.
Okay just a cure Committee
mystery.
So.
I will move to adopt the
amendment.
Second.
Representative Armstrong is
there discussion of the members.
Is there any objection to the.
The amendment is adopted
two I thought Representative
night or did you have your hand
up for discussion of the bill.
Right yes madam chair I will
discuss the bill are lowered it
when you went to the amendment
okay but we do have an amended
bill now Representative signing
on it so I had Representative
nagrik.
The thank you madam chair and
thank you representative I I
support the bill but I'm a
little bit of concerned about
the on page four paragraph G.
lines eight through twenty two
and I had a just simply have a
suggestion it seems to me that
the definition of consent is in
paragraph H. one.
And it seems that if you took
the last two lines of.
graph G. which would be lines
twenty one and twenty two and
added those two line twenty
five.
You have a definition of consent
that would incorporate all that
and you really don't need.
All the other stuff because it's
going to be considered.
Whether consent was given or not
and and so it just is a bit odd
to see a statute that says well
this this may not be at this may
not be a.
You know that's kind of up to a
court to decide and and if we
defined consent as freely given
agreement to.
To the conduct of this year by a
competent person period all
surrounding circumstances are to
be considered in determining
whether a person gave consent I
think you're a has you well
covered that's my only comment
madam chair.
Thank you I'm Representative
that this mirrors the UCMJ that
the current military code that
code of military justice
I'd like to defer to a
lieutenant colonel junk.
Expertise.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative what I
can tell you is we are best
served in the military we train
how we fight you may have heard
this before in other
circumstances.
Other contacts and that's one of
the reasons why we want to adopt
wholeheartedly the language of
the the current U. C. N. J. in
this we're not just doing this
the server in New Mexico when
crimes are committed by service
members in New Mexico we're
we're also training while we do
this here in New Mexico to
prepare from the deployed we
deployed it is the synergies
and.
I and I understand the concerns
with the language.
However I'm fairly confident
that if we were to find
ourselves in a situation where
we have these definitions
the panel and the military judge
would be very capable of
utilizing these terms
incorporate what.
Thank you lieutenant colonel.
Madam chair.
I'm sorry Representative any
other questions.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
We do pass.
We have a motion for
Representative night great for
to pass on hospital third
meeting.
The S. amended.
Second I need a second the
second Representative Lewis okay
well court please call the roll.
Representative okay.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Thomson yes.
By Jessica Benham yes.
Madam chair yes.
Two zero we have a due passes
Amanda.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee well thank you very
much this is this is great we
actually ended early I'm so we
should put you on first
Representative.
Thank you everybody for a really
hard really very thoughtful
afternoon and hard work
happy Valentine's day see you
Monday.
