Representative rain here
Representative Townsend.
By check.
Here.
Madam chair.
I'm here and I think
Representative Alcon is trying
to Representative Alcon.
I'm here I'm here somebody's
grabbed me by the phone and then
we go.
Okay we have a quorum.
Thank you very much
I saw Senator Ivey Soto Matt
there we go Senator Ivey said
you're welcome.
Thank you very much of Madam
chair okay
Senate bill two eighty five.
Yes thank you very much madam
chair members of the committee
and also let me just let the
committee know that I do have
two expert witnesses on this
bill one is Mr Damon Martinez
and the other one is Dr mills
Rosenbaum if they are available
to be promoted that would be
appreciated so madam chair
members of the committee section
forty three dash one dash ten.
Allows a peace officer to detain
and transport a person for
emergency mental health
evaluation care under for
different circumstances that the
that are based on the plate
peace officers training and
experience.
When that happens is that when a
police officer transport
somebody usually the peace
officer is these days as writing
alone and when they transport
them back to check them for
weapons and they also have to
they also pursuant to the
protocols are secure that person
by handcuffing them and putting
them in the back of the police
car.
When someone is needing
emergency
mental health evaluation this
tends to freak them out.
And so what this bill allows is
it allows a a peace officer to
to ask a M. D. M. T. transport
the participants so the peace
officer still want doing
evaluation are there are making
a decision as to whether or not
the person needs to
Needs to be transported.
We're not changing that but
we're allowing an option as to
who does the transport when and
and EMTs as the transport one of
these it in addition to the fact
that they don't
Act help them and put them in
the back of a police car the
other thing that happens is that
most EMTs of ride with two or
three together at the same time
so consequently you have any
incentive was driving and that
person is able to focus on
driving you'll have one or two
EMTs will be able to be in the
back of the ambulance or other
transport we'll be able to stay
focused on that individual and
keep that individual focused on
on where they're at and what's
going on it's a much safer
situation.
And so with that madam chair and
members of the committee if it
would be appropriate this time I
would yield really primarily to
a doctor mills Rosenbaum he is
the director of behavioral
health for the Albuquerque
previous part.
I thank you madam chair members
of the committee all you're
there with David Martinez
threaded indeed okay very good
go ahead yes I'm yield rose and
I'm a psychiatrist I work with
I've been working with
Albuquerque police department
for almost fifteen years working
in the field and doing a lot of
pick up orders will call pick up
orders when we go out right up
certificate of evaluation based
on someone's mental illness and
bring them to the hospital
because we think they are
dangerous to themselves or
others so I've witnessed
literally hundreds or thousands
of these over my career and this
law will will serve a a niche
that's kind of surprising that
it hasn't already been filled
because there's so many people
I'll just give examples an
elderly woman slightly demented
says she doesn't want to go to
the hospital maybe a little bit
ambivalent Hancock's back of a
police car there's got to be a
better way and with the system
without this law there is not a
better way right now we've tried
and tried and tried believe me.
Another example eighteen year
old kid depressed people are
depressed become suicidal by
definition they're always
ambivalent they want to live
they want to die they want to
live they want to die they can't
make up their mind
we go out there same deal this
is his first contact with with
mental health services handcuffs
in the back of a police car
there's gotta be a better way
and I believe this law is that
better way.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Madam chairwoman
Members of the committee Senator
Ivy Soto I would just point out
that as the fiscal impact report
stated that ten percent of all
nine eleven requests for police
or of a mental health related
issue and this is what this bill
addresses as the doctor the
senator said and I will leave it
at that thank you thank you
madam chair will.
So I'm meeting place but then
we're getting done I'm do it
Senator would you like to go to
the audience now.
Yes please.
Okay for public comment those in
favor Senate Bill.
Two eighty five we say yes if
there's any opposition the state
now and will have a ten second
call.
Okay we have a hundred percent
in favor but it is the only two
people and I think they both
would like to speak first.
This happens you don't need to
put the timer on they're not
going to take longer and share
they're experienced yes dividers
our state army all.
Chair members of the committee
David Hotmail I'm registered
lobbyist for the City of
Albuquerque New City of
Albuquerque obviously stands in
strong support of this bill I'm
also here to testify as an
individual citizen parent and
husband
with personal experience in this
matter and I want to thank
Senator Ivey Soto and the doctor
in the City of Albuquerque for
pursuing this important
legislation perhaps one of the
most difficult days of any
parent's life is making a call
are based upon needs for mental
health treatment for their child
got very difficult day is only
made worse when all you have to
share your mentally ill child
resist and not understand why
she is having to be handcuffed
and placed in the back of a
police car on the way to get
mental health care
that is a of a lifelong memory
for not only the parent the
family siblings but also for the
person in need of mental health
makes a bad situation incredibly
worse it puts the law law
enforcement officers in awful
positions I can tell you from
personal experience that a PED
is handled this tremendously
well but it is a difficult and
impossible situation that this
bill takes it very very critical
step in resolving and I would
urge the committee to assist the
City of Albuquerque and assist
families who have to make this
very difficult decision to
remove the criminal aspect of
mental health care from this
equation thank you very much.
Thank you I have a couple more
people to raise their hand so
let me remind everybody please
be brief Jim Jackson you're
next.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jim Jackson for
disability rights New Mexico
as the sponsor and experts have
noted these encounters can be
very stressful and traumatic.
And the we agree that it's much
better to reduce the.
Disorder level of police
involvement and encounters at
and not be treating people as if
they were criminal based on
their behaviors and we point out
that the we do think that this
is also a better and safer
alternative for the police
officers involved as well it's
an optional the arrangement for
the police officer and we think
it's a much more humane way to
deal with these issues so
disability rights New Mexico
encourages you to support this
bill thank you.
Thank you Charlotte when you
know.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Charlotte mother when you and I
were quickly on a coop I'm here
today on behalf of the New
Mexico behavioral health
providers we ask you to stand
with us in support of Senate
bill two eighty five thank you.
Thank you any lane Maestas.
Can you hear me yes already have
is my instance okay and so I
just want to start off by saying
that I I see with the Sanchez
attempting to do and I am
obviously very grateful for the
efforts and what this bill does
however
I can't say that I fully support
it I would like to see that
police were not the ones
responding at all to these calls
they just simply aren't
qualified people with mental
health for kids at a high rate
by police because they aren't
qualified to answer these calls
my sister's death she was shot
twenty one times by the
responding deputies called to
help her I think highlights that
so again I'm grateful for for
what this bill does and and the
efforts but I would like to see
that they're not the ones
responding to these calls in the
future thank you.
Madam chair your muted.
In my efforts to.
Subjected to any dog barking.
I apologize that concludes our
public comment I wondered if the
Senator wanted to respond real
quickly before we go to
questions from the committee.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I I appreciate
very much the perspective of the
of the last person who spoke
what out what I'll simply say is
first of all that is that is the
status quo that the bigger
picture conversation we probably
need to have but the reality
also is when people call nine
one one and the dispatcher
doesn't know what's happening.
What they do is they send police
officers.
And that in part of what we need
to do is make sure that police
officers after the options in
the tools available to them so
that situations don't escalate
further this is exactly part of
the problem that we are trying
to address here
at some point it would be good
to have a larger conversation
about about who should be
dispatched under what
circumstances but like I said
the dispatcher doesn't always
know what's happening they need
to get somebody out there to
assess the situation a police
officer is the first responder
that we have
what this bill does is it allows
them to work that situation in a
way where it does not have to
escalate in the manner that
often happens and and and and
really the you know part of it
also is is just wonder stand you
have somebody who is in the
middle of a mental health crisis
and the number one
responsibility of a police
officer is to secure the scene
for everybody around thank you
very much okay thank you first
on my list is Representative
Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Ivey Soto so.
You know I've done many of these
and most of the time the the
individual is compliant you know
so that absolutely this would
work but I I have a couple
questions when we look at
paragraph see on page three the
new paragraph C. R. this works
so this is the family's garden
to the DA's office.
With our with a psychologist or
psychiatrist and they've
explained that their loved one
needs to be committed and are
not willing to go and so we're
going to get a court order.
And I'm wondering if we
shouldn't include a paragraph be
on page two in there and Senator
Ivey Soto your comments or or.
Maybe you've got some language
that you can think of off the
flight.
Thank you Representative Rehm I
I I appreciate you you looking
at that
You know certainly I think one
of the things that we could do
if you look there at the top of
page three of the inserts.
would be simply to strike.
Our with the words subsection
eight oh.
Okay.
Which case I would say at the
request of a peace officer for
any reason provided for in this
section.
What about what that would
certainly even though it is
located in New
from section be.
Are which which does standalone.
it would it would allow I think
an option with them of the other
subsections to be able to
transport somebody.
Madam chair in I would move that
amendment and I and I may have
one more so.
Madam chair on that
last one of the time and.
Representative night on that
point okay go ahead
Representative I think of the
words that need to be stricken
yes that's three of ten of the
senator would be to strike.
Word for in subsection a of and
I believe there are the word
yeah so it says for any reason
provided in this section.
That madam chair rows addresses
any reason provided for in this
section.
Provided for in this section.
But certainly provided in this
section what would work as well
as follows.
Yeah I don't know that the word
for does anything but.
My recommendation thank you
madam chair.
You know I'm.
Senator we we had to what the
procedure is for us is we have
to get the council service to to
draft the amendment for our
committee report and if for is.
Useful they'll leave it and if
it's not they'll take it out but
we all know what we're doing
right.
Okay.
Representative I was right not
in his head
Representative remains of the
rest of you have two cameras
asked thank Representative
Armstrong you're not in your
head to okay
so you're aware of that amended
Representative remained the
Senator finds that relate to us
okay and also
second that let's just move to
adopt that amendment.
And just so we have
Representative rien moving that
I'll second it is there any
objection.
No there's not.
Okay those of you who are you
don't have your cameras on
you're gonna have to speak up or
forever hold your peace we're
counting you is a yes.
All right so that amendment is
adopted Representative renew
thought you had maybe one more
yes sure and Senator Ivey Soto
but let's go to page five then
H. a peace officer transport and
being reimbursed so.
That's really to address
transporting an individual to
the state hospital up at Las
Vegas in our why can't we
transported by ambulance and
baby in reembarked so.
Madam chair it I don't know if
it's possible for
miss Evans to allow me to share
my screen.
R. so Representative Rehm and I
had a brief conversation about
this latter issue and actually
Jim Jackson from disability
formerly from just played rex
New Mexico and
also focus me about this and I
just happen to have
a little bit of language if I
could share my screen real
quick.
and suggest that actually what
we could do in response to the
issue raised by Representative
Rehm which is consistent to what
Mr Jackson brought up.
That would have to go through
Council services well what we do
is it would strike existing
subsection page which is written
in fairly arcane language about
having to do it without get a
quarter to get reimbursed.
We would just simply say that
when individuals transported
pursuant to this section of
peace officer who transports a
proposed plans to evaluation
facility shall be reimbursed by
the referring County I don't
think we need a second without a
court order we go on the
disabled person medical
technician or mercy medical
responder who transports to
person pursuant to this section
shall be reimbursed by the
agency requests in the transport
and then this is the part that
Mr Jackson was concerned about
the individual transported shall
not be financially responsible
for the cost of transportation.
And if you think about the
public policy behind it when
someone is having that it of the
mental health issue that
requires immediate attention we
want that person as a society to
be transported.
Receive help.
I actually wanted endorsed that
because it.
There was a terrible terrible
crime in my district for a
mentally unstable man ended up
killing five people.
And it would have if we had to
pay only to get him transported
somewhere that would have saved.
I'm injection to humanity it
would have saved so much so much
of our government resources
Representative Rehm.
You madam chair in senators.
So I would move that but one of
the other things that I would
not excluded from there unless
it can be reimbursed by some
health insurance policy.
We may want to have that so the
county done Barrett if a if
folks you know what C. covers.
Our health expert Representative
Armstrong is that not all ways.
The call madam chair at I would
think that would be okay but
there's often costsharing
with that so I don't know how
you wanna would deal with that
and I had another question about
would always be the county.
That would reimburse what it
sometimes be like the
Albuquerque police that would
transport someone to Las Vegas
or would it only be.
the sheriff's office.
And madam chair my understanding
of the of the structure of the
of the current
statute is that when a person is
transported to of the evaluation
facility that is from the county
detention center so that is why
I stressed how many
other and and but then that's
why down below in terms of of
the EMTs though they may often
be requested by a city police
department to make a transport
locally are so that's why that
is not the way that I wrote that
did not include the county.
you madam chair and
Senator I'm wondering on the
insurance question if you can
say in in the last one that the
the individual won't be
personally responsible for
I'm just I'm trying to think
Or any for it any costsharing if
there's some way that to to put
in here that
That their insurance if they
have it could be.
Bill but they wouldn't have any.
Costsharing yes white and sort
of the work personally if that
helps you know
I think that helps and you know
the the it doesn't say
I know she'll be right
reimbursed by the agency or
if no insurance coverage
available.
So reimbursed by the agency
requesting the transport if no
If no insurance coverage
available.
YC
you're you're talking to you
yeah.
I think I I I guess my my
my thought on that is I don't
want to EMTs to have to be
trying to decide to wipe bill
the individual for insurance too
I build the city odds on our
agency for that I would prefer
that the agency right with that
out of the HSD reimburse the the
EMT and then if the agency wants
to see if there is insurance
they can do that.
Thank you madam chair and that
we.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
representative the other piece
that's coming to mind.
With chair Armstrong
Representative Armstrong was a
point about the personal
responsibility is that it would
create a new one situation in
which the carrier may have a
costsharing option and that was
they wouldn't have a mechanism
of knowing about this
legislation or that they would
it be that the patient would be
responsible for that the insured
would it be the really wouldn't
be so I do think up to Senator
Ivey so those point we want to
make sure the onus is it doesn't
get pushed in the wrong place
including on the carriers to
look for whoever is responsible
for paying and that cost sharing
mechanism.
That's all madam chair yeah I
think
On that point also madam chair
and representative I think it
just yet it makes it all messy
there's nothing in there that
says that they they couldn't
figure that out if there was a
way to reimburse but I think
I'll just leave it alone.
Madam chair the agencies that
police agencies are not are not
set up to be ill for a medical
or anything like that so.
Anybody needs reimbursement the
medical texts or the respond
there's need to figure out
because they they they have the
access to the for medical
transport.
And on that point I think they
collect insurance information
every time they pick somebody
up.
Madam chair what I would note is
that this is an option available
to law enforcement agency it's
not one that they would be
required to use it as a tool for
them and so certainly I know for
the
or an imagined for the larger
law enforcement agencies they
would develop over they have
developed relationships with our
EMTs.
And so that they can handle it
that way
in the in the in the in the
smaller areas you know that's
that's that's handle more on a
on an individualized basis but
again this is an option and we
can certainly improve this as we
go along and learn from the
experience of of of how this
will work on on a daily basis.
Madam chair and senator Ivey
Soto if I can say so first of
all white is the sheriff's
department end up with the order
it is a civil action and it goes
to the civil division of the
sheriff's department to
administers those orders then on
the agency it should not be the
agency it needs to be the county
as is in current language and
one of the reason is because the
county has the engine indigent
care fund and that's where it is
it's not at the agency.
We are just leave reimbursed by
the county and leave it because
that's already in statute they
already know what that means.
That's the way that if you look
on the screen that's what H. one
right right.
Which one.
Correct.
So that's accurate.
Representative Armstrong I just
I just didn't added on number
three if you would look at that.
I think that
I think that's I think that's
helpful.
And I agree number two of them
could say reimbursed by that
county leave it the same because
the county all of these out on
what number two and that's what
Representative Rehm was
referring to was to not one
right S. share of those of the
committee of the board do though
that could often be
the the the city police are who
are called and
in fact I would I would
yield up very briefly to Mr
Martinez.
on whether number two should be
HSD.
Or if it should be law
enforcement agency or purpose we
County.
Madam chair members of the
committee Senator Ivey Soto one
of the ways that will be
important for for example the
City of Albuquerque to use this
long the future knock on wood is
the more in the City of
Albuquerque are currently
working through the Albuquerque
community safety department
creating a new department in
which something like this law
could be used and
as as a senator said earlier of
the way nine one with not the
way nine one one dispatches
hopefully this will give a third
alternative four nine one nine
one one to dispatch including a
PED fire and then to the new
department to use this
Senator to answer your question
concerning to I think as written
is
referencing agency is I think
that's the most accurate that we
can get to do this morning.
Madam chair yes.
I would move this as an
amendment and I understand
Council services going to need a
massage at but conceptually I
think we're all on board what it
is with this what what is shared
on our screen right now.
that's correct.
Do I have a second for that all
second second Representative
Armstrong.
That is a friendly amendment and
I will be happy to print this
and take it to the house
Judiciary office too so they can
get up Council Service.
Okay or you can take it to
Council services.
Have them deliver it what I am
not sure I'm if you'll check
with my staff
Ellen because Dale can let you
know what we
What we're doing.
Would you take your screen down
now so I can see who offices.
Representative Rehm does that
conclude your question I'm sure
that's all I have thank you all
right thank you next on my list
was Representative I'll call.
Thank you madam chair thank
dispatch.
More than anything else it just
bothers me that this legislation
is running full right because
we'll talk about this all summer
long.
And here we are new in the last
days of the legislation the
legislature again this
legislation through House
Judiciary but the.
Will this drop a interim would
be working on this and working
on this and talk about it and
here we are and where we last
days and honestly this is a
piece of legislation that needs
to be done.
It needs to be taken care of
because we have a lot of
problems out there
we the first responders.
Care of people that are
mentally.
I'm stable is a lot better than
that we not officers coffee
number.
But.
That's all I have to say Madam
I'm really sad that we are here
still right this piece of
legislation what.
Representative Nibert you're
listening are you finished.
Representative nighter.
Okay courses have been answered
not sure very good madam vice
chair.
Thank you madam chair I wanted
to move the deep pass on SB two
eighty five I believe as a
manager secretary.
We have a motion Representative
to move house bill two eighty
five as amended in a second
Representative Rehm.
Senate bill two eighty thank you
nice to house I think the thing
Senate Bill.
I I would want to be back to
where we're still hearing house
bill you.
Okay clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night.
Yes.
Representative yes ma'am
Representative Thomson.
They may vote really I'm so
sorry I just wanted choose the
City of Albuquerque New Senator
for leading really important
efforts certainly hits close to
home for me I would just ask as
we continue this conversation we
know these resources and the
ways counties engage with our
law enforcement officers play
out really differently in rural
New Mexico so even just to
continued to leverage that
conversation our resources are
slim our needs are high so just
appreciate the ways you all can
continue to learn about and lift
up the the different scenarios
and situations that rural New
Mexico's basing on the same
really important issue thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee and
thank you Representative ring
for your assistance with this
bill making it better.
I and I think we did a good job
for you.
Not trying to slow you down at
all.
Okay thank you thank you senator
next we have Senator Lopez.
Senate bill one ninety two.
And I know the Senators having
an amendment prepared for us to
go one ninety two.
here's yes very good welcome
Senator Lopez.
Okay
I'll just hear you hear.
Allergies.
Allergy season has yet but take
over.
I'm madam chair if I may I think
Mr Grayson here's my expert
witness and I think he's
If you could allow him to be in
maybe he's already in.
Yeah James grace in areas
Madam chair good morning and I
am here in front of you with a
Senate bill one ninety two Law
Enforcement disclosure of
evidence and madam chair what
this measure is proposing is to
actually put into our statute
what is mandating that law
enforcement agencies and peace
officers disclosed to a I'm
prosecuting official evidence is
favorable to an accused person
in a criminal case and madam
chair members of the of the.
The committee what this actually
is referring to is what is known
as the Brady gig Leo amendment
and I if I could madam chair
also allow my expert witness Mr
Grayson to say a few words.
You certainly can go ahead Mr
Grayson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm this bill.
As Senator Lopez indicated this
bill does incorporate the Google
requirements into New Mexico law
those requirements already
apply.
To prosecutors and I'm a deputy
district attorney in the second
judicial district and as a
prosecutor I just it will be a
constitutional duty to disclose
favorable evidence to the
defendant in a favorable
evidence you includes
exculpatory evidence and
impeachment evidence.
And so what this bill would do
is it would would
incorporate into law the
existing constitutional
requirement on police officers
to cooperate with the prosecutor
in disclosing those materials
president excuse me law
enforcement officers are members
of the prosecutorial team and so
they are subject to that
requirement in this bill would
create the same kind of
consequences for police officers
for knowing refusal to comply
with that obligation that exists
for prosecutors as a matter of
their ethical duties.
And madam chair that that's the
end of our testimony will stand
for questions.
The audience to see if we have
people here in favor or in
opposition and I would like to
offer a pole for ten seconds
first please.
Senate bill one ninety two.
We have.
Three in favor and three in
opposition.
You have if you would like to
speak please are you have one
minute to do so.
First opposition.
Curtis.
Thank you members of the
committee my name is Steven
Curtis on a labor and employment
lawyer in Albuquerque New Mexico
asked me Council eighteen has
asked me to address some of the
legal issues we have with the
bill I want to be clear that the
legal issues have nothing to do
with the substantive requirement
that the constitution be invited
by in that favorable evidence be
provided to criminal defendants
however there are several
language issues with the bill
first of all and that page one
line twenty three to page two
line one there's an affirmative
obligation both on a peace
officer and the agency that
needs to be looked at because
police officers already turned
over evidence to the agency at
which point it becomes the
agency's obligation to comply
with you putting the police
officer certification online
second there is no exception the
description of importation
evidence is too broad and
thirdly there's
session six need to be taking a
look at and we have proposed
amendments we haven't heard
anything thank you very much.
Hello madam chair thank you for
the opportunity this is not
uncommon for the world to
policing we're all very well
aware of of Garrity in I mean of
of giclee of the City of
Albuquerque we've been working
with the DA up to kind of really
honing in narrow the the
question so it's not so
subjective I don't like the way
the bill is written it and
provides a much more questions
than that I have answers
in the federal system which is
where get we comes from there's
a little more confidentiality
and protections for the the
personnel records of a police
officer I would be interested in
seeing amendments to provide a
little more protections because
just throwing this information
on a database is not only going
to destroy somebody's career in
this world but in their next
world this is not something that
we are afraid of we just need to
ensure that it is a proponent of
Of of safety and and something
realistic that everybody can
comply with I also want to I
don't have enough time there's a
lot of questions.
Okay
Carter Bundy.
Madam chair members of the
committee Carter Bundy with us
thank you so much for letting us
address some of the issues we
certainly don't object to the
general concept here but I think
to follow up a little bit on
what what Steven Curtis was
saying putting the affirmative
obligation on the peace officer
to disclose without saying upon
request or even if they've
already given to their agency is
going to jeopardize their
certification especially when
there's a lot of electronic
evidence now they may have
access to it they may have
turned it over and then the
agency really ought to be the
ones to be turning that over or
of course if the DA or Attorney
General asked them for it that
would make sense for them to
hand over but to have this
affirmative obligation to hand
over everything not just your
employer but to the prosecutor
it is a lot of extra work
instead really under pressure
certification we have some other
suggestions to but I I hope
you'll call us if you want to
hear them thank you.
Elaine Maestas.
Yeah I just wanted to say that
I'm in strong support of this
bill and I just wanted to thank
Senator Lopez for bringing this
bill forward and ask each of you
for a pass thank you.
Is there any more public
comment.
Okay so let's go to the
committee and I think Senator
Lopez.
Do you do we have the yeah.
I'm madam madam chair.
I know that I did request for an
amendment basically to the
analysis of the committee and
chase is working on it at this
point so hopefully it'll be here
soon.
I I was wondering if you wanted
to.
Apps can you just.
Tell us about it it might affect
the discussion or would you
rather just wait till the and
then it gets here because we do
have a discussion okay I'm I
could wait if you so wish we can
go through discussion but it
there okay this is I think that
what the.
The analysis on the democratic
analysis is that it was
primarily drafting errors but.
Okay let's see who's first this
tier.
Representative renew our first
on my list.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator Lopez so I think Mr
Grayson set right this is
already.
Log in it already exist what
this legislation truly is is the
legislature getting into a
Discussion between the chair of
and the DA in the second
district.
I really think this is improper
our.
But let's go ahead and look at
some of the one of the things
that I really see is a problem
so let's look at page three and
what's what that line seven.
So no we we refuse to recognize
the legal efficiency.
Warren endorsed the provision of
the constitution constitutional
law so.
So we have a law that the our
court of appeals has said
this is unconstitutional and so
are you officer shouldn't go
ahead and Enforcement and it's
appeal the Supreme Court.
So.
The officer doesn't enforce the
law and then it goes to the
Supreme Court may overturn the
court of appeals which.
We've seen happen.
So now he's in violation of
that.
The you know officers so they
they get dispatched to allowed
party.
The common thing is you guys
either you know tone it down and
if and if we have to come back
there we're gonna have to take
some action.
an officer stop someone on the
street and doesn't give them a
ticket we didn't enforce law.
There we go to war in the
nineteen executive orders.
Our executive orders law.
Anyway let me have some comments
I guess for for those.
Ring ring thank you for
questions I think to answer the
question first about Page three
line seventeen in reference to
if there's a court appeals
opinion a court of appeals
opinion even if it's on appeal
to the New Mexico Supreme Court
as a matter of sorcerer that
that opinion is binding and so
that's by rule twelve I believe
twelve four four four four five
of the rules of appellate
procedure so that would apply to
police officers they would be
able to follow that court of
appeals opinion any court
decision saying that the the law
is unconstitutional the officers
would would be able to follow
that law so this.
This is the language of this
bill wouldn't take away an
officer's ability to to follow
the law for discretion as to
whether to
issue a ticket for example this
instead incorporates the
existing duty of police officers
to enforce the law and emphasize
that it's not the role of police
officers to question the
legitimacy of the law or
executive orders which which
also have now the forcible.
And madam chair and Mr Grayson
so what about a executive orders
or rules.
Or they laws.
Madam chair representative bring
yes there are laws that they are
not they're not statutes but
they have the force of law and
police officers are required to
follow.
So madam chair and Mr Grayson so
if the governor had a.
Must wear mask mandate what law
is that.
Madam chair representative ring
that is specifically provided
for by law that the governor has
that power to issue that as
under the
As a matter of executive orders
from the department of health
and that I just don't have the
staff to start with me
Representative Rehm I apologize
madam chair I know it's in.
Lucent title ten.
but I don't have the specific
statute but it does authorized
the governor to issue executive
orders to protect public health
and those would then have the
force of law.
Madam chair and Mr Grayson.
What is a
a mix of wonder card.
that an individual can go ahead
and show and they can't be
arrested.
Representative Rehm.
I'm I'm wondering what it is in
the bill.
No it's a it's a card apparently
that individuals can show and
not be a rest.
I'm not sure maybe
I I'm not familiar with that
either so.
That just came up
Madam chair and Mr Grayson so.
Right now it is it you know the
genco of decisions there if I
were in office and I'm is
refusing to give you the
information well one the case
could be dismissed but how could
you forced me to go to provide
that information.
We're.
Madam chair representative bring
yes that it is possible to to
force that the officer to comply
by filing a motion for an order
to show cause with the court the
courts could issue an order for
the officer to respond and then
the officer could potentially be
held in contempt but there would
be no impact on the the officer
certification that there would
be no affirmative obligation on
the officer to provide that
information absent a court order
and that's what this is what we
change.
Madam chair and Mr Grayson see I
think that's the remedy I don't
think we need this it's already
law you can force that.
Let's go back to madam chairman
Mr grace let's go back to my
example of you stop someone and
don't give them traffic ticket.
so I failed enforce the law.
Madam chair representative
Reeves that would be not be a
knowing refusal to enforce the
law that would be discretion at
discretionary act in terms of
how the law is enforced that's
not a refusal to recognize the
legal FSQ efficacy of the
statute so it would be the
position of a law enforcement
officer
who are by their very title one
fortunate thing forced the laws
it's not it's not their
responsibility to decide whether
the law is proper or whether the
law has any force or where the
water complies with the
constitution that's a matter
that's to be decided by the
courts and so this this
provision in the bill which
would ensure that officers do
not take that upon themselves to
decide whether basically which
laws should be enforced and
which law should not be enforced
but it would not take away
discretion.
Representative Rehm Madam.
Madam chair and and Mr Grayson I
actually read it somewhat
different I think that if a
violation occurred in front of
me and I failed to take action
that this section could be used
against me.
But all right I really think
that it's improper for
us the legislature to be
interjected in a discussion
that's going on between D. A.
and the share.
And that's why we I'm gonna vote
against it
I don't have a problem with the
officers for the D. A. knowing
anything that would be
derogatory
you know so I and I think you
can already do that so it's this
is not needed and we're just
getting involved in a.
If you will a percent match and
that's not good thank you madam
chair.
Representative nighters.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you to have some concerns
so along the same line because
is pretty short built with
changes.
Is madam chairman and Senator
who is the board that's referred
to all and all page two one
twenty one.
Madam chair Mr Grayson.
I'm sure Representative
Representative Nibert and
Senator Lopez.
The the board is the law
enforcement academy fort and
they are responsible for
issuing law enforcement
certifications to all state and
they're also responsible for any
disciplinary measures are taken
against officers.
And so that's the the board that
oversees the certification of
all law enforcement officers of
the state of New Mexico.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that's correct.
So this board
Has a tremendous responsibility
and it looks to me like that
board.
If it finds a violation it can
refuse to issue or may suspend
or revoke the.
Officers certification if I read
that correctly is that right.
Madam chair representative
number yes that's correct and
then it is a may it's not shall
and so that the borders are
discretion to decide whether to
impose to support.
In it in the question and.
Or in your discussion with
Representative rain you focused
on recognizing the legal
advocacy.
And route six on page three and.
I would like you to focus on the
force but because.
It's there's a nor their.
Sorry an officer who would know
on labor issues to.
Yeah force a provision.
And secretary
so let's not discussed the legal
advocacy because you've already
discussed that but what's this
yes ma'am force but.
Order officer can have their
certification to.
Retain their employment if they
knowingly refuse to enforce a
provision.
sh.
Constitution laws executive
orders or rules of the state
this is how I read that would
you agree.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I would I would agree yes
and representative Nibert madam
chair I think the the language
in force.
It incorporates basically the
existing duty that all officers
law enforcement officers have
their sworn to take an oath to
enforce and uphold the
constitution and the laws of the
state of New Mexico and so this
provision refers to a knowing
refusal to enforce so that's
different from
and and enforcement of law that
has discretion as to how it's
enforced that's that's different
from no refusal Representative
Nibert madam chair.
And madam chair and senator Mr
grace and.
You know we passed the law the
laws are in fact there are.
They're bound in in multiple
volumes of books at this point
of that proposal laws of the
state our constitution order not
all that great but it's it's so
it's a pretty good rate of.
But.
And that's a tremendous Task
bird to keep
keep I have all that in and of
itself.
But my real concern is.
We are now making.
Officers.
Sponsor for for forcing.
Rules which I interpret correct
me if I'm wrong I interpret as
the regulations imposed by state
agencies would you agree with
that.
Madam chair representative I
would I would agree.
I don't know I haven't seen all
the rules compiled by state
agencies but I suspect that they
probably are.
Are composed of of it least as
many pages as our statutes and.
That may be better I don't know
but we have so many agencies
that are are engaged in
rulemaking habit rules and
regulations and it it's always
been my impression maybe I'm
wrong maybe it's changed since I
went to law school but there's
always my impression that in the
administrative arena the
agencies are really primarily
responsible for.
Are in force then of their own
rules.
And not really a law enforcement
agency.
Has that has is my impression
wrong or has it changed over the
years.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I think it depends on the
situation so most most agencies
with enforce their own rules
there are agencies that
supplement the criminal law for
example the board of pharmacy
defines what drugs are in
schedule one and schedule two
for purposes of enforcement of
the controlled substances act
other rules and regulations make
and make create a crime as.
exercise needs exercise of the
authority delegated by the
legislature for example if there
was a discussion about executive
orders earlier I believe there
is a provision in the in the law
that referenced referring to the
the failure to comply with those
executive orders and so there
may be regulations that affect
law enforcement directly and I
believe that's what this
language in the statute meant to
corporate.
I'm just looking at the words on
the page and it says rules are.
M. it may be showing my lack of
experience in the arena of.
narcotics or what have you but I
suspect that the even if those
items are in the pharmacy
regulations that there's a
specific statute that that
directs law enforcement agencies
to our.
Enforce laws that prohibit the
use sale are.
Ingestion arms of those products
and I would imagine that in that
arena it's pretty specific
because of I would think courts
would require that the law
enforcement agencies are
operating under rules of agency
for a narcotics violation more
operating under statutes that
the procurement that activity
are correct me if I'm wrong
madam chair Senator best Mr
Gration.
Madam chair and representative
Nibert that that is for the most
part correct however the
controlled substances act refers
specifically to.
The board of pharmacy
regulations defining
schedule one and schedule two
different levels of for example
defining our products and so for
example if there were not enough
cotton our collective work that
was defined in the controlled
substances act what was defined
as in our Kotick under the
pharmacy regulations
as.
Authority delegated by the
legislature then that would have
the force of law and that is a
violation of the controlled
substances act someone has that
substance that is defined as of
our product by the board of
pharmacy so law enforcement
officers would be required to
enforce that regulation because
it's incorporated into the
criminal code.
Well madam chair and in Mr
president sounds to me like we
have a stature.
We have a statute that directs
you to enforce that law and that
the definitions of what wise is
to the level that are caught it
or whatever is.
I guess.
To be defined by.
That particular board fired by
regulation I I see that
differently that most other
regulations that we have.
We we don't have.
The reason that I'm most
familiar with is oil and gas we
don't have statutes directed law
enforcement to our engage in our
activities regarding oil and gas
that are specific even though
the.
Department of energy minerals
and natural resources has many
regulations that the in in
forces and at those doctor
called upon.
The state police or county
sheriff's for municipal.
Police departments to engage in
that for small
so I see a little bit different
chair not I'm concerned about
the the route of of that the of
this statute or this our
legislation.
In that arena because I think
we're putting.
Additional burdens on law
enforcement officers of the
state that they.
Refuse to recognize or enforce
our regulations that frankly in
my opinion aren't even intended
for them to be to to to enforce
and so I'm I'm really concerned
there we we can have a debate on
executive orders as well but
where are your sure you are you
interested in the rules
regulations of the state because
I don't believe that this body
when we enact legislation that
authorizes HSD to.
Our issue regulations.
That we ever contemplate that we
are also issue we will reverse
to our our.
Police departments.
The.
Right or ability to engage and
and force met and process for a
lot of prostitution with the
enforcement of those
regulations.
I think we want the
administrative agencies who are
charged with that responsibility
to our engage in the
investigation and enforcement
actions that we are delegated to
that and so this provision
because it right some concern
because a police officer.
Could lose their ability to
Continue their employment.
If they refuse to enforce our
rules of the state at the I.
I really really think that
that's the staff and across the
wide significant we and frankly
goes be all.
This bodies understanding of
what was delegating to state
agencies at the time we we
delegate that authority and
there may be some specific
instances where as you pointed
out more specific reference to
our state agency actions that
they get a court order to.
Our statutory acts but the I
suspect with those are few and
far between
so I I really.
I am having a hard time
grappling with that.
Madam chair I have no further
questions thank you.
Thank you next I have
Representative Alcon.
Thank you and we will do it in
my right correct.
The senator Tom issues checking
right now.
The the comments madam chair and
it's the kind of the fun COVID
because you know again coming
back to put in writing judge had
on.
We had a conference in
A retired police officer was.
Think about how much power they
lost when they would from.
Law enforcement to the.
Because the law enforcement love
and Office you can stop you on
the road and make a decision
whether to give you a citation
or not just left to go.
Thank you for all of them they
committed this is just give you
a warning.
Once you do that the Houston
judges this.
The judge has no power
whatsoever to just say I'm gonna
let you go.
That is not allowed under the
rules.
So.
And then you go to a once we
happening in today's world of
the governor's hoarders we have
a law enforcement to state
governors meeting.
Thank you.
And this is because law
enforcement are leaders in our
community people look up to the.
And now in the see them doing
exactly what they are telling
people not to do and telling
people not to break the law but
it's okay to break the law if
it's okay with them to break the
law this makes sense it just
doesn't.
I'm so frustrated with this
whole thing going on lately I
just can't understand it this
Madam madam chair I just with
them and with the
through so we can go
disincentive backed out to the
floor.
Thank you.
Let me.
You know I can tell you the
amendment because they're in the
majority analysis and they are
fairly simple and I understand
the amendment is improving right
now and then I'll go back to
Representative read I think you
have another comment.
Let me tell you what the
amendments are.
If you look at page two line
eight.
Protracted Class personas.
It's supposed to read protected
class of persons.
So I think that's it right
Senator.
So it's it's not if everybody
would look at the bills.
Page two.
You would you would rebuilt
strike pro tech protracted input
protected.
There are protected.
And then for the last word on
that line percentages it would
say persons.
So I think we could probably act
on that without the amendment
it's not exactly rocket science
to figure out those changes was
there anything else Senator
madam chair that was all okay
all right thank you we'll talk
about in just a second
Representative region.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
Grayson what what I'd like to do
is let's go over to the and mac
and we're going to ten point two
nine point one point one one.
Subsection C..
Grounds for discipline a police
officer so this Law Enforcement
Academy.
Number four ax indicate a lack
of good moral character or which
constitute dishonesty or fraud.
And which adversely affect the
officers ability to exercise the
duties of a police officer.
So do you believe that that
would take care of
of the your concerns.
Okay this is this is a question
for Mr grace's and
I think you're asking.
With the.
Violations that are outlined
that are prohibited in this bill
you're asking if they aren't
already covered in the
administrative code.
Madam chair that's correct
because the next page and
there's there's more so you.
Representative Townsend.
Test yourself.
Okay.
All right.
Mr gray said if you want to
address that real quickly.
Yes thank you madam chair and
representative of Rehm and so I
think the starting point
in the discussion is is there a
duty to enforce to begin with
and the duty to enforce is not
what's addressed in this bill so
this bill addresses what happens
if I a duty is is knowingly for
example if an officer knowingly
refuses to comply with the duty
the duty itself is set out in
section twenty nine dash one
dash one which imposes a duty on
law enforcement officers to
investigate the criminal law
Representative Rehm I I believe
that it I don't have the
language or from me and from
from my understanding from what
you read from the administrative
code it's possible it could
cover the situation but I don't
know that it's it's it's Mr
explicit error that that
officers would would have
Disciplinary consequences for in
knowing refusal to cooperate
with the prosecutor in terms of
disclosing quickly material
foreign note knowing of refusal
to recognize the legal efforts
efficacy of the constitution or
laws of New Mexico.
there was some broad language
that possibly could include
those acts of but this this
would be much more so.
Representative Rehm chair I hope
that answers the question.
Thank you.
Madam chair Mr Grayson's and
then under.
Subsection be grounds for
discipline
Number four.
Commit acts which lack which
indicate a lack of good moral
character or which constitute
dishonesty or fraud and which
adversely affect the
We do do exercise a duties of a
certified officer so I think I
think it's already covered.
I it you know
Under the are disappointed at
the law enforcement academy
Mysteries in this malfeasance or
non fees for all reasons that
you can be disciplined.
And so I think you already have
it you know the are creating a
database I and
putting that out to the public
is not a good idea.
I finally found out what the
make Linden our card is and it's
an agreement with the DOJ and
APD.
And there are certain of crimes
misdemeanor crimes that the DOJ
and this agreement are not to
make arrests for and although
they are restful fences are I
think this crosses insecurity
between
what they're currently doing.
so.
Are you again I I think this is
just legislation to create this
database with derogatory
information against an officer
and they are you already have
the means to do it and your
stated such thank you madam.
Thank you thing there has I had
a couple of comments I wanted to
make.
But first let me move to adopt
the amendment where we changed
Going to the proper spelling on
those two words second let.
The second for Representative
Akan is there any objection to
that amendment.
Okay seeing amendment is adopted
and it will be will have the
proper
Amendment that's included in our
committee report so thank you
very much what I want to point
out here is that
On
page three.
Winds thirteen and lines
seventeen.
We have the word knowingly.
In the recent we have knowingly
is that judges will not go after
any law enforcement officer for
acting in good faith.
So that is why we have knowing.
And I think that
that really.
Covers it for me and I we we
have all the rest of this in the
law already knowingly making a
false statement in the
application so that's already in
the long but now we're just
basically what we're doing here
and I really appreciate this
analysis.
I'm.
We're codifying sixty years of
mandatory due process
requirements in criminal
prosecutions.
And we here we have not a
defense attorney federal
prosecutor as an expert witness
because the prosecutors in your
need clear guidelines for
demands that law enforcement
disclosures and that the
prosecutors don't want.
They want the best information
in order to do their jobs
properly.
And there need to be
consequences for officers who
knowingly fail to comply so I'm
one possibility
with regard to fiscal impact in
this doesn't have a fiscal
impact just that.
Rick is effective in reducing
knowing and intentional
violations of disclosure
requirements there should be a
reduction in criminal appeals on
constitutional due process
violations of those disclosures
yeah years so I am I'm
wholeheartedly in support of the
US and I I really appreciate the
senator and Mr Grayson today by
chair.
Madam chair ready at like to
move it to pass on SB one ninety
two as amended.
Thank you very much.
Representative Akan second that
motion.
What to call the roll please.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert well.
Representative green no ma'am
for the reasons I've explained.
Representative Thomson no ma'am.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Madam chair I am back to to vote
no sorry.
Seven two four we have a due
pass on Senate bill one ninety
two as amended thank you very
much you know numbers we have
another.
I'd about our agenda but we have
a caucus the Republicans have a
caucus the Democrats have caucus
starting in five minutes so I'm
we're going to adjourn and I
will let you know if there's an
opportunity to have another
hearing but I'm I'm not.
Completely optimistic about
that.
Thank you all very much we'll
see you on the floor.
We're.
