Area thank you very good.
There was I'm sorry as I
mentioned on the floor we're
we're only going to have
A brief meeting which is rare
for this committee but we want
to try to get hospital I.
Considered I hope Representative
Matthews is with us she left the
caucus when we Jan and we do
have a committee solve I've just
checked is that Mr file our
analyses are all on the Canadian
side and I know Representative
Matthews has a couple of folks
from the City of Albuquerque who
will be with her you know I was
reminded.
I needed to be reminded because
we've actually meant since have
this hearing a lot.
A long time ago and it's been
moved and moved and the bills
been changed considerably.
What we're dealing with now
accepting your promotion.
What we're doing dealing with
now primarily is
How to deal with pre trial
release and
So when we take public comment.
I I do want to have
Representative Matthews and
Laine what we have I'm I'm going
to limit public comment to
fifteen minutes per side and and
we will be eternally grateful to
anyone who can.
Be shorter than that.
Then the minutes per
Comments so that's what we're
going to do Mrs Representative
Matthews cancer will let her
take over.
Checking my sound can anybody
hear me we can do in
Representative you have the
floor.
Okay thank you very much madam
chair members of the committee
The committee substitute we're
looking at today is.
Very different from the original
bill that was introduced and
this committee substitute offers
a very focused response I
believe to the level financing
crime we're sitting not only in
Albuquerque but throughout much
of the state.
And it recognizes the importance
of giving our law enforcement
agencies.
The tools that they need to
effectively combat crime and
improve public safety.
Many substitute establishes a
set of common sense requirements
for the use of.
The GPS monitors that are.
And required of a person who.
Person charged with a felony who
is released on pre trial
detention.
From group released from pre
trial detention sorry
to where.
and these three basic
requirements are twenty four
seven monitoring for these
defendants.
again charged with a felony as a
condition of pre trial release
the second one is a requirement
that law enforcement be advised
immediately if the defendant is
not prohibited location or
disables the monitor.
And the third is that the
location monitoring data be made
available to a long enforcement
agent ADA the public defender
for the AG upon request.
New Mexico is a relatively in a
relatively early stage in the
use of GPS monitoring in
connection with the release of
defendants on a pre trial
release and I mention that
because the funding that was
authorized in redistricting
special session and in H. B. to
which the house is just past
totals one point two million
dollars to pay for this program
and.
Representative is a hundred
percent increase in funding for
GPS monitoring very majority of
FY twenty two in FY twenty three
we are at a stage where.
We can't act some common sense
statute statutory provisions and
get this process right with some
basic rules that are going to
apply throughout the state.
and I do have some experts with
me
like very briefly introduce
Diana loose who is the president
of the.
District attorneys association
throughout the state you can
read about that as who is the
executive director of the
district attorney's association
and who has.
Was a long time ADA in Santa Fe
County.
Carol Medina from Albuquerque
police department.
I think.
Not in the audience yet or the
attendees get.
Okay
I will I will text him and in
the meantime
I think it might be appropriate
for the you do a loose to talk
very briefly at this point about
how this proposal a committee
substitute would be useful in
her part of the state
and.
And perhaps a few comments from
him about this as we begin this
process if that's so okay would
you want to kind of try to frame
the discussion first I need you
to read me that
two oh two number and I'll move
the committee sub for discussion
purposes.
Yes at the the number is two two
two six one five point one okay
all right thank you that's what
I have to make sure I help and I
really really want each of you
to hear us we'd like to try to
get this started an hour so try
to be as brief as possible.
Thank you madam chair maybe may
at DA Luz speak briefly.
Madam chair and members of the
committee representative.
I just dying to lose I'm briefly
I'm at pre trial services our
county operated if they are
operated all on and around the
state they're only the second
district the sixth district
Sandoval County and San Juan
County her are you have been
with AOC that are operated pre
trial services by the courts.
And so we have I inconsistency
and how they're operating right
now if counties offer GPS it's
usually I'd either they own them
or perhaps a contract with the
company I'm and data is directly
sure to the judge I it is also
shared
in some locations with the
district attorney's the defense
and law enforcement but it is
not consistent I'm better is
twenty four seven monitoring I'm
in air in some areas for the
counties are operating and so
what this bill is trying to do
is one provide consistency I'm
and the same information that
everyone would have the same
operation throughout the state I
and I know that we're trying to
keep it brief I and so I will
stop their and madam chair.
Thank you so much you Mr Valdez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I really just want
to dress the the the concern
that's been raised as to
the privacy issues involved in
this bill
There is no case now that says
that the state is not allowed to
have this type of data and when
you look at any analysis of the
Fourth Amendment it always
begins with the reasonable
expectation of privacy does a
person have a reasonable
expectation of privacy and
whatever's to be protected.
I I can't see a court saying
that because
When somebody puts on a device.
That sole purpose is to keep
track of your whereabouts Court
judges found that wearing that
device is necessary to insure
the safety of the community or
to ensure the the compliance
with the court order that that
there would be an expectation of
privacy in knowing where you're
at since that's the very
function of the device
as miss Lou stated there are
programs now where that data is
routinely shared with
The district attorney's offices
with law enforcement officers
and we just think that it should
be standardized and made
available to law enforcement on
a consistent basis thank you
madam chair.
Thank you for the comment before
we go to the audience madam
chair I I'm wondering if the
line Medina might be a chief
Medina I attempted and I haven't
had a response I'm just that
somebody.
One of our that's our supervisor
okay.
Okay thank.
Okay let's go to the audience
let's have a quick poll twenty
seconds to weigh in on whether
you are in favor of this version
House Bill five and or whether
you are in opposition let's go
now.
Like we're about fifty fifty
here folks we have three in
favor and three in opposition so
let me go now to the
Attendees and see if there are
those with their hands raised
let's do the
I'll start with the opposition
because I saw the first one I
saw I know is part six.
let's start with the opposition
so if you're in favor put your
hands down Kim Chavez Cook go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee can Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender and we were only
given the choices supporter
oppose I I did my best to
choose.
we support much of this bill we
are grateful to the sponsor for
focusing on improving the
supervision process itself
because we think that that is
actually going to be an
effective way to improve the
current situation so we think
the sponsor for that and support
that aspect of the bill as was
flagged in her opening remarks
so we do have concerns about the
privacy issue and while I agree
in the abstract with do able
does is
Comment that the crux of that
assessment would be whether
person has a reasonable
expectation of privacy I think
that it is overstating it to say
that anyone on conditions of
release has abdicated their
interest in privacy we do have
case law that talks about how
significant the privacy interest
is in your location data arising
from the US Supreme Court
carpenter V. United States
because of the.
Huge amount of information that
your location alone can
communicate to the world and we
do not oppose law enforcement
ever having access to this but
we do think that there needs to
be some showing by law
enforcement upon making that
request that they have a reason
to believe that those records
are going to further an ongoing
criminal investigation now I
can't tell this committee
because the case was sparse
whether or not probable cause is
for top required or something
below probable cause but some
factual showing should be
required and that would be
consistent with the way that we
treat probationers as well who
also have a limited expectation
of privacy it doesn't go away
completely it's just I'm gonna
have to cut you off your wealth
management okay.
Thank you.
our.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
Canadian Bennett Baur chief
public defender I will keep it
to less than a minute.
I I also agree with miss
shoppers cook that there are
privacy interests here for
people who are charged but not
convicted of crimes I also
believes and and first of all
thank you to sponsor
for bring for this amended
version
I think really what we just need
to focus on is how we set up a
process if we if we're going to
put it in statute does recognize
very real concerns and need for
access in appropriate
circumstances.
Just listening and then district
attorney and I believe this
knowing there but I think if you
ask yourself if your gates.
Please make yourselves folks
only Bennett Baur should be
speaking on ours done speaking
if you heard all that thank you
madam chair.
Thank you though.
Okay Aaron Jones.
One minute.
The madam chair members the
committee.
I stand that I'll have to stick
my last post.
And posibilidad right now
Sanchez.
What.
Thank you and I don't have
anywhere hands up in opposition
let me see if I got any of the
state who would like to speak in
favor.
Erin Jones.
Erin Jones.
Let me let me try JD Bullington
JD Bullington go ahead.
Madam chair this is Erin Jones
can you hear me.
Okay go ahead.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Erin Jones
I'm a commander with the
Albuquerque police department
and I just want to
Representative that information
given to law enforcement
specifically for individuals who
have committed crimes or
suspected in crimes that also
individuals who have cut off her
ankle monitor it's helpful for
us to have that information in a
timely manner we obviously
respect
individual's privacy and we want
to support that but the
information given to law
enforcement in an expedient
manner to help apprehend those
individuals who have failed to
comply with the conditions is
something that would be
beneficial to the Department
thank you for the time thank you
very much JD Bullington your
turn now.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce that supports this
substitute version of house bill
five however the chamber does
disagree with the decision to
dismiss the need to detain New
Mexico's most serious offenders
in jail pre trial regarding
defendants who have GPS monitors
absolutely they should be
monitored twenty four seven
absolutely our law enforcement
agencies should be alerted the
moment a violation occurs and
yes the police should have
access to the GPS data as part
of their criminal investigation
we live in a community where
released defendants are arrested
for committing a new crime twice
per day so pre trial services
needs to be part of the public
safety mission we do words the
committee members to support
this legislation as written
thank you.
Thank you.
David Martinez.
Madam chair honor honorable
members of the committee this is
Damon Martinez on the senior
policy adviser for the
Albuquerque police department
this summer the more convene a
of the Albuquerque metro
initiative prime initiative
which brought together members
from the.
Criminal justice system not
everybody will agree on
everything but he came out with
forty
of action items and one of the
action items was to adequately
fund twenty four seven pre trial
monitoring services this was a
priority for this administration
going forward in addition to
this bill the City of
Albuquerque as also supports the
money requests from the New
Mexico court systems to
implement the twenty four seven
monitoring system and the madam
chair members of the committee
thank you for your time and.
Thank you so much do we have any
we're who wished attendees who
wish to speak.
Okay I see none let's go to the
The committee and.
C..
I'm going to
I see one of our analysts has
her healed up I'm not I don't
know if there's a technical
issue this call is there
something you need to tell us
yes thank you I'm so sorry madam
chair I was noticing on the
committee analysis on page three
where it was substantive issues
it actually less the incorrect
substitute but it is the correct
analysis okay thank you so much
appreciate that.
So first I have Representative
regime whose and Representative
diverse office so that's why the
hands there go ahead
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Matthews I want
to take you to page two why yeah
And they're going to maintain
the status for five years I
would suggest to you that we
need a longer time period and
why isn't yes that is not all
murder victims are found within
five years we have several
situations where they're found
much later than that.
And for that reason I would say
we need to keep that data a
little bit longer that's my
comment and that's all.
Thank you Representative
Representative Chandler.
I'm.
Thank you madam chair
Interesting I my question is why
do you need it madam chair and
senator why do you need it for
five years.
The exact opposite of
Representative Rehm.
Representative Representative
Matthews and you can defer to
one of your experts if you wish.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
Presented for that question and
go above representatives for
their views on that issue
the five years was recommended
by the district attorney and
second judicial district but I
would also offer either.
D. A. list or Mr Valdez who
might have some additional
information about what time is
an appropriate period of time to
keep data.
When you're just go right ahead
sure madam chair Representative
Chandler I'm certainly I'm
destination by Representative
ring I is an individual can be
charged I and can certainly
skyline I and you would be
surprised at how many years ago
by before someone is located
especially depending on that the
seriously miss of the charge all
rights on a common for sex
crimes are kidnapping cases are
for individuals to be gone for
over five years we still have to
have that information to show
where they were what they were
doing they could have committed
other crimes during that time it
could be something connected to
the current case contacted the
witness or victim I'm it
wouldn't be needed always on but
certainly the language if
modified could certainly say it
can be kept up to I and then the
court could make a decision in
the particular case along at
that is to be kept down with the
body worn cameras where they've
done it graduated based on the
level of the crime I certainly
it could just be discretionary
and so that we're not trying to
put all that specific language
in there I hope that answers
your question.
Thank you that's helpful going
to the issue of
disclosing them the data to law
enforcement and others.
Stepping back at the this was an
issue a few months ago and the
press and I seem to recall madam
chair representative we're in
law enforcement I think in the
Albuquerque Bernalillo area
we're asking for monitoring data
in the in the this data madam
chair and representative I
understand is held by the courts
is that correct.
Is it.
Madam chair representative I
don't know if I was the answer
Representative back to Spanish
I'm right now the second
judicial district operates your
pre trial services in the GPS
monitoring for people released
and it is the courts and
maintain the data the second
judicial district okay great
that's helpful thank you for
that answer so that the courts
whole.
Madam chair and representative
and my understanding of the
little kind of controversy
around that was and maybe that's
why this bill is being readiness
the courts would not disclose it
is that not right madam chair
and representative.
Madam chair representative
it.
One is primarily as I understand
it the second judicial district
where the second judicial
district takes the position that
it will not share the data
and I would ask the.
The analysts.
My understanding is that is not
necessarily true and other parts
of the state.
Madam chair representative that
is correct where the counties
operate in in the counties that
do have pre trial services and
GPS monitoring of the data is
shared with the courts and that
I it is shared with both the
state and the defense is sure
with law enforcement
I'm at work we're seeing in some
areas there can be a delay of up
to a week when someone cuts off
the monitor or someone has a
violation that is a major
violation of like having contact
with the witness or victim at
the address I'm that delay time
because of the inconsistency
around the state that is what
we're saying.
Okay so it's eight madam chair
and representative the second
judicial district takes the
position and presumably because
there some legal basis for doing
so to withhold that information
upon request it would that be a
fair statement Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative I I'm
not sure that is a fair
statement I mean they they take
that position but it is
questionable whether that is
correct legally the GPS data
that is the longest to the court
it does not belong to the
defendant.
And when you're doing twenty
four seven monitoring.
The concept that there isn't any
expectation of privacy as to
your location data and that's
what we're talking about
location data.
and it is a condition in return
for releasing pre trial that you
agree to where that monitor and
that and know that it is being
monitored twenty four seven the
concept of a
right privacy in that
circumstance is.
Questionable and I I would note
also and I think this is pretty
important if there's a violation
from the monitors find a
violation they immediately it
your the incentives in some
situations day issue a higher
low alert and immediately
advise law enforcement this
doesn't always happen but that's
why having some rules around
this so all is important
in order to to advise law
enforcement that they need to be
on the outlook for this person
if there is a right to privacy.
You you wouldn't be able to do a
high I ache very high alert kind
of thing like that and that is
recognized at least in part by
the New Mexico Supreme Court is
a proper procedure and twenty
four seven monitoring.
Thank you for that detailed
answer but I'm not sure my
question was answered has anyone
answers the second judicial
district wide they have been
unwilling to disclose the
monitoring data.
And we don't need to argue with
their position I would just like
to know what their stated
position is if you know madam
chair and representative.
Madam chair and representative
my understanding is that this is
from our visited with pre trial
detention services in
Albuquerque several times and
they haven't have had a number
of conversations with them and
they seem to think that there is
a expect that there is a right
to privacy around this.
that's that's what they're
there or lay eggs expressed to
me.
Okay no that was helpful answers
thank you
Has there been any consideration
of putting per gram letters
around what law enforcement who
to whom law enforcement and
others because I noticed the
staff now has other individuals
who may access the information
parameters about recall
requesting some.
Statement as to why they needed
or delineating the basis for the
need for and then I'd like to
talk a little bit madam chair
about what kind of protections
of that data is available so
let's first answer that question
are there
would you think it not
reasonable that perhaps
law enforcement or the DA or the
public defender of the Attorney
General might have to state the
recall reasonable basis for
asking for such information
madam chair and representative.
Representative I just lost my
video here and I can you see me
yes.
Well that's we thank you yeah I
get just give me one second
please that there we go okay.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
Your question do we have to go
back to why do we have GPS
monitoring and the reason we
have that is doing sure that the
defendant not violate the
conditions of release and those
conditions may.
May include a restricted
locations for example in a
stalking situation the
restriction may be that you
can't go within a mile of
somebody's house or work place
of employment.
The point of having the active
monitoring and having the GPS
manager is to be able to keep
the defendant.
From violating the law by.
Going and stalking the victim
again it's a it's a protection
for the pop for the victim the
potential victim state
protection for the public and if
you had to go through we've
already had a probable cause
showing that this defendant
violated a law it is serious all
because the people who wear the
GPS managers are not there on
bad check charges they're
they're on pretty serious it
mainly violent kinds of crime.
And.
And the condition for them to
stay free if you're not going to
go do this again.
And if we had to have all kinds
of showings beyond the fact that
there's been a violation of the
terms are released we wouldn't
be doing a very good job of
protecting the victim.
Just terrified of course of this
person who is been stalking
them.
Madam chair and.
Representative so you don't
believe that there's any
possibility that there's there's
a potential for abuse if if the
law enforcement agency is that
or public defender or anyone
else who's listed in your list
can just write a letter saying
I'd like that GPS data on so and
so for an an an undefined period
of time.
For whatever reason H. two
without any requirement they at
least articulate a reasonable
basis for asking for the
information and I don't mean
having to go to court madam
chair I mean writing a letter or
something that actually
documents the basis for it I'm
not talking about going to court
getting a warrant or subpoena
one would think that a police
officer could write write down
the reasons for it so that it
could not be that person
there could be some parameters
put around the bases for the
request.
Representative I.
About for every person who might
ever want to request data at and
whether it ever would be
possible for there to be an
abuse but but I'm.
That would be a serious
violation I think of.
Police rules and law enforcement
conduct and so forth whatever
those parameters are and would
be.
I'm sorry somebody just walked
in.
Thank you.
Where we're hearing okay this.
The joys of hearing offices with
the and
What do you do we we we we
expect law enforcement to act
properly and I see no reason to
assume that they're not going to
act properly and I don't believe
I think that under the
circumstances the data doesn't
belong to the defending it along
to the court.
And the defendant doesn't have a
privacy expectation and if
there's no privacy expectation
there's no reason to require
that law enforcement go through
a bunch of hoops in order to get
the information and I think
that's the crux of the
situation.
I don't know if E. eight if
either the dust would like to.
Weigh in on that for a second.
As I understand act.
And just jump in I'm fine to go
to one of your district
attorneys but I will.
Does that.
Particular section.
Is only the electronic location
monitoring.
Is made available so it's not
its location.
So and go ahead with the the
district attorney's responding.
Madam chair representative I'm.
If a person is put on GPS
monitoring there are
restrictions on where they can
go and who they can be around in
so the request for that data is
simply when they're
investigating that they've
either been involved in New
crime or they went somewhere or
less somewhere or had contact
with someone that they're not
supposed to that is the reason
why there's not any language
that requires a showing
eight and very few number of
people are put on GPS monitoring
based on people that are
released on one because there's
only so many devices either
owned by the courts are
operating needs for the counties
that are operating under limited
often times are not even one
available and so I hope that
that helps explain if they're
not just to leave their house
then that's what the location
that is monitoring if they are
not supposed to leave the City
of Albuquerque that's what it's
monitoring I and so that's
that's what the location data is
showing is that they are at a
health services to be active
left the city that left the
state that's what's being
monitored that's water sewer
showing because you're not going
to know what they did to you see
the location data.
Thank you.
Okay okay so I think what I
heard madam chair was we want to
be able to use this for fishing
expedition we don't have to have
a basis for believing that
they're stalking the victim
again when they haven't been
told to stay when they what we
want to just be able to to visit
check on that whenever we went
when it whatever you feel like
it or if there was a crime in
the area and we what we want to
be able to just check on
everybody who has a
Monitoring device on them so we
can just without any other
basis check to see where they
were is that a fair statement.
I'm.
I believe this is madam chair at
Representative I don't believe
that's a fair statement
whatsoever again I.
If I had the dust would like to
speak directly to that.
Madam chair representative I'm
it's not a fishing expedition
I'm not going to be asking for
data just to have data at law as
you heard earlier from the
commander Rick Albuquerque
police department I'm it's using
when there has been a new
projects occurred or they've had
a report from someone that an
individual has violated their
conditions I in some manner but
the data is going to verify
whether or not that's accurate
or not in the webcast location
data is an agreed condition that
the defendant's son Sir
condition differently separate
greed to that that agreed to the
monitoring to be replaced and so
they've already accepted about
information in it does seem on
but if you think about it as
attorneys if you think about the
fact that the court holds
information about a defendant's
location that the defense or the
prosecutor don't have access to
our that's unusual I'm in so
that's why I'm I I hope that
that that's explained
I'm interested question thank
you.
Thank you madam chair one last
area what sort of protections
are given to that data.
Should be disclosed to the
agencies such as a law
enforcement agency.
Is that information
Subject to the information of
public records act.
Your.
Madam chair and Representative
your muted.
It sorry.
Madam chair representative of
these records are subject to
improve requests they are public
records so the concept that that
the public can get them but
police agencies can't get them
is it me just bizarre I it that
concept is is that I it doesn't
help protect.
Improve public safety yes people
have to go through with it
request impact is a lawsuit now
pending in the in the second
judicial district by by the
district attorney.
Who is trying to get records
it is a E. in the office was
issues a records he then filed a
request to get the records and
the agency still refuse to
records even though under it for
a law you don't have to have any
showing of anything in order to
have access to a public record.
So.
Strange.
I want to just call your
attention on this point
Representative Chandler is that
alright of course when looking
at our committee analysis and it
actually says that the New
Mexico it brought prohibits the
disclosure GPS records prior to
charges being filed.
Okay so madam chair exactly what
we're hearing and.
We we want to get this right but
that's what
It's it's right there is the
committee analysis and I.
Want to delay this but I I would
certainly like for all of you to
be looking at this in case you
want to do and and and that's
Prior to final passage so.
I'm just bring that up well
madam chair and Representative
my concern is that it is
improbable.
I mean that it is subject to
excuse me it is subject to a
public records that so imagine
you're an individual whose
records are now in the hands of
the police I'm glad to know that
at least on the second judicial
district is trying to protect
the interest of the individuals
but I imagine it's in a law
enforcement in hands and someone
yeah some individuals who would
like to know that person's
travel patterns or daily
routines at center at center I
interested in establishing match
and all they have to do is file
of public records request with
that agency and they could
obtain that information.
That is of concern to me that
was my the point I was making
you all apparently madam chair
and representative believe they
are subject to the public
records act which I find very
concerning and I I would hope
that we all your find that
concerning because that person
who may or may not be guilty of
a crime remember they have been
prosecuted yet is now subject to
surveillance just by the police
by people who are have an
interest in what that person's
doing.
Chair representative I think
that your your
concluding I don't know if
that's a word that you're
thanks for waiting thank you
looting where that came from
you're conflating the difference
between.
the person is has agreed to
where the monitor.
R. and understands that it is
tracking their location.
And.
That law enforcement prior to
another charge can in fact get
that data that's what the what
the statute is that's what the
bill is saying.
Do you think pre exist.
All of this and basically gives
the public a right to the
different data and its use
sometimes I know of it
particular situation which uses
somebody who wants to file a
lawsuit because somebody who
Wasn't detained have committed a
horrible crime you're looking
for
they're getting the the
answering so a lawsuit against
somebody.
so it's and the only reason that
the second judicial district is
my understanding filed suit
under under intra was because
they were not able to get to
date it any other way.
I think that the the and they
wanted to test to see if we
could get the data that way
But that shouldn't be the way
that law enforcement is getting
that data law enforcement should
be able to get that data because
it is part it is law enforcement
data.
And madam chair and
representative and they should
be able to articulate a recent
reason for it.
I'm not just a fishing
expedition and and one other
point you all madam chair and
representative you keep
reminding us that quote they
have agreed.
What is the consequence for not
agreeing to wearing the ankle
monitoring bracelet.
Madam chair representative Dave
because we're dealing with with
that in in general we're going
to be dealing with people who
are alleged to have been which
is been probable cause
establish that they have
committed a serious violent
crime generally is very serious
violent crime is that they would
be held pending trial right so I
don't know I used to study what
consent means involuntary
consent means in the old days we
used to talk about that Madam
chair representative I have a
suspicion that that would not be
considered out of on Terry
consent given the consequences
that are posed to the person and
choice but with that we I have
concerns about
how one gets access to the data
madam chair and the lack of
protections for the data once it
is disclosed and I'm considering
how a vote but I am disappointed
that there seems to be no
interest in remedy either of
those concerns madam chair thank
you.
Thank you actually I'm gonna
turn this over to the vice chair
in just a moment for a minute I
noticed and has our hand up
again and the call of our
analyst and they want to address
this before representative Ely
asks his questions so do you
want to go ahead yes thank you
madam chair and maybe a
prosecutor Lou Lou so I'm sorry
if that's how you pronounce your
name I apologize she might want
to jump in on this I think the
issues are being conflated I
would normally interrupt but I
want to make clear and again law
enforcement and other criminal
defense attorneys please step
in.
In order to be arrested somebody
a problem cross has to be
established for an arrest
warrant as well as for a search
warrant
when somebody is that arrested
they are still pre trial they're
still not convicted it goes
through the process that is part
that is outlined in the rules of
criminal procedure so somebody
are if which has been a great
the subject of great topic in
the last.
Many weeks and years
so I think that if somebody
refuses to wear the ankle
monitor it doesn't necessarily
mean that they would be held or
detained that is part of the
process of coming up with the
least restrictive measures that
somebody's eligible for there is
a whole process it's not an
automatic that somebody would be
and that's that's what's in the
constitution and the rules
article two section thirteen and
then the rules of criminal
procedure so that's not an
automatic the other
clarification I want to make is
that when somebody agrees to
wear an ankle monitor as part of
their conditions of their
release they're agreeing to be
monitored by the court by pre
trial services that is where
that sort of wall comes up is
that law enforcement in pre
trial services are two separate
entities and here law
enforcement would like the
information that the court hats
that's the issue so they don't
go together necessarily so when
somebody's being monitored by
an ankle bracelet their meeting
monitored as a condition of
their release until they go to
trial or Chile violate violation
is not necessarily a crime
and so for law enforcement to
want that information in the
investigation of another crime
which is how the bill is written
that's two separate things well
a supervised release violation
is not necessarily a crime it
might be but it's not
necessarily a crime
and then this information so I
just want to clarify because I
feel like it's not necessarily
being stated very clearly I hope
that I did just that and
clarified the law not.
Without any opinion.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
We're now going next to
representative Ely.
Thank you madam chair so yeah I
share some of those concerns I
do think these are things that
we could look at after gets out
of committee but I had a very
specific question and just one
believe it or not on section C.
it says the electronic location
monitoring data maintain percent
dissection shall be made
available upon request to a law
enforcement agency district
attorney a public defender the
office of Attorney General so
help me understand why is the
defense lawyer the private
defense lawyer not included in
that list.
Anybody there.
Sh.
Sorry.
Well I thought maybe I went
blank sorry.
You
might want my on mute button
seems to keep moving around
happened.
All right.
Madam chair representative you
Representative
That's a great question and and
that quite frankly
I it
I think that probably in the
appropriate circumstances we
could probably come up with some
appropriate language to add
private defense lawyer.
because the goal is not to yes
yes yes the goal is for the
people who are part of this
process.
We didn't need for this
information to be able to get it
and I private counsel a private
attorney in a criminal case with
that seem to fit within that
same as a PED or same as a law
enforcement agency I'm I I do
think madam chair and
representative that as we get to
the floor assuming this gets out
of committee that is section see
we need to work on because I
agree with Representative
Chandler I think it would be
simple enough to identify some
mechanism by which people would
say this is why we need the
information because I share some
of Representative Chandler's
concerns but with that I'll pass
thank you madam chair.
Committee I don't see any
further hands up.
There are
I've been a do pass on of the
house Judiciary substitute for
House Bill five.
I believe that was the do you
pass motion from Representative
reading on the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill five with the second
Representative Nibert.
You madam chair is the for the
discussion I'm sorry yes I want
to I wanted to I'm sorry.
It is home.
All the jobs that I had to call
about that was somewhat urgent
let me
I wanted to
let.
Folks we're really trying to get
this right and
I have been in touch in addition
to the committee at analysis
that I referred you to that on.
The major analysts pointed out
something to me that and this is
for the district attorney's
because we don't want you to
lose a case over this.
Okay so reporting alleged
violations to law enforcement is
fine but turning over all
tracking data without a warrant
or at least reasonable
reasonable suspicion may result
in suppression of evidence and
jeopardize convictions for
horrible crimes okay so you
don't want to end up in that
situation whether award is based
on probable cause or reasonable
suspicion is needed.
Could not be known until is
litigated so if you will at
least consider that education is
subject to the
To address that concern before
it goes to the floor before we
vote on the final bill I just
wanted to call that to your
attention because we're we are
all interested in.
And created is much public
safety as possible and we don't
want to lose the conviction is
in fact there
the
Indictment is correct and the
individual is dangerous.
Thank you thank you madam chair
for sharing that concerned
No wonder I did they do at the
dust would like to I'm not I'm
not asking for a solution.
I'm just asking for them to for
all your your chance to look at
that and see and look at our
committee analysis and see if
you think there could be further
on improvements in the bill and
I think everyone's grateful for
what the work that you've done
so far.
So madam chair you wanted.
Continue.
Go ahead.
I'm sure madam chair we have
reached the end of the committee
questions it looks like I don't
see any for their hands so we
did have a motion on the table
with the second so if it's the
appropriate time we will then go
to a roll call vote on that
motion.
So this are and just to clarify
the motion that was passed on
house I am very two passed on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill I
thank you for the clarification
representative Nibert
depreciated.
Roll call please.
Representative Akan.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Chandler.
No one I'd like to explain
about.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Eli yes and I
would also like to explain more.
Representative Lewis.
Representative McQueen yes.
Our.
Representative Lewis.
Wonder if Liz I heard you
Representative Lewis.
Lisa I voted yes well.
Representative Nibert yes ma'am.
Representative rain yes.
Representative Townsend yes
ma'am.
Thank.
Noted like to expand my vote.
Madam chair.
Yes it is but my vote to.
What.
Okay okay settlement will start
with Representative you like to
explain is both and
Representative Chandler them
myself and then ending with
madam chair.
Representative did you want to
announce the votes first madam
thank you.
By a vote of ten to to we have
the do not pass on house bill
five and they do pass on
Committee substitute for House
Bill five.
Madam chair right then I the
mass before people explain the
roads it didn't Representative
Cook.
Right.
Okay okay thank you.
I'm sure you want me to start
thank you Representative I
please yeah so I don't know if
I've been here six years I don't
think I've ever explain one of
my votes but this is one that I
have to explain I was initially
against this bill and I think
for good reason this is an
entirely different bill
the original bill I thought on
I'm speaking directly to my
community to Albuquerque in
particular would have made
things more dangers
I think and I want to be very
clear about this that the
district attorney in Albuquerque
but politics over public safety
you just yet the fact is is that
there are the evidence shows two
things that most of these people
that we would have locked up
would not have been convicted of
anything.
Innocent people would have been
deprived of their families other
jobs everything else and those
that may have been guilty but
not convicted would come out on
the streets more dangerous the
solution that the studies have
shown over and over again that
best works as a deterrent to
crime is swift and certain
punishment and that requires the
district attorney to in effect
be the ambassador for law
enforcement to the courts courts
want to do the right thing and
they it but they need to be
presented with credible evidence
to detain people and juries need
to be to be presented with
evidence again credible evidence
to convict people and what the
district attorney is doing was I
thought the exact opposite he
was making cases stale we've
seen that over and over again
the district attorney has
continued to blame law
enforcement the courts and now
the legislature we gave him five
million dollars several years
ago we still know what to do
with it and the fact is is that
now he was coming in with the
proposal that I thought was
antithetical to exactly what it
was we were trying to do which
is get people to work together
to stop blaming one another to
stop supporting data and to work
as a team to act to get cases
quickly ready for trial so that
people know what they're facing
because most cases are plea and
that's what should be happening
and for those that shouldn't
need to go to trial dismissed
and so the original pose well I
thought was dangerous this one I
have some reservations about but
I really think in this instance
this is a step albeit with some
changes in the right direction
but it's going to take a number
of different solutions to get a
handle on what is clearly a
crime problem in Albuquerque we
do need to get a handle on that
and this is one of the ways to
do it and so I appreciate the
sponsor ringing at and thank you
for all your patience for
listening to that diatribe thank
you.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
I appreciate the fact that this
bill has been much whittled down
and in an effort to keep it
within the parameters of our
constitution so I think the
sponsor for that I am still
concerned that there seems to be
a lack of recognition and
willingness to address concerns
about
Placing in some guard rails that
at least require some parameters
to be articulated as to why the
information is needed are some
factual basis there of and all
the confusion about what is
available to the public or not
has seems to be confusion not
anything factual and I think we
need to understand that because
I think we have a duty to
protect this information because
I think it has the potential for
being misused and there was no
acknowledgement from the sponsor
or any of the advocates for this
bill that there is even a
possibility that that so for
that reason I'm voting against
the bill I voted against the
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair I will if
it if it makes sense make my
explanation next and then pass
it to to chair chairs out of
this meeting I appreciated
hearing from so many of you all
Representative Matthew and your
experience both when I sneaked
into watch the Senate Judiciary
presentations the extensive
conversations we hosted in this
space and finally our first ever
presentation of house bill five
which looks as we've all seen
significantly different than the
at legislation as it was
instructed to do several weeks
ago I appreciated your good
faith effort and I trusted your
intentions along the way but as
already stated by Representative
Eli and Representative Chandler
I had significant concerns about
the ways that narratives are
being laid out in the situation
and I feel like we have a
responsibility as elected
officials in this body and that
serve in different capacities to
craft language and policy
solutions that are more tailored
to the evidence and and
demonstrated information in
front of us and not so much
about what gets heard and played
in the media so I've been a did
bit disappointed as actors have
weighed in on this and have
clouded I'd say what is our
capacity for responsible
policymaking but I appreciate
that through this process and I
imagine democracy it at its best
we've come to this solution that
it's much much more focused and
much closer to something I
believe well actually have room
to improve public safety so
thank you for that as
Representative Chandler stated I
still have concerns about the
expectations of privacy is
privacy here and the
justification of of those are
question this data use for
additional purposes so that's my
explanation of my notebook but I
do appreciate your work
Representative to get us here
today and towards as much more
focused solution thank you.
Madam chair.
Thank you very much madam chair
and I was I just wanted to state
that I do believe our analysts
have legitimate concerns about.
Ultimately securing public
safety because you one thing we
don't want whether it's in the
criminal law or it's child abuse
protection are the child
protective services is we don't
want to reach the wrong
conclusion and make a case.
I have a case be overturned or
End up with somebody is very
dangerous on the street so that
is my concern and I hope that
you will look at possible
tailoring of this one you know a
little bit further for the floor
so with that I Representative
Matthews here have disrupted you
want to say something.
And I I.
You don't need to say anything
further okay thank you very much
we appreciate it and now stand
on the floor and I did not
make it entirely clear at this
the beginning of this
Meeting that we're not hearing
house joint resolution to
tonight the
Representative Lewis has been in
touch with the sponsored house
bill one forty five because we
are out of time for this
committee I'm gonna spend some
time with
the sponsors of that and
tomorrow I've got some
suggestions on that.
But those things will be rolled
to Friday Representative
Pettigrew had contacted me on
the floor after we had adjourned
to let me know the house bill
one ninety six
he would prefer to have it on
Friday that was going to be
really fast it'll be first on
Friday then we will go to one
forty five they come it is up
for one forty five and trying to
get that
Squared away and then go on to
other agenda from there so with
that distance Committee is a
journal tonight and I thank you
all for your patience let me
just say that unfortunately our
floor debate today took a couple
hours more than I had
anticipated and that to played a
role in our inability to get
through our agenda today but I
hope we can.
Be more expeditious in the
future and try to get through
more bills in committee thanks
everybody and have a good
evening.
We're adjourned.
