Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen.
Representative night for.
Representative read here
Representative green.
Representative Fenske here madam
vice chair madam chair here we
have a quorum K..
So before we get started I'd
like to talk about protocols for
this meeting we have some bills
that there is a great deal of
public interest in which I'm
very appreciative of.
So what we're gonna do is we
will take public comment the
public comment will be fifteen
minutes for each side meeting
opposition and those in support
we will do some online
participation as well the
speakers will be
Allotted ninety seconds a minute
half for their comments and I
will be timing it.
and I want to remind people that
this is a place of decorum that
we will not tolerate
Inappropriate comments casting
aspersions insults of speakers
or presenters or this committee
and that will be enforced also
there will be no photography
unless there's already been
commission received and we do
have a journalist here who will
be taking some photographs but
the chair has to approve anyone
who's taking recording or taking
photographs of just be aware I
hope everybody understands and I
very much appreciate your but we
do want people to understand
that this is a safe place for
people to participate in so
right now we are on.
Senate bill thirteen.
Do you want to concur yes could
we we're ready for concurrence
we have I built on concurrence.
I'm happy to take a motion madam
chair I move that Senate bill
two hundred as amended Senate
bill seventy one as amended
Senate bill three eighty three
as amended house bill four
twenty nine and Senate bill
three eighty eight do now pass
their second.
We have a due pass motion for
Senate bill two hundred as
amended Senate bill seventy one
as amended Senate bill three
eighty three as amended house
bill four twenty nine as
four twenty nine and Senate bill
three eighty eight a motion made
by vice chair Romero seconded by
Presents a Penske would you call
the roll please Representative
Akan.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative line for.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm.
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes a vote of six to
zero we have is to pass on
Senate bill two hundred as
amended seven Senate bill
seventy one is amended Senate
bill three eighty three is
amended house bill four twenty
nine and Senate bill three
eighty okay.
Thank you we are now on Senate
bill thirteen.
Speak supports.
Thank you.
Representative the floor is
yours thank you madam chair
Senate bill thirteen is
essentially a privacy protection
discrimination prevention gender
affirming care and abortion
related protection bill
these this bill as we have
understood from what's happening
around the country is necessary
to protect patients providers
and ensure that no one's
complies for safe and legal
health care so with that madam
chair there's several portions
of the bill that ensure that
while we go through
what is necessary to keep this
protection is through a system
with which we can ensure that
folks who receive this care New
Mexico are never subject to any
thing else but the laws of New
Mexico and so with that madam
chair just like to introduce my
expert.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Rebecca
Gaydos I'm an attorney and I am
the board chair of Planned
Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains action fund.
Good afternoon to Chandler
members of the committee mark
Baker also an attorney and I
work.
And at rules will stand for
questions settlement terms or
will get a lot yes I think you
will all right so let's go to
the audience those wishing to
speak in opposition please raise
your hand.
In the audience anyone wishing
to speak in opposition I'm sorry
oh I'm sorry yes Sir and then
we'll go over this way okay and
there's a Mike I would recommend
people go to the center aisle.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm against this bill.
Several reasons
First of all I think it lacks
transparency because of the way
it's written I also think
there's legality problems and I
am representing the knights of
Columbus and thank you could you
give us your name Sir for my
activation unencumbered Pino I'm
sorry no one I would also thank
you sure thank you.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee I'm Jody Hendrickson
I'm the executive director with
New Mexico Family action movie
and we oppose this bill because
it is the most egregiously
unconstitutional bill that we
have seen thus far.
No matter how you feel about the
services are protections
outlined in this bill.
We think that you should be
appalled at the blatant
violation of freedom of speech
that section six poses section
six in this bill tries to
silence any electronic
communication regarding
protected health activities as
has been already verified this
is not regarding hip this is
regarding any service but we
want to talk about according to
an analysis from the American
center for law and justice this
language expressly covers any
pro life communicative activity
aimed at stopping abortion it is
hard to imagine a broader more
blatantly unconstitutional
restriction note that it applies
not just to the communications
of pro life groups but also even
to the inquiries from pro life
individuals I love the fact that
in our country we're able to
have dialogue even we when we
differ in opinions when we see
things differently the beauty of
our constitutional right to
freedom of speech is that we can
have dialogue and this bill is a
blatant violation to that.
We hope that you will oppose
this bill to protect the freedom
of speech about New Mexicans
because to pass a bill that is
such a blatant violation to it
is really a slap in the face to
anyone who has served our
country given their lives given
their husbands wives sons or
daughters fighting for the
freedoms that we hold so dear so
please we ask you to oppose this
bill.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Lisa
Martinez and the executive
director of New Mexico Alliance
for life and my biggest question
to the committee is what exactly
does this bill do if anything to
protect New Mexicans outside of
the one percent who benefit
outside of the abortion lobby
who's now in the business of
profiting from transgender
procedures on children we're
also told that we need to
accommodate out of state women's
access to abortions in
particular Texas women need
access to abortions of all
things a focus on and champion
in our state this is it but per
the CDC out of state to
questions in New Mexico have
increased by thirty nine percent
in one year in fact New Mexico
taxpayers are already funding
seventy eight percent of all
abortions in the state and that
includes three hundred at least
abortions from out of state
citizen since we don't have a
residency requirement for
Medicaid is also shocking that
we are now in the place where
the abortion lobby behind this
bill is seeking to censor muzzle
pro life speech and section six
this bill is clearly a violation
of constitutional right to sort
free speech and seeking to
provide individuals up to ten
thousand dollars it's radical as
it is ridiculous lastly in
section nine which exempt from
extradition criminal fugitives
who commit to conspire to commit
illegal abortions so long as a
perpetrator remains in New
Mexico the major concern coupled
with the infanticide language in
H. B. seven that these bills
allow for an induced labor
abortion we're babies ND left to
die as in California is already
happening here in New Mexico for
congressional testimony from UNM
abortion and so for that reason
madam chair members of the
committee I ask you to vote now.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
Right let's go online.
Those wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Right Michael Hendricks.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee alive
very much appreciate the
opportunity to speak I also ask
I'm an attorney here in
Albuquerque I do ask that you
vote no on this for various
reasons the first being that
that hasn't interference with
other state investigations if we
think about the way the union
was formed and the system by
which we're able to to so
together very carefully
different states from across a
vast land mass it was because
the spirit and intent of the
original compact was to allow
for there to be a unification as
much as there could be if
workgroup before truly seeking
justice in our country we must
allow the system to function and
trust the process is already
been stated in section six
there's an this in clear
violation of the freedom of
speech that since trying to both
our state and federal
constitutions you cannot
criminalize speech without
showing compelling governmental
interest and that has to be
narrowly tailored to meet that
interests and this is just this
is blatant this is this is a
very broad language that would
penalize anyone speaking in
reference to the suppose it
protected health care activities
in electronic form electronic is
not narrowly tailored enough it
needs to be narrowly tailored
down the matter how you feel
about the services also the
remainder of the proposal seems
to be unenforceable as a matter
of practice you can't compel
personal jurisdiction on a
person's not New Mexico you
can't you can't compel them to
be under personal jurisdiction
just because they respond to a
dispute about personal
jurisdiction I think that has
something worth looking at a
hundred your time is up thank
you Kelly Lester.
Kelly Lester.
Hello yes thank you my name is
Kelly Lester I'm with and then
there were none we are an
organization that helps workers
who used to work in the abortion
industry I'm also a worker a
former worker and a woman who
has had four questions and I can
tell you that this bill helps
protect predators thirty percent
of our former workers say that
they knew that people that were
coming in to have abortions were
either being coerced or
trafficked and this bill
protects those people coming out
of state into New Mexico to get
these procedures and then there
being no clause for any criminal
prosecution of them after the
fact.
The other thing that this bill
does is it allows for babies to
be born after on abortion and
there'd be no protection for
that and I can tell you
countless stories of workers
meeting in a room and in another
room hearing a baby crying that
was not killed in the abortion
procedure and there being
nothing done and this bill
protects not only there being
nothing done but those babies
being built and so we are asking
that you would vote no to this
bill this bill does not end
abortion in New Mexico but it
protects the most egregious
forms and things that happened
through the abortion procedure
thank you thank you anyone else
online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Okay we're now ready to go to
the audience for those wishing
to speak in the audience wishing
to speak in person and I've been
given a list for those in
support so would you all who are
on the list please stand up and
get money and of course other
people are welcome within the
time parameters that I outlined.
Okay.
Hello hello my name is here is
often I'm a staff attorney at
the southwest women's Law Center
this bill protects providers New
Mexicans and those fleeing to
New Mexico to receive health
care it tells other states that
we will not be complicit in
opposing their laws for which we
had no say on those in New
Mexico it protects the privacy
of both those getting care and
those giving care for people who
so strongly disagree with the
laws of New Mexico they are
constantly working to obtain
private medical information in
order to criminalize those who
are simply acting legally under
our laws.
Those receiving care New Mexico
should not need to retain an
attorney or call a hotline just
to make sure that their actions
here in our state our legal.
The Southwes women's Law Center.
Please is strongly supports this
bill because those in New Mexico
should never fear extradition
for doing what is legal in our
state thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Erin
Armstrong I've been an advocate
and attorney in this field for
many years thank you for
considering this incredibly time
we build to protect patients and
providers who live in and see
care in our state.
The dangers criminalization and
legal targeting of abortion and
gender affirming care around the
country is not theoretical
people are being actively
targeted and persecuted for
seeking the care that they need.
Just this week Kentucky passed
laws subjecting people receive
or provide abortion care to the
death penalty.
South Carolina and other states
are following suit.
Additionally just this week
three women in taxes were sued
for wrongful death by a man who
claims they helped their dear
friend his ex wife obtain
medication for an abortion.
He seeking one million dollars
in damages from each woman.
Just last week a lawsuit was
filed in taxes by five women
tonight's life saving abortion
care.
Though they face the risk of
hemorrhage or life threatening
infection these women were not
only told they could not have a
questions in their home states
some doctors were too afraid in
this legal claim it even to
forward their medical records.
According to the suit the women
found themselves crossing state
borders to seek medical
treatment outside Texas I'm
worried that families and
neighbors I report them to state
authorities.
One point of and her husband
consider driving here to New
Mexico.
According to The New York Times
she was so worried about being
prosecuted I didn't even feel
safe going options she said I
didn't know what they could and
couldn't search.
Lauren hall another plaintiff
was eighteen weeks pregnant and
had already set up a crib at
home when scans revealed that
her fetus had no school and no
developed breaking thank you
Aaron thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm revenue
Bethany Mayer Evans and I'm here
representing the New Mexico
religious coalition for
reproductive choice and of the
faith rooted organization we
represent many people of
different faith backgrounds who
believe that reproductive and
gender affirming health care
should remain safe and legal
here in New Mexico across these
diverse faith backgrounds we
find a common calling to care
for our neighbor to lift up the
voices of the marginalized and
to stand for justice and equity
for all persons SB thirteen
reaffirms that in the state of
New Mexico
Defense everyone is for you to
get the health care that they
need we know that you've heard
in the past religious arguments
against this lifesaving and life
affirming care and so I want to
make it clear that it's because
of our strong moral and
religious values and are
faithful commitment to justice
for all persons that we stand
and support today thank you
thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee and
Marshall Martinez executive
director of equality New Mexico
your statewide LGBTQ civil
rights organization so far this
year over three hundred and
fifty anti LGBTQ bills have been
introduced in legislatures
across the country the vast
majority of these attacking
trans people especially trans
youth and their parents
including states neighboring us
like Texas that have labeled
social transitioning merely
supporting your child with a
hair cut or closing as child
abuse this legislature has
repeatedly said for generations
and even in this session that we
will affirm and protect LGBTQ
people in all of our full
authentic selves that protection
must extend to the young people
and their families who are
coming into the state because of
our affirming accepting and
loving values.
Thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee
Alexandria Taylor and executive
director of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs at the core of our
mission is ensuring survivors of
sexual assault have access to
services justice and healing and
alignment with our mission we
believe all those seeking care
in our state deserve a farming
care violence takes away a
person's choice about what
happens to their body and their
life to kill our communities we
must support them by by ensuring
every single person has the
freedom and choice to make their
own decisions about their health
with love and support as an
organization working to prevent
sexual violence and support
survivors across the state we
know that sexual violence
happens in every single
community violence takes away a
person's choice about what
happens to their body and their
life we work with statewide
sexual assault coalitions in
every state across the country
and they are struggling to
support survivors and accessing
the care they need we believe
firmly that to heal our
communities we must support
survivors by ensuring every
single person has the freedom
and choice to make their own
decisions about their health and
we believe that each person
knows what is best for their own
life thank you thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jennifer
Rafael gets and the executive
director for the commission on
the status of women and I stand
in support of SB thirteen for
all the reasons previously
stated and additionally I've
been part of a lot of
conversations during the session
about the need to expand the
number of medical professionals
and services in our state
especially in our rural
communities how can we begin to
meet this goal when our protect
practitioners are being vilified
for doing their jobs happening
expectations to see care when
their personal and private
medical treatments are exposed
as public information passing SB
thirteen makes a clear statement
that New Mexico values its
medical providers and the
privacy of its citizens the
commission on the status of
women stands in support of SB
thirteen and I'm asking you all
to please do the same thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Kayla
herring and I'm the director of
public affairs for Planned
Parenthood of the rocky
mountains every day our
dedicated compassionate medical
providers who have faced decades
of threats violence and
harassment of them and their
families see patients every day
who are coming from harder and
harder situations trying to
access the care that they need
because of what is happening
around the country well we work
in other ways to reduce barriers
like distance The New Mexicans
and those coming to our state
have to travel for care the time
they have to take off of work
whether it is paid or unpaid
finding child care for the
children and families that they
already have and paying for room
and board and the cost of that
care.
We're seeing other barriers to
and we seek with Senate bill
thirteen to remove some of the
most horrific barriers that
we're seeing around the country
like patients having their
health care information used
against them threats of abuse of
litigation fear to cross state
lines and what that means to
come home and console and a
family member about the care
that they received and other
states trying to impose their
laws and folks who are just
trying to access compassionate
care in our state thank you so
much.
Madam chair members of the
committee can Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
for all the reasons stated
before we are in strong support
of this legislation thank you
very much.
Online.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Dr Megan Henry and I'm The
New Mexico section secretary of
a cog I've been practicing
obstetrics and gynecology and
rural northwest New Mexico for
the last six and a half years
I'm going to read part of a
letter that I wrote that you
should have all been provided
which is signed by a large and
diverse group of healthcare
providers from across our state.
All the physicians are precious
resource that is already hard to
come by in New Mexico in order
to provide the best possible
care we need to know that we can
make sound clinical decisions
without influence from divisive
politics sadly public bodies
outside of New Mexico have
passed legislation that directly
interferes with those decisions
we have heard from colleagues in
other states I know many of them
are considering or have already
left their states as a result of
no longer feeling safe to
practice evidence based medicine
and the way that they know is
best please vote to pass Senate
bill thirteen your support of
this legislation will affirm
that you value us and the care
we provide knowing that we can
continue to provide the best and
most appropriate care to anyone
the amendment they from the
state or from one of our
neighboring states is vital so
that we can continue to live
here and care for New Mexicans
and others in need thank you.
Dr Torrez.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes hi my name is darshan Patel
and I'm a family medicine
physician raised in New Mexico
and currently practicing in our
state I'm here today to speak in
favor of SB thirteen a bill that
protects provision of
reproductive and gender
affirming health care in our
state and our region I applaud
the bill's authors and co
sponsors for their courage and
leadership on this issue and to
the numerous advocates and
supporters thank you for your
hard work in protecting our
patients and our health care
providers as they seek to
find seek to and provide
essential health care this is
doctor policies enacted in our
neighboring states have had a
chilling effect on the provision
of reproductive and gender
affirming health care in our
state I am seeing patients on a
regular basis who are raised to
present to the local hospitals
and clinics for important life
saving care healthcare providers
have been placed in a position
where they have to wait
potentially losing their medical
licenses faced enormous
financial penalties and even
prison time just for offering
what any reputable medical or
scientific organization will
tell you is essential and
necessary medical care it is our
black brown indigenous people of
color who are suffering the most
this piece of legislation is one
of the many necessary staff to
move our state and our country
in the right direction to
safeguard the rights of women
and R. L. G. B. T. community
thank you for your time.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee happy what is
today Wednesday okay hi it is my
history month and as we get
started I have to say the names
of the mothers of reproductive
best justice again Dr twenty by
Leonard Rep alma Crawford Evelyn
S. field Terry James this all
the more it may Senator
McConnell snippy in New bio Dr
Loretta Ross Elizabeth Terry
able Mabel Thomas when that P.
Willis and Kim young blood these
are the black we're women that
brought you reproductive justice
and reproductive justice is
rooted in inclusion in in in in
intersection malady in complete
support of operating bodies and
the full spectrum of health care
that they required to thrive
today we see insidious behavior
to ban Health Care next door in
Amarillo and countless
legislation how far more
siblings relatives and friends
loved ones were merely existing
in the harsh landscape of our
society is laid out by I'm
affected officials in the
Supreme Court today myself and
eighty percent of New Mexicans
one more time eighty percent of
New Mexicans are asking you to
pass this legislation and hold
the line of accountability so
let it be known that bodily
autonomy in access to health
care without obstacles must be
the norm and not the end
reachability exception thank you
all.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Monet arch back and I'm not here
on behalf of the New Mexico
Black central organizing
committee we stand in strong
support of SB thirteen because
it prohibits state agencies from
sharing information related to
reproductive health care for New
Mexico patients and their
providers in the New Mexico
Black central organizing
committee we define reproductive
justice as the human right to
maintain personal bodily
autonomy have children not have
children and parents the
children we have in safe and
sustainable communities
reproductive justice is about
protecting people from being
criminalized from abortion care
there's no choice what when
where there's no protection from
being criminalized our society
will not be free until the most
vulnerable people are able to
access the resources and for
human rights to live self
determined lives without fear
discrimination or retaliation
abortion access is an economic
and racial justice issue in a
crucial part of civil rights we
ask where do passed from the
committee thank you for your
time.
You madam chair members of the
committee on merits made Jan I'm
speaking on behalf of R. A. A.
U. W. American Association of
university women and perhaps on
behalf of legal removal of
voters of New Mexico both
organizations stand in strong
support of this legislation and
well hope that the committee
will pass this legislation we
need to protect of people who
pursue a reproductive health
care and also providers from
being prosecuted this is a very
important issue for our state we
urge you to support this
legislation thank you.
Yes hello madam chair and
representative my name is Sam
the page I'm speaking today on
behalf of the league of women
voters of New Mexico.
The league support everyone's
right to access affordable high
quality reproductive health care
and gender affirming care
including access to abortion
services and birth control as
well as gender care services we
urge you to pass this important
piece of legislation thank you.
Last.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee I'm R. the
president of Santa Fe national
organization for women and we
believe that all our patients
and providers for reproductive
and gender affirming care need
this protection we stand in
strong support thank you.
That.
Those are public comment portion
of.
This discussion could of
Representative would you like to
add anything on I noticed that
senator Lopez is here so it
would you like to add anything
Senator.
Madam chair I don't want to I
know that.
Michael mother here is already
done some presentation I
apologize I'm just gotten off
the floor.
Welcome
Representative yeah madam chair
I just wanted to I don't know if
it needed in your packet or not
this is already happening this
is why we need this bill now
we're we're seeing folks being
targeted for lawsuits for aiding
those and seeking reproductive
health care and so I just wanted
to draw your attention to the
fact that this is we're already
seeing this in neighboring
states thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Discussion.
For members Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair and try to read
through this quickly and
I wanted to ask a few questions
and.
If we go to page three and we're
looking at winds thirteen
through.
Fat eighteen and I was I will
when I look at this let's assume
that our doctors will licensed
in another state of practicing
in this state.
So if that state says Hey you're
doing stuff that we don't allow.
Then what we're saying here is
that.
Our state won't cooperate with
their investigation.
Madam chair representative so
what this is clarifying is that
if they're practicing in this
state it legal practice so we're
not meddling with at all any
other states laws were just
saying and affirming the in this
state it's a protected practice.
Okay but madam chair and
representative if the other
states as this is not.
a practice that we sanction or
that's allowed in our state.
The way I'm reading this it says
we're not going to allow.
You to get any information from
our state conducted an
investigation.
And to the activities of that
drive here's sector that's
correct chair.
Madam chair and representative.
What I'm worried about on this
also is that you could you
could.
Okay so you could have something
there The Medical Board another
status saying we want to know
what's going on we say we're not
going to give you any
information I think that would
lead to that doctor losing his
license.
Madam chair representative again
if there are license in a
separate state practicing here
and we have reciprocity here
with that license and they're
practicing medicine under our
laws we're not going to subject
them to any other laws but the
state of New Mexicos.
Whether whether it's licensure
us something else that's that's
not in this bill Madam chair
representative.
Yes madam chair and and
Representative even you know I
did I just see that as
problematic.
not cooperating with the Four
an investigation you know what
to a different state we we refer
to it as a.
For an investigation and.
I I can see that that doctor
would then be you know they say
well if you're not going to
cooperate we have no option but
to go ahead and and revoke your
license and then I think that
would create of a bigger problem
the go ahead Madam chair
representative so you have to be
licensed in the state of New
Mexico to practice medicine we
don't have a medical contact
with any other states you have
to be licensed here in order to
give the type of care that we're
trying to protect here and so
that's not the scenario you
brought about it that's not a
situation which were in.
Okay madam chair and
Representative I thought that we
had Representative pocit
Representative possibly where if
your license over there we'd
recognize that no Madam chair
representative reciprocity
meaning you have to then get a
license in the state.
In madam chair and
Representative so when I get to
the bottom of page four we're
looking at winds twenty to.
in to the very top of page I.
The start looking at this.
So the the service subpoena.
And of.
And we're saying we're not going
to comply with that.
Well that will that extend to a
for a to a federal investigation
as well.
Madam chair representative so
this is first and section eight
focuses on
protected health care activities
so that's the room with which
were in and then we talk about
federal law all refer to money
My experts of course madam chair
members of the committee this is
about state courts not federal
courts.
So the light of federal.
Madam chair and
expert if if I'm a state of
important state and I.
Request information and you
refuse to with north and go to
the federal court to try to
force you to comply.
You could come you could do
whatever you wanted and in a
federal court Representative
madam chair.
Well I I think that's
problematic because madam chair
and expert I think what is will
be is elevated you know we.
If we want to that's alright yes
madam chair representative ream
I've talked to reports at the
law school and federal courts
are courts of limited
jurisdiction and so there have
to be some basis for it to go to
federal court some federal
jurisdictional hook and the fact
that somebody in another state
tried to domesticate a subpoena
here and it was an honor I don't
see is triggering federal
jurisdiction I don't see where
the hope would be that to take
it to federal court these are
normally done you have to
domesticate subpoenas from
foreign jurisdictions in in New
Mexico court and then in the
dispute over that subpoena is
resolved within the New Mexico
court and so this is typically a
matter of back and forth among
the states that unusual
circumstance we have here is
that unlike in any.
Prior time that that I've seen
in my life term my career
practicing law we have other
states passing laws that purport
to reach into another state and
criminalize conduct that occurs
exclusively there and in law
enforcement you can't even
charge in federal court a crime
in the district of New Mexico
even if it's a federal crime if
the crime occurred in the
western district of Texas
because you were each court
hears cases from the on its own
geographic region and so I don't
see circumcenter go to federal
court and this is just a
reaction to an unusual set of
circumstances they were seeing
of all with other states trying
to reach into the economy of New
Mexico.
And madam chair an expert on
that so you don't think there's
any way to get a hook in the roe
versus Wade or some other of
Supreme Court decision.
chair Chandler Representative
Rehm someone could come in and
argue about the
constitutionality of a piece of
the statute and bring the
federal case to challenge on
cost federal constitutional
grounds but in terms of just the
execution of a subpoena because
another state wanted to
investigate
protected health
health care activity that
occurred in New Mexico
I don't see that there be a
federal for that it would have
to be the federal constitutional
challenge to the law and then we
see what they said but I don't
think that there would be a.
Protect each state exercising
its own autonomy over the
conduct that occurs with its own
state I'd be surprised if there
was a general federalism hawk
for a constitutional challenge
to what's proposed here.
And madam chair and
Representative when we go to
page six we are one thirteen
we're talking about
the hip in can you give me an
example of who is under the
hip a accountability act.
Madam chair members of the
committee and it would be so
happy to find covered entities
and business associates doctors
offices hospitals
Things like that it would not
include for example most
employers.
individuals.
It's a trap usually health care
providers yes madam chair an
expert or would it include a
clinic that provides abortion.
For reproductive health and
anyway Madam chair
representative yes.
Madam chair and Representative
when we go over to.
Seven page seven and now we're
on one street for.
I see an individual suffers
substantial emotional these
distress and I'm wondering who's
going to determine.
Or for that.
Madam chair representative so
that's a standard
language for Dayan under tort
law so when you you have to
prove it to report that you had
that that severe substantial
emotional distress and and prove
those damages.
Key.
Madam chair and Representative
when we get to page eight one
nine and ten.
the court shall reward to
prevailing plaintiff reasonable
for any fees and costs
What if the lost.
With AP award that.
Madam chair representative only
if they prevail.
And madam chair and
Representative why don't we
allow it both ways.
Madam chair representative Rehm
it's highly unusual to have a.
An attorney's fees provision
that swings both ways where a
defendant is entitled to recover
their fees that's a the the
normal American rules that each
party pays their own fees in a
situation like this where you
have a real access to the point
concern where there's an
important ride it issue and
failing to a for a provide for
attorney's fees will deny people
the ability to effectively
vindicate that right in that
circumstance the legislature
commonly includes prevailing
party attorney's fees provision
and it's very very unusual to
see it go both ways.
Madam madam chair and expert
what I think this is I've heard
it referred to in here is the
English model.
where they okay you the which
way is which way we you know
it's this committee in the past
has said you know it shall be up
to the court to decide you know
reasonable fees and just leave
it that way you know if they if
they they may award rather than
the shallow Ford.
Madam chair Representative Rehm
there lots of subtle differences
in the wording of attorneys fees
provisions and so I'm not sure
which that you might be pointing
to but the American role would
be that there's everybody pays
their own way and litigation
which works as long as there's
enough at issue and the parties
are well resourced enough that
they can provide access to the
courts but litigation is so
expensive these days and the
danger the risk that a plaintiff
takes is if you file a case
that's not going to win you'll
have include the costs of
litigation and not have the
opportunity to to recover those
and so there's a deterrent
through that to prevent cases
that have no merit but awarding
it both ways would be a double
whammy in denying people access
to the courts because they would
be that penalty of whatever they
sued coming back and not only
them paying their own way but
also paying the defendant's way
and that prevents people when
they're when I you have a bill
that's addressing an important
right and important bundle of
rights that would be in a
typical situation statutes.
Madam chair and as for what I
see that as is when I said she
health it encourages frivolous
lawsuits and that's what I would
you know I think so what we need
to have is that they may you
know and if if there got a
justifiable lawsuit they're
going to find an attorney to go
ahead and take this on and he'll
take a contingency fee so.
Thank you I don't think there
was a question there and we can
keep our answers as brief as
possible yes madam chair and and
I was asking do you agree I'm
sorry.
Madam chair representative green
I I don't agree in the sense
that
That that that the party holding
can.
Recover fees if they prevail so
there's already hurdles so it's
only meritorious claims by
definition where attorney's fees
will be awarded you have to be a
prevailing party.
So what do you say shower may
and in federal court it's always
defined the prevailing party
even in state statute to say may
can prevail.
Okay well madam chair based on
that I would propose on page
eight one nine that we change
shall to may.
Unfriendly madam chair.
Is that a motion representative
madam chair yes.
Their second.
The waking up of.
Was it.
To be if you wish to say
anything further on that
particular motion Representative
madam chair I just think that
you know as the expert said that
in most cases if they're
prevailing they're going to
receive their fees and costs
anyway I think we ought to go
with may which is been how this
committee is rules in the past.
Further discussion on the
motion.
Would you call the roll please.
Representative Alcon.
A motion to amend.
To add may I should be clear I
apologize on page eight striking
online line the word show and
and and inserting instead of
may.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker no.
Representative McQueen.
The state of Representative
Nibert yes.
Representative read.
Representative green yes ma'am
Representative Penske no.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair no.
By a vote of two to six we have
the not I doubt the amendment.
I'm surprised but.
The floor Representative thank
you madam chair and
Representative when we go down
to page eight we're looking at
the uniform criminal extradition
Act and then we go over to the
top of page nine
If someone commits a crime in
another state it's been the
practice that we cooperate with
that state I mean there's
there's going to be an
extradition hearing and
cooperate with that state and
when I look at the top of page
nine line one to ten this is
saying we're not cooperate with
them.
And I don't understand the
rationale of that.
Madam chair representative
because in our state we're
protecting health care by
ensuring that those who
practicing would not be subject
to Anne's any extradition I mean
that's the point of the bill.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Chasey.
Just a couple of quick questions
here we have
I wonder there are some other
states that are enacting similar
legislation according to the FIR
I wonder if madam chair orders
excuse me vice chair or Senator
Lopez wanted just mention those
briefly madam chair then leader
it's Washington Connecticut
Massachusetts and California
they've taken different
approaches this is a narrower
approach then what we've seen in
somewhere like Washington
and I don't know from.
Senator you can okay great madam
chair has the ability do you
know if there have been any
attempts to remove those federal
court or have there has there
been any action under those we
we've not heard okay thank.
One last quick question.
Chair.
Do you think the tort claims act
By eight prohibits the private
right of action.
Madam chair I think Mister Baker
might be able to answer that
Madam chair representative
chasing now I believe that the
school this is an nexus
standalone statute that
specifically authorizes a cause
of action that can be brought
against public body and just
like the New Mexico Civil Rights
Act stands alone this with
standalone separate from tort
claims act that's what I thought
thank you madam chair new
questions thank you anyone else
with questions.
I'm a representative of
Representative like to make a
motion.
Seems pretty proper to me right
now and it still.
We have a motion.
Four do pass yeah we have a
motion for do pass on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill thirteen made by
Representative al cone seconded
by speaker Martinez.
Any further discussion.
Yeah I just want to commend you
all for bringing forth this bill
I think it's very important for
the state to let people know
that it's a safe place to obtain
essential health care and I also
want to point out that those
states that are criminalizing
the ability of a drive to be
able to act to communicate with
their patients to me is a war on
doctors not just women and it's
really something that we need to
keep in mind we think of that as
an as an okay approve or lease
those states think of it that
isn't okay approach to
addressing the abortion problem
but what they're really doing is
reading health care and doctors
it's a war on doctors that's how
I view it as well and we've got
to keep that in mind
because they try to tell it is
something where they're
protecting people but actually
so thank you very much would you
call the roll Representative
all.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker yes Representative
McQueen.
Representative night
Representative read.
Representative green.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes by a vote of sixty two we
have to pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee of course.
Thank you very much thank you
center.
Okay.
I see that Senator savant cases
here and we are his timing is
perfect.
Well we bring them out when yes
okay time yeah yes.
Tax you can't blame me for that.
You know what.
Local I'm gonna hand you a piece
of paper here shows the bills of
house members in the past and
Senate judiciary last couple of
a.
Senator Senator that's really
I'm.
I understand that manager I'm
I'm teasing Center local I know
but.
Madam chair.
Senator four twenty eight thank
you for hearing us this bill
would amend the unfair trade
practices act the goal of this
legislation is to fit within one
of the federal exceptions that
limits and restricts when action
can be taken in court against
the manufacturer distributor of
firearms in the law this area is
admittedly in transition as
recently as a couple weeks ago
we had a the piece of
legislation in New Jersey that
was.
Worked on very closely I think
about number number advocates to
try to find will phone away
within that federal exception
that was struck down so what
we've done is we've taken a lot
of these cases a recent Supreme
Court precedents for their cases
to try and find and an area of
the law where we believe the
federal except of the federal
community against manufacturers
would be subject to the state
authority some Senator Brandon
Cummings whose staff attorney
with the Judiciary Committee and
he'll help me with some of the
finer details very quickly the
under of unfair trade practices
act as a long standing statue
New Mexico it's designed to
protect consumers you'll see and
one of the issues that you'll
hear this afternoon with some
opposition is that we're
increasing the statutory minimum
penalties I'll let you know that
has been changed since nineteen
fifty three so when you see a
change from hundred dollars to
ten thousand dollars it's going
to seem like a large increase
but again we're talking about
something in well over a century
half century ago before those
numbers were established and
I'll be happy to try and justify
the the numbers that we use
section one of the Bill modifies
the business corporation act as
follows the pro Bridgestone jobs
was Bridgestone K. it was
decided by the U. S. I'm sorry
by the New Mexico Supreme Court.
On the some looking for the date
of decision but it was in twenty
twenty two.
and this is a recent decision
that relates to the issue of
jurisdiction so we're
recognizing that the court that
case the the of the court
appeals previously said that
jurisdiction could be
established by registered agent
in the state of New Mexico this
report said no and said that if
you want to have that you'd have
to have that in the model
Corporation acts of that is
designed to allow us to bring
suit in New Mexico under the
unfair trade practices act in
these cases the cases of guns.
The goal here quite simply is
that we would want to have to be
able to or would have to bring
these cases in Tennessee or
Arkansas or whatever the
corporate offices or
headquarters maybe.
The section to.
Of the bill updates and at
several different definitions
many of them relate to firearms
farms are assessor res one of
the principal goals that were
attending to attack here is the
marketing and selling of
assessors farms assessors that
are designed to convert a semi
semiautomatic firearm to an
automatic firearm the example
that we've been using quite a
bit is that you can buy a thirty
five or forty dollar we'd be
happy to show you what it looks
like thirty five or forty to a
piece of a switch you can put on
a very common clock two o'clock
to probably one of most common
hand guns that we find around
it's a semi automatic meaning
that you have to pull the
trigger for each shot with a
thirty five dollars which you
can convert that to a automatic
pistol that will fire in the
video we watch something in the
neighborhood about thirty to
forty rounds in less than a
second
and so the goal here is to try
and assure that those types of
devices and assessors are not
available automatic weapons are
already illegal under federal
law but what we're finding is
the market place saturated with
assessors that allow you to make
conversion from and semi
automatic to an automatic weapon
so that's what you'll see in
section to a number of new
definitions we're also
addressing here the fact that
the unfair trade practices act
does not keep up with the fact
that we got a new way of buying
and selling these days with
namely Amazon and online sales
an example I would give you is
after the session one of you
wants to take a trip to con Kuhn
and while you're there you
purchased something online from
Amazon it gets delivered in New
Mexico the argument could be
made that the purchase or sale
was made in Concord of but if
the product is delivered to New
Mexico this bill would ensure
that that as a basis for
jurisdiction the delivery of a
product in New Mexico should be
a basis for that and and that is
not for more money and expansion
of of the Authority
jurisdictions in Mexico but it's
again the reason for some of
those definitions for online
marketplace and for sellers.
We've also made certain
definitions that section two for
trade and commerce.
And so I think that'll probably
be an area where you'll focus a
lot of your attention section
three the bill is just clean up
language Representative and I
say that when I use cleanup
language I'm using that I think
to be fair to all of you this
section three of the bill
relates to containers on to them
for trade exactly I don't know
what where the I don't know how
that existing area of the act
about but it essentially relates
to things like shopping carts
for milk crates and things of
that kind again that's that's
all existing language but there
is some cleanup there.
Section four relates to
compliance with federal laws
this is again one of the key
parts of the bill here which is
where we make an exception under
the unfair trade practices act
for compliance with federal law
what we're trying to attack here
is the representation of goods
that are marketed and sold as
legal when they're in fact
illegal and so this makes the
representation misrepresentation
of legal versus illegal fire
arms and fire and and gun drugs
and assessor res a specific
enumerated violation of the on
for trade practices that.
Section five of the bill I'm
thinking fairly sings cleanup
language there's numerous
references in section fifty five
to the Attorney General as he
him you all used to us changing
those to gender neutral and that
is section five of the bill.
Section six of the bills mostly
existing language this relates
to the authority of the Attorney
General to settle a case and
that that Madam does not bar
further action against someone
into unfair trade practices act
I don't think that's a
substantive change in the bill
at all as in the case of section
five.
Section seven is an important
part of the bill this defines
the the includes a definition of
who can bring an unfair trade
practices lawsuit so that this
can capture those individuals
selling illegal weapons that
really is the goal here you'll
hear some opposition the bill
from a large penalty of two
hundred fifty thousand are
penalty please focus on the word
knowing that that violation
regards a knowing violation for
that type of a panel to apply
sections of the bill is the area
where we increase the statutory
damages I read as I indicated
earlier in some cases from a
hundred dollars from nineteen
fifty three to ten thousand
dollars I'll just tell you the
the.
We had to pick up we had come up
with some numbers to bring
ourselves up to date from
nineteen fifty three I selected
ten thousand dollars because
that's the jurisdictional limit
for small claims court in New
Mexico so that seems like an
appropriate number but that is a
very subjective on a number and
one that I'm open to discussing
with the committee.
Section eight of the bill raises
the recovery by turning general
the civil penalties it change
can recover.
Session nine subjects anything
that may be gathered by the
Attorney General to April
disclosures and so this is an
area where there's a civil
investigative demand by the
Attorney General and where those
documents records become.
Disclosed the one of the
important parts of this bill is
that one of the challenges we
have in the current market place
with things like Amazon is
knowing who's actually placing
the sale those who is actually
the seller and we're trying to
take an action against the
seller for unlawful on or unfair
or unconscionable trade practice
identification define who the
seller maybe this this bill
would require some of that
information to be voluntarily
disclosed with regard to the
seller in a way that's now not
required by the act section ten
is just clean up language with
regard to gender.
Settlement of the bill relates
to existing exceptions for
advertisers and publishers but
again clarifies that the
misrepresentation of items as
legal in New Mexico with the
illegal would begin a violation
in for trade practicum PT with
the goal of this bill is to put
an end to those who represent
illegal firearms and illegal
assessors as legal.
and section twelve the bill is
the satisfaction of the federal
law for the statutory exemptions
that precludes actions against
gun manufacturers and
distributors but again there are
exceptions under that federal
law and and we're of the mind
that this bill very carefully is
within the lanes that the
Congress is allowed for an
action be brought against a gun
manufacturer distributor where
there is a knowing
misrepresentation or violation
of state law on this is the
state law that would be within
that federal exception so madam
chair I know there's a lot of
this bill I'm sure the private
lot of questions and lively
debate will stand for questions.
thank you senator did you have a
couple of amendments that were.
I'm sorry membership number of
changes are the same time.
Okay.
Somebody from.
Yes did you have a couple of
amendments that you wanted to
discuss Senator thank you madam
chair thank you for giving that
opportunity so one of the first
the.
Excuse me center
Austin I think there
the end in eighty four eighty
five I believe etcetera etcetera
that's correct.
So upon introduction there was
some suspicion that this goal
the goal of this bill was
related to cannabis and the
recently and legalization of
cannabis and here that the
misrepresentation of something
as ill as to be legal when it's
illegal under federal law was
the goal of this legislation I
was amused by that the I guess
interpretation or those who
thought perhaps that was my the
objective it was not in the
thought never occurred to me but
nonetheless some were concerned
about that so to disabuse any
thought that that's the purpose
of this bill I've proposed
Senate I'm sorry to amendment
number two eighty four point one
which would make abundantly
clear that this bill is not
intended to in any way relate to
misrepresentation of cannabis as
legal under federal law when in
fact it's illegal under federal
law or that's because legally
New Mexico that is legal under
federal law so that's the the
eight eighty four point one
amendment.
and
The.
Two eighty five amendment is
again to to try to address the
fact that there was some concern
about the civil investigative
demands that would be done I
would call them ultra subpoena
and those we have a subpoena
process under rules of civil
procedure and the bill as it was
originally drafted would have
had appropriation by which
people could are the Attorney
General and others could obtain
information related to a
potential claim the suggestion
was that we should just simply
follow the existing procedure
for a subpoena and and I think
that that that's probably a good
idea as well too so that's the
two eighty five point one
amendment and madam chair I
believe those are the two
minutes you haven't funny from
Maine right now.
So I I would propose we discuss
the amendments before remove so
if someone would like to move
the amendments for discussion
and you want both of them at the
same time or do I would prefer
to do once a list to eighty four
and then eighty five so some of.
two two six two eight four point
one so we have a motion for for
the purposes of discussion on
the first amendment which is a
shorter amendment
Committee.
Questions.
I I just wanna come I appreciate
the amendment I've perhaps was
one of those insisting.
that this might be one way of
doing that so I appreciate that
the clarity and the
need to make sure that well
we're in the space that we we
protect this law.
I see no discussion as an agency
to make a motion.
With.
We have a motion to adopt the
first amendment which is two six
two eight four point one to call
the roll please.
Representative.
Representative Chasey have.
Representative.
Mr speaker yes Representative
McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read.
Representative rain.
Representative Penske yes.
At a vice chair of this madam
chair yes.
Nine two zero the amendment is.
So we're now I'm happy to have a
motion.
For the.
Great thank questions about.
Second amendment and well we do
have a question about the second
but the.
Okay.
In a motion.
Okay give us a few minutes
Center.
If you Madam by me and
Representative off my my
suggestion you may want to think
about I don't again I don't know
the wishes of used to chair the
committee mice and ice my
suspicions there's no opposition
to this proposed amendment I
would suspect that those with
concerns of the bill would
support this amendment as well.
Yes so you're just restoring
that.
Current practices in enterprises
act the current procedure that.
Merry would have been said
Brandon whispering into my ear
madam chair may I just have an
answer that question for me read
this for and all our ears madam
chair that's good thank you.
it would restore the language
that was previously there but it
will also make it a violation of
the U. PA itself to willfully
refuse to comply with about the
issued subpoenas.
And the penalty would be for
firearms related willfully
refusing to comply with legally
issued subpoena two hundred
fifty thousand for other PPL
violations if they willfully
refused to comply with the
subpoena procedure ten thousand.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative anyone
else with questions
Representative Nibert.
Madam chair
This is a read this write this
section would just for the farm
one of the more important trade
practices act would not.
Madam chair representative it
would it with regard to the
subpoena Authority so so the
answer questions little bit of
both there is a specific section
there that relates to the
willful failure to comply with
the subpoena as it relates to
firearms and that's the that's
the enhanced penalty civil
penalty the other section
relates to a subpoena outside of
the manufacture distribution of
guns but again in both cases
they require willful failure to
comply with the subpoena.
And we're.
Or jump in that the two hundred
fifty thousand dollars or only
again in the case of this
Representative in the case of a
violation related to the
manufacturing advertising
distributing and selling a
firearm and and I'll note here
if you look at the continuation
on the on the amendment
subparagraph one it requires
that a knowing violation and
this is in violation of the laws
of New Mexico are reunited state
CTE W. violating federal law for
that for that subpoena penalty
to apply.
I realize these are these are
significant penalties
Representative and and I'm sure
their concern for many but take
the standard is very high has
been knowing
willful violation of federal law
this gonna capture very bad
actors.
And that's really in addition to
the other.
Damages madam chair and senator
with respect to.
The other.
Penalties if you will under the
unfair practices act is that
correct Madam would respectfully
disagree if I understand your
question so I would say there in
addition to because they're
really two separate things the
section we're looking at right
now would be violation a knowing
violation of a subpoena so
that's one section the other
section you're looking at the
other civil penalties would be
some of the Sestri penalties for
unfair and unconscionable trip
and deceptive trade practices so
we already have statutory
language that makes it unlawful
to engage in deceptive and
unconscionable unfair trade
practices and that has the
penalties there are as little as
actual damages than you'll see
in the existing act you can have
a multiple of three times actual
damages and the existing act has
of some minimal maybe will
statutory damages so we're
increasing those but that's as
for violation of the that's for
engaging in unfair deceptive
practice that's that penalty the
the amendment here we're looking
at is for violation of a
subpoena those receive a
subpoena and refuse will fully
comply with the subpoena then
you're subjecting yourself to
this liability.
And again that would only be
with respect to firearms
firearms would be the only thing
that would be captured under the
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars provision of the two
hundred thousand are yes
Representative.
And and so I guess my question
is why would we have.
A.
Such a high penalty for firearms
the other will full of
violations would be at a lower
rate I think ten thousand
dollars if I read it correctly.
Discussing the bill are we
discussing.
Thank you.
That but the two hundred fifty
it's a new that's.
I'm happy to.
Get
right here.
Yes but you're comparing it to
other provisions in the bill.
So I see what you're saying.
The.
I'm sorry you had a pending
question Representative so if I
understood it correctly we're
we're right now we're looking at
the amendment itself you the
amendment that's before you
relates only to the issuance of
a subpoena the failure to comply
with the subpoena but you're
right there's the two and a
fifty thousand dollar penalty
for of the act or violation of
the act itself you'll see that
under section seven beginning or
give secretary Seneal beginning
on page fifteen so the.
That that's outside I think of
the amendment that's before you
right now but but you're right
it is hi penalty both those two
places and it does relate to
farms and I guess the question
is why a single out firearms for
such a large County and the goal
of this bill very Catley is
targeted the illegal sales of
products and assessors to modify
semi automatic weapons to
automatic weapons I could be
more bluntly that.
Thank you.
Is there a motion on the
amendment.
So move madam chair.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment is our second.
a motion made by Representative
Romero seconded by
Representative Chasey to adopt
two two six two eight five point
one would you call the roll
please Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Gleim Mr speaker
this.
Representative yes.
That neither the no ma'am.
Senator green.
Representative Stansky.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes by a vote of six
to to the amendment is adopted.
Very good Senator would you like
to say anything more about your
bill before we go to the
audience I think the best use
the Christian would go to the
audience will respond to
questions if you give me a
chance maybe at the end of all
the presentations to something's
up sure.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition and number
ninety seconds and we're
limiting the amount of time to
fifteen minutes per side so
those wishing to speak in the
audience in opposition.
Step up.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Daryn let's sort
with the national shooting
sports foundation we represent
the firearm industry I would
respectfully disagree with what
the senator presented related
the bill
We do need to understand what is
a violation of the UTPA and that
is a knowing statement that that
tends to or may mislead what
does that mean there's not a
single person this room would
know what that means tends to
were may mislead this isn't
about machine guns are glocks
which is so we need to
understand the penalty now for
that would be a quarter of a
million dollars against firearm
industry in ten thousand dollars
against every other business so
we're talking about ads here
there isn't any abuse today of
the UTPA we don't see a lot of
lawsuits because the payoff is
three hundred dollars this is
changing it to ten thousand
dollars for all businesses and
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars for firearm related
businesses the chances of
winning a quarter of a million
dollars filing suit here much
better than going to the local
casinos
The expansion of filing the
lawsuit to anyone who is aware
of a violation that's anyone who
sees an ad can pile on to these
lawsuits
so the knowing violation that's
one thing the center talks about
a knowing violation that that
creates some high standards so
she with this it does not
because it's simply a knowing
statement that tends to mislead
it's not like knowing in a
criminal violation so we would
ask you to oppose this
legislation it clearly is a
malicious assault against the
fireman district like to remind
you that we are the only
industry that is necessary for
your constituents to exercise a
constitutional right and that is
especially true since you have
enacted universal background
checks thank you madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's market
person I own Los ranchos gun
shop in the Albuquerque area
this proposed legislation does
so a number of things
Senator Cervantes is correct
this statute needs to be updated
and the technical corrections
that are included in the statute
in bringing the general penalty
up it seems to make sense to
hold employers to hold retailers
and distributors responsible for
the actions that they take
however with respect to spurs us
specifically with firearms this
is the hammer looking for nail.
This is an over abuse of a
penalty the examples the Senator
again let's say with the glocks
which I have not met the person
whose order the clocks which
online that was not complicit in
the criminal action of buying
and installing that device on
their gone anyone who goes
online and converts they're
going from a semi automatic to
an automatic on committed a
crime and they are as complicit
switcher inviting are
significant penalties that may
be raised by someone who is
already committed a felony.
We don't need to identify the
gun industry which has not had a
history of bad axe.
But putting us at risk every day
so thank you and I thank you for
my time thanks thank you Sir.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Eric Rasmussen I own right to
bear arms a lot of what I wanted
to say is already been said of
one of the things that I just
want to add to is the easy
nature of charges being brought
up against us if you will for
that quarter of a million
dollars is is a little bar with
that tends to mislead I can tell
you as a small businessman that
would absolutely crush me as any
other small business here in New
Mexico
that you know even if I won in
court the multiple avenues of
people to be able to file those
charges against me we tied me up
litigation costing me money that
I'm not going to have to pay for
litigation and I have no
recourse to reclaim that
according to this bill because
no matter what I'm gonna be
paying for my own lowers fees
even if I am not found to be
liable for anything that
somebody is perceive that our
stores dot.
I guess that's the biggest thing
right now thank you for your
time thank you Sir.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you my name is
Tom Kay I'm a manager right to
bear arms gun store in
Albuquerque to tag onto a
mystery Brinson said.
To buy blocks which is a felony
it's against the national
firearms act it already carries
a two hundred fifty thousand
dollar fine and a ten year
prison sentence the bill also
goes farther than just the
automatic firearms part if you
read further down into it I
don't remember which section it
is it references assessor res
point slings holsters other
pieces also the bill allows for
anybody who knows of a potential
violation to bring the suit you
do not have to be harmed by this
so even though you have nothing
to do with any potential
violation you can still go ahead
and bring the suit thank you
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm doctor William
fire rising from Santa Fe and I
don't represent anyone but
myself.
I stand opposed Senate bill four
twenty eight.
This bill presents us with the
same problem that the
legislature created with medical
malpractice claims a couple of
years ago and it will have a
similar negative affect by
driving New Mexicans out of
business with exorbitant
insurance rates insurance
companies can't distinguish
between good and bad actors they
do not know who is knowing as
the bill states all rates will
rise.
Others already testified about
penalty and insurance problems
with this bill but I'd like to
mention the problems of this
bill causes for US consumers
especially those of us who live
in rural areas I understand the
motive to hinder bad actors but
please do not do so by driving
our firearms dealers out of
business and preventing New
Mexicans from patronizing these
businesses the small businesses
are also our friends and
neighbors and they do not
deserve to lose their lives
because insurance is made on
affordable by this bill.
Thank you thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak on this issue.
Let's go online.
Nate eski.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'll start with
that brief tangent on the clock
switches if this passes the
attorney general's office will
spend a lot of time chasing down
rabbit holes that lead to either
China or the a TF conducting
sting operations I'm sure
that'll be very embarrassing for
them beyond that Senator
Bronte's said earlier on the
Senate floor that ambiguity
creates litigation and he's
absolutely correct
a lot of these accessories have
been subject to furious back and
forth swings in the gallery on
the federal level in a previous
years.
The threats of these penalties
on the cost created to accompany
in defending itself will be
enough alone to drive many.
More coming how does hardly as
you've heard the risk involved
in defending even what proved to
be unfounded because action
brought by the state is extreme
will require at least tens of
thousand dollars spent in terms
fees and time responding to the
suit I appreciate that Senator
Montez withdrew what I've been
calling discover of steroids and
what he called the super
subpoenas that's definitely a
step in the right direction but
doesn't make the bill palatable
as written allows the unlimited
resources state to be used
directly against innocence to
bleed them dry financially even
if that's not the explicit
content thank you.
Thank you.
Next Sunderland.
Hello there my name's a next
Sutherland I'm the trauma
surgeon and trauma medical
director of in the second
busiest trauma program in the
state.
And I chair to the northern New
Mexico regional trauma advisory
committee for a number of years
I'd like to urge you to vote
against this bill.
your constituents are not stupid
we we know that this is designed
to allow lawfare against people
who provide us with firearms to
protect ourselves.
Most of the things that this
would.
Go after are already illegal I
can't help but timeline about
the mention of the clocks which
is which is already at a ten
year felony
this if we're not going after
those people already making it
illegal or is is not going to
help.
so I.
I think this is a a transparent
attempts to bankrupt.
The the firearms industry in New
Mexico which is a
constitutionally protected
activity and it will lead to
innocent New Mexicans getting
hurt.
Thank you Kerry Romero.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee Kerry Romero
executive director registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
council about Senators and
guides for many of the reasons
that have already been stated we
stand opposed to this
legislation specifically the
potential for increased
litigation and also we feel that
the the additional language
including accessories is
unnecessary I don't really see
how adding in gun sling would
add anything to this legislation
so we stand opposed thank you
thank you
Those wishing to speak in
support of the bill in the
audience please raise your hand
if you could line up in the
center there that be really
helpful thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is percent
of registered lobbyists forget
parts and we support legislation
because we do fit feel it fits
within the exemptions provided
within federal law we appreciate
the sponsor bring the before
thank you thank you.
Madam chair Hank you Santa Fe
County commissioner and the
Santa Fe county passed a
resolution in support of making
guns safer and so we're in
support of this legislation
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Juliana coup by
Representative The New Mexico
trial lawyers association we see
this as an important consumer
rights bill and we support this
bill thank you.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak in
support.
Those online wishing to speak in
support please raise your hand.
I don't see anyone with their
hands raised so back to you
Senator.
Thank you madam chair to trend
summarized in two so very
briefly I think one of the
important points maintenance the
recognition that this that much
much of the conduct that we're
attempting to attack here is
illegal under federal law
doesn't mean it should be legal
under state law we should have
to rely upon the federal
government and for some of these
laws that we have these laws are
so of the of there's been some
concern about the two hundred
fifty thousand dollars within
just pull that out of here that
is the federal a penalty so
we're simply doing something
equivalent to that the the
requirements for meeting any
these kind of centers all of you
look at the language very
carefully it's requires a
knowing misrepresentation
knowing standard so the the
these this unfair trade practice
that does not capture negligent
conduct requires a showing the
demonstration of knowledge and
trying to think of of I wanted
to wanted to give the committee
just is this the article here
the
Their QB news just in I got it
just on February seventh of this
year the entire story and I may
just paraphrase I know you'll
wanna hear me read the entire
article it this is a story out
of Albuquerque top law
enforcement officers in New
Mexico are warning people about
the increasing number of guns
modified to act as machine guns
and they posted a video from the
US attorney's office in APD
chief Harold Medina about the
stiff penalties read a associate
with the so called blocks which
the smaller than a penny the
clocks which is a growing
concern across the country there
are a number of of
representations here about
concerns with a TF but we're
seeing this even in the media of
Albuquerque the concern with
with these conversion of
semiautomatic weapons again we
have to pull the trigger each
time to discharge of a
projectile to be able to single
pull trigger and go through a
great a great deal of of of of
harm in a very short period of
time is that put out with an
extended magazine on the clock
and we see the extent magazine
but a thirty round magazine on
the bottom of the pistol he can
discharge at about a second
that's a lot of firepower.
Thank you senator anything else.
No ensure will four any
questions the suggestion that
we're gonna bankrupt the
industry I hope that when we're
done with all this the industry
who I regard as my friends I'm a
gun owner always have been my
whole life farmer rancher of the
concealed carry permit holder I
think I'm a responsible gun
owner we should be the ones
leading efforts a gun safety and
I hope that in time the
retailers will realize this bill
is actually in their interest
because it's designed to put
people out of business who are
misrepresenting as a legal that
which is illegal this is and put
out of business people that are
converting of firearms to
illegal firearms this is not
targeted to them for this to
attack them they have to be
knowingly violating and
knowingly misrepresented farms
and I don't believe any people's
from would do so thank you madam
chair thank you senator
representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and
senator of.
You mentioned the blocks which
is turning guns and machine guns
that type of conversions already
illegal is it not it is.
Under federal under federal with
very similar fines and penalties
I think two hundred fifty
thousand dollars with that of
the accurate.
It would be similar to the fines
and penalties that we're
proposing this bill would be
identical to that yeah we don't
have that state law but that's
the goal of this the statute.
But the.
If someone were to to do that
they can be prosecuted under
existing federal law and pursue
those.
For federal the justice
department to pursue those
actions in.
Federal District Court against
people who would either sell
those for actually possessed so
those types of
For lack of better word products
that would enhance the
capabilities of those firearms
because they're not madam chair
and senator madam chair again
under federal law that's right
again this is perhaps something
that'll appeal to you
representative of this is about
a states rights issue and and we
ought to be able to use my only
how to get to you you know with
the you're right you can press
consider federal are we gonna
have to rely upon the federal
government to this or should be
able to do this ourselves in our
state.
M. madam chair and senator my
real concern with this
legislation.
It just more of the federal law
to be enforced in state law act
I did maybe understand it but
we're putting it in the
trade.
Practices deprivations of the
unfair trade practices act which
Seems to be a little bit of an
unusual place for for
prohibiting these the use of
drugs and.
More.
Frankly my biggest concern is
that we've cast and that the
that's way too wide if if I read
the bill correctly.
We're not just focused on on
expanding or providing for the
unlawful sale and possession of
these products that you make you
that
You're you're you're amending
the lawful trade practices that.
Which.
Could scoop up a lot of other
Products that that the.
Thank all products that are sold
in the state.
And I'm concerned about that so
could you maybe show me how this
is just limited to two of these
types of of.
Of at.
Products if you will related to
the two grams.
Thank you Representative
appreciate that opportunity in
imitation I'll start to answer
your question by reference to
the federal
protection of lawful commerce in
arms act this is the PLC a the
federal law that really from
immunized as manufacturers and
distributors guns begin with
limited exceptions the limited
exception here that we're trying
to utilize is an exception the
reasons follows and again
manufactures are immunized under
federal law except in an action
in which the manufacturer seller
of a qualified product knowingly
violated a state or federal
statute aplik will to the sale
of marketing the product so your
question was this seems strange
to that this would be within the
unfair trade practices act but
frankly the congressional
immunity of manufactures makes a
specific exception when a
manufacturer selling seller
knowingly violates a state a
state statute as we're doing
here with cream that state
statute that would be a basis
for a knowing violation in the
marketing or sell the product
the second part your question is
if you look on page six of the
bill an existing on site for
trade practices long act there
is a list.
Of enumerated examples of what
we have previously is deemed to
be
deceptive or unfair trade
practices and so in in again
that existing law you'll see a
number of of existing paragraphs
of examples of what this
legislature's previously so so
with me the the requirements for
that type of a practice what
we've done here programs to
you'll see on page seven is
specific new language
Representative goods or services
as legal to purchase of the laws
of New Mexico or the United
States when not legal to
purchase so that's a
misrepresentation of the
legality of a fire that's that
would be a new and very
specifically enumerated
violations of the act then
you'll also see on page nine an
additional number paragraph
twenty one this would also be
another example of enumerated
violation of the act which would
be the knowing manufacture
advertising distributing or
offering for sale something
contrary to laws of New Mexico
or the United States again in
knowing violation of federal or
state law.
And so Senator if if we madam
chair and senator if we look at
at that program twenty one.
And we have a manufacturer to
manufacture such items and and
can do so under another state
law.
Of and.
Is doing so if I if I read the
book to the bill here.
They're they're knowingly
manufacturing that item it's
unlawful New Mexico but it may
be lawful elsewhere there's
nothing that
insulates that manufacture from
from the of I guess the the long
reach of of this this actor the
provisions that I see are are
the long reach of this act to
bring him to New Mexico.
For a suit under the unlawful
trade practices at.
So madam chairman Representative
it's a legitimate concern that
we've addressed if you look on
the section for the bill which
begins on page twelve you'll see
a number of clarifications an
exemption so that beginning on
on the bottom of page twelve
this section for and you'll see
something here for exemptions
there are existing exemptions
under the unfair trade practices
act and here we're making some
modifications we're.
Exempting from the reach of this
bill anything that's expressly
permitted under the laws of the
United States or or New Mexico
so something is lawful under
federal or state law that is not
captured by this act that's the
subparagraph a you'll see on
page thirteen then you'll see in
subparagraph B. this this bill
would not capture someone whose
immune from suit under the laws
of the United States or the laws
of New Mexico and then again in
subparagraph C. you'll see there
would have to be a requirement
of proof and proximate cause and
you have to show that in some
programs see to that the actions
or transactions giving rise to
the claim occurred in whole or
in part inside of New Mexico so
I think that bridge directly
addresses your concerns and
would not capture the example
that you gave in that scenario
there would have to be a showing
that the claim arose in whole or
in part inside New Mexico.
That's on the language of the.
So if the.
Manufacture was legal in another
state.
The item manufactured to illegal
New Mexico.
And a person.
From New Mexico why is it in
another state.
You're saying that the
manufacture would be not subject
to.
Any action under this bill.
If it becomes a statute.
Because that item was properly
so in another state.
And and that's Representative we
have you look at that subsection
paragraph C. one you have the
status of the actions or
transactions giving rise to the
claim that would be the
manufacture the selling the
product in that had to have
occurred in New Mexico in whole
or in part your scenario that of
that would have occurred in New
Mexico.
So let's look at the advertising
for.
There's an advertisement the
madam chair and senator that
the.
Is.
Representing.
For.
Ask for the sale of.
The availability for sale of
this product that would be
illegal New Mexico.
It's legal in other states but
that advertisement.
Comes to New Mexico because it's
a national publication or
whatever people subscribe to it
whatever the case may be.
Can the manufacturer then become
liable for advertising that
happens to hit New Mexico even
though it's legal for purchase
in another state.
Brandon's asking the question on
ask important in your example
with the sale of the with this
sale product reducing some of
the advertisement in New Mexico
could just be the advertisement
that let's say it's advertising
the sale of a product that may
be legal in another state.
But the advertisement is a
national campaign and it people
subscribe if it's a magazine I
subscribe to the magazine or
it's on your television set
point on the airwaves radio it
is heard by New Mexico
residents.
So I I understand your question
and so Senator I'm so sorry for
you me too much time in the
Senate if you look on page five
of the bill.
Subsection Kate has a definition
for trade or commerce.
I think this is the area where
it's going to dress your
concerns directly trader
commerce includes and then this
is some of this is existing
language in the act but we
change it someone and if you
look at a page six a paragraph
to this is being online to.
This order should be on the line
above that really says and any
trader comes with a person in
New Mexico or location within
the state and then subparagraph
two says a trader commerce by a
person business entity that
systematically serves a market
in New Mexico whether or not the
goods or services were purchased
in New Mexico and so here we get
into the issue I think of what
you're talking about is is
serving a market somewhat preps
marketing for once again the
requirement are the location of
the the conduct it's good that
you're attacking half of taking
place in New Mexico.
Yeah I I'm really concerned with
that language I'm not sure if it
gets.
To the point madam chair where.
And manufacture who advertises
would be comforted.
By this language
And I think there's still some
concerns that someone may bring
an action for that even though
they're not selling the product
in New Mexico.
The product is advertised in New
Mexico through various mediums
of and the I I I'm concerned
that that.
That that threshold may be
Matt in a lawsuit that the.
could be filed under this.
Bill and and bring them in to
court officials your long arm
jurisdiction here.
Rings a lot of folks to New
Mexico thank may think they're
they're exempt from New Mexico
court proceedings for the.
I think that would be very
concern if the goal is to keep
the the.
Alex from being sold in the
state.
It certainly seems like.
We could create a law that does
that that there is a federal
statute in another section of
law not within this
uniform trade practices act.
And accomplish the same purpose
you may not get you the travel
damages and and the the civil
fines and what have you for it
certainly would allow the.
Forsman of.
The cell of those items in New
Mexico against the whatever laws
are are that would prohibit
those items
So I'm I'm concerned about.
Those aspects of the unfair
trade practices at.
The.
The idea that of.
Someone's advertisement could
say you know if it's compliant
and and
You know X. number of states.
And over time that
representation may be inaccurate
would would that representation
then served in the knowingly of
falls and subject them to
transaction here even though in
some states it's still legal to
purchase it.
with that action live because.
The loss of change so that that
representation made is now not
accurate.
Would that be able to to reach
out and get him even though
Representation real is not
directed to New Mexico because
we've prohibited that
That is something that would
would be actionable Madam chair
representative you know this is
that the your question is one
that would really permeate the
entire unfair trade practices in
all cases and and that gets us
back to the knowing requirement
of those the act requires a
knowing violation so to use your
example of a they advertise that
this is legal in twenty four
states and it's really only
going twenty three states is
that a knowing violation I think
would be very difficult to
charge that in in claim that's a
basis for knowing violation
again this is true of all
prosecutions you're going to
address some level of discretion
to the Attorney General or the
prosecutor and they're going to
decide whether they want to
prosecute a case where the rest
are going to show is that the ad
said it was legal in twenty
three states and was really
legal in twenty two if the
prosecutors have that kind of
time on their hands well
good for them well Madam
chairman and senator it's not
just the Attorney General and
district attorney second forces
that not allow for citizenship
suits as well it does and and
again they're still gonna have
to meet those elements approved
the C. in the exceptions under
paragraph four which again
reaffirms the fact that somebody
if it's a and private
enforcement they're going to
have to provide the proof in
subsection C. required by the
laws of New Mexico including
approximate because and
establishing that the claim in
the actions transactions
occurred inside New Mexico
that's going to be then your
practice in mind Representative
standing issue right and when
the unit probably very custom
tuned probably a combination of
standing in jurisdiction.
You madam chair and senator you
said earlier that
I think you were pretty blunt
you said that this is related to
go after the the one industry
and it's it's apparent on its
face but are you concerned at
all that it captures
The sale of other products and
provides
additional
Restrictions or penalties or
suits that other manufacturers
of other products not firearm
related subject to this act
With is there anything that you
drafted that would would cause
other manufactures to be
concerned that this now captures
the amendment or enhances the
penalties that they're subject
to were citizen suits what at.
So madam chair Representative
let me correct in a statement
that you attribute to be limited
to such which is the the issue
of gun gun manufactures and
comply with federal law is the
impetus for this bill but I'll
be the first one to recognize
too that this goes this would
have consequences beyond merely
firearms and guns in that self
evident to all of us and and as
you heard even one of the
opponents recognizing this is a
an unfair trade practices act
has been amended at least with
regard to civil penalties since
nineteen fifty three so yes this
is going to have implications
beyond just because this will
have implications anything else
that is use of the actors use
for to enforce but if you look
at what we're actually changing
as a definition of an unfair
deceptive trade practice you're
gonna find that on page six and
subsection L. in the only
changes that were making with
regard to the enumerated
examples of unfair trade
practice or violations would be
in paragraph two Representative
goods and services as legal to
purchase New Mexico when not
legal that's not specific to
guns but admittedly if you
understand that language comes
right out of that federal
exemption that's where that's
coming from and then twenty one
is very specific the guns which
is the knowing manufacture
distribution of firearms and
destructive devices contrary
laws of the state of New Mexico
so
I'll grant you this has
implications beyond farms but I
don't see that it's a grand
expansion or really much of an
expansion at all in terms of
what is defined as an
unconscionable trade practice
the fines and penalties yes all
could see that's a significant
change.
The the
When I've always looked at the
fact it's always some sort of.
It's not really the
manufacturing of the product
it's the is that how they
represent the product or what
they're trying to say about the
product that get you in trouble
under this act for this line
but.
The the manufacture of.
And.
I guess the distribution and and
now offering for cell.
Is of a firearm is now caught up
and it's not just the
representations or it goes to
the manufacturing.
I'll be at the advertising is
with something that's
traditionally
adverse to the trade practices
at the distribution and offering
for sale is generally not
something that one sees under a
unlawful trade practices act K.
fisheries somebody's
representing something that's
not true that they're telling
the public that hi my product
does this when that's not an
accurate statement so that
knowing manufacturing
distributing and offering for
cell aspect of it makes it.
Somewhat unique as to this
product that that we're singling
out and
I think
That's a concern that the lions
and others have with respect to
that
Sure.
I think that's all I have for
now
I appreciate the the time to
answer questions thank you
others Representative Romero
thank you madam chair I just I
I'm again
I appreciate this bill a thing.
As was stated you know fifty
three years of of not updating
gives us a real opportunity here
to to focus on what's what's
happening in our state the only
area that I'm quite concerned
about is on page fifteen
which sort of prefaces the
entirety of that section section
seven is that private remedies a
person aware of or likely.
that awareness piece I guess is.
Really vague to me.
is it the lowest level of what
awareness with being a person
aware of for.
The person aware of unfair
practices I guess that seems
like a really low standard can
you just described what your
intent was that with that was
and and maybe we might be able
to fix that language chair by
sure by may differ to Mister
Cummings about that I'll just
tell you that we've spent a good
part of the sixty day session
trying to follow the federal
laws the where the courts are
coming down these days the
recent Supreme Court decision
because so for example I know to
the dismay of some we've stopped
autumn I guess efforts to ban
assault weapons in the session
or any or may extended magazines
of race things because we just
don't think that those laws are
going to do anything that result
in a challenge under the second
amendment so regulate agency
Cummings explain why we that
that language will say there's a
very specific case and statutory
basis for just about everywhere
we chip chosen to put in here so
Mr Cummins.
so the existing standard under
the UAPA is likely to be damaged
the federal standard is a little
tighter than our standard and
it's injury in fact in the
California in California that
passed the tightest standard
which required a person to show
that they they had suffered harm
so under the tightest standard
with the court there said was
anytime anyone buys anything
that meets both of those tests
under the federal standard you
by the thing and you don't have
to show economic harm the loss
would be that you didn't get the
thing that you ordered the
problem with expanding it to
people who are knowingly selling
illegal machine guns which is
illegal suppressors destructive
devices is that if you buy one
as you've heard here tonight if
you buy the item you're a felon
and it's a five year minimum
mandatory sentence in the
federal system with a ten year
guidelines since so by adding
aware of you don't actually make
right now as the law stands
under our very very broad
standard anything offered for
sale on Amazon that you
purchased would be subject to
the unfair practices act if they
had knowingly if they if they
deceive you about the quality or
if they deceived to Galanti
adding aware of simply means
that persons can bring a suit in
instances in which they cannot
legally purchase the item if you
buy the machine guns which you
are felons if you are aware of
the machine guns which being
sold this act will not allow you
to file a civil suit.
So madam chair Senator
If you are with so the awareness
is is.
Basically just understanding
that ignorance of the law is not
the standard that we're going
after or is it that you were
aware that you're purchasing
something that is illegal.
Or you're aware that somebody
that there that there is
something available that's a
legal that you're purchasing I
guess I'm trying to understand
where which one it is Madam
chair representative
the it's the trick is it's not
it's not about so much whether
you knew that the item was
illegal it's about the fact that
under our present standard you'd
be able to file the U. PA action
over it over any item that was
purchased that was illegal but
in this specific instance you
can't if you make that sale then
you've committed a felony so the
idea is to allow actions against
people who are the so the the
center part the knowing part is
on the side of the seller.
So this okay still requires in
order to sue someone for selling
an illegal gun or know what you
illegal gun accessory that
seller has to knowingly violate
the law at the time of the state
which is inclusive madam chair
of folks that are selling out
th third party sales and those
out of state that are selling
into the state of New Mexico
chair representative that's
correct federal law requires
that the the into New Mexico
part for anything related to
firearms you can't have an act
that allowed New Mexicans to
enforce New Mexico law that that
does not affect New Mexico so if
the ad for purchase said only
available to residents of Texas
The New Mexicans would not be
able to sue over that.
And madam chair
Senator and the it has to be
purchased here in the state I
can't it does this pertain to
those who would bring an item
from another place knowingly is
the knowing standard and the
awareness standard about
bringing it in.
Madam chair representative no
the knowing standards about the
sale and would have sold to a or
offered for sale to a person in
the state.
So if New Mexican purchased an
item that was delivered to them
in Texas and then brought it
back to New Mexico they would
have broken the law perhaps but
they would not be able to file
U. PAC.
Okay.
You madam chair.
You madam chair.
So of picking up on the last
line of inquiry I I do have some
concerns it's really more of a
standing concern though about
what to and and section seven.
So madam chair if you look at
paragraph a.
Would you introduce this concept
of a person aware of.
We do it again in paragraph the.
As I understand current law
under not unfair trade practices
act claim it would be to someone
who is either suffered damage
are likely to suffer is that
correct.
Madam chair representative the
standard is right now it's
likely to be engaged with simply
means that someone.
Something has been made it
available for purchase that
would violate the U. PA in any
of the enumerated path so madam
chair I to me I think and and so
the committee understands the
public understands this is in
the context of a private right
of action correct Madam chair
representative yes the Attorney
General has separate authority
to sue as well is that correct.
Richard brags Act that's right
and so madam chair I to me I
think we're conflating those two
things when we open up standing
like this it's I feel like what
we're saying is we're trying to
give.
The rest of New Mexicans who may
or may not be harmed and the
target of this Attorney General
type of authority so from my
perspective if if there's a bad
actor that deserves to be sued.
And the person who's in the the
downstream part of being harmed
hasn't doesn't know that they're
gonna be harm it doesn't have
the resources to prevent that
from happening I think that's
the rule the Attorney General I
am more concerned if we open up
the standing piece here.
To where we're going to create
these you know these enforcement
firms essentially so can I maybe
just get some understanding
about why do we need in light of
the fact that we have Attorney
General as authority the this
new concept of of being aware of
to create standing so madam
chair was be of of no clear the
existing unfair trade practices
act allows for private right of
action that there's not an
exclusion for the attorney
general's office we you and I
have that same authority and
right to do so the existing
language of bottom of page
fifteen in a private remedies.
Establishes standing a person
likely to be damage that's a
that's it that's existing
language that's pretty loose now
too I think you and I probably
agree you know let likely to be
damage doesn't require even the
damage allows that even the the
likelihood of developing damaged
and so you know I I would argue
the with the awareness actually
narrows that that brought
language somewhat rather than
expands it understands some
concern that this is expanding I
think is actually knowing that
you've got the existing likely
but then awareness of as an
alternative.
So madam chair I you know I I
guess when I look at the
existing law that you have to be
likely to be damaged so I think
you have to in order to
establish standing if that was
challenge you have to say one
you know I normally
a purchaser in the in this type
of of product and I was thinking
about purchasing it or this is
something I would normally do.
I think when you expand it to
aware of I don't think you have
to be of a possible consumer in
that room I think it's just
you're aware that that third
parties doing something.
And you file suit against them
even if you have no intention of
ever being harmed or in the path
of being part of that so that's
why I think it expands it.
Madam chair representative I
understand and I and I think
that's the golden for trade
practices act as to when
somebody's aware of what again
existing language what when or
if there were to be aware of of
unfair deceptive trade trade
practice if you look at the
continuing language of that
person may be granted in
junction I don't think that's a
bad thing I think of I'm aware
that you're doing something that
is an unfair deceptive trade
practice I should be able to
seek an injunction for that
without having to be damaged by
that conduct first I think
that's probably where you and I
just see it differently yep.
and madam chair and I and I I
agree.
To a point I think.
Where I differ is a couple
things one I think that's
finally the rule the Attorney
General.
To step in when
there's somebody that's a bad
actor and those in the
downstream impact aren't
regulating it through filing
suit.
but the second thing and I think
this is kind of more of just an
overall concern and this is
progress maybe were plaintiffs
and defense lawyers part ways as
well is.
When you have
And you know the guns is you
know it is what is termed fifty
thousand but even just the
smaller sum of ten thousand when
you're you know a small business
owner and you're looking at
having to potentially defend one
of these actions it's not the
fact that you may be right that
you have a defensible claim and
you can take it to a jury and
when that oftentimes doesn't
factor in the analysis for for
the small business owners it's
it's the mere threat of being
sued
and if you open this up to.
Essentially any third party that
has standing I'm concerned about
this because I'm more of like a
bully pulpit so to speak of a
boy's club to to you know
intimidate people that may or
may not be bad actors just
because the cost of litigation
defending these and I'm
concerned about sort of these
you know third party.
Claims being open to the the
more standing.
Being aware of so I I think we
were.
Before going to agree to
disagree on that one I do have a
question about definitions and
at you know I don't know center
if you you're free to respond to
that if you have anything in
response but.
You you do you may never points
the representative I think the
only one that I.
I want to respond to is here
thinking that that some of these
responsibilities lie with the
Attorney General as opposed to
private remedies analysts say
it's existing unfair trade
practices law all right so
so if your suggestion these
things should only be limited
attorney general's office that
that ship has sailed or at least
you that the restricting what is
unfair trade practice now
because we've already recognized
that that private right and if
you look at that sexually talked
about earlier in section seven
the existing law specifically
says or does not even have to
proof of damages or or financial
injury because again the goal
here is to consumer protection
law so we shouldn't have to wait
to somebody gets hurt or damage
to try and stop it from
happening.
Yeah madam chair I I'm well
aware there is a private cause
of action currently.
but I think it's limited to
someone who's likely to be
damaged.
And again I'm just concerned or
expanding that.
Page four I just want to get
some clarification on this
how we're defining online market
place.
The way I read the leader
provisions in the bill is does
this concept of an online
marketplace only apply to those
who are selling or transferring
firearms.
Are we living in in black
regular consumer goods and and
services with this online
marketplace concept.
managers so does not look
restricted to guns and and
that's up to the point you
recognize and looking at that
definition right a my argument
right now is in for trade
practices already applies to an
online seller onto an online
marketplace but what we're
trying to do in the act is begin
to incorporate some of these
concepts that were probably can
tirelessly alien in nineteen
fifty three in other words the
simple to give again it's so I'm
if I'm
leaving the session I'm going to
take a trip to Hawaii our motion
use while she's con Kuhn a
foreign country they make a
purchase on Amazon for a
delivered to my home here in New
Mexico these are concepts that
were not around in nineteen
fifty three and so where does
the the words that sale take
place is that sailing conquers
that sale in New Mexico we're
trying to establish here that
that is at least arguably the
minimum context that you're used
to write to establish
jurisdiction in the state of New
Mexico so I may place the order
from my hotel income come but it
was shipped to New Mexico it's a
sale that should subject the
seller to New Mexico
jurisdiction so as your question
is that definition that online
marketplace is to recognize the
world in which we live which is
we're buying things online madam
chair and I yeah I don't I don't
take issue with the definition
that I think I understand that I
guess maybe of a better way to
ask the question is I as I read
sort of for their own the bill
like when you get to page
nineteen for example.
This this concept online
marketplace appears but I think
it's it's limited to firearms.
So I'm wondering is there some
other section a bill that I
missed.
That we would introduce this
concept of online marketplace
accountability outside of
firearms because I don't know
that I saw the movie manager you
will you're looking at that area
with regard to a firearm but if
you look even right below that
subsection age.
You were talking again about and
action right you'll see
reference there to on online
marketplace and action against a
third party seller so your
question was the unit is the
area that or the concept of an
online marketplace Mexico beyond
guns or is it strictly limit
against and if you look in that
subsection H. there's an example
where online marketplaces used
as a definition within the act
and not specific to guns and so
this is a circumstance this
language is reserve tend to when
you buy something online
you'd like to know who the
sellers and sometimes you can't
find out sometimes for example
of using of of of market place
if you will they're not
identifying who the seller is
this language that I'm referring
to here requires that that that
information be made available
and I'm looking for other uses
to answer your question where
the online marketplace may be
used outside of guns
specifically but I may all just
can find it again for you on
page twenty subsection J. and I
will keep going through all the
Mitchell seed subsection J. once
again another example with this
concept of an online marketplace
is is introduced to the unfair
trade practicability so in
subsection J. this is deals with
somebody who does not maintain a
place of business in the United
States or conceals the place of
business and we can trying to
establish jurisdiction you'll
see that's fallen on page twenty
one with concepts that are
common to you and me minimum
contacts of invoking the
benefits and protections of laws
of the state purpose full of
ailment.
and anticipation being held in
the court although all the buzz
words you in our customers
lawyers to seeing when it comes
down to establishing
jurisdiction.
Madam so appreciate explanation
I've.
No I think Representative J. is
kind of dealing with these
important on the market places.
and I guess the way originally
read the bill in paragraph page
that you described on page
nineteen I I guess I read need
an agency quince meaning that
need cap sort of captured where
the online marketplace applied
under the under the unfair trade
practices act and we were
defining it which which types of
events they would be held liable
it's limited fireman and I guess
I looked at page for
Representative H. after reading
need in and read that to mean
any action basically brought
under paragraph G. above and so
you know it's just a technical
thing but I'm just wondering if
the language sure does actually
capture.
online marketplace transactions
outside of fire so that's that's
that's really the only reason
why I raise it.
And then.
Page thirteen.
So now we're talking about
exemptions under section four.
And.
As our existing law.
B. were saying if you're immune
from suit.
And then see we did in two.
A different kind of exemption
and so the question I have is
in paragraph State subparagraph
one we talk about proximate
cause resulting in important.
and I think this relates back to
the expanding so this harm.
Of who is at the potential
consumers that who this is
focused on here.
Representative does you have
you're you're looking at the
exclusions section on the right
your excluded if you can't
demonstrate proximate cause and
so madam chair so I that's over
the period of two but then I
wonder okay so if I.
I bring suit under the theory of
aware of for example
And let's say somebody was
actually harm because I think
that would apply to so if if I
purchase something and it's a
violation unfair pre trade price
act I don't think I'm limited
bring suit I think somebody else
could bring as well.
how does the third party proof.
That harm when they're not the
ones that suffered harm.
Medford was coming for that
question.
Madam chair representative at
this language is exactly is is
tracks the immunity the special
immunity granted to.
So that is it's actually fifteen
USC seven two section three
sub sections a and B. and this
is exactly the standard that is
applied by the federal
government and the law shielding
firearms manufacturers
distributors advertisers.
and sellers in the in that space
so this is specifying that for
the people operating in that
space This act does not attempt
to and cannot be used to sue
someone in contravention to up
to the immunity granted by the
federal government.
And madam chair I guess so you
know.
In about that third party that
file suit.
I'm just wondering if if the
actual person that.
That was harmed wasn't
interested in pursuing a claim
third party I think we have
standing to bring it.
And now I think they argued
would have subpoena power and so
are we you know.
By again going back to that idea
of expanding Google with this
kind of language are we.
Going to run into a situation
where if I'm a third party and I
bring the car I believe the
claim but now I've got to defend
this exemption and I've got to
show harm do I have the
authority to subpoena the
injured party.
And essentially Marshall them to
show that there was harm.
Madam.
Madam chair representative
there's no grant about that
authority under this act madam
chair I mean when you said that
authority to subpoena power
there's no grant of subpoena
power or the the ability to call
Wirth at third party to show up
for your.
Under the hypothetical that
we're dealing with the person
who suffered the harm does not
want to participate in a lawsuit
mmhm so this wouldn't extend the
ability to bring anyone to court
in any new ways in that area and
I don't believe that that exists
that forty exists at this time.
so madam chairman.
Are you saying I guess under the
rules of civil procedure any
other mechanism you can issue a
subpoena power.
Madam chair representative I
think under the rules of civil
procedure improving your case
I don't believe that you could
coerce a third party to
participate.
Madam chair and I I guess I I I
don't think you can course and
of join the action or anything
else but I think you could
maybe.
Subpoena them to show up and
answer questions.
Madam chair representative I
think you're right that you
could but I don't think that
unless you could force them to
join the action that you would
meet the specific and very
narrow area that is allowed to
be litigated under the PLC a.
Okay so.
That's my again it just relates
back to expanding this idea of
standing I think it's
introducing more problems and
it's going to fix in light of
the for the AG has an already
the private remedies that are
available under statutes of
those my questions thank you
Madam.
Other questions.
Thank you madam chair
Thank you.
Madam chair and senator when we
go over to page three we go over
to wind seven through nine
there's been a lot of discussion
about the locks which and I
haven't gone to Amazon to see if
you can I add is it still being
sold their
Chairman Madam chair
representative the clocks which
is not sold on Amazon it is sold
online marketplaces but Amazon
and eBay are both very efficient
at preventing illegal items
being sold their an example of
an on market place that does
routinely have locks which is
available despite the fact that
selling and possessing them is
illegal as arms list.
Is what arms list A. R. M. S. L.
I. S. T..
Madam chair and senator.
To the bottom of page three and
we go to the top of page four of
one eighty one one eighty is of
about holsters.
Is that correct and I'm
wondering why we're.
Looting holsters.
Max
will just about take a stab at
it so Representative Rehm again
that when you talk about holders
were not suggest that that's
unfair on commercial trade
practice is simply part of
defining and pharmacists are in
so we're simply taking that
definition from elsewhere were
something like a farmer
pharmacists are is to provide.
If I'm who I may the firm so
it's good Madam chair
representative and in fact there
are illegal holsters there stirs
that are designed to disguise
the fact that it is a firearm
which is illegal to the you
can't take a.
Like a tape deck say something
big enough to have a gun in it
hi to going in and make it taxes
make the action work while it's
inside that device under federal
law and there are people that
make and sell these devices to
hide what is actually a gun.
madam chair and expert I think
then if we're going to define it
we need to add some more
language on that.
That to me just as a holster but
if.
Of you know to to the skies it
be able to shoot it from there's
something else.
Representative was a question up
madam chair and senator yes I
think we need more language on
the on this to go ahead and
clarify that the way I read is
it be you know wearing or
caring about one's person of a
farm.
Chair differs because.
Madam chair representative
anything that's identified as a
firearms accessory or firearm
part has to be read in context
with the fact that this act will
only permit you to file suit if
those items break state or
federal law so we're a holster
in a in an extreme case could be
an item that's illegal
if you can't just sue over any
holster so the only things that
you're about to file suit under
under the PLC ADA immunity with
be specifically is anybody's
anybody knowingly selling
something that violates the
state or federal.
And madam chair and expert when
I go to page four and I go to
line three number B. the storage
or mounting.
that looks like to me some type
of caring K. the M. I. missing
something there.
Madam chair representative you
aren't but again this is another
example of a thing of an item or
a type of item it's almost that
probably ninety nine point nine
percent are legal there are
items that fall in that category
that could be illegal you can
only file a lawsuit under this
act if both of those committee
both of those
conditions were met.
Again maybe we need to put
something there there that
violates federal law but
Madam chair and
Senator when we continue down
and on page four to one I.
Any attachment or device
specifically adapted to be
inserted into were affixed onto
a farm to enable alter or
improve the function or
capabilities of the farms so
across the whole industry.
There are a lot of triggers that
are manufactured some are
manufactured for competition and
some are manufactured for
putting or law enforcement.
And this seems to capture all of
those.
And
And it does a trigger have to be
effective to go ahead and file
that's my question is Madam
chair representative the trigger
would have to be able.
In order to be able to bring C.
and may help the committee to
know that there is definitions
are drawn to.
Which is how the federal
government does finds these
different devices.
Madam chair and.
Senator when I get down to paid
for and I get down the line
fifteen.
It looks like
we when we're talking about
shipping are we bringing.
FedEx into this because they're
bring in part from wherever
ended New Mexico.
So madam chair the page you're
looking at the definition of an
online marketplace we've talked
about that at some length
earlier and and this is just to
define what that is and that
does include the shipping or
delivery of goods to services in
New Mexico is the example I gave
you if you're in Conklin you
make in a online purchase and it
gets shipped in New Mexico is
that a purchase in New Mexico or
not some might argue that it's
not because the purchase to
takes place plan action you're
performing a be out of the
country what are the goods being
delivered in New Mexico we
believe that that is a of
subjecting oneself to
jurisdiction of the state of New
Mexico.
Yes and madam chair and senator
whatever whatever meaning it is
to me it kind of like it
highlights the shipper could be
charged as well for me captured
in to this.
Madam chair again Representative
remade movie bears repeating
only if there's a knowing
violation so so you're right fat
acts the shipper could be
charged if they know that
they're shipping something in
violation of federal or state
law.
I would have to prove they knew
they were doing that.
Madam chair and senator when we
go to page eight we're looking
at wind too with three.
And it.
And which says for are fit for
the particular from.
Purpose who's going to determine
that.
Representative you have the
unfortunate to observation of
some it's common to us as
lawyers so this is language it
comes out of our our fundamental
warranty loss of fitness for a
particular purpose is a type of
warranty of just as a warranty
of merchantability these are are
terms of art that exist under
the law for for warranty
purposes so I I understand why
you may not understand what it
means as fitness for particular
purpose now the rest of us do
who went to law school or took
the bar or practice know exactly
what that means it becomes a
case specific determination but
that is a term of art.
And madam chair and senator when
we get to page nine and we go
ninety one our page.
Page nine wind twenty one to
twenty four can you give any
examples of.
It is currently occurred that
would be a violation now I
understand the clocks which but
beyond that.
Madam again turned to rent
rental income as a of of just
like all you Brandon is of.
Pretty smart lawyer but he's
also very much of a gun
enthusiast and so he's going to
my experts on gun issues so
you're asking I think you're
asking Representative for
examples of what would be
knowing manufacturing
advertising distributing
contrary laws of New Mexico
United States all of us come and
give you some of the many
examples.
Madam chair representative among
the knowing manufacturing
advertising distributing
offering for sale instances we
have people who have set up
so there's a thing that sold
that is legal presently or is in
dispute maybe about legality
called an eighty percent
receiver some people have heard
about this it's a it's the lower
receiver of a gun either o'clock
or an A. R. fifteen most
commonly that is nearly
completed but not but it hasn't
reached the level of manufacture
that the federal government
considers that a gun but you
probably know but maybe some of
the rest of us don't is that you
can buy every single part of a
gun except that serialized part
so I so used by so you the state
what would become the serialized
part before it has reached the
stage of manufacture that the
ATF considers it done or done
enough you finish the rest of it
and you assemble the parts
because the rest of the parts
are are for sale on eBay
gunbroker or any other website
even some of them are sold
because they're legal are sold
on Amazon US symbol the gun.
Thank you that's legal you
haven't broken any laws you keep
the gun for yourself use the gun
if you're gonna that's perfectly
legal but what we've seen is
clusters of organizations that
want guns that are allowed to
have them and so I set up a a
little CNC machine and I can
finish those unfinished
receivers about maybe that in
maybe ten minutes tops so I take
that simple and it's a gun and I
do that ten more times and I
sell those guns and now those
are guns that have never had a
serial number I'm breaking state
and federal law while I'm doing.
But those are good and never had
a serial number and are now sold
into the black market
effectively because to buy it
under those circumstances is
illegal.
And all it took you was some
equipment that you're able to
buy legally
and that allows you to equip.
Not in New Mexico and California
New York that them people with
that that equipped that have
produced illegally sold
thousands of guns.
Madam chair and and expert.
This is Seaver that needs more
million is that what you're
saying before you can install
the trigger point.
Madam chair representative yes
generally.
So.
Madam chair and.
Senator go over to page thirteen
and I'm looking at.
Of what I'm looking at the.
Winds fifteen through eighteen.
So it's not but whatever it is
hasn't been advertised in New
Mexico.
But I think if I go to wishes
pics Colorado it is advertised
store I can purchase a when I go
up there I haven't used the
internet to search it I haven't
done anything you go to Colorado
and I purchased one of these
prohibited items to say the box
here since we've been talking
about that I go up there and I
get it and I bring it back well
it violates federal law I'm
trying to think of something
else spoke.
But anyway I went up there and
got something that doesn't
violate federal law.
And bring it back is could that
be a violent under this.
Madam chair representative no
not unless there's a New Mexico
law prohibiting that I.
And madam chair I think that's
all of that for right now thank
you.
Anyone else of speaker Martinez
thank you madam chair thank you.
For being here
so I I look through this bill
earlier today and I'm still
reading through it now.
Firearms in on for practices act
which I get and I think
generally speaking and be
supportive.
Why are we opening up all these
other sections what what why I
mean you you use in your
introduction simple madam chair
of you know going to Cancun in
buying something in the online
market place
it.
It seems like it's at least two
separate bills and curious as to
whites were combined in one.
I thank you thank you madam
chair and so we think that when
you begin your analysis by
looking at the federal PLC Hey
that's again I referred to
earlier the protection of lawful
commerce in arms act this is the
federal law that largely
protects gun manufacturers and
distributors with a great deal
of immunity from lawsuits in the
the act has.
The language about under what
circumstances there's an
exception so the exception that
I referred to earlier is an
action in which the manufacturer
seller knowingly violates a
state or federal statutes of so
to get yourself within the
exception of of the federal law
if the show the state statute
which has been knowingly
violated so the statute that
would make the most sense to us
again is the existing unfair
trade practices act that would
need to be the statutory basis
for knowing what Alicia so
that's that's why we get
ourselves into the unfair trade
practices act to begin with then
we have to begin to.
Representative reflect the in
the unfair trade practices it
some of the realities of of what
we're trying to accomplish here
so for example in section one
we're making a modification
under the powers of a foreign
corporation consistent with the
case that I gave earlier the
Bridgestone K. I believe I cited
that earlier and I misplaced the
case itself but yeah this is the
New Mexico Supreme Court case we
just decided last year to
relates to jurisdiction of
foreign corporations is the
Chavez could you go through the
chair please I'm I'm sorry Madam
yes so this is I was referring
to the Chavez versus Bridgestone
case decided by the New Mexico
Supreme Court with regard to
jurisdictions so we we've added
from the very beginning this act
of language to the unfair trade
practices act that is required
really to accomplish the overall
goal of trying to meet that
federal exception so it would
make any sense to enact any of
these changes in the in for
trade practice I get we couldn't
bring a lawsuit against an out
of state manufacture of a gun
and so this is again to try and
establish that jurisdictional
basis consistent with that
Supreme Court decision the idea
of jurisdictions
something even the US Supreme
Court is recently grappled with
in the Ford motor K. but we
again set in that case studying
the New Mexico the basis we
believe we've created the right
way to get jurisdiction over a
the gun manufacturer New Mexico
I said this earlier today would
make a lot of sense to trying to
force the slower trying to or
forcing ourselves to have to
bring suit in Tennessee or
Arkansas.
Thank you madam chair and and
senator so is it fair to say
that you can't we really can't.
Back to the work of in this case
and these are my words not yours
but holding firearms
manufactures responsible unless
we open this up in the ways that
you are proposing.
the unfair trade practices act
be opened up.
Is that a fair statement chair
Mister speaker I think that's a
fair way to say this again the
only way you can get yourself
within that federal exemption
that a federal solutions you
have to show of a knowing
violation of a state statute or
federal statutes and so now
granted because I pointed out
earlier we are doing other
things stand for trade practices
act that are not directly
related to firearms some of that
is just simply updating for
example again statutory fines
and penalties that have been
modified in well over half a
century so we're doing more that
we're changing references to
from the Attorney General from
he to general neutral terms and
we're doing a number of things
in here that are really designed
to clean up the unfair trade
practices act generally so to
get your question yes we're
going beyond just the issue of
guns use the opportunity of this
bill to do some of that updating
under the act but in terms of
substantive changes to the act
itself they're all to answer
your question.
In our experience in our
analysis they're required to be
able to hold a gun manufacturer
level.
I think I think what what's
what's because he's a little bit
of harbor then chairman and
senator you know I'm thinking of
you know Facebook market place
Where.
You know I think the I'm
assuming.
As a more less reputable
corporation.
They're probably trying very
hard and I'm sure the gases some
systems in place to keep folks
from selling
You know or or Amazon for that
matter from selling
Good to services that are.
Perhaps ms Representative or
whatnot.
And it seems to me that this
opens up.
A whole can of worms and and I'm
not correct me if I'm wrong here
but it seems like I can goal
proved to Amazon.
You know not everything that the
sale is directly from them
they're a marketplace for others
to come in and sell their own
stuff.
Your radically I can go in and
start picking things off and
perhaps filing.
Cases based on what I'm picking
off.
As potentially being.
Ms Representative by the seller
madam chair repeat Senator and
and that's that's that gives me
a little bit of paas here I mean
it seems like he would be a good
idea.
To bring in these manufacturers
in Oldham accountable but in the
process of doing that we're
opening it up to.
Essentially any part of the
online market place so I'm just
wondering
you know your reaction to that
understanding that
This is about good many factors
but we're opening it up to a
whole host of others.
Madam speaker I would argue that
the unfair trade practices act
already allows all of that ten
for trade practices act already
allows us to bring a cause of
action against someone who makes
a false deceptive marketing
practice who represents goods or
services as something other than
what they are all of those are
already actionable under the
existing unfair trade practice
are I know I know there's some
suggestion that this is somehow
opening this up all of that is
already of actionable under the
on for trade back second nothing
here changes any of that the the
only thing that really.
Relates to guns is a knowing
violation of state or federal
law and we're using that very
deliberately because that's the
federal exception that that's
the only way you get in that
federal exception is a knowing
violation that's that's why
we're isolating that for guns is
that knowing requirement but
otherwise your question Mr
speaker.
The examples of an online seller
putting a good or service into
the stream of commerce in New
Mexico is is an actual cause of
action again just so we can get
jurisdiction sure.
Yeah no I I hear that thank you
Mr madam chair and senator
perhaps you answer this and I'm
sorry been in now
for the room.
page sixteen section be a line
twelve from aware or if I'm
aware of four likely to be
damaged by.
A deceptive trade practice.
Hi shall be entitled to ten
thousand dollars that means that
if I.
To back to my example madam
chair Senator if if I may not be
harmed directly by the unfair
trade practice but I.
I've seen it I've witnessed it.
And assuming somebody bought
something off of Amazon I'm
entitled to that ten thousand
dollars senator Senator.
Madam chair and Mr speaker yes I
mean the the existing languages
already got he likely to be
damaged component that's
existing part of the act
elsewhere so here this as an
awareness of a of a potential
injury and I would simply argue
to that that's a policy decision
always should somebody have to
be injured before you can seek
an injunction or a remedy
against them are we expecting
somebody get hurt first or
should you be able to act
against that in anticipation of
an awareness of that potential
harm and that really is the I
think the best way I can answer
that question for sure.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator
Can I say it this is a
fascinating area of law
and certainly learning a whole
lot.
As we go through this
I I think
I think that this is a I think
it's a a good.
Policy proposals with regard to.
Firearms I think that it's a
creative way.
To.
Look at the issue of gun safety.
From a perhaps much more
impactful angle then you know
maybe some of the stuff we've
done in the past.
It does feel a little bit.
Feels like a very wide.
Net that we're casting here and
and I I get why I hear why
I do have some.
I don't know if the reservations
are reaches feels it feels like
a lot
but certainly the intent is is
valued and and certainly
respective thank you madam chair
thank you Sir.
Other comments questions.
Senator I'd like to go back to
page six fifteen I.
And again it's the Stewart
issue.
I'm very concerned that this
blows the whole standing issue
wide open and it's not just on
guns which I'm very sympathetic
to but for any sort of claim
that one could developed under
the unfair trade practices act.
And I appreciate your your
suggestion that it's a narrowing
but it's not a narrowing.
I'm sorry Madam I don't accept
this suggestion that that's a
narrowing of the language it's
really a broadening of the
language.
It's something I can see
something on television and if
it turned out to be a deceptive
ad.
I would be a person who would
qualify whether or not I was
interested in something that's
going to make me look younger
not
And I'm smart enough to know
that it's never gonna work.
It's I would still have been
aware of the false you know
we're deceptive thing so that to
sweeps just about anyone who
watches television is on the
internet reading all kinds of
crazy stuff to be able to say
have standing to bring a claim
under this and it's not just
guns it's any other product or
good or whatever that you can
you could establish under this
provision.
In.
I think that's the loan well
beyond what we always think I
when this I heard about this
bill I thought great we got
another tool to go after our gun
problem which I'm thrilled that
we are thinking creatively and I
commend you for that Senator but
then we decide to also start
expanding it to adjust to relate
to other consumer and items and
that's what's gonna probably
cost me to have to vote against
this bill
because I feel it it's not as
advertised in a sense in terms
of what we thought it may be an
unfair practice itself.
Because really it's being touted
in the media and to us when I
first got it is something we
were that was going to help us
with the gun problem and I think
it will but it also does a whole
bunch of other things Senator do
you have a reaction to that am I
a new chair so again I
appreciate your use the word
creative in the speaker using
the same word and that's the
right word in other words we've
seen the the Giffords group had
a bill of state law in New
Jersey I think it was just
struck down about a month or so
ago we're we're trying to take
these court cases and find out
from the federal courts where we
have to stay within our lane and
and I believe that we've done so
the I've heard from you your
concern that this is a
broadening capturing more
products of then we have under
the existing unfair trade
practicality came to to push
back on the notion I think that
all of these examples would be
given all actionable now and so
we're using the word aware very
purposefully reason were
knowingly very purposefully
because again this is where the
federal giving us guidance to
apply that federal exception we
can only get in that federal
exception by meeting some of the
standards and that's that's very
candidly why some of this
language is adopted I I'd love
to be able to tell you look the
simple solution is strike the
word aware out of these two
circumstances because I
understand your concern and
others have expressed that
concern to seem like an easy
solution to strike the word
aware we do doing so making a
simple change of knowing I think
takes us out of the federal
exception I think we would find
ourselves challenged probably
successfully just as what
happened in New Jersey under the
federal community for
manufactures would probably lose
that.
I'd like to finish my discussion
with the senator
and we'll send our Preciado what
you're saying it with respect to
guns and I'll defer to your
reserves with respect to guns
and what could be actionable
with respect to guns therefore I
would suggest that if you want
to just to apply this to guns
that's great and have a
different standard for other
kinds of unfair trade practices
you know we I I can't help but
bring this up because I. we hear
a lot about this when I'm
engaged in actions that I think
are really designed to help
workers in the state and told my
my proposals are on unfriendly
to business.
Well I think this proposal caps
as it is if it were kept as it
is when it applies to all other
kinds of act commercial
activities and the potential for
unfair you know miss deceptive
advertising is unfair to
business in the state you know
I'm all in on the gun situation
and if that could be carved out
as a separate funfair kind of
trade practice and if you need
that aware were to comply with
federal law and case law
regarding guns that's fine with
me but this you're applying that
also to all other kinds of
commercial activity in the state
and that is not good for
business in the state.
Senator and and I'll have a hard
time supporting the bill with
that language stays in.
And vice chair did you have an
amendment I would just suggest
madam chair given the discussion
on page fifteen striking the new
language online twenty five
aware of for.
And on page sixteen
line twelve also striking aware
of or.
Madam I'm sorry can you repeat
that please want to add page
fifteen line twenty five the new
language aware of or.
And on page sixteen line twelve
aware of the war on.
And career respond yes you may
so first of all let me go back
here comes chair.
Hi gap where you're at and I
understand that and and by share
Meryl I also appreciate your
solution so I'm working here
this comes in if you'll allow me
to defer to him may have a
creative solution taking up the
amendment and the language
you're suggesting probably makes
the bill and workable but that
awareness component we could
tailor to be applicables only to
unfair trade practice private
entities with regard to guns and
I I think that I hope I'm being
distinctive you just take it out
entirely then your then you
don't have that awareness
component at all and we need to
have that awareness component
but we can make it very
specifically only with regard to
guns and stilled and honor of
the goal here of ringing gun
manufacture within the inner for
Travis Tritt practice at same
time disabuse in perhaps the
chair of the concern that this
would capture too many other of
unfair trade practices.
That and I I don't know whether
Mister Cummings he's he's kind
of over here trying to craft a
solution as we're talking but I
would have I would ask you to
keep open the possibility of not
debate amendment specifically
talking about but something that
I think would have the same
effect Representative Chasey I
think you want to speak to this
amendment proposed to the prime
right now I'm sure I think if
you do want to do just because
you need to have that language
that you have here firearm
destructive device farm part of
fire makes history don't you
rather than just guns.
And so madam chair again then I
go to Mr Cummings because as you
he's writing the language as we
speak and I think it's got a
specific proposal I realize
there's a pending amendment
before us but I'd ask by your
mouth to maybe consider a
modification of the.
Right maybe I may madam chair to
Mr coming yes you may do you
need some time we could break in
use we could call you back and
in here some other matters Madam
I think I actually have it I
think the the way to do that
would be to strike or aware of
in the place where it is
presently let's go back we're on
page fifteen is that right yes
ma'am okay.
So on page fifteen line twenty
five where the additional
language a person aware of or
you would strike aware of for
and return it to the original
language so that the original
standard would be applicables.
So that the original
language would be applicables to
all claims right prior that that
the act already allowed you to
to file suit over and then at
the end of that sentence so you
would have to go to page
sixteen.
Nine four after the word
reasonable but the for the
period.
Insert.
Except that in the case of an
alleged violation of the unfair
practices act relating to the
manufacture comma distribution
comma advertising comma or sail
or offering for sale of a
firearm comma destructive device
comma firearm part for firearm
accessory any person aware of an
unfair or deceptive trade
practice for an unconscionable
trade practice may bring suit.
So the aware of standard would
only apply to firearms okay.
if you could write that down
that would be super helpful.
And what about a in the on.
In the next paragraph.
Where there is also aware of.
You're looking at page sixteen
lesser will.
Trying to get slightly.
Except that.
Madam chair we would have to do
the same thing that subparagraph
B. as we just proposed
subparagraph fade strike the of
aware of war and then add the
language that was coming to
suggest otherwise separate Fe
relates to injunctive remedies
subparagraph B. relates to of
financial so reminiscent
restored so which so you have to
Yeah we we would potentially
remove the strike through online
nine ten eleven twelve so that
would all PED is said to be
existing language kept as is and
we would strike the proposed new
language is aware of.
And then
The same thing except that so
that we would have that same
exceptional language after.
C..
There's.
Have to be online problem line
fourteen.
Actually.
We don't need it there you can
just remove it because the code
on the bottom of the track on
that's.
Except that.
Because
we already have.
This part of the paragraph.
So the person who.
If that works.
In which case madam chair and
senator would be simpler to just
create two new paragraphs that
would deal specifically with.
Firearms.
And and replicate the language
potentially impact Madam I'm I
would like that I think that
that's going to be clear that
what we're trying to do which
trying to fashion a within the
existing areas so I think you're
right about a couple of
additional subparagraphs of that
this targeted specifically to
guns and then putting in the
awareness component of the
private.
The better and cleaner so I I
would suggest we get off of a
real amendment drafted for
entities that and what we can do
is finish our conversation about
that discussion of the bill
we're meeting tomorrow morning
and we can bring back the
amendment and we can but we
won't have additional discussion
we'll just talk about that one
the amendment have so if there's
other discussion about the bill
happy to entertain for
discussion before we and then
we'll just try to get it out of
here early I'm sure you would
like that opportunity like you
haven't written written in there
about this this is an important
bill and I've passed the
background check loopholes and
I've done the red flag in
everyone of my pass I'm told I'm
gonna be sued and second
amendment is going to come after
me and I was going to come after
me and I've been hearing that
for about ten years and so you
know we successfully done so and
that's because we try to be very
careful here into this just
right.
Well thank you etcetera and I
appreciate your work on this as
I said I'm I think this is a
good approach on guns but I'm
don't want to extend into other
areas so thank you very much
will be meeting tomorrow morning
I would suggest we meet at eight
thirty tomorrow morning and we
could put.
I mean chair nine o'clock it
will do your your bill your
amendment first and will get
settings for the usual sleep
with.
Madam chair and I do know that
Representative there's several
of us who have another meeting
tomorrow morning.
At.
Eight o'clock right.
Well I don't know what to tell
you mean.
To that nine o'clock we're
starting we have I mean we've
got bills without a get out of
here more the less you will have
a written amendments thank you
very much Senator your hand but
that's alright we're used to
getting cold leftover food as
you are as well center I'm sure.
You know we're in caucus in the
Senate right now we're going
back to the floor and so we're
Judiciary such co chair and I
know you didn't want to start
earlier by that but we've we've
been able to get a lot of your
bills out so I hope you all to
pay attention thank you very
much Senator have floor sponsor
and a floor Sanchez.
I don't know I don't know what
to look out for gonna try if not
we're going to be a lot of the.
So next and there's food folks
you can grab the amendment we
just I just want to work through
you as much done as we can so
we're on Senate bill three
ninety eight.
I'm sorry speaker.
Okay
we're on Senate bill three
ninety eight.
Is
Nancy is Senator Rodriguez here
Madam chair she's on her way
back upstairs okay well
then we are now on Senate bill
three sixty eight we really
don't have time for allied three
sixty eight.
Okay and I'm happy to call
representative Thompson who's
been waiting patiently.
And I promise all very brief and
I will do so then you will do
you Center souls.
So madam chair Senate bill one
oh six just add a few more
practitioners.
Into the non complete non
compete clause so current law
provides that non compete
agreements do not apply to
physicians dentists osteopathic
physicians podiatrists certified
registered nurse and that
anaesthetists certified midwives
and certified nurse nurse
practitioners and what we are
attempting to add is to add the
and
physicians assistants and
pharmacists thanks to call in I
colleges and the reason for this
this that if you sign a contract
with the no compete clause and
you you want to get a new job
and you can't get one in the
state because of the no compete
clause you're gonna leave and so
we don't we can't afford to lose
any health care professionals so
it's just making it a bigger
group of people who can not be
held by a non compete clause.
Up if we.
We'll go to the audience is or
anyone just wanting to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Online anyone wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
See anyone anyone wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
Madam chair Linda Siegel for the
New Mexico psychological
association we support this
bill.
Thank you Linda earlier was bill
yes.
She's they support it so anyone
else in the audience wishing to
speak in support anyone else
online wishing to speak in
support.
All right
I saw you I see you Senator
sorry.
For running of.
Yeah we're doing robo built
through.
All right so let's go to the
committee on speaker mode to
pass.
We have a due pass a motion made
by speaker Martinez seconded I
believe by Representative
Nyberg
no you had a question I'm sorry
all right second by
Representative Representative
Chasey Representative Nibert has
a question.
Madam chair representative.
When we add physician assistant
I'm I'm wondering if.
You have a physician that wants
to hire a physician assistant
and I agree to put him through
school and generally.
Get them trained you would
normally have a non compete for
a few years and that type of
arrangement and I'm wondering if
that would.
Maybe.
Well if the.
Desire of a physician to.
Go to those lengths to try to
get you know a.
Senator another professional to
get that extra training to then
hire them as a physician
assistant and manager about that
and Representative I've never
heard of such a thing
And I would guess if you're
gonna pay for someone's
schooling there would be some
sort of a contract but not not
come you know that you must
serve three years with me but
not that you can't go work for
someone else after whatever time
that would you know ten years
whatever it happens to be that
that's part of the contract but
as I said I've never heard of
anybody and training someone.
To a.
To work with them Madam chair
representative of the only way
that you can really.
Enforce that time because we
can't force people to work for
us the only way to really
enforce it is to prohibit them
from working for somebody else's
in that area and that's where I
I've seen that type employ them
I understand why we generally
don't do that but.
With with that that one just
jumped out of the because I I
would think that there have been
doctors who have seen a talented
individual may say you know if
you go through this all the this
for three you need to work for
me for for three years or
whatever the only way you can
really enforce that is is not
letting them go to the next
doctor who's going to pay more
money two you know in year one
or year two and so that's where
you generally see those non
compete provisions to.
Provide a disincentive for them
to seek those other
employment opportunities and
likewise to create an obstacle
for that competing drive to to
make that offer of the employees
that I just hired and and have
this investment.
I just would like your your
comments on that and madam chair
and representative I would think
that there would be an agreement
that the you know if you don't
do your three years or how many
ever years then you all the
money back I mean that to me
that's a contract that's not a
no compete clause.
The well Madam chair
representative there may be
moving forward you would alter
your contract the highest
presume that that some of those
emergency clause and stuff this
thing would would declares
public policy that those
provisions are unenforceable.
Media Lee and so you have the
potential for those types of
agreements to be enforced now
and we would not have the
ability rewrite those contracts
at this time so you know if if
that's if that's your answer
will you may want to think about
a delay in at least that portion
of the of the the bill so that
it captures.
Some of that but I just throw it
out there and you know again I
don't know if it's a real
problem but I know if I were
drafting that type of risk
management drafted those for
some others situations that
would be something I would be
concerned with thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
Thank you Representative anyone
else.
The question comment.
would you call the roll please
we have a motion for do pass
Representative vocals.
Representative Chasey is yes.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night for yes
Representative reef yes.
Representative green.
The Senators us yes.
Madam vice chances these madam
chair yes.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Senator Rodriguez is my my desk
maybe I'll make it up.
souls thank you madam chair of
Senate bill one seventeen eighty
New Mexico is one of the few
states that have prescribing
psychologist a psychologist that
then have highly specialized
additional training to be able
to prescribe psychotropic drugs
they've been doing this in New
Mexico successfully without any
kind of incidents are certainly
no higher level than
psychiatrists they have
requested to move under the
medical board the medical board
would like them under need them
for the extra supervision that
it pertains everybody has agreed
to all of this and so this bill
just moves the prescribing
psychologists the branch of
psychology that as the
specialized training under the
medical board with that will
stand for questions thank you
senator let's go to the audience
anyone wishing to speak in
opposition to this bill please
raise your hand.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand we have a
Tyler Dillard Tyler.
Can you hear me yes.
Yes my name is actually it's Ty
retailers on the citizens from
from Santa Fe and
I do speak in opposition to this
bill and I'll tell you the
reason why
because on the face of it this
seems unobjectionable we have a
mental health crisis we have
solutions to which which can be
better organized can be better
supervised by doctors fine the
problem is that there has been
an increasing evidence in
studies that these
procedure these tools these
drugs are really not
particularly effective I have
looked at a couple of different
studies of this one of them that
came to mind which I saw in the
press because the study got a
lot of press was on my side in
article in Newsweek in
September.
And I want to read you just a
little section of that article
if I may.
here we go.
A team of researchers at the US
food and drug administration
along with a long time critic of
the drugs from Harvard Medical
School published the most
comprehensive analysis to date
of all the anti depressant
clinical trial data in its files
much of it previously on publish
the study which examined two
hundred and thirty two placebo
controlled trials of seventy
three thousand three hundred and
eighty eight patients diagnosed
with major depressive disorder
suggested that the active
ingredients and time.
Your time is up thank you
Senator do you wish to comment
before we go to the committee
yes ma'am I could madam chair
this bill has nothing to do with
specific drugs or anything of
that sort these people are
already highly trained
professionals that do this on an
everyday basis this really is
about but they're moving under
the supervision of the The
Medical Board.
Thank you senator questions
about the bill.
Happy to entertain them motion
then cherry move it to the house
and Senate bill one seventeen as
amended the second.
Hey we have a motion made by
vice chair Romero for do pass in
a second by leader Chasey on
Senate bill one oh six as
amended which involves seventeen
as amended one seven seven okay
sorry.
Reading long line there that
time of the session it is.
It was one of my classes so
would you call the roll
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative read.
Representative green this.
Representative said Penske yes
madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes I have a.
Thank you madam chair committee
and I I appreciate your stamina.
All right let's let's do Senate
bill three ninety eight Housing
Authority commissioner
employment Senator Rodriguez and
I appreciate your patience
Senator I'm sorry about that
thank you for hearing my bill
and I have Hank he's here with
me he is a county commissioner
now many of you are familiar
with him he's to be the director
of the have a coalition to end
homelessness in that I thank you
madam chairman members of the
committee can you hear me this
there okay thank you this is the
bill and I'll make it short
unless you want more information
madam chairman that merely
attends to correct an old
archaic law that we found in the
books from I think was a sixties
and it let me explain a little
bit of a background here that
counties many times they develop
and establish public housing
authorities this has to do with
with affordable housing they do
that in an effort to find this
affordable housing in their
communities now they have boards
they put together a board and
the county commissioners serve
on the board because they're
like departments these Housing
Authority so like departments of
the counties so they serve on
the board and then they appoint
someone else to to meet the
seven members for example that
are on the board well they the
county commission themselves
found a clause or a provision I
should say in the loft that
tends to now if it's pretty
clear to me to prohibit elected
what elected officials or anyone
who works in the city member old
archaic law in the city where
the public housing authorities
established so that leaves
everyone out elected officials
of any kind can't serve on these
boards county commissioners
can't serve on the board any
anyone who works in the
community and has a job can't
work on the board so all we had
to do was strike that
appropriations so.
So that they can continue to
serve on their own boards
without a violation that's
really what it does Madam
chairman members of the
committee.
Senator let's go to the audience
anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in opposition to this
bill please raise your hand.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand down if
you want to take the might care.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Dan
weeks are Representative
Bernalillo county Bernalillo
county City of Albuquerque are
forming a cold collaborative and
we will have to have a board and
this would prohibit us if we
don't change it from having any
or look to officials are
practice else involved in so we
support this very much thank you
you're welcome anyone else in
the audience wishing to speak in
opposition I mean in support.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in support.
All right Senator any concluding
comments before now you know for
the sake of time thank you for
hearing.
Pass.
You got out and we got the beat
up there speaker.
She does.
We have a motion for do past
made by Representative semansky
and seconded by.
It's seconded by.
So.
Seconded by Casey is there for
the discussion of the bill.
No I guess not
Attention to call the roll
please.
Thank you madam chair
representative of all come on.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert.
Representative grieve yes.
Representative Rehm yeah.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Japan's yes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with eleven both you
have a do pass on Senate bill
three ninety eight thank you
senator good to see you thank
you very much thank you all
members of the committee.
If you have more days.
Okay.
Yes we're now on item well
actually there is an exciting
mysteries.
Is anyone here for three law
enforcement body cam X..
Apparently not all right.
Fast you can get into the sea.
That fifty cent take awhile so
why don't we let.
Hello this is fifty six.
What
thanks.
Thanks
fifty one I'm so sorry.
Why don't we take a vote we
won't need the chair.
So
Fifty or no let's wait on fifty
eight do let me recommend that
we do one oh seven because that
is a simple bill let's let's go
there okay I think it's simple.
Evening madam chair you ready
for us to begin.
Before the vote thank you very
much madam chair members of the
committee Senate bill one oh
four is amended relates to
children in custody taken into
custody with CYFD and it does
three.
Primary things the first is that
it allows CYFD to perform an
investigation over the course of
three days which is an extension
of one so right now it's two
days
it provides notice when a child
is taken into custody a notice
is given to the office of Family
representation and a tribe or
pueblo our nation if that child
is native American and then
third.
If a child has been taken into
custody.
in the prior year we're
extending the amount of time
that CYFD has to perform an
investigation and we are
elevating the investigation so
that it is reviewed by about the
supervisor.
And with that will stand for
questions I have with me Emily
Martin of C. way of active
services.
Let's go to let's go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those are mine wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hands okay
we have a life here for the
third.
Thank you chairman and committee
members my name is Maryland back
the founder and executive
director of New Mexico child
first network a nonprofit
organization dedicated to
improving the lives of children
in foster care how we stand
strong support this has been a
labor of love from all of the
agencies ad agencies the court
often advocates legal
representation you name it we've
come together for cooperating
moment that is very rare and we
have the highest rate of short
term placements in the entire
country we have high rates of
repeat maltreatment we just
can't thank everyone enough for
bringing this forward thank you
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter just
one echo what the first person
said in the interest of time
thank you thank you anyone else
in the audience wishing to speak
on this bill.
Those online wishing to speak in
support of the bill Allison.
Yes good evening madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for this opportunity my name
is Allison and cockiness and I
am the legal director of
advocacy Inc we are the largest
provider of legal representation
of children in the foster care
system in New Mexico and we
stand in strong support of this
bill and hope that you will I
supported as well this bill will
allow for an added layer of of
scholars I don't see scrutiny
because that sounds like a
negative thing it's but it does
allow for a little bit more time
to develop the investigations
and also to raise the level at
which these cases are going to
be evaluated in order to prevent
kids from slipping through the
cracks and we are very proud
that this bill has come together
in the way that it has with so
many partners so we are asking
for your support with this bill
thank you thank you anyone else
online wishing to speak in
support I I don't see anyone.
What okay Representative
anything else before we go to
the committee
I know madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
Representative you mentioned in
your comments that it extended
the length of time.
So.
I'm really concerned about some
of these issues and when we talk
about an extended length of
time.
I'm concerned that.
Our kids are getting the
treatment that they could to
convince me otherwise his.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yes I believe we
can but I'm gonna ask that miss
Martin respond to that yes Madam
chair representative Nibert
thank you for the question
actually what this does is it
extends the time for CYFD once a
child has been given
the law enforcement has given
CYFD custody of a child it gives
us three days to work with law
enforcement our child advocacy
centers to really do a much
thorough investigation three
days doesn't seem like a lot but
in the course of an
investigation into abuse and
neglect three days is a lot more
than two to make that
determination whether we're
going to file for continued
custody of that child with the
court or not.
Madam chair.
Representative hat has CYFD
alternatives.
Rule that was just returning the
kids back to the parents without
maybe considering some other.
Circumstances are or what law
enforcement and child advocacy
groups are.
Maybe concerned with because
we've had a death in Travis
county that was resolved with
CYFD return the child to the
parents when I believe there
were several other agencies
saying no don't send that child
back and and so have the change
our policies
Madam chair representative over
the course of the last year and
a half since US secretary Vigil
and I stepped into our our roles
as secretary and director of
protective services we've done a
number of
reviews including that
collaborative safety review
we've done deep dives into cases
and looking at practices the
practices within the department
and are working on it re
training re looking at the tools
that we utilize to to address
safety and what this bill does
is really does give us that one
extra day to ensure that we are
making the right decision if
that child has not been in the
custody of the department before
but if they have within that
last the last year even if it
was for for our.
Hopefully now we'll call it not
forty eight hour hold but at a
three day hold
it will actually be five days
and it has to go to a higher
level of review and as as it's
written in the bill right now
that that is the secretaries
does it need and if that
secretary we're looking at a
regional manager type level or
maybe a field deputy director
reviewing those cases before
that decision is made for the
child to go home and that that
extra level of.
A review of oversight of support
to dig in to ensure that we are
making that is best decision as
we can without the crystal ball
that I desperately want to find
one day.
Madam chair representative I I
hope that extra day
accomplishes the results that we
do
I I still
I have concerns about the
processing and about maybe the
rules that have been created in
the following of those rules and
you know frankly
In the last few years we've had
that a couple of the US and and
you know the first one was hard
to swallow the second one.
It really knocked us to our food
and our knees and and so.
I'm hoping that.
This extra day.
Get you where you need to be
because our kids need to be.
properly evaluated families via
valuations and sometimes kids
should not go back to their
parents it's unfortunate but
thank you for thank you madam
chair.
We did we got a motion to have a
motion no okay Representative
Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
It's are you sitting in
Representative Dixon sepia so
you're the house sponsor I
appreciate the additional time
for the investigation I don't
when we tell you why I'm
probably not going to vote for
it I'm concerned about the
language in the second amendment
which is the child
it's a child's been taken into
custody release to the trials
child's parents guardians or
custodians taken again within
six months.
Then there restrictions on
whether the child can be
returned.
I think it could be interpreted
that if the child were taken
into custody.
And this is what I would argue
if I were are doing this in
court and really then returned
within a very brief period of
time.
And then.
Later within the six months that
petition was filed there's some
kind of additional scrutiny it's
it's it's almost as if it's
restricting the return I kind
of.
I think that's I think it should
be more evaluating it carefully
than restricting because I'm
trying to think of the case the
timeline in a particular case
where we took I represented the
mom and the dad and they had a
quite a few children.
The dad had a really good job
and the first time the children
were taken into custody.
There were.
He had a job where he could
actually support this large
family and there were so many
requirements for his treatment
plan he couldn't keep his job
and then they ended up in a
really inferior living situation
and for that reason the children
were taken into custody again
wasn't really.
About any abuse and it was
it was poverty and so I worry
about just the use of
restricting so that that's why I
don't want to hold that the
discussion that I have a real
concern with it and I would be
if I were still doing these
cases I would be litigating on
this I guarantee it thank you
madam.
Thank Representative it motion
Representative bring one okay.
Madam chair and Representative
the server house bill with this
I thought I saw this previously.
Madam chair and representative
no.
Thank you madam.
Happy to entertain a motion.
Motion FOR do pass me by
Representative read we have a
second.
Seconded by Representative
reviews.
Would you call the roll
Representative all phone.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read yes
Representative green yes.
Representative.
For.
Yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
a yes by a vote of eight to one
we have a to pass on.
Senate bill one oh seven eight.
Thank you madam chair.
But I propose I think we should
do
Senate bill three sixty eight
I understand there may be some
agreement on a house bill I mean
on Senate bill fifty but let's
we'll talk about that it in some
points up so we have the law
enforcement body cam I see
Center pope.
It's.
Thank you madam chair I do have
a Montana right Nelson from
Albuquerque police department on
zoom is an expert if we need him
okay as well.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill three
sixty eight are deals with
legislation for body cam
exemptions for a law enforcement
officers what this bill does
madam chair is it actually gives
to exemptions one for officers
were conducting undercover
operations and those that are
conducting explosive recovery
we're doing this for really the
safety of the officers of course
during undercover work we don't
want them to be identified put
them so but their lives at risk
and then when it comes down to
the force of recovery some of
this these cameras electronic
equipment could expose them set
off some of the explosives that
they're near there's also an
update on subsection C..
on the presumption so on section
see where rates peace officers
who fail to comply with the
policies and procedures required
to be adopted pursuant to
subsection a of this section.
Right now the provided the law
reads show and we're changing
shall to may and it's may be
presumed to have acted in bad
faith.
And shell is what it currently
reason were changing that shall
to may.
May be deemed liable for the
independent tort of negligence
violation of evidence for the
independent tort of intentional
spoliation of evidence this
amendment was made in Senate
Judiciary
by the chairman and the reason
for the original subsection was
initially when this legislation
was done
I don't want to name his name
but there is a certain a county
sheriff in my county that kind
of fought a lot of this so that
was one reason why this was put
in there the chairman and myself
as well we believe that we can
change that shall to may we
believe a lot of the law
enforcement has have been braced
this technology in the use of
these body worn cameras not only
does it protect the community
and have transparency but it's
also protecting them and
transparency there as well with
that madam chair like to also
introduce
David Martinez from Albuquerque
police farmers welfare
professionals and with that will
go to public comment taking
questions from the committee.
Great thank you senator let's go
to the audience those wishing to
speak in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
yes secretary in yes chief.
Madam chair members of the
committee for someone thank the
sponsor for making these and
very necessary changes it is
always been kind of hard to
swallow for most law enforcement
due to the one chair for the
pointed out that there was a
presumption of have acted in bad
faith and are believed most of
police officers that I know
certainly embrace body worn
cameras I've had volunteered for
a camera my police car when I
was very new and before it was
law and have have had of either
body worn camera in car chairman
police car for my entire career
and I think most of the time to
actually intensifies the officer
more so than it does anything
else and so I really appreciate
this and and for the people who
who don't believe or that this
change might be necessary
particularly changing the shall
to may I would I would just say
this have you ever had a P.
electronic equipment that fills
on you and I think most people
answer and respond in the
affirmative have you ever had a
blue screen on the computer have
you ever had about a refill on
your cell phone have you ever
had a text message didn't go
through and I would say the most
so circumstances certainly
wouldn't be life or death under
those circumstances I really
appreciate the sponsor
appropriate Representative
centers about this yesterday
acknowledging this change in
white was necessary at the time
and it not indulging Law
Enforcement happening embrace
this and I can certainly speak
in more detail but I'm just very
appreciative we support the
changes thank you Secretary.
You madam chair I have the
savings that will okay you're so
kind thank you
does anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in support.
Those online wishing to speak in
support.
Okay grace Phillips.
Madam chair members of the
committee grace Phillips from
New Mexico counties we think
these are really sensible and
important improvements to the
body worn camera line we stand
and support.
Thank you back to the sponsor
anything you wish to say before
we go committee you madam chair
thank you
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair etcetera
etcetera pope
I read this earlier and I
focused on the other changes in
the bill I didn't really focus
on that challan may which is of
course pretty significant change
mentor center when it's is may
be deemed liable or maybe
presume to act in bad faith
who's doing the teaming in the
presenting.
Madam chair representative
affected expert responded that.
Madam chair representative as
Representative queen at this
point dance your question I
believe that that would be a
judge and a formal proceedings.
And madam chair
Centered expert with if you say
at this point.
If it's a shell it is it is the
answer different.
Madam chair representative
Representative queen know the
answers in different so it would
be a judge or potentially a
finder of fact.
Madam chair representative and I
want to call you your honor you.
Yes Representative.
So madam chair
Center expert
It.
If there is an incident it was
not caught on camera.
The camera was was turned off.
Would there be evidence will
earn argument available that you
know in six other incidents this
particular officers camera
happen to be turned off I mean
this can you establish a sort of
a pattern of conduct.
My experts Madam chair
representative Representative
McQueen yes and
That again that would the judge
would have the totality of the
circumstances specifically
looking at whether this officer
you know in camera however the
judge might go about it to see
if there is a pattern of you
know other instances going on or
if this was a specific instance
one of the things that
It if it if this situation
should occur Madam chair
representative queen McQueen
For example with a P. do you
what you're gonna have is.
An officer usually won't be by
themselves there will be other
offices around so there will
either be at other cameras on to
to to take it and then all this
is just one type of evidence you
know you have camera evidence
but then you have the testimony
of the officers or of witnesses
or victims that may be also be
able to present
that evidence to the fact
finder.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Romero I just
like to move it to pass.
We have a motion for do pass me
by Representative I'll get to
Representative Romero seconded
by Representative Chasey
Representative Rehm.
Yes madam chair and then Senator
hope and I visited earlier today
at a proposed amendment but when
I look at it is not written
correctly so I'm not going to
offer it but want to make the
committee aware of what the and
and Senator Popa said that it's
friendly right now.
But
One of the things that another
exception that we need to have
is striving to a call
in my business I've looked at a
video of a state police officer
driving like from Albuquerque
all the way down to.
Carlsbad you know for five hours
another one is a rescue call and
why state rescue called the
mansion your wife or husband
fell in the shower they're all
caught up with the glass the
officers responded they're cut
up the they're videoing all of
that rescue call and then if you
have a neighbor that you don't
get along with he can if Perot
that yeah that's going to be
blurred out but the of the words
the communication won't be and
then make it posted on Facebook
or whatever.
The city.
There's the cameras are manually
turned on.
So there are situations with the
officer can't turn it on because
something suddenly happens and
you know I agree that with Mr
Martinez that there's other
officers who may be able to turn
on their cameras with that one
officer may not be able to.
And.
I think that's it but you know I
think that we need to since we
got a chance we need to fix up
right.
But anyway those are my comments
and I appreciate the
conversations after me.
Thank you Representative we have
a motion on the floor for to
pass representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair just one
question.
Is there any technology that
picks up the.
Cameras sensors that would be.
That would allow someone to
detect the presence of an
officer and I'm really thinking
about maybe a swat situation
where the officers need to be
concealed.
And was just wondering if
there's technology out there
that would be available that we
may need to address as well
because I can see some other
situations without exist we may
need to put some more sections
in there.
Madam chair representative
Nibert Montoya Nelson who's on
soon he might be able to answer
that question Montoya Nelson.
We have.
He's not listed.
Oh okay our notion.
Can you elevate in.
Adjusted okay.
The chief says no Montoya
Nelson.
Hello guys okay here we are were
you able to hear that question
Sir.
I believe I what could you
repeat it for me please.
Madam chair and Mister Nelson I
was just concerned that if there
are other situations where
officers need to be concealed
whether or not having that body
camera on would be detectable by
any technology thereby blowing
their cover so to speak.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee yes
that question yes that the
cameras do emit a Bluetooth and
or wifi signal so they can be
detected.
Madam chair on I'm not suggested
tonight but it seems like there
may be some need to be look at
this.
As there could be other
situations like under cover
operations where the concealment
of their identity should be
protective.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative anyone
else for the question we have a
motion on the floor for to pass
of this bill to call the roll
Representative Alcon from
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes
Representative Nibert yes
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes
Representative Egolf yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes a vote of ten to zero we
have to do that as thank you
madam chair committee members of
slow easier definitely this year
so I see people packing up to go
the for which I know I'm sorry
guys the nature of our game
so this is what I I want to
share with you we are meeting
tomorrow morning there's an
Attorney General bill that it's
important to his office and
we'll be hearing that bill to
Morrow we'll be hearing Senator
serve on today's is amendment if
we have time before the floor we
can do house bill fifty if not
we may get tomorrow and in the
end we will up to presumably
have time between the early
morning floor session evening
floor session so sometime
tomorrow we'll get to fifty and
I apologize but that is the
nature of our work at this time
of year so.
I said nine o'clock tomorrow and
really truthfully I'd rather do
eight thirty but you know.
I'm here with.
Your sleep.
