Representative look.
Representative night here.
Representative reading.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Dayan Hochman.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee today
were discussing house bill
eleven it makes some changes to
the medical malpractice act
which was passed last year known
as H. B. seventy five most
Pacific we were looking to amend
the definition of independent
health care provider to school
references to HSD and also it
delays the application of the
four million dollar cap for
damages implemented in the
original bill as applicable to
outpatient health care
facilities before I introduce my
experts madam chair I want to
read a brief statement I'm not
really one
To pontificate or add long
introductions to built madam
chair but this one is incredibly
important and because of the
gravitas of this issue I think
it's important to to read the
statement so madam chair members
of the committee New Mexico
healthcare providers face a very
real crisis on January first if
we do not act and the twenty
twenty one legislative session
after much debate negotiation
the New Mexico legislature
passed H. B. seventy five to
modernize the medical
malpractice act this year's
legislative session attorneys
insurance carriers patient
advocates and many others
collaborated with legislators
from both parties and our
governor to craft a landmark
bill the medical malpractice act
twenty twenty one was everyone
perfectly happy with the result
of course not and go she Asians
try to improve patient safety
and provide affordable
professional liability insurance
for hospitals and health care
professionals for decades to
come many physicians and
hospitals understood even
supported the need to improve
access to compensation for
patients who are injured now as
this bill becomes law we find
ourselves in an urgent situation
that none of the stakeholders
intended independent physicians
who provide services in hospital
outpatient facilities and small
outpatient health care
facilities are owned and
operated by independent
physicians are now subject to
the same multi million dollar
malpractice cap it was intended
only for hospitals under New
Mexico case law madam chair
independent providers are being
mistaken as agents of hospitals
and as such are subject to the
four million dollar cap soon to
be six million eventually thus
necessitated necessitating
removal of the term of a parent
agency leaving only actual
employees of the hospitals being
subject to that cap the six can
be found on page two my twenty
five HB eleven.
You must also delay the
implementation of the pot for
the six million dollar cap for
non hospital controlled
outpatient facilities to see if
something can be done to get
them insurance to date no
insurance in the country will
offer four million dollar policy
to these independent positions
own independent physician owned
outpatient facilities the
current insurers in the state
will offer seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars of coverage the
cap independent providers fall
under but will not issue a four
million dollar currency policy.
This is here today quite
literally requested quotes but
the practitioners here today but
literally requested quotes from
every insurance company that
underwrites the such policies
and they were all unsuccessful
without appropriate insurance
physicians cannot and should not
practice medicine on January
first it's not safe for patients
and it's not fair to the
providers I understand why
they've come together to ask us
to make this change madam chair
this is not a time for
grandstanding or politicization
of a non partisan issue we have
a mandate to save health care in
New Mexico at the end of the day
a vote against this bill is a
vote against doctors and their
patients failure is not an
option.
At this time before I introduce
the experts chair I want to turn
my go over to my co sponsor
madam what during diagnosis.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
grateful that I can spoke co
sponsor house bill eleven with
Representative Hochman Vigil to
avert.
Very helpful very real health
care crisis we face on January
first if we do not take action
today.
To echo Representative Hochman
Vigil we have an urgent crisis
that we must transcend transcend
politics in twenty two days
hundreds of physicians and ended
in independent doctor owned
practices we'll have to shut
down their businesses leaving
thousands of patients without
care I like to paint a picture
of what that will look like in
communities across New Mexico
including Los crucis specialists
and surgeons are in small are
small in number all in our
communities rely on a doctor in
private practice who is also on
call at a local hospital for
emergencies in twenty two days
if there is a car accident
premature birth and appendix or.
The heart attack a physician may
literally be not be available to
answer the call further imagine
if you're an expectant mother
being taken care of by a small
family facility you'll no longer
be able to have the doctor who
you trust and know to deliver
your baby at a hospital because
the doctor can no longer
practice there why because the
physicians of the private
practice have been and I able to
buy into an insurance policy to
cover a four million dollar
practice cap that was intended
for hospitals only and not for
small practices under the twenty
twenty one medical malpractice
act our independent doctors
agree to and we're prepared to
pay for higher insurance per
premiums but no one anticipated
that the insurance market would
deny policies to every single
new Mexican applicant under this
new law.
If we do not fix this unintended
and unforeseen problem in the
next twenty two days then these
New Mexico New Mexican owned
independent physician owned
practices will stop providing
services and hundreds of New
Mexicans will be at risk for
serious illness life altering
impacts and death all in in our
communities will suffer the
brunt of these consequences with
quick action we can avert this
crisis on January first we have
many doctors across the room
with us today and on zoom and
they will tell you in very real
consequences that will happen if
we do not take action I believe
them and that is why we hope
you'll pass house bill eleven
and with that I'll hand the Mike
back over to my co sponsor.
Thank you madam chair also
sitting with us today is Cappy
love from the New Mexico
trawlers Association and Nick
audio from the New Mexico
Medical Society with that we
stand for questions.
Those.
See what your.
Many of us.
Technical problems we're
getting.
We're getting adjusted to the
partial.
Meeting and.
You're not speaking into
microphones those folks if you
would.
And speaking of microcode is
hello correct.
Okay next to whoever wants to
come up come up students I'm at
that role.
Hello can you hear me yes thank
you madam chair.
looking me in the first.
My name is siki Frazier on the
CEO for X. ray associates of New
Mexico we're radiology practice
throughout the state of New
Mexico we've twenty four
radiologists we've three breast
surgeons who practice at seven
different hospitals as of
January first we will no longer
be able to read the X. rays
performed at these hospitals I
don't know how of to make this
clear we cannot do it we do not
have the insurance.
We have four months of backlog
of surgeries scheduled with
patients into April.
We will have to cancel those
surgeries if this is not
corrected we support House Bill
Levin thank you.
thank you madam chair it's nice
to be back in the building Scott
Scanlon registered lobbyist.
Of house bill eleven
I'm sorry I was reminded of
earlier this year that San Juan
ridge.
But we're here for the patience
of New Mexico and for doctors
and so as I'm not going to
repeat what we want to.
Is a serious issue engine.
Is that the old button down or
is a good.
Check check check check.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is JD
Bullington and I am here today
representing the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
as well as I a sole community
provider hospitals that are
located outside of the greater
Abakaliki area but we applaud
the sponsors for bringing this
initiative forward and we are
also greatly appreciate of of
the legislature for addressing
this matter immediately while
this is somewhat of a technical
fix to remedy an oversight in
the legislation it's a very
important fix that we need this
remedy immediately our health
care infrastructure network in
the state is strained currently
and we cannot afford to lose any
component of the health care
provider network and so this
legislation is very important
and again we are greatly
appreciative you're taking up
this matter now thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Linda Siegel
representing the New Mexico
nurse practitioner council and
the nurse or a nurse midwives
association and we we support
this bill nurse practitioners
are impacted by this we have
nurse pricked practitioners who
work in hospitals on contractor
independent providers we have
nurse midwifery clinics that are
considered under the licensed
outpatient facility which would
certainly be required to get the
four million dollar policy so we
sent stand.
Madam chair members of the
committee to and Brepols.
Ciation we also stand in support
I just want to give a huge
shout.
They spent trying to figure out
what the tweak is and getting us
to this place and certainly for
all the parties that help to
traffic.
I want to ask.
The individuals who are on this.
For this meeting.
Madam chair you'll hear me.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's Jason
Thompson I'm here representing
the New Mexico society of
anesthesiologists
first and foremost just like to
thank the sponsors for.
In this forward and bringing
this to our attention I want to
be too repetitive here of course
I would have loved to have
the physicians in this group
speak to you instead but they're
working in their respective
hospitals so the main point that
they would want me to impart to
you is that we all know the
current state of the strain of
our health care workforce and
it's strange and spread thin
enough as it is currently so
ultimately we have to have these
technical fixes past in order
for states our state's
independent positions such as
anesthesiologists to continue to
provide their vital health care
services which in this case or
anesthesiology services for
surgeries to residents we Hazen
in these hospitals and we have
to ensure that this Bob with
this fix in this law works as
intended because alternately if
this fix is not put in place in
patients around New Mexico will
be the ones paying the biggest
price for this so again we thank
you for taking this step and we
urge passage of this bill today
thank you.
Good morning my name is Mike
right now on Representative
southwest bone and joint
institute in Silver City New
Mexico madam chair members of
the committee I urge your
support of this bill our
surgeons partner with our local
county hospital to provide
emergency on call services and
surgical services to patients
throughout southwest New Mexico
and it's without passage of this
bill.
Those services would be.
Very difficult to find without
to this fix so.
Thank you for your time and I
urge your support and passage of
house bill eleven thank you.
That concludes our public
comment and let me go to
committee then.
Thank you madam chair.
And thank you presenters.
Interesting that we find
ourselves here today.
But not.
Not unforeseen.
Representative can you tell me.
Funding this down the road.
Fixes that bill.
madam chair of for later
Townsend at this point in time
it is these provided to these
providers an opportunity to
further explore the availability
of insurance for these
particular situations and for
this cap amounts I am also gonna
turn this over to I'm a celeb
who can add if necessary.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Townsend with all
due respect I I don't think that
this was a bad deal to start
with it was contentious in the
beginning but remarkably for
very different parties came
together with a common goal of
protecting patients and
providing safe health care New
Mexico well also make it
possible for our doctors to make
a living and at the end during
the negotiations and the
drafting.
All four parties hospitals the
medical society trial lawyers
and patients work together to
finalize this this bill
including the drafting of this
bill and I think it's really
important to note that even as
we sit here today all of those
parties still have an agreement
as to the intent of the bill.
The drafting we're some snafus
happened is what we're facing
today
and so I think hunting this down
the road so that we can try to
figure out what the problem is
with the outpatient facilities
not getting insurance and also
fixing the language around the
definition of and then the
independent provider is going to
go a long way toward
implementing implementing what
everybody intended of this bill
and so I mean it really is
remarkable in such a divided
society that we have this is a
group of diverse interests
working toward what really
everybody has a common goal
which is safe and quality health
care in New Mexico and so I
would really urge that you pass
this bill because truly January
first we have a crisis we really
strongly believe after working
closely together with all of the
interested parties that this is
going to make a major fix and
also get us closer toward
finding out what what if any
other other problems there are
around ensuring outpatient
facilities.
And also madam chair I the
accounts and I want to also add
that all the stakeholders and
parties at the stable and
otherwise are completely
committed to making sure that
any particular fix that is
needed in the bill gets maybe
this is one of those fixes and
we're all coming here together
in unison with this solution as
a first step if additional
solutions need to be found we
will be back here again and we
have a commitment to that so
this is just the first step.
Madam chair.
That could take my mask off.
Because.
It's such a great meal that
we're here in an American city
that we got to fix it because we
didn't know what it was going to
do.
That we have to put thirty
million dollars again HB who.
To bridge the gap.
And so all we're doing is taken
taxpayer money.
In my opinion and I wanted to
trial lawyers.
At the expense of the patient.
It it it is not a good deal it's
a horrible be.
We thought this bill when it
came board on health not.
We thought this bill before
because we saw all these kind of
things coming.
This is not a good.
The right fix is to repeal the
be all and then start from
scratch and fix the thing.
Down the road tell after the
governor's election is not a
good fit.
It's a terrible fix.
And the citizens of New Mexico
the patients and the doctors
deserve better.
I think when you go back and you
look how this bill went through.
The people of New Mexico.
It was hard fought.
It passed with out on party
lines.
It passed on one of.
The house floor my member.
How how it was passed and just
one just one answer please write
to my recollection has would
bein by part.
Back from the Santo.
They didn't pass with almost all
of the support of health care
members Democrats and
Republicans.
Look at the I look at the.
The purchase.
Sanchez would go back to.
The way this works is passed the
Senate the version retirement
has the New Mexico state.
It came over to the house.
But the that is in the bill that
was that.
But it.
This bill is not a good.
This fix is not a good thing
just a lot of good long term fix
for New Mexicans it's not a good
long term fix for the patient
this bill needs to be stricken
and that it needs to be
straightened up I'm not saying
that there doesn't need to be if
the but this.
Madam at I agree that the path
of house bill seventy five in
this.
The theme gentleman from Chavis
said in a terrible is neglecting
to tell the people of New Mexico
is that once the bill.
Made it to the Senate there were
good productive conversations
between the Medical Society.
Hospitals.
And the lawyers that represent
people who were injured and
killed.
And I think it's important to
keep.
That things happen.
Patients are killed by mistakes
at a.
And when that happens.
They need to have some way.
That's what this is also about
that.
And.
The New Mexico Medical Society
issued a letter.
By the time the bill passes.
Ortiz.
And just.
Is protective of the interests
of all the people.
I think then.
For folks to say that the.
It is at.
Is eight four were to.
Not re litigate the compromise
bill that house bill.
What we're.
Madam chair and what we're
trying to do is make sure that
physician.
All the other health care
providers that they could
continue to provide care.
To provide care for patients.
They will not be able to do so
because they will not be able
to.
So if we do nothing.
What will happen.
A great many of them I would
venture to guess the majority of
them.
Health care system so they're
not considered independent
providers.
So in a better providers can buy
insurance for up to seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
but they run the risk that it is
a claim made against them for
care provided Jan January one
were there after.
That the injured patient could
receive it a judgment up to.
That would but the independent
provider personally on the hook
for three point two five
million.
I don't think there's a health
care provider in the state that
would take a three point two
five million dollar risk.
That is the simple fact.
So we have a choice.
This problem thank you Health
Care flowing to.
Or do we play politics.
Madam chair I hate to say it but
that is exactly what is
happening here.
If we did not have a
redistricting bill before us.
That jeopardize the the
political interests of any.
At this would not be an issue.
you know there's been email
about this so I I feel
comfortable discussing it but
this is the this bill is being
held hostage.
The interest of a single member
of the state house who who by
the citizens redistricting.
That that Representative
Powdrell Culbert and Republican
caucus feel she can.
That's why we're having this
problem.
Yesterday there was no concern
about this bill.
But we have a political party
things that they can hold the
patients in New Mexico and
hospitals and independent
writers hostage for the
interests of an incumbent
politician.
That is exactly what's going on
that is what the floor leader
said in an email to every member
of the legislature last night.
That's very sad.
That the interest of an
incumbent politician would be.
Raised above.
So there is a choice do we.
Make a fix to address and an
inadvertent error in this
legislation.
Or do we let politics play out
and tell patients you know.
Or call Rod Stewart.
Because you know I can be able
to get care here in our state.
You know we talk about wanting
to get politics out of things
and and you know it turned out.
the opposite is have.
A little bit will consider.
And the people of our state will
get to see whether or not.
The minority party care about
care continue to flow to
patients or not are we gonna
play politics.
Certainly do not want to have
this issue added to the agenda
but the.
It is worse will receive this
could have been here.
So this is it we're either going
to keep the patients getting
care.
Writers and I'll say it again.
Brought by members for rural
parts of the state talk about
the point of having health care
delivery in rural New Mexico.
Changes in contracting changes
in a non compete clauses other
things that have been brought
forth to make sure.
I support everyone of those it's
important.
Keep in mind the differences
that occur.
And let's make sure that that.
I'm told that I'm.
They're having a little trouble
hearing us on the web cam
webcasts excuse me so I'm gonna
try to speak up louder and I
would ask all the members to do
so as well and I'm going to call
next on.
Thank you madam chair of.
Really drafted the bill.
Madam chair representative
Nibert at this is a bill that
that was the result of several
stakeholders on both sides of
this issue coming together and
meeting for several weeks I
believe to try and find an
appropriate fix with which every
single stakeholder could be
comfortable.
We don't want to be here Madam
chair representative Nibert but
we have no other choice because
every other potential fix every
other potential solution would
not work we absolutely have to
have a legislative fix to this
problem which was when the
governor's office was brought in
and we had to get the issue on
the call for this particular
second special session of the
year so Madam chair
representative Nibert.
To answer your question this
bill was drafted by those at
this table.
including of other interests who
could not be here today and it
has been vetted.
fight several of those members
lawyers and other stakeholders
who are all comfortable with the
solution and I believe it is the
correct sanctioned approach at
this time twenty days twenty
some odd days before insurance
coverage will work out.
And madam.
This emergency arise.
Madam chair representative I'm
very I cannot answer questions
I'm gonna give you to someone
who can.
Madam chair representative
Nibert this emergency that that
this house bill eleven attempts
to address arose very recently
as any young executive director
indicated the the
That is within the vast majority
of outpatient health care
facilities in the state and also
the independent physicians who
could be deemed to be agents
discovered that there was no no
insurance Kerrier in the state
or outside of the state who is
willing to write the four
million dollar policy that would
be needed to provide them with
adequate coverage.
You're free emergency existed
ten days ago.
Why was this.
Madam chair representative nine
point I'm gonna head over to
Capulet answer the question.
Madam chair representative
Nibert as soon as that I'll give
you a little bit of history very
short to help you understand the
patient compensation fund had
the superintendent of insurance
had to set rates for doctors and
outpatient facilities and the
deadline for that was at the end
of October that set forth the
the process of people submitting
requests to their insurance
companies to get coverage and
then the insurance companies
started looking at the language
in assessing their risks and
then returning responses thing
they wouldn't get coverage so
when we discovered that there
was this problem Mr audio
hospital lawyers and and I
worked closely together trying
to find all of the other
potential solutions that
wouldn't interrupt the special
session so we tracked we
basically tried all of the other
solutions first and concluded
this is the only one and so
that's why it took a little
while for it to immediately
get on this agenda.
The first question.
As to who drafted it because I
find it rather.
Probably unusual it may be.
The first time in the history of
our state but we've gone through
space Senator special session as
well I've been.
Where we've had calls from the
governor to put us in the
specials.
And what we received yesterday
from the governor's.
Original proclamation.
Strikes me as.
Out of the norm.
Not only did the governor.
Yep an issue that
constitutionally I think that's
her job and emergency exist in
the state she's to T. up an
issue.
Madam chair in this instance.
She teed up the specific
language that she wanted to see.
And so that's why I asked the
question who drafted it because
it looks to me like the
governor's office drafted
because of her proclamation.
She tells us.
It tells the legislature.
How we're going to address the
issue.
And.
I've been.
Thank you for.
Two years now about the the the
need to have a separation of
powers and respect for
separation of powers in the
state.
And I don't think it's the
executive job to tell us.
As the legislature how to do our
job she has the right and the
ability to do the issue of but
we have a responsibility to the
people of New Mexico to
determine how to address the
issue.
In this instance.
You probably don't want me to
read it so I won't but.
She tells us exactly which words
appear on this piece of paper
which works to strike which
works to add including Liam.
I just find that very strange
and and so I I was concerned
that the governor.
Wrote House Bill Evans.
and and I would have some some
real problems with that
I would hope moving forward but
the governor would respect that
separation of powers.
That would be up issues for us
to address and let us do our job
let us as legislators do our job
again yeah and see what the
needs are from the people we
represent the people.
And come up with.
I realize you all probably were
working with the governor's
office to get the call but I
just find it offensive that that
we're being.
All what were to put on.
Madam chair of.
I disagree with
the representative.
Santa Fe that.
The the words unintended.
Receivable is disingenuous I I I
for one of.
When I read the bill.
I was trying to remember the
history of of house bill seventy
five and some of the arguments
we made it.
Not not at this table but in
this.
Committee.
and and my recollection is we
brought out some of these very
points that house bill seventy
five was going to create.
These problems that physicians
and other medical professionals
could not receive insurance.
If they did receive insurance it
would be at such high rates that
they would not be able to
continue their practice and and
continued at charging the state.
Or the physicians would leave
New Mexico.
And in my community.
I can give you several examples
of physicians who have left our
state.
Because of the legislation of
this body passed.
Recommend that they have already
left.
I'm now full because of this
crisis that we find ourselves in
ten days ago fairly.
That within thirty days of the
crisis appearing.
We heard testimony that the
empire.
Groups.
Are going to be out of business
on December thirty first.
That's the.
Pretty quickly session as to how
you're going to shut down a
business.
Again I I think that.
Representative those in the
health.
Have recognized that this was
going.
Time that we were debating how.
Madam chair.
I understand this bills vitally
important.
We have to fix the.
Hi.
Do not understand.
How this.
It seems to me that this is a
crisis within the.
And that of.
We are now but.
A pretty dire situation I would
also contend that.
Russell.
We're we're facing dire
consequence.
A lot of issues affect the
medical industry that is making
it very difficult to recruit
physicians.
Item that you.
One that.
That makes it more difficult for
us as a community to attract.
Find this six.
In the language of.
The HSD is you may not be but
but the the other part just a
temporary fix it expires what
January one of twenty twenty
three or July one.
So we'll put a bandaid on that
part.
There was testimony made madam
chair and.
This was probably more.
Of.
That our courts decide that.
Medical professionals working in
a hospital we're really agents
of.
madam chair representative
Nibert
This in the court of appeals
decision of health plan B.
requests
one nineteen New Mexico for
twenty two is a ninety.
That's the opinion that kind of
change the agency.
it since the deadline decision
it has become Vegas to whether a
physician an independent
position providing services in a
hospital can be deemed an agent
and that's that's really why the
agency crisis exists here
if an endemic independent
physician is providing services
in a hospital they will not have
an answer as to what to whether
they're an agent until a judge
tells them or jury tell from
their agents of course they risk
being.
That is why we have addressed
that language.
To give those independent
providers the security they need
to carry a seven hundred fifty
thousand dollar policy and note.
Work.
That was being drafted and
argued.
Madam chair and representative
Nibert yes all at both Mr audio
individuals from other
individuals from the medical
society we had lawyers for
hospitals both in house counsel
for hospitals as well as
Council who Representative
hospitals and doctors in
litigation malpractice
litigation all working on that
legislation and it was very
collaborative but you can see
why with that many individuals
working on legislation there
might have been a four word
miss.
At and madam chair.
The number up with lawyers.
Madam chair representative I
believe that's correct.
And madam chair representative.
I believe so Madam chair
representative.
For.
Somebody.
Madam chair representative I
think that my experts because
the explanation for that.
But as with.
Originally there was an act.
But this crisis has arisen
because we've learned.
Yes it jumped off the page to
me.
Chair and representative so.
We received a lot of emails and
things from medical providers
around the state that talks
about it was.
And what I'm hearing is it
wasn't negotiation it wasn't a
mistake it was a matter.
It was the negotiations that
resulted in the very dilemma
that working in today.
And I think those points were
brought up.
Ten months ago
yeah and so.
You know.
Yeah
I have a real problem with the
original bill I have a problem
with with the with with the
staff to because what it's done
to our community and I know that
this band aid is needed.
But we really need a more
comprehensive fix if we really
want to help you.
There was a statement made by.
Madam chair.
It's not about bill and that we
just want to get back to within
ten.
That that was.
Who would be captured by that
that.
And we argued that those folks
would not be able to secure that
insurance the those words may
have come out of my mouth would
not mind.
This was my that this bill will
get us safe and reliable health
care madam chair Representative.
That in further detail.
Madam chair and and
Representative.
You know we've got the the
twenty two days so we have a
crisis.
as you know I did not vote for
house bill seventy five.
And
I see this as a fix it to to
getting.
To get into that place as start
may having those conversations
again I want to make sure that
we do not continue to
to open up that we're going to
make sure that that make we make
sure that that the patients can
continue to be seen you know we
talk about money you yourself is
that you know in the rural areas
that we continue to lose
physicians and that you're
you're a constituents can be
seen so this is a way to make
sure twenty two days that they
continue to get health care so
we needed it we need to act
fast.
Madam chair and representative
of our.
Not want to lose any health.
That I would argue.
We ought to be doing the exact
opposite of what house bill
seventy five did we ought to be
enacted legislation that
encourages physicians and
medical professionals to come to
New Mexico particularly in rural
New Mexico to provide services
to our citizens.
I find that to be a very.
Important obligation on my part
to do what I can to try to.
Create an atmosphere where
doctors would want to.
But madam chair and
representative that I hope that
you'll have your vote on this
bill because I think that this
is going to help keep them and
keep them working
on July first.
Well January first using.
Here Representative.
Madam chair and representative
of.
You did bring up about half
their I'm not going to dispute
what was said earlier about what
went over the center.
And read what the tally was and
when that house bill seventy
five left.
This body the house.
The vote was thirty four.
That is thirty five plus.
Thirty five for.
I don't recall whether is that.
So that was of a.
The the
Fact of the matter is.
Every Republican that voted
against house bill.
Twenty four.
Obviously there were a number.
So that that that was that was a
vote that left.
level house and Madam chair
representative is that what your
recollection would be on that
issue.
madam chair and representative
it is.
Let's turn to the bill itself
On page two line twenty five.
The HSD issue that pursuant to
the governor's proclamation.
Yes that that we strive to work
or not MHM and out of.
And we've got.
The governor ought to be happy
with the bill.
This gets to the issue of agency
that that the Madam chair
representative that you're
experts discuss the that's not.
Madam chair representative
that's correct am I deleting
these words Madam chair
representative it makes it clear
that those who are not employees
of the hospital
Will receive independent
provider status and and will be
classified differently than if
they were.
That correct.
Madam chair representative I'm
gonna have my I'm gonna refer to
my witness.
Madam chair representative
Nibert
the.
Was always intended among the
parties to be the individual
provider who is not employed by
a hospital.
And so removing the language for
not an agent review in removes
any confusion about.
Pendant provider has privileges
and goes to a hospital to per.
We want to make clear that that
independent provider is still an
independent provider when
they're working in the hospital
with privileges now it that
providers who is employed by a
hospital will be under the
hospital's responsibility as
removing or not an agent makes
the intent of the original
intent of the per.
It removes the four million
dollar policy that they have to
see.
Right right and no one ever
intended for independent provide
I'm sorry madam chair
Representative Nibert no one
ever intended for independent
providers to have to get a four
million dollar policy the intent
was always for independent
providers have a seven hundred
and fifty thousand dollar policy
and to be able to participate in
the pacing compensation fund.
Madam chair representative of.
You've already testified that
that your lawyers knew all about
this the HSD situation so it was
it was an issue that was
compromised and and so I'm I'm
not sure that you can sit there
and say we didn't know about
sign I mean.
It may yeah that language should
have never been in the bill
Pruitt except for a compromise
apparently with the trial with
that may I address that Madam
chair representative Nibert the
language never should have been
in the bill you're correct it is
not my position that I intend.
The intent of the parties always
has been and this explicitly
during the negotiations we all
agreed the law around agency
would not be touched in this
bill and independent providers
who are acting as independent
providers regardless of whether
they do procedures in hospitals
will always have the seven
hundred fifty thousand dollar
cap that's always been the
intention.
Matt Madam chair of.
That the word agent have
significant meaning when this
bill came out of this body and
and went over the Senate and the
new because you it was a
compromise what the effect was
you can't get around that the
new new it was going to be a
train wreck at the and and and
so.
I mean.
I don't know how else.
I don't think you can hide
behind smoke and mirrors on this
issue you have to tell those
folks out there that that was
something that was done.
The effects were clear you knew.
Have dealt with and treated
medical professionals working in
a hospital as an agent of the
hospital regardless of whether
they were employed by the
hospital and therefore the four
million dollar revision would
apply to all.
So madam chair and
representative I think for
clarification we we're going to
be for two of my other witness.
Representative Nibert the only
reason that that well.
Right behind that was that if
someone is deemed to be in.
The hospital under respondents
appear.
And we're here today is the
concern that that there could be
loopholes and that a perfect
case that's how it would would
work but there is concern that
both if if the providers is
named in.
They could be on the hook for
that and also up for ended up.
That is what we're we're trying
to fix.
that if someone's in a.
And then the law of agency.
Health care.
Discussed it with.
Go back and look at the
videotape but I am positive that
we brought that issue up.
Is this freight training.
Wait until the train gets.
Well I'll move on of all paid
for
Line nineteen and following.
And I'll just make an assumption
it doesn't say.
After
The New.
Visions in our bill.
Designates what's new and so I'm
assuming and correct me if I'm.
Section two is new is it not.
Thank you madam chair
representative divert a yes it
is section two is now and
fortunately enough I've actually
been through this issue before
and one of my bills and I
believe during the twenty twenty
one session we had to come back
to Judiciary and one of my bills
because of the temporary
provision issue we've we've
talked with the doctor about
this and LCS and this is usually
for temporary provision how it
is I presented in a bill.
Because it's temporary.
Because of the temporary but.
Actors designate note to us.
This is a new section.
It's not like.
Where we have a strike out of
the box.
That I will assume and correct
me if I'm wrong.
The language on page one page
two page three.
Paid for up the line eighteen is
existing statutes.
Michael then correct all my
assumption.
Madam chair representative and I
but you are not your not in
correcting here and your
supposition that is correct this
is new material starting from
section two as a temporary
provision proposed in the law.
And and so so normally.
Flag to us in fact I think
Representative realizing walks
in that I may have that
discussion was to build
Representative one point that
that that they would go to us
that this is the new stuff so
section two.
And section three and section
four.
Is new language that you all are
bringing for.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that is correct you're
not sure that I'm correct that
is correct side with the master
gets so much.
So if I look at such.
Section two.
As you aptly pointed up is only
a temporary provision that
applies for approximately
eighteen months.
Correct Madam chair
representative rubber that is
correct as well.
So what is going to happen on
July second of.
How how.
How is this going to help our
medical providers after July
second.
At Madam chair representative
night Burt the reasoning behind
this particular section two is
one we were only made aware of
this crisis a few days ago so in
order to fully that the issue
and in order to have
conversations with potential
insurers we needed additional
time to explore the field and
how insurance is usually applied
to outpatient facilities so that
we can know the lay of the land
by some time and figure out
whether or not this provision
would need to be changed down
the road however I think madam
chair representative Nibert we
have to remind ourselves
that we can't re litigate an
issue that has already been
passed by this legislature and
codified into law so in order to
help us find a way to keep that
law that codified law the way it
is we just needed additional
time and this is what this
that's exactly what this
temporary provision will deal.
Madam chair representative when
I first read this provision
they're worth.
Maybe not as clear as I would a
like that I I.
It seems to me that the first
Senate sort of started.
If an injury occurs between
January one twenty twenty two to
July one twenty twenty three
except for punitive damages.
Because you don't find I first
read that I thought that the
claim had to be made at that
time and it's only the last part
of that sentence with the if the
injury occurred about.
I would suggest maybe people who
for.
So you're giving some temporary.
After.
For the current arising after.
July one twenty twenty three
that.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that is correct okay so
my question is how does that.
Help us get safe and reliable
for health care.
Madam chair representative Ney
bird I mean the issue It present
is whether or not safe health
and four will health care can be
provided which is predicated on
the availability of insurance
and insurance protects both
doctors and their patients so
what we're trying to do with
this temporary position
provision is to help those
specific outpatient facilities
have more information as to what
is available to them I think
it's very important madam chair
representative Nibert to keep
the context of this particular
situation at mind we learned
about this issue ten days ago
if not less so to act
without having additional
information or all the
information I think would not
behoove those doctors and their
patients that work we're trying
to protect because we don't have
all the information we need to
make a specific decision whether
or not the law does need to be
amended down the road.
I'm I'm I'm gonna give the I'm
gonna give it over to myself she
fishes any additional from.
Madam chair and representative
Nibert I think actually you hit
on the head of you think you got
it exactly right and there
that's the plan and the the
reason why we negotiated so that
we would have eighteen months.
There's a session where it could
be addressed if necessary.
Get.
That limitation good for
eighteen months.
Maybe it ought to be a permanent
provisions not a temporary.
I saw all those.
Six other aspects of.
The statute that is now in
effect.
Really looking at the whole.
Encourage our health.
So that the temporary provision
applies to that group.
Section three of section four.
Talk about the out of the bill.
Thank you and I.
We're raised.
I think it's not disingenuous to
raise them that.
For saying.
That's the fact that leaves a
very sour taste in my.
With such an emergency.
State emergency.
Madam chair representative thank
you for.
Taking time and.
We do have to do something I
hope our goal is.
You got to go to the right.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative icon
can you add a clarification as
to what you mean by part of.
Madam chair representative al
cone I think Representative
Gallegos is RT stated that she
actually was a nay vote against
the original bill I will share
with you Representative of Madam
chair representative I was the
last vote
maybe on H. B. seventy five and
the house before it was
substantially amended in the
Senate I studied I I ate I
struggled with that bill greatly
as it was proposed to the house
and I do believe I don't speak
for them but miss love was part
of the part of the original bill
and where you Miss Mister idea
Mr idea was as.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative of
code in yes I was involved from
the very beginning when the
original house bill seventy five
which was specifically only
intended to remove hospitals
from the patient compensation
act was introduced that's the
one that was the very narrow
vote and then it was
substantially changed based on
negotiations by all the parties
and I was there for through all
of those.
Madam chair representative all
cone yes.
Madam chair representative al
cone yes.
As Israel.
Seventy five in this committee
what do with the the.
Madam chair representative all
prone to be honest with you it
all is starting to run together.
But I'm.
Remember.
The original members.
This is.
A long time.
Thank you.
And up so my question is.
In this committee.
That's what I remember but Madam
chair representative I
absolutely.
That that that means.
The.
But that little chair for what
I'm getting at is I'm here in
this debate.
About.
This will be the last time.
The bill is not.
What.
So my problem is with all the
big.
And move on to the.
It's we're we we live in the
state.
And all.
There's nothing wrong with.
I love hearing that.
And then
we told them we already hello
this.
We.
And make with.
This committee because the
people that are on the do not.
Well we're not amendments
offered to fix it at that time
the elder.
The thing is.
It was a mistake so that.
We will fix that.
We don't know what.
All.
All.
I don't see what.
Thank my biggest problem with
that and here's.
But I can't remember anybody
offered an amendment to fix this
before it even went to the floor
or would with the Senate okay
back in the Senate I don't
remember the name of.
Madam chair I guess.
We need to get this done.
If something the.
I think we got it we got it the
general.
Here.
Waller's later we can.
Michael created a simple
solution to this.
Thank let's get it fixed let's
go on with life.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
And and I appreciate.
That.
I guess my.
Every Democrat.
This bill passed.
Support and their work I think
I.
Direct impact with.
I will tell you that.
Tell you that and.
And their work our.
How it helps fix this problem
law.
Madam chair a leader Townsend at
first I I kind of want to bring
us back to the discussion being
held right here today which is
HB eleven.
you know and so whether or not
the thirty million dollars
proposed as part of HB to for
the patient compensation fund is
relevant to this bill I'm not
I'm not entirely sure but I I as
a member of appropriations madam
chair later yes Townsend thirty
million dollars is being
proposed as part house bill to
shore up the patient
compensation fund to ensure that
it remains solvent.
And that.
For this issue well I guess we
would be.
Madam chair later Townsend of
yes we would still be here today
absolutely.
Well I
I don't believe this is.
Problems that we.
Or.
I didn't vote for it.
That I would vote for.
That brings us back to the table
in the.
A few days.
And then let's fix that.
I appreciate it.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee so let's go back
to what I do remember.
Because there's been a lot of
Frank.
When this bill came before the
committee it was not.
It was a simple fix we just
kicked the hospitals out of
patience compensation but that
was it.
So the idea that we anticipated
that there was this agency
problem or the problem with the
outpatient clinics is nonsense
because we didn't have that in
front of us we just didn't.
When the bill could went over to
the Senate and came back on
concurrence seven members that's
all it takes seven members to
insist on a four but.
No yes for that.
Passed on a unanimous voice vote
on concurrence out of the house
why.
Because it was a good bill
that's why.
Because it was a compromise yes
people were unhappy on both
sides.
On all sides more than just to
there were a lot of moving parts
this is an incredibly
complicated efforts.
But it was really a wonderful
moment.
For the legislature that we
didn't intervene into this we
sat in a fact work a deal.
Make it happen.
The fact that we're talking
about the patient's compensation
fund in the thirty million
dollars I remember pretty
clearly.
That the patient's compensation
fund before we did anything on
this bill was close to fifty
million dollars under water this
bill has nothing to do with
those numbers it is apples and
oranges.
And so the idea that we
anticipated this so we could
have fixed it everything else is
just you know just no way to say
it it's just nonsense.
In order to do.
Both sides.
Representative Townsend if he
was here and and left I'd be
looking right at him and say you
agreed to this concurrence of
why because it was a painful for
everybody eight painful
difficult compromise.
But that also health care
providers could operate.
So now we face something
totally.
My comments are going to be much
shorter.
Representative op he's exactly
right.
Could we just say to the
participants well listen but we
don't want to own up to any
mistakes so we wouldn't want to
do that no of course not.
Change in the medical
malpractice.
We decided as a body let them go
back and see if they can work it
out.
And guess what once again.
And I really I mean I'm
complimenting all of you for
this it is a good thing.
Our job.
This the participants have come
to us but all sides and so.
We have to do this before the
end of the year.
Or people will lose their jobs.
Patients will lose health care
and people could be compromised
medically and we can't.
And so I just want to state very
firmly that this is not a moment
where we drive down to go
across.
The country this is a moment for
New Mexicans to be proud of the
process and say people come
together it's the best of New
Mexico to reach a consensus and
then pass it out.
And the idea of saying well
let's just wait we can just wait
we can do it in January we've
already heard from all of you we
can't wait we have to do this
now that's why we need the
emergency clause.
So I say to my colleagues are
both on might caucus and on the
other side of the aisle please
vote for this we need the
emergency clause we need all of
us together to help this portion
of our society Oct comebacks.
White polity Health Care and
let's move.
There should be really no kind.
His self rigidity thank you
madam chair members the
committee.
Health.
Second.
To the delight recommendation
for.
I really do want to the.
Santa Fe so I know that it was
something that rate be paid
rather.
I I just want to say that.
We have no staff.
And we.
Very kind.
Because of our structure.
Representative of course.
Representative could.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative.
Representative Lewis is yes.
Representative.
Representative night Burt.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Townsend.
By Sarah could.
Madam chair.
Thank you.
I do recognize the.
Really if I had a.
I really am concerned about the
state of our entire.
We have a body.
Get our arms around that.
By a vote of seven.
