Representative Nibert.
You.
Representative Rehm.
Representative.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Cook.
Your.
Thank you.
Present as well Madam chair on
here as well.
Representative Nibert is here.
And madam chair I don't know if
you this is Representative Lewis
I don't know if you could hear
me I sat here I got you
Representative.
Right thank you.
Okay and madam chair I'm here to
now okay very good.
We need Senator Shendo unless
someone is presenting for the
Senator.
Madam chair actually
Senator Shendo is another
meeting so he asked if I could
present if he wasn't able to
make it that'd be great John to
be great you might have some
experts I I just.
From the department of
transportation Representative.
It's the cabinet secretary.
Okay.
I.
Can Ortiz or Michael Santa
Michael Santa okay he raises
hands so if you.
Yes.
Madam chair thank you this is a
secretary Santa I'm here
whenever you're ready.
Right good to see you know.
Thank you
Are you ready to present on
Senate bill three twenty five.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members yes I will
just defer to the secretary.
Mr secretary.
Thank you madam chair Mike Santa
secretary for the department of
transportation and just to give
you a I'll be brief just to give
you a quick scenario often times
we have motorists who
in the crash and damage some of
our assets for example
guardrails signs traffic signals
those type of things again the
position where sometimes
insurance doesn't cover their
uninsured or we have to file a
claim against them to recoup the
cost of replacing or fixing that
property what this bill does is
just allow us to negotiate for a
lesser cost with those
individuals right now we don't
have the ability to do that and
so we either have to take the
loss for file a suit or a claim
against the these individuals
and most of the time because the
amounts are small we choose not
to file a claim or to move
forward and so this just gives
us the ability to negotiate
they're in a situation where
they can't pay we can settle for
less than of these recoup some
of those costs I think it's a
good bill for both sides and so
really that's all this bill does
madam chair I'll be happy to
stand for any questions and if
there's any legal questions I
think into the waiting room I
have Mister Aaron Franklin you
can bring in if there are
questions but that's pretty much
what this bill thank you one.
When we go ahead and bring Mr
Franklin and now.
You madam chair.
Okay thank you I see he's with
us would you like to say
anything.
Madam chair I don't believe so I
think but if there definitely is
any legal questions I would
defer to him thank you okay.
Let's go to the audience first
with a ten second call
for those to express their
support of our.
Lack there of for a Senate bill
three twenty five if you support
that bill but yes if you do not
supported vote now now the vote
for ten seconds.
Well we've got one person
support in no opposition so it's
a hundred percent Mr secretary.
let's go to members of the
committee first I have
Representative Townsend.
Yes thank you madam chair thank
you secretary Sandoval question.
it.
Just.
For instance.
The person.
In your.
Simple.
Was.
Thank you all in a one car
accident that damaged the guard
rail.
Which is airs.
Or their heirs be subject to
this the helping.
Madam chair representative for
that too.
Representative.
In our.
I'll be right up.
Going to be right going to one
second.
Excuse me just a moment we're
I'm trying to get Senator
Ingles.
Needed and I can't get it muted.
Georgia could you.
Okay thank you sorry we were
interrupting your presentation.
For your your your questions go
ahead Representative Townsend.
Yes ma'am my question is very
simple madam chair and secretary
was in the event
In an example if a person
damaged property whether it be
the guard rail or sign you know
whatever it might be and their
killed in the accident with the
heirs of that person be
responsible for those damages.
Thank you madam chair
representative I would defer to
our attorney Aaron Franklin I
don't believe this bill changes
that one way or the other but
all at our attorney and think in
response so Erin.
thank you madam chair.
Representative Townsend can you
hear me.
Yes Sir.
Okay so are you in in response
to your question and in
conjunction with cabinet
secretaries animals response you
would not be looking at it being
an issue of the heirs
inherit seeing that sort of
claim the the bill itself
doesn't change it I mean
ultimately if there were ever
any sort of playing that the
department or in any situation
that was that was attached to it
to see that you would typically
look at that going towards the
astute and not years but that
that's not the intent of this
particular bill is.
You madam chair thank you
Representative Townsend.
Thank you madam chair I was
having a little trouble getting
on yes I think others were
so could you very quickly.
what is the intent and purpose
of this piece of legislation.
Thank you madam chair basically
this bill just allows the
department to negotiate in those
situations where the insurance
company or person that is
uninsured what the department
money for damage to our property
so someone damaging a guardrail
someone's are starting on fire
and damaging the asphalt or
pavement underneath in which
case they're not able to pay for
their insurance doesn't cover
normally we would have to file a
claim against them to recoup
that money then right now we
don't have the ability to
negotiate so for example of
someone did two thousand dollars
worth of damage we have to go
after the entire two thousand
dollars what this bill would
allow us to do is if it was a
situation that we want to settle
for three hundred dollars this
bill would allow us to do that
so it can clear the claim to
that person we get some recoup
some of that fee and then
everyone is is okay moving
forward so that's all this bill
does Madam chair representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative and the secretary
so this just gives the.
Department the ability to
collect from those that can pay
and negotiate something less for
those that
that the department deems they
cannot pay ME how do you make
that determination and that.
Madam chair representative a lot
of times it'll happen is we look
at what is owed and if it's
worth for us to pursue this in
court a lot of the time it would
be more expensive for us to
pursue the smaller the smaller
claims in court and so what we
like to do for this bill is have
that ability to negotiate and so
if well we felt like this would
be a good case to negotiate with
contact that person see if there
was a reasonable settlement and
then settle at that cost without
having to go to court and
without us having to take the
full loss of that particular
claim so it's just gives us the
ability to negotiate whenever we
think it's in the best interest
of us and in the other.
Madam chair and secretary Mike.
My kids.
One concern that I have I have
no problems with with the day
yes damages for
For damages to property not at
all my problem is is and my
question probably is I don't
think it should be the
department's.
In the department's provided to.
To choose who.
Is responsible I mean yes
damages done your job as as
secretary in the department is
to hold hello.
I I.
I just think that.
an attorney for you and your
Department Sandwell now this
guy's got insurance or
I did a quick check in there
some assets here we can go after
or the next guy she doesn't have
much sure and me that just
doesn't seem like fair equitable
justice so I take issue with
that if you're if you're gonna
go after damages I'm all in but
if you're gonna pick and choose
who pays damages
you lost me I appreciate it
thank you very much madam chair.
Representative right.
Madam chair I move a do pass on
Senate bill three twenty five.
The motion for to pass through
Representative Rehm second
the second Representative Alcon
further discussion.
I have
I have a couple questions I
think.
What could clarify that for me
is the committee analysis
essentially.
Says under current law.
The department transportation
has two options when I was
highways and other
infrastructure damage one of the
lost.
Or litigate.
Would not be accurate.
Mr.
That's correct.
Okay thank you Mr secretary so.
Most.
I think probably most of us and
if we never been in any kind of
a vehicle
crash in this is representative
right area of expertise is to do
accident reconstruction
It usually settles.
So I.
I think it's imminently.
Practical to do that.
So.
So what when I have a question
about.
Is
Page four line twenty four.
When it says and they include.
The contract for collection of
such damages.
Does that mean like a collection
agency.
Madam chair
what that would mean is there
are some companies out there who
pursue these four hundred would
be on behalf of the department I
do want to make clear that these
claims that we filed do not go
on anyone's.
Credit report and so I do want
to make that clear but if it
does open up that if we you know
we have a lot of small claims
and if someone if we decide to
contract that out that is
allowed for someone on behalf of
the department to negotiate and
and get some money back so
that's what that is but just to
be clear does not go on any
credit report.
Mr secretary is that in in
statute or is that just in
practice.
Madam chair I'll defer to Erin
but I think that's just affect
this.
Madam chair of so with the
department functions now in
practice cabinet secretaries
Santa is correct we do not.
Why any sort of outstanding
claim to anyone's credit report.
The goal of this bill is is
really just to recoup losses of
the department in the state are
suffering and and so to
reiterate what can inspectors to
animals that are and what we
would be looking at in the case
of.
Contracting out would be having
a third party to.
Essentially work to recover
claims on the department's
behalf this would not be selling
points out for.
Thank you.
I understand that and it seems
like you know you have a
different mission than to be
collecting bills.
I'm I guess I would just like to
see that not necessarily in
statute but in in some kind of
regulation that it doesn't go on
to our.
A person's credit report that.
He
she is subject to further
collection of these fees and I I
also I'm gonna vote for the bill
and I understand it I think this
does make sense for you to have
this option but our analysts
pointed out that I think this
was first passed in nineteen
fifty three and there's a lot of
very old language in the statute
and it probably could use some
updating including a lot of
penalties don't match what are
in in the law elsewhere.
for the penalty for totally the
fine for a misdemeanor and so
forth so that's just an
observation Representative three
wants to make another comment.
Do you Representative Rehm.
Rep which there yes
as you know my wife was in the
insurance plans what this is
trying to fix for minimum risk
insurance is twenty five
thousand for injury maximum of
fifty and then the property
damage is ten thousand so one
car runs into another and knocks
Act car into guard rail so the
damage to the other car was
state is twelve thousand dollars
and the damage to the guard rail
is twenty five hundred well
you've already exceeded the
limits of the policy this allows
the insurance to come back and
say look we'll give you nine
thousand dollars for your car
damage and here's a thousand to
the state and that's the
maximum amount of coverage we
have that's kind of what they're
trying to all thank you right is
there for the discussion.
Saying to call the roll.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Eli.
Representative.
yes I'm sure it connect to
quickly yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative maverick yes.
Yes.
Representative Townsend.
Just check and then yes.
Yes.
Yes one now and to pass on
Senate bill three twenty five.
Thank you very much you Madam
tell thank you madam chair in Mr
secretary.
And we will go in a minute we're
going to go to Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino first Sentinel three forty.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee
morning.
Senate bill three forty of oil
will seem a little familiar to
you because we we tried to fix
this problem in the past
unfortunately it the the the
limited this is responding to
continue.
And so we now have come before
you with the the bill the
essence of it is on page seven
of the bottom that's the that's
the entirety of the bill.
I.
Yes this bill is that we we want
to make sure.
That we.
We want to make sure that the
person who gets a license from
another state is actually.
Eligible to receive medical
cannabis in New Mexico are
reciprocity arrangement has been
taken advantage of by.
People who are.
Using the internet to see sure.
Letters not licenses letters
from positions in thirty state
California is the most likely
but he could be anywhere that
they have loose medical cannabis
programs.
The secure this license is a
license is simply a letter.
And then they come to New Mexico
and under the the language of
our of our lowest currently
they're able to function in this
year and and consumers and then
what we are trying to do here is
to make clear that this should
be a governmentally issued the
card from one of the leading
medical cannabis program in
another state not remote the
doctor who is basically selling
these letters over the internet
for thirteen thirty five forty
dollars.
I have with me Madam chairman
very in showers from the
department of health who has
been working on this issue and
we have the the.
The director of the medical
cannabis program for the state.
Dr Dominic.
Sorry for your last name
companies are low and so I'd
like to ask for the showers
suspicion and doctors or low.
These.
Thank you senator Ortiz the
piano madam chair and members of
the committee thank you for
Vigil hearing this bill three
forty SB three forty is really
just proposing that we treat
reciprocal participants of the
medical cannabis program the way
the statute intended.
We didn't foresee this loophole
but it's causing and the program
significant strain and we're
actually just concerned about
the potential impact this could
have on those New Mexicans who
truly depend on the program for
their medicine the purpose of
reciprocity as it relates to
this program is to allow out of
state medical cannabis patients
who were in New Mexico access to
their medicine they should be
participants in a bona fide
state program.
Just a prostate was not intended
to allow New Mexico residents
the ability to circumvent the
enrollment requirements of our
medical cannabis program but
that's what we're seen.
It was also not intended to
admit folks who are not in bona
fide medical cannabis programs
elsewhere to use this provision
yet that's what we're also seen
here so this bill would require
that individuals be enrolled in
a legitimate program and their
state or territory and this is
all to ensure that each
participant has received an
appropriate medical evaluation
prior to enrollment and is in
the care of a medical provider
thank you.
Chairman Dr Sir Lopez director
of the medical cannabis program
from the state.
Dr.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
And I I believe that senator
Ortiz Y. Pino and miss showers
really discussed and presented
the bulk of the reasons why we
need this particular this
particular bill.
One point I would like to raise
is this is really about the
integrity of the program as a
medical program we want to
ensure that individuals who are
applying to the program as a
reciprocal participants are
engaging with the medical
provider to ensure that the
cannabis they use is helping in
with their medical condition and
it's not actually creating
harmful side effects we're
creating a worsening of their
medical condition.
The current problem that we're
experiencing is that individuals
are not getting very good
evaluations through these online
services which range in cost
anywhere between fifteen to
forty dollars and most often
only evaluate the individual for
five to ten minutes in those
cases the provider is not truly
evaluating the individual's
medical situation and they're
not providing follow up
oftentimes what we are also
hearing is they are not
interacting with the the
patients regular medical
provider and so this could
potentially be contrary to some
of the treatment that that
medical provider has advised and
is currently working with that
patient to ensure a better
outcome and so because of this
we really do ask for this bill
to be passed so that we can
actually help protect the
integrity of the program and
ensure that patients are getting
the care that not only do they
deserve but also that is
necessary for their better
health thank you.
Thank you re ready for me to go
to the audience.
Senator yes yes.
All right folks who are in
attendance if there is anyone
who wishes to well actually I
got to call first with a ten
second all those in favor of
Senate bill three forty can
about yes of those in opposition
about now we'll do that real
quickly and then we'll see if
there's any public comments.
We didn't have big crowd today
senator so we didn't have any
results to share and I'm not
seeing any hands up in the
attendee list so let me go to
the committee and I have first
Representative Alcon.
Madam chair I.
Question for the senator can you
tell me where I can get a thirty
dollar of medical cannabis card.
Is that
there are places on the internet
where you can get one very
quickly there's only a five
minute interview with our
position in California who has a
very broad understanding of
medical cannabis can be used.
Thank you thank you.
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair I am more of a COVID
and a question for the senator
I'm gonna support your bill
because I don't think it's right
that you just got a letter over
the internet you can come here
and get marijuana.
I think there's a greater
problem you know the feds are
saying if you contain your
marijuana program within your
state and we're kind of backing
off when it's crossing state
lines that's when the feds get
kind of upset so it's more of a
COVID but I'm is support your
bill because you're trying to
fix that one issue thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I move a
do pass.
For it to pass representative
Armstrong I'll second that
motion.
Is there for the discussion.
Let's have a quick call the
roll.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Representative Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Yes.
Act.
Two zero and to pass on Senate
bill three four.
Madam chairman thank you very
much.
We're very happy to have you
with us we're thank you.
Next we're going to go to
Senator Ingle.
For Senate bill three seventy
five.
Welcome Senator.
Thank you thank you madam
chairman.
Madam chairman of Senate bill
three seventy five is a piece of
legislation that then provision
of the law enforcement training
act to redefine the role and
composition of the law
enforcement academy board.
To implement new basic in in
service training requirements
for law enforcement officer the
bill removes the oversight of
officer certification and
misconduct duties from Law
Enforcement Academy board and
places them in the new
independent law enforcement
certification board.
Bill amends the membership of
the law enforcement academy
board to include the director of
the Meryl new law New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy and
directors of all satellite
Enforcement Academy seven
government appointees.
And those appointees would be
one attorney who's currently
employed with the district
attorney's office one attorney
currently employed with the
public defender Department.
One certified police chief of
the New Mexico Indian nation
tribe or pueblo.
Two members who have experience
in specialized in providing
adult education.
To Senator large members one of
whom will have experience in
behavior health provider neither
of whom have sure shell a fair
bit a police officer.
Or have family or financial
connection to law enforcement
agencies are officers and
basically what we're doing here
is to give our officers new and
better training and and in light
of what's happened.
Nationwide on some of our police
stuff with if you're aware were
aware and members of the
committee are things that have
happened so we have better place
more better trained for
different situations.
That require.
Really crisis management
training and intervention and
dealing with individuals who are
experiencing mental health
issues message of the escalation
in peer to peer intervention.
Management and racial
sensitivity.
And also use of force training
that'll eliminate any kind of
vascular neck restraint or chill
cold I have to experts very
Karan and chief Johnson of state
police and certainly welcome
their comments on this and then
Senator appropriations thank
you.
For
them to speak at this time Mr
around.
I'm actually not do we have the
other gentleman I just been as
panelists I believe secretary
Tim Johnson.
Like to invite you to speak at
this time thank you madam chair
members of the committee Larry
around a registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico municipal league
I'm Ingle did a good job
explaining the the.
What this bill does there's a
couple things that I would add
the other thing that that we are
putting this legislation is
creation of a statewide database
to coordinate sharing of
information between state local
and federal law enforcement as
it relates to officers who who
have instances of X. excessive
force or been terminated
decertified are convicted or you
have civil judgments against and
for for use of force and we also
require this similar training
for fire and EMS so all first
responders because they're all
dealing with with individuals in
the field and want to make sure
everybody has the tools
necessary to deal with the kind
of what's what's happening in
modern day and and trying to
help people and provide the best
services and then I can and in
Senate finance there was also an
increase in the death benefit
for on law enforcement officers
who were killed in the line of
duty and that's what the Senate
finance amendment does happy to
stand for questions thank you
madam chair.
We know that I'm I'm confusing
him with our analyst.
Tim Johnson right.
Yes.
Mr tell I just major cabinet
secretary I don't.
What you really want that job so
my part.
Madam chairman of the committee
I was cutting out there I wasn't
sure if you asked me to come in
and not I would hope that Mr Dow
is very handsome a gentleman if
you if you confuse the two of us
but he doesn't have his camera
on so I'm not sure of the all of
imagine that he is but I'm here
to answer any technical
questions that any of you may
have on this bill I I do support
this and I think this is a good
step in in in the right
direction to hopefully help
improve.
Some of those contacts that
between law enforcement and
members of our community that
have been
Then be been look at over the
last eight to ten months and in
some folks and not thinking that
those have gone well I do
believe the the additional
training for law enforcement is
super important to hopefully
prevent
some of those incidents on the
front end of rather than seeing
them on the back end which we
all have
but I'm here to answer any
technical questions of that you
may have and thank you for your
time and.
Thank you very much and data you
know I have that Mr down before
but all I've seen is his name on
the screen for this entire
session so I really can't
comment on is a resemblance or
lack thereof to you secretary
Johnson.
I I would assume he looks
exactly like Brad Pitt that
that's what I'm going with.
It's going to have to turn on
his camera.
We really need to check that out
at this time we'll go take a ten
second call in the audience and
see who is here in support of
Senate bill three seventy five
and those in opposition so
here's your chance folks to
speak up.
So we have
Seventy five percent three
people in favor one twenty five
percent in opposition.
So let me see if we have any
folks who would like to make a
call.
Eleven Maestas.
Go ahead.
Miss my.
Can you hear me.
There you go yeah I just want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
this bill forward this bill is a
good step in the right direction
however it is only one piece of
the puzzle that is needed when
we evaluate what is truly needed
this bills efforts to maybe come
in all employed without taking
other vital steps needed to
addressing the underlining
issues we truly are in need of a
robust transformation of
policing in our state I think
the Sanchez again for bringing
this legislation forward but we
cannot afford to ignore the
obvious fact that we have more
work that needs to be done
ignoring these facts are costing
people like
my sister Lisa lose Cerro was
shot twenty one time.
their lives so again thank you
for your work but there is much
more work that needs to be done.
Thank you this last us Carter
Bundy.
Madam chair members of the
committee Carter Bundy with
asked me for the reasons stated
we stand in strong support of
this bill thank you.
Is there any more public
comment.
Okay seeing we're going to go
back to the committee.
At the top of my list is
representative Nibert.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
Just a few questions I'm gonna
focus on the law enforcement
aspects but the emergency
medical services aspects and my
question is first does this
legislation only affects the.
Law Enforcement Academy program
with respect to emergency
medical services training.
Madam chairman I yield to Larry
who ran for the technical parts
of this that relate to future
things that sedation to have
something to do with phone make
sure we get the answer it hit
the enter correct on that but to
it I think it it it basically
has to do with every part of.
Of any kind of municipal and
county law enforcement fire
departments everything so to
make sure we get you get the
proper education ball yield
Mister rand.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Ingle and Representative Nibert
the law enforcement academy
itself would not oversee or be
responsible for any of the EMS
training what we did was and
twenty four.
Can be dash twelve which is the
training for EMS services which
is section two of the bill we
put the same type of training is
a training requirements were for
EMS services so they will have
to in their training programs
will have to adopt training.
That are set that are consistent
throughout the bill.
Madam chair and senator on I'm
sorry to hear that
Because some of the our.
M. S..
Programs that are being offered
in our community colleges
including eastern New Mexico
university of Russell woods also
supports New Mexico junior
college of the NMU reredos are
are dynamic community college
C. N. M. their Albuquerque Santa
Fe Community College San Juan
college and then the U. N. M.
the MSAs out of right R. all
have programs and it's been
expressed to me that their
concerns are yes they have to
expand their curriculum to
include.
The six issues that are now set
forth in the in this bill
that that's going to take of.
Additional hours of classroom
instruction and they have
expressed some concern and if
they are.
Subject to this act apparently
they are now or were would be if
it becomes law that they would
have to incorporate that
training in their programs and.
That is going to take care of
the requirements for that the
doctor certificate the.
Additional hours of instruction
of their they're concerned about
the effect on on their program
well whether that is spam number
hours or whether they have to
cut back some other a critical
instruction that deals solely
with health.
The the people there are
instructing really don't get
involved a lot of that but what
we state care of.
Crisis management issues they're
just there to render all of our
agents seek medical service to
hurt individual on and so the
there has been some expressions
by
Programs at the community
college level work that this
could affect their partner about
it and negative fashion so I
just raise that and maybe Mr ran
you may want to expand on on
addressing those concerns or
maybe it's just something that
are you all obtained by the
bill.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert and and we
have had some discussions with
the M. S. folks and and also
take this opportunity to comment
on yes my just can't with this
legislation is for it to be a
first step and for this to be an
ongoing process so we can not
only help law enforcement but
all first responders deal with
prices mental health issues that
we're running into of the
community and all and although I
agree that primarily in essence
is there to render aid I go back
to my experience in law
enforcement and I would also
differ achieve Johnson
often times EMS Boettcher beyond
people mental health crisis
before law enforcement yes there
or after they leave the scene
and so we think it's important
to expand this for all first
responders and the other
critical pieces that all that
I'll that I'll point you to is
your peer intervention and
stress management because all
first responders are doing this
with things that nobody should
have to see or deal with not
having to try and figure out of
the deal with that in their own
life in their professional lives
and so we think it's important
that this does apply to first
responders but we are happy to
work with them through the
center because the intention of
municipally is to do work with
the attorney general's office
the police chiefs association
chair of fire and EMS to help
develop these programs we're
doing in a collaborative manner
and I know chief Johnson spoke
with somebody from the brutality
on campus and so I would I would
invite him to needed to help
answer that question.
Madam chair members the
committee Senator neighbor
Well first off I would not ever
of try to.
Related you that I'm an expert
on the EMS side because I'm not
of that that piece of the bill
and I don't have a lot of
knowledge about but I can tell
you Sir that today I spoke with
a gentleman by the name of Mr
Jesse Davis of who I believe is.
Part of the some type of EMS
Association high ranking member
of that and I did have a
conversation with him about this
piece and I think the problem
and I don't want to put words in
your mouth Representative Nibert
but I believe the problem that
she is trying to relate
is that the way the current
statute is written
it kind of has their training in
in a or their training their
curriculum and the oversight of
that curriculum it is written in
current law under U. N. M. EMS
academy and I guess for many
years to include right now they
would like to see that their
curriculum and the oversight of
the curriculum be handled
through the New Mexico EMS
bureau so I think the peace that
he is most concerned with and
and that group of professionals
concern with has to do with
current law.
That of the this bill someone
just cut and paste as you can
see but did add some of those
first responder type of training
that of that we believe is
needed for all folks for all
professions that may be dealing
with people in crisis and I and
I will remind remind you of
Representative members of this
committee that on the Senate
side of Senator Ivy Soto
currently has a bill of that it
may require I I'm not real
familiar with the bill that may
require you Mr trance for folks
that are in crisis versus law
enforcement and he makes you
know he makes some excellent
points during his debate so some
of the some of the topics that
you see in here if that becomes
law I would imagine the EMS
folks are going to want to have
a little bit better training on
that that piece as well because
of that might ultimately be
their job and I would be remiss
as did Mr her and I find and
offer my condolences to Mrs
Maestas of herders because
several times throughout the
session my heart goes out to her
and I'm sorry for her situation
but I hope that answers your
question Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair thank you
chase.
Well my one last question
regards to enjoy duplication of
training R. as in in the part of
the state that I come from are
the EMS people.
Are generally also firefighters
and yet we have two training
courses here and.
Both courses require.
And overlap or the same sex
topics
and so the question becomes
particularly for the community
colleges if you're.
If they have firefighters to
have that training already they
come to their EMS program.
Would they be able to buy.
We do the training that they've
already received with respect to
the six categories or are they
going to have to go through that
those six items all over again
Because it's required to be a
mask and firefighting aspects of
the.
Thank you madam chair thank
sorry go ahead Larry thank you
madam chair representative
Nibert the reason that they're
all three sections we want to
make sure that those folks are
trained in these areas so I
think the answer would be so
long as they have received that
training they would not have to
receive due on duplicate
training and that's also
something that's why we have a a
year out for an effective date
so we can develop that program
and make sure and deal with
those kind of issues because if
you know if you have a law
enforcement officers also an EMS
certified there's no reason for
them to have to go through the
training twice we just want to
make sure that all the first
responders received appropriate
training.
Madam chair and Senator Ingle
I'm and Mr Gramm.
I would I would just simply bank
the the request is as you all
move forward and develop maybe
the rules regulations concerning
best that you reach out to to
those sectors are community
college institutions and am here
you L. M. S. academy Mr Davis at
the eastern New Mexico
university Rossell is the the
mass program director and I
think you would be interested in
weighing at all those issues and
so I would just make the
requests that you reach out to
those institutions bring them to
the table so that they
Can not only with and what your
intentions are but also
expressed to you and others have
made complicated or have by
affect their programs that are
over that are already in
existence and I would suspect
that at the end of the day they
may want to come as a the chief
has already indicated may want
to come with some cleanup
legislation on their own but
next year a couple years to
further clarify whether
what the hierarchy is with
respect to those institutions
programs basically are you
absolutely have massive database
so I would just encourage you to
reach out to them and.
See if there's some common
ground that you work out when
you develop your rules and
regulations thank you madam
chair thank you Senator thank
you experts for being here.
Thank you very much
Representative Alcon.
Trouble is Madam chair of the
property and I would just like
to make a motion to do that for
a new bass.
Also.
We have a motion let's guide
taking motion because we can
continue discussion on we have a
motion Representative Alcon a
second from home.
I seconded
second Representative Armstrong
I will move on to discussion I
have Representative Eli madam
chair and rolled correct all I
am apparently going to be the
house sponsor which means I'm a
bring both with judge Al Capone
and our Senator Ingle so Act
politics makes strange
bedfellows with Senator Ingle
and if you want to come will
floor is going to be really nice
to me so with that madam chair
all fully supportable
supplements an excellent idea
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair on the only friend
in the Senate he has.
Has had friends on the house
either.
That is that is not true madam
vice chair.
Good morning madam chair and
Sanchez thank you for this
important conversation I
certainly have been paying the
attention that I can to what it
looks like to to talk about
increased accountability and
appropriate training and I so
much appreciate the leader
leadership you all have taken on
both with your expertise
and your backgrounds and and and
your legislative positions to
bring us something that's so
well thought out and crafted
from all that you have together
of course we're running around
this Wednesday morning in
different commitments a
different caucuses so I'm
sending text back and forth
about some other elements that
potentially folks have wanted to
consider in this conversation
and one of the things that has
been brought to me is there
there has been a house amendment
prepared Madam chair of House
Judiciary amendment prepared
that raises some additional
questions about strengthening
this legislation if it's
appropriate madam chair I'd like
to move that amendment for
discussion just so that we can
have another point of reference
as we talk through what the best
way is to creates
the right kind of a thirty and
invoice and positions on the the
board moving forward so madam
chair I am.
Going to email this ammendment
now but some of the provisions
talk about the appropriate chair
is on this board and then what
the make up of the board is and
one of the important questions
raised madam chair and I'd like
to ask the Sanchez if if they'd
weigh in on this piece now as we
get this mailed is this dynamic
between looking at board members
that are either retired or
currently in their positions and
madam chair I I'd like to stay
in offer that I think
potentially a mix of both would
feel comforting to me because of
course when someone's retired
it's like they don't have the
same kind of skin in the game
they can take a step back they
can offer nuanced perspective
and leadership but I also hear
that that the value of bringing
and folks that are still working
in the field is that they're up
to date on best practices and
standards and they know and are
most familiar with the kind of
cultures are creating moving
forward so madam chair I'm gonna
at email that amendment into our
staff so that we can get it
shared if we haven't already but
I would turn out to number I
might get the share file okay in
the Here file yeah it's in the
chair elected.
So we have that in the share
file but I would just appreciate
especially on that point about
how we create the right kind of
leadership between current and
retired members of from our
senators and Sanchez thank you
madam chair.
Would you just confirm the two
oh two number Representative yes
I am working to pull that up in
my email now.
Course I remember which email I
have this in madam chair I can
if it's okay I can give it I
have given yes it's two two zero
nine one zero point two.
Your share file folks.
I believe it's been shared with
the proponents of the
legislation as well I don't know
if you sit Senator Ingle but I
know Mr Karan how.
That's fine okay.
Okay so this is this is
preposterous for discussion
purposes and I think
the vice chair would like to
hear your thoughts
Mr.
Thank you madam chairman and
vice chair Cadena I appreciate
and I did I receive this a
little little bit before the
committee started and I'll just
go through the proposed
amendment I have S. three
different amendments all go
through one by one the first
amendment actually would would
create an issue in the bill
because that Senate finance
committee amendment eleven was
only re lettering of sections
which had to be amended when we
added the increased benefit for
a law enforcement officers
killed in the line of duty so if
we actually adopted that that
would create a technical problem
in the bill would no longer
match up.
The second one which talks on
page four line ten after of your
strike in the remainder of the
line the law enforcement academy
we're currently has the Attorney
General on the board and serving
as the chair of the board and
our regional drafts of the
legislation we remove the
Attorney General for the law
enforcement academy board on
during discussions and Senate
judiciary the Attorney General
reached out to us and also with
members of Senate Judiciary in
particular Senator Lopez and
asked that he remain part of the
law enforcement academy board to
help develop training curriculum
he thought that was important to
him him and his office once we
saw the amendment we reach up to
twenty general's office and he
indicated that he still felt he
was is in support of the
legislation and wants to be
involved in law enforcement
academy board process.
And.
The third amendment is the one
that that would create a pretty
significant change in on this
amendment we're dealing with the
law enforcement certification
board currently we have a
retired judge to serve as the
chair of the board the idea that
was deliberately Ideon that is
when you're dealing with
certification decertification
and investigations of officers
who have excessive force
allegations against them having
a judge someone who is familiar
with the judicata Inc looking at
evidence due process
requirements civil and or
criminal procedure we thought
that was important and that's
why we identified a retired
judge and then the rest of it
what it would do is it would use
retired peace officer sheriff's
deputies or tribal law and
tribal law enforcement officers
part of what we're trying to do
in this legislation is actually
modernize law enforcement in
this this is exclusive to the
law enforcement section the bill
we're trying to modernize law
enforcement because what's
what's happening law enforcement
over the past twenty or thirty
years we have some significant
and dramatic changes so for
instance my father in law who
retired in nineteen ninety one
is the tenant from the
Albuquerque police department
could be on the certification
board and his perspective is
dramatically different policing
because he went to an academy in
the sixties and for instance I
use myself as another example I
graduated the police academy in
nineteen ninety five I was
trained on the use of talk of
hard time that's when you you
shackle somebody by their feet
and then you take their hands
and handcuff him and you and you
have got their hands to their
feet but we discovered in the
time since is you you create a
the city positional asphyxiation
so people are are going through
crisis or there or they may be
on a controlled substance they
can die because they suffocate
when they're hot time and so
when we're using retired law
enforcement officers the
experience is great but we're
looking to really modernize and
so what we want to do is trying
have folks.
We're really kind of on the
cutting edge and dealing in
modern policing and so that's
why we that's why we
deliberately used current peace
officers on the board so I I do
appreciate the perspective of
having and having retired or or
veteran officers on that board I
still think you could you could
have veteran officer serving but
we think it's important that we
have currently trained officers
who who are up on the latest
training which are also trying
to develop involved in the
certification board and that's
why it's crafted in the way it
is and that's why we would we
would not you know we were
reluctant to accept the
amendment with the retired
piece.
Representative and I think you
have a question about that.
I just really appreciate hearing
that insight and that response
and certainly that's the
consideration I'm sitting with
like how do we have enough room
between people that are
currently doing during a lot and
carrying weight and
responsibilities in in practice
and on and on the force in and
do do now and then not expertise
so I I would certainly just ask
Senator and your experience that
we might consider what a balance
could look like and potentially
create some openness for a mix
of both current and retired
should you all make it out of
committee today and on to the
floor and I would very much
appreciate that consideration
and continued conversation thank
you madam chair.
Thank you discussion on the
amendment Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair.
I guess my question chair and
the both the parties would be
I don't like the idea of having
met maybe as a retired law
enforcement to the board and not
replacing because the.
Nice to have people like Senator
Ingle into can fall back on and
he can tell you about the
but he's be through.
And what he sees in the future.
And the
one portion alone the rest of
that I can live without you
think that would be a
consideration.
Madam chair welcome what what I
would offer to you is the
current make up of the board we
have seven members who are
identified that they have to be
by specific position we have two
members who are at large members
of the public who would be
appointed and there's nothing
that would stop
the appointment of retired law
enforcement or retired judges or
any other member of the board so
I would say that would be a good
place where we could utilize a
retired law enforcement officers
already available under those
two at large members.
Thank you thank you madam chair
just my thought.
All Representative Rehm is back.
Madam chair what I would think
that this amendment should have
is that those members they can
be retired or current but they
should have at least three years
of supervisory experience so
they know what officers do and
they know how to manage those
officers and so I would say that
they need to be a at three years
of at least a sergeant or above
that would be my recommendation
because you need to get some
people on that board or
committee who actually
understand what law enforcement
us thank you madam chair.
So I'm please clarify for me
just because of the last two.
What's the law enforcement law
enforcement academy the
difference between the economy
and that the sport.
Thank you madam chair so the law
enforcement academy board will
be tasked exclusively with
adopting training standards for
all the law enforcement
academies across the state and
so that is currently they do
deal with certification issues
as well if this legislation
passes they will only be focused
on law enforcement training and
that board is made up heavily of
current law enforcement
officers as well as two members
who would be have specialize in
adult education and also member
who specializes in provision of
behavioral health services the
law enforcement certification
for their sole responsibility
will be to look at certification
and decertification issues with
law enforcement officer so for
instance when you have the James
Boyd shooting in Albuquerque
those two officers once they had
been they had received
discipline and charges were
brought the law enforcement
academy we're currently but
under this scenario the law
enforcement certification board
would look at the facts in that
case and make a determination
whether or not they should keep
their certification whether they
should teach their certification
should be suspended or if it
should be revoked and they could
no longer work as law
enforcement officers and that's
that new board and that the
amendment that's the one that
that the certification board is
the one that it would be that
would make the changes to that's
more of an ajoute budgeted
controlling and that's again
body.
Point.
I want to make sure I'm
understanding because I thought
we're referring to the new
should this legislation passed
board the two additional numbers
referring to appointed at large
are those in the league that
currently exist or are they in
this legislation now for the
potentially new board.
Madam chair asked monsters madam
chairman vice chair the two at
large members when I was
referring to in certification
board so they each have their
their membership that's
appointed and so it's easy to
get to get confront all between
the two.
The date madam chair Sanchez
they are exist in this
legislation as crafted in the
new board which is the
certification.
Yes you thank you madam chair
Senators.
Secretary Johnson I saw your
hand up.
Thank you madam chair and
members the committee I just
wanted to really briefly
hopefully address some of
Representative cut cut Daniels
questions it yeah I know it's
it's super confusing it is to me
it as well or you know basically
have one board now creating to
boards and and the one piece I
think and I think is where
you're getting at getting out
and up I think this is the third
time in this this committee that
I'll be putting words in your
mouth of but if you look at the
current board make up and I hope
this is what you're getting at
but the current board make up
well is the AG are I believe
there's six of the police
officers and two members at
large
so when you see these two boards
that were that were making out I
hope I hope you're able to see
or you and believe that.
When this was written they're
trying to get more diversity in
order on these types of issues
of some of the folks that you
know are the loudest opposed to
what you know some of the
interactions that we're having
these days they're now going to
have a say on this they're
they're on these boards and and
they're gonna be able to review
this and and and be a part of
the solution so I would hope you
would look at current make up
ma'am and then look at what is
going to look like once this is
implemented and I think I would
hope that you would be very
pleased with that because is
it's it's almost in a different
direction and where we currently
are.
One of the nodes in our
committee analysis is that
because you're referring
to the law enforcement academy
board and the law enforcement
certification board as the board
that both the boards it probably
would make sense to call one
eight law enforcement
certification commission and
then I definitions for boarding
commission to the bell to.
very.
I
wanted to
Indicate that Attorney General
and email address.
There's a conflict between
section six and section ten.
Where in which the
Director has the power in duty
to issue certificates of
completion for graduates of the
law enforcement academy training
program and tele communicator
program and the new material
section ten creates a new
section under
The department of public safety
act the newly minted law
enforcement certification board.
Has the role of issuing
certificates of completion.
For this exact same thing.
Madam chair I can address that
issue so the law enforcement
academy director that
certificate of completion would
be more like your diploma so you
do you have now graduated law
enforcement academy the
certification board would
actually issue the certification
the certifies them as a law
enforcement officer so more like
once you've once you once you
graduate law school you get your
diploma once you pass the bar
you get your license so the
certification is issued by the
certification course more like
the license personal versus a
certificate of completion of the
academy.
Whatever we can do not to
confuse people in Vegas helpful.
Let me look at the amendment
again and see if I have a
question.
We didn't adopt yet or are.
You don't consider to be a
friendly remain amendment.
One of the things.
It was suggested that you have
and I don't know.
Your bill well I'm not we have
an attorney in private practice
to practices as a plaintiff's
attorney and civil rights an
attorney in private practice to
represents public entities and
civil rights claims and
determine who is prosecuted
represented criminal defendants.
Those folks now in either of the
boards.
Madam chair no.
chief John.
Indicated that the actual law
enforcement County Board now if
you count the Attorney General
of the chief law enforcement
officer in the state has seven
law enforcement officers on a
nine member board into at large
members and so when we actually
look at that and wrote it out
and you're looking at an
unbalanced board we thought that
certification for because of
their new mission it would be
very important a very balanced
board with many different
perspectives.
Okay I think I have some other
folks with questions
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair at I just
not a real question I just am
contemplating the amendment and
while I appreciate it I I worry
about it
being heavily or exclusively
retired
police officers are it's hard to
envision a new system and a new
culture if you have exclusively
or predominantly
folks from an older a culture if
you will our pre
of reform a culture and so that
that's my concern on the
amendment and so I I just wanted
to put that out there that
that's that's my concern thank
you.
Comment on that I think offense
to that because I'm a retired
judge.
I was.
I like this raised I represent
that remark.
Well me too and madam chair I I
have a struggle with the same
thing in trying to reform health
care system I have a hard time
envisioning a whole new way of
things of doing things one I've
been immersed for forty five
years in doing it one way and so
I I I hold up myself to the same
same comments thank you.
Okay Representative Rehm another
comment or question I had madam
chair and we reprogrammed you
you know what so it when
And I'm currently in a brilliant
Count insurers so when I attend
training I have to take that
certificate and forwarded to the
law enforcement academy in the
law enforcement academy has
jacked up there were all of
money treating this and they
enter it into their database and
I think the new board should be
issuing that certification
number my certification number
right now is that the law
enforcement academy in that
jacket in the duplicate is I
don't think is a good idea and
just you know if you will kind
of clogs up the the wheels what
do you think.
Mr Chairman representative Ramon
and I may ask chief Johnson also
to to comment because he's
currently having to deal with
some of this way I would want to
that is is that certificates
you've completed your training
because that's gonna be a
training requirement that is
adopted by law enforcement
academy where they want to make
sure you're getting your correct
in service training that would
still go to law enforcement
academy because they're the ones
responsible for overall training
statewide if it's an issue as to
whether or not you have your
certified as a police officer or
there is a discussion about that
certification that now would be
under a separate and independent
board and and that's it's a
deliberate change because would
it would do well they have to
communicate yes because the
certification but a lot to make
sure that you're meeting all
those basic training
requirements but we want to
different set of eyes looking in
issues of officers were who are
subject to discipline or
potential termination or
decertification and that's why
you have that determination made
by separate and independent
board.
Madam chair Mr grant right I
realized that and so all the
discipline is over at a
different for and so you know if
we look at that but just want if
I graduated from university it
is university gives me my
diploma and I think that's why
all the records are already
there you want to keep it in
house rather than move it over
to the new board and then sent
back.
Madam chair and representative
of rain.
The way I'm understanding your
question or comment is that that
to me is more of an
administrative issue that's part
of why we have this year to get
this implemented because you're
right I mean if we if we can
figure out a way that we can
either either put those records
electronically they can be
shared by the two boards those
are the kind of things that we
can work out in this interim
period which is why we're giving
ourselves in time to implement
so we're not trying to create an
administrative problem we just
want to make sure that we're
revamping the system.
Madam chair and Mr Gramm this
isn't actually in the amendment
but you know one of the things I
see on the database that they're
going to keep.
I think that you need to make
that not subject to it brought
in the reason why state that is
you're gonna have undercover
officers listed in that
database.
I don't know if you thought
about that mystery and are not.
Representative Rehm I understand
and and I think I understand the
issue of of protecting the the
identity of a of an undercover
officer although I think now
even under current law if you
had it for requested delta
undercover officer they wouldn't
be able to know them by name but
I'm not sure that there would be
any identifying or or you know
any video or or or photographic
evidence that would lead to
their
that would lead to their
identity being compromised I I
make that also chief Johnson I
don't know if maybe been dealing
with those more than I am right
now.
Madam chair of Representative
Representative Rehm.
Yeah I mean so some of these
pieces are split are still being
worked out exactly how we want
this to look up based on the
current of you know it per
statutes verses
You know a case law that we have
from the state on what what is
releasable but I do know there's
you know several bills floating
through through that building
that you're in the that are
discussing what should be public
record as as it pertains to on
officers jacket
and so I'm and I think those one
of those things is like Mr and
mention
if the bill needs to get tweaked
moving forward I think you'll be
opportunities to
but I I do understand I I get
what I get your concern and I
think we currently do a pretty
good job of trying to protect of
the under cover stuff you know
as you mentioned and I hope that
answers your question
Representative Wheatley.
Chair of the incident and the
grand of.
If you can name I can go to the
internet more than likely
Facebook find a picture of them
and that's my concern more than
anything else the the database
absolutely and this should be
available to all law enforcement
agencies in New Mexico and
outside New Mexico so that we
don't have a bad office.
State.
But yeah thank you.
Thank you I'm getting message
two that the speaker would like
us to recessed object to the
call of the chair so we can go
to the floor so I think we can
probably act on this bill before
we do that we do have a motion
and a second I'm gonna ask the
clerk to call the roll.
Madam chair.
Session are we on the amendment
now we are not built.
Now we were just discussing the
amendment.
On the.
There's been no motion to adopt
the amendment got it okay thank
you madam chair.
Sure.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
What what.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative.
To go.
Is excuse.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Thank.
Yes.
Madam chair.
You have a S. seven now do pass
on house bill three seventy
five.
Okay thank you all very much and
we are subject to the call of
the chair Madam chair madam
chair those are the new class
today will no or yes on the new
pass you voted down I'm sorry
thanks James have you push the
button interject.
It was supposed to be a test.
The reports probably not done
yet.
I just want to get to I want to
get some points to judge outcome
I think you can do that
judge L. grams good grazing so
the parliamentarian rules chair
you can do that madam chair.
Here I'm sorry I totally really
cool.
Your.
Thank you all right.
We're we're in recess.
