Madam chair here madam chair you
have a quorum.
Thank you the first matter of
business before we get to the
regular calendar is our consent
calendar we have two bills that
are up for consent there was a
consensus on the committee which
consists of.
Vice chair Romero.
ranking member green and
Representative Nighbor and we're
recommending these two bills for
consent does anyone wish to call
either of these bills from the
consent calendar.
Is our motion.
Senator us to see.
Thank you we have a motion on
consent for Senate bill two
sixty as amended and Senate bill
three oh two to call the roll.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative read yes.
Representative green.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes madam chair you
have a do pass on Senate bill
two sixty as amended in Senate
bill three oh two.
Thank you.
First matter businesses house
bill six.
Representative Romero will be
present.
Amendment to distribute.
In hand.
Austin I think there's an an
amendment and
Yes it was passed in the hand
and perfect thank you Austin.
Your is yours thank you madam
chair so if you'll recall we did
start hearing house bill six
about a week ago we were asked
to confer with
the department association who
had basically discussed with
members of this committee that
they there might be changes we
present to you today a an
amendments but I would just like
to give a little bit of
background with it and and
understand the will of the
committee so what we didn't do
prior to introducing the bill
was discussed some of the
history of landlord tenant law
in the state where we haven't
changed anything for forty eight
years when we started this
uniformed law
following the Civil Rights Act
of nineteen sixty four we then
had to unpack how redlining was
going to work in our community
and covenant still to this day
have the racial component which
does which disallowed people
from getting mortgages on
accessing housing fairly we're
still dealing with that today
and when we look at the
expansive issues that we have
with access to housing including
inflation and home buying being
too expensive today for many
individuals they're basically
forced to read
and so what we have since we've
been trying to figure these
issues out is a real balance of
power issue which was part of
what we had to do to go back and
negotiate with the apartment
association
despite us creating this
ammendment they are not in
agreement with it they're not
here to speak in support of this
bill
we've met twice with them in
twenty twenty one and twenty two
multiple times to try to have a
mutually acceptable bill we've
made a lot of compromise is here
from what we.
I had originally agreed to and
so even prior to the session and
twenty twenty two we asked about
the version of the bill that you
saw and we were turned down so
having gone in good faith again
to speak to them they're still
not in support of this bill.
but you do have an amendment
which we have conferred upon
you know we're neutral on this
ammendment having spent the time
to do it but just felt like it
was important to talk a little
bit about how we got here today
so perhaps we could have a
motion on the adventure movie
for suggestions thank you very
much if you want to tell us
about the amendment
Representative sure so the idea
through the negotiation was to I
think in short clarify the
timeline that folks were
confused about in the
in the previous bill the sec it
would shorten the time line and
and officially make it a forty
five day period so that's really
what the strike throughs and and
date changes would be.
Good idea my expert Maria Griego
with the new center for long
poverty thank you madam chair in
addition to reducing the overall
timeline which is that fifty two
days in the current version of
the bill it reduces it to forty
five days it also deleted
entirety the
Section on what happens if
there's a moratorium the refusal
to rent during a declared state
of emergency and then because we
heard over and over again from
the.
Industries that they're they
took issue with
the paragraph in the retaliation
section about complaining to an
owner about the functioning or
safety of the utility utility
equipment
they've you know said over and
over that's a normal
conversation that happens with
landlords and tenants we removed
that.
So that's what this amendment
which is.
Other questions on the
amendment.
Representative Eli chair thank
you so.
I can I get.
Maybe of this of brief overview
of the presenters there's a
number of time frames there's
change from a legend of ten.
Fourteen to ten can can you walk
me through each one of those as
as as how it affects the overall
time proofs I think that's
really what landlords are going
to be most concerned about is if
I have a non paying tenants.
What's the time involved from
the time that I first provide
notice of nonpayment of rent
tell the time where I can have a
hearing and potentially get a
court decision one way or the
other on whether I convicted
tenant.
You want to Madam chair
representative you want to just
go through each version of the
time change or just overall sort
of how it affects because it
essentially this this confines
it to a forty five day time
frame maximum and so through
each of the notices at such a we
can go through each notice each
Manchuria if you don't mind I
think just as I take notes on
the seventy helpful for me.
Thank you madam chair and
representative waiting for the
question so with this ammendment
if the tenant is late on rent
they will be required to give at
the one of the required to get a
ten day notice of nonpayment of
rent it was and that's calendar
days it was eleven for it is
eleven the current version of
the bill.
the biggest
Area where we'd appreciate on
the time is the time between the
issuance of summons in trial
setting so in the current
version of the bill it's
fourteen to twenty one days
we've reduced that to ten to
fourteen days.
And then on the back and forth
the timing of the writ of
restitution
the Max to do twenty days of
fifteen to twenty days.
In the current version of the
bill fifteen to twenty.
So madam chair.
The initial notice the tenant
than under the amendment would
be you have ten days to come up
with the amount that's due and
owing otherwise the landlord my
file infection actions that
right.
Madam chair representative lane
that's correct okay and then if
I'm the landlord and I move for
filing addiction action.
are you saying then that the
bill now will read that.
The court has to wait a minimum
ten days to set a trial.
Madam chair representative lane
that that act would now read is
that the trial must be scheduled
within ten to fourteen days
in town remaining is that of
funds ten to fourteen days what
triggers the ten days efficient
to the size of the funds.
Madam chair representative
Mexico no please go excuse me
Sir.
And madam chair so I'm just
looking at the.
Is that on page nine.
Yes it is madam chair
representative on the
When the
That's for that caring for.
Or if maybe the better would ask
is if you could just direct me
to where I the ten to fourteen
days issuance of summons
languages section eight.
Representative Lane fiction.
Okay.
Which starts on page sixteen.
Madam chair representative lane
the exact paragraph is on page
seventeen
paragraph one which starts at
nine eight okay thank you madam
chair and so then.
After the summonses issued in
the court be directed a Senate
hearing within ten to fourteen
days accordance Memon is that
correct Madam chair
representative lane that's
correct okay chair though the
third time frame I think I wrote
down was let's assume that I
have a trial.
The court fines against me as a
tenant.
and then the owners seeking a
red restitution and and I think
the the fifteen to twenty is
that is that the time frame for
which I is the tenant can come
up with the amount due and
owing.
Madam chair representative
playing yes that's correct you
can either cure within that time
frame or if you don't then and
then the rate will be issued
annually removed and madam chair
where's that fifteen to twenty
days in the bill.
Madam chair representative of
its on page eighteen.
Writ of restitution.
It's
Between lines nine and ten.
From yeah nine.
Okay thank you Mr so that that
was more than and.
You're just saying that as part
overall time frame gotcha okay
that helps.
So madam chair with the amended
timelines.
Ten days notice of nonpayment.
Ten days this from some of those
twenty.
And in fifteen days.
Of.
Curit peer that I'm at thirty
five how do we get to which is a
forty I feel like I'm missing
something here.
My apologies Representative
Madam chair representative when
I was confirming with Michael
expert would you mind asking the
question again Madam sure no
problem so I'm just doing the
mass of if I as a landlord issue
attended notice of that starts
the clock so there's ten
calendar days.
And then I could file suit I see
Monday eleven.
and then.
From the day I file suit.
That's another ten to fourteen
days before there's a trial and
then after the trial it's
there's a cure rate of fifteen
to twenty I think the number I
heard was forty five days so I'm
just trying to stand where the
forty five comes from based on
that math that's correct it's a
total of forty five days so the
day read it took into account
the first day of the month when
the rent is due
the fifth inning it hasn't been
paid on the following day that
is the date the notice could be
issued.
Can calendar day notice.
And madam chair as I understood
the presentation the moment the.
Maybe it's on the backside yeah
so the entirety of.
The renewable rental Grimmett
during a declared emergency that
sectional Levin is now
completely out of the bills are
right.
The moratorium is.
Is completely left out yet
exactly fictional and.
Madam chair I appreciate that
change our member.
Of discussing this very item on
the house floor in the thirty
day maybe was it's to this come
up on the thirty day and this
was a issue that I discussed
with the sponsor you know about
the situation where if you have
an emergency and you have a
rental agreement actually
expires
in a lot of these you know these
a lot of these are major
corporations a lot of these are
are maybe a teacher that they
have a second home is sort of a
retirement someone income and it
may have a mortgage attached to
it and what happens if you have
a non paying tenants the leases
expired so you're not just
terminated for non payment of
rent and yet you still can get
them out I had some concerns
about that so I appreciate you
doing.
That piece and the last question
madam chair.
What's the thought process
behind taking away the.
The complaint.
As a basis for for him in
retaliation for non functioning
appliances.
Madam chair Representative Lane
it was something that we heard
over and over again from
these at industry groups I'm
saying that this is a common
conversation that happens
between tenants and landlords
and that it would be that in
there which is a slippery slope
that would allow for these
Gular everyday conversations to
potentially leads to.
a retaliation claim and so
and to to be fair madam chair
and Representative lane I think
you know that language after you
do this being the third year of
the bill that language with
suggested amendments got got
away from what our original
intent was there so in the end
we decided that it would be a
fair compromise to take that out
the madam chair that.
I think some of these are are
typically contracted for also I
think a lot of these lease
agreement so that if I find and
then you know microwave
something like that and and it's
not functioning or washer dryer
actually probably washer dryers
more common because not all
units come with washer dryer and
so if those were non functioning
then I think the ten it would
have a recourse through you know
a basic breach of lease is that
correct.
That Madam chair representative
that could be sure okay so it's
not like we're Madam like
really.
And sat on the sofa those are my
questions thank you madam chair.
Any other questions on the.
Okay happy to entertain and
motion on the amendment.
A second that motion to adopt
the amendment and I think you
should read the to rotate number
I don't know that we did two two
six zero three four point one
right so motion made the leader
Chasey segment by leisure lane
call the roll thank you madam
chair representative upon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Speaker Martinez Representative
McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative read yes
Representative green yes ma'am
Representative Penske yes madam
vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes madam chair with
a vote of ten you haven't been
adopted amendment.
Amended bill Representative
other questions on the the
Representative Rehm.
I'm.
And representative of I want to
make sure when we're talking
about days we're talking about
calendar days not the okay this
is a state that's current and
chair and
When we go to page three and we
look at lines two through six
what is the purpose of.
This this paragraph here.
Madam chair representative so
this ensures that for those that
are on already subsidized
housing right thank they're
already having a difficult time
with the portion of rent that is
assigned to them so this insures
that for those that are in a in
a situation where and typically
I think we discussed this on the
previous hearing where eighty
percent of their rent is coming
from section eight veterans
assistance etcetera that they
only have to pay the ten percent
of the twenty percent that they
would have owed since they're
already in a difficult financial
situation that we wouldn't want
to further burden them further
from that when they're
guaranteed eighty percent of the
rent for the homeowner at that
time.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
Disco.
Madam chair and Representative
let's go over to page five and
let's work at the end and I
agree this is current language
thirteen through.
Sixteen so they have the the to
the landlord has thirty days to
go ahead and complete the work
the problem is with the
construction industry and can a
completed within can I hire a
contractor to get done in thirty
days that's the real problem and
I don't see any with the war
room in there for that Madam
chair representative that's
current law we're not
contemplating a change to that
today.
Okay but okay.
I think that's problematic but.
It's.
Madam chair and Representative
when we go to page six and we're
going to
one eight and we're talking
about for for for for the no
right so we have a landlord.
Who has gone on vacation
suddenly has a hospital
emergency and he does that make.
The
if the notice within that time.
He is then precluded from ever
making it.
Is that correct Madam chair
representative can you just
describe where you are in the
bill of page six.
Line nine.
Madam chair.
Go head to.
On chair representative re it is
current law the landlord has to
give a statement of direction
from the deposit within thirty
days after the leader of move
out or and to the lease
Whether there's equitable
arguments if the if the landlord
is hospitalized or otherwise and
dispose of it till that period
that would be for the judge to
decide I've never I've never had
that argument and just to
clarify a prior statement Madam
chair representative the
controversy land there doesn't
have to complete the work in
thirty days the only have to
give a statement with estimates
of how much it would cost of
okay thank you for that
clarification you all and madam
chair Representative front page
six when we go to a line
Seventeen and eighteen we see
that shall be liable.
for court costs and reasonable
attorney fees.
This committee in the past is
not like the shelve the like
the may be may be you know of.
And I was wondering if we could
change that to may.
Madam chair representative again
current law we're not
contemplating that for this bill
well Madam chair representative
we could amended anything even
if it is current I was just
wondering if we have the heart
to go in and change that to may.
So would be consistent with you
know it should be up to the
judge to go ahead and determine
whether fees or right and court
costs are awarded.
Madam chair representative that
would be and friendly I think
just based on what we're looking
at in the cohesion of the bill.
It it wouldn't be a friendly
amendment.
Okay.
And
Madam chair representative I'm
glad that you have shorten some
of the time line.
If we just look at forty five
days what you've done is now
require landlords to get
sufficient to deposit to cover
two months you know and and I I
think that's the.
While I understand what you're
trying to do is protect the
tenet what you're doing is
increasing the up front cost and
I think that that's going to be
problematic.
Now
When I read on its begins at the
bottom of page eight goes to the
top of page nine.
How does the landlord deal with
a person who is continually what
on payments.
Madam chair Representative Rehm
The same is is they would under
current law you still have you
still would issue the notice
Go through the process this bill
is just extending the time.
And madam chair Representative
Freeman it's the increased time
reduces the eviction filing so
that the landlord does get paid
met many of these
situations where there are it's
a it's a lesser payment
typically where fifty percent of
those
payments are are still paid what
they can and then just need a
little bit more time to pay the
rest of it.
Yes madam chair and
representative when we look at.
Page nine from twelve the
Two twenty five it talks about
what the landlords going to
recover but in their we don't
have and show of recoveries
attorney's fees.
The server reason why we don't
want to have it both ways Madam
chair representative review of
fees would be interpreted as
attorney fees.
Okay.
The.
So madam chair and
representative when I go to page
thirteen.
That.
Winds five through eight.
And in particular one six Wirth
says increase rant.
I.
So I'm a person living in a and
parchment and I've been living
there for five years.
Maybe the landlord and I had
words over something but I've
been living there for five years
and now he's increasing the
rents for all tenants I've I
could come and say well this was
retaliatory.
And I think maybe meetings
crease rant without
justification or something like
that.
Madam chair representative in
that context you a judge would
not obviously be favorable to
that person because if they were
doing that fairly and equitably
it wouldn't be a retaliation
claim on that's why we're making
sure that when these are brought
forth that they are actually
retaliatory so if you look at a
residence may prove retaliation
if and then you go through the
process of being able to prove
that in the circumstance you
just brought up it wouldn't be a
valid retaliation claim.
Okay thank you madam chair I
think that's all the questions I
have for now.
Representative night.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for.
The amendments I'm still
concerned they may not of been
exactly what I would like to
saying that it's a stab
Of this express some of my
real concerns I I know you're
probably not going to do to
change in the
Hi I am concerned about the.
Maximum late fee that might be
imposed
four thank you to pay timely
particularly if.
It's a Vigil type situation and
usually
When you have tenants that are
virtually late that's when used
you start imposing those late
fees you usually don't most
landlords are I don't think
impose on for the one off you
know somebody's sick they can't
make a payment the but the the
people that are a bit chilly
late here you have to.
Have some lever to get them to
come in on the first day of the
month to pay their rent and so
I'm concerned on page three
typically those that have.
Are only paying a portion of the
total rent and it looks to me
like in some of those instances
the actual late penalty is of a.
Early.
The maintenance amount if it's
ten percent of.
The portion of the resident
pays.
As a Max it could be fairly
small dollars I would think and
so they may not be much
incentive there to to alter that
the course of conductivity will
I just point that out again I
think the representative from
Santa Fe to my left pointed out
the issues with respect to
receipts someone pays with a
check or money order.
If you have a receipt and and
having to
find that the it may not seem
like a big deal with the I
thought we were couple years ago
getting out the cash payments
making sure that there was some
written evidence of of payment
we were we're back to
doing those things on page six
in particular
We have a number of things that.
Really in in my estimation
onerous
to the landlord.
And.
Forfeiture for for many things
but I'd like to in the interest
of time just focus on page seven
paragraph the.
We strike bad faith.
So we can have a situation where
a mistake is made by the owner.
And yet we are punishing that
owner for a.
Substantial penalty.
For potentially
You know honest mistakes.
Their entry in their books was
incorrect they send the wrong
amount because their entry was
incorrect or or something along
those lines.
Bad faith I understand why you
punish bad faith somebody's
going out of their way to
you know because somebody
important.
But that's not when you strike
that faced with then you have
the two times the amount
properly improperly withheld
you're really punishing people
for potentially on a store or
what I consider maybe
mistakes by the employee in the
office and the office or
whatever they send the wrong
amount of and I I.
I think the bad faith standards
should be imposed there when
you're penalizing the owner.
And I would certainly like to
see you strike that strike
strike out and leave the bat
faced standard in there
the the one and the four again
are are.
you know.
Provisions of really for for.
The rights of the landlord to to
collect some of those things of
certain events repair and that
that's a problematic
Over on
Page a.
Bottom of page eight.
Top of page nine.
I think we may have talked about
this the other day as well just
to the automated terminate the
rental agreement and the
resident shall voluntarily
deliver possession contested
termination in court or seek to
address in response and I
believe
The answer to that was that that
was the retaliation type of
defensive I might have and
so.
I'd like to have the the
concerned with how that
sentences structure and really
what what the last portion of
that sentence really says but
that's.
What I gather you said the other
day was getting after
retaliation stuff so.
You might want to look at at
that language and and see if
there's a better way of getting
your intent expressed.
Then
I think you've heard several of
us expressed concern over the
retaliation provisions and
that's on page thirteen.
And the real the real concern is
that.
The resident can maybe may prove
retaliation yes.
Two things occur.
The first thing that has to
occur is that the owner either
threatens an action decreases
services increases ram for
refuses to renew the Ronald
Graham so that's or serve the
notice of termination so that's
the first set of elements that
have to have to exist and then
and.
You have a list of of the number
of things that that would also
have to exist so what my
question is if if somebody.
What state has testified on
behalf of another tenant.
How does the landlord ever
increase the rent on that
tenants.
Madam chair representative.
Thank you madam chair and
representative well again the
landlord is not prohibited from
increasing the rent this is just
this
Bill simply sets out a standard
for the court to.
Assess and analyze a retaliation
claim
so what we did is we took
language are we we use the model
that's used in employment
retaliation claims the McDonnell
Douglas burden shifting method
was actually
recommended and requested by the
apartment association a couple
years ago
so again the tenant has to
The sensually state that they
were think agent protected
activity
and then the burden shifts to
the landlord
just say that whatever the
landlord did was not
retaliatory that they had a
valid reason for doing that so a
valid reason for increasing the
rent was not in retaliation for
a complaint well but because
they had increased expenses and
they can find evidence of that
and then the burden shifts and
ends with the tenant having to
prove the last bit that that
that with the landlord said with
its pre textual
and it's still a very difficult
standard to meet retaliation
cases are almost never brought
their Ms number one
and it's still probably going to
build an up hill battle for
tenants even with this new
standard but it just gives them
a little bit more opportunity to
assert that.
Well I just want my concern is.
Retaliation.
Well let me ask this Madam chair
representative is wrecked
retaliation to provide in the in
the bill or and the statute
otherwise.
Yes.
No Madam chair representative
it's not it's you know police we
create a standard again going
back to employment law so you
know online for page thirteen a
resident may prove retaliation
if.
They do two things the paragraph
one and then the one of the
conditions of paragraph two.
And and I guess my concern is
whether or not just having those
two factors.
Indeed made so threshold of
retaliation.
Madam chair representative of it
what I mean they'd have to bring
the case forward to a judge and
make the case and for and and
and again the burden would shift
so they the the landlord still
has the ability to be like to
show good faith and then they
have to prove without beyond you
know that doubt that they would.
That they were retaliated
against me to creates the
standard right now we don't have
that.
Well I appreciate you taking out
paragraph H.
I think that could be
gold hurdles.
to overcome but it just a.
It just.
Really concerns me that that
If you have the two elements
that a court might say well that
person has.
Shown that they've been
retaliated because they meet
their graph one and they meet
that condition paragraph two and
and even if the the landlord
has.
You know CPI index has
market analysis it shows rents
in this neighborhood have gone
up you know experts that
whatever
there there may be a claim I I
hope that your your testimonies
correct and that that would not
happen in that a court would
find that this language doesn't
do what my fear is but I do have
some.
Trepidation with respect to the
Madam chair representative I
would just point out page
fifteen section C.
it talks about being able in
particular to increase rent
without that challenge.
So there's extra protection in
there already.
Photo one of the conditions and
one is to refuse to renew the
rental agreement
You know there may be a myriad
of reasons not to do that but.
Anyway I I just hope that the
courts would be with you as you
as you suggest I I think that's
why.
We've seen a lot of discomfort
with respect to the language
that that we see there and and
It's it's it's a concern of not
just me but I think a lot of the
the landlords around the state
have some concerns there.
In paragraph the I guess helps
helps of both through that a
little bit to
Over on page seventeen.
Paragraphs the rebel line
seventeen.
For me understand this provision
correctly the the the court is
going to maintain this list
right Madam chair representative
that's correct and chair
representative and so when I as
a landlord go to file my.
Cause of action against the
tenant.
Of the court isn't going to the
clerk of the court will then
hand me.
Not only my summons but this
packet of material that I'm to
served with the summons them am
I understanding that correctly.
Madam chair and representative
Nibert it's simply just a list
of resource listed I don't think
anybody's envisioning that a
packet okay so as a piece of
paper with maybe a list of
people or you madam is our
Representative this was
requested by the courts to be
able to offer this service.
Well that's that probably goes
to the heart of my questions
because often times of we get
some push back from the courts
telling us we we should be
telling them to but it fails for
the then the I guess I guess I'm
comfortable with it what happens
if I file that cause of action
and they don't hand me that
piece of paper.
Madam chair representative
Nibert there's no course of
action that the bill is written
in a way that gives courts
flexibility it's right it starts
with to the extent practicable
so if the court is short staffed
or they are under funded and
they can't do it then they will
not be required to do so there's
no penalty for the clerk
disincentive exactly okay and so
there's no real.
Implications on the party on the
part of the plaintiff to make
sure that that blue gets to
added on madam chair
representative.
Over on page nineteen
This concerns a red restitution
Representative C. or any portion
of of of this reserve
restitution portion.
If the
tenet is not successful
In doing that is there any
provision in here to allow the
landlord to recover attorney's
fees because I saw provisions
for the tenant to recover
attorney's fees but is there any
provision for the landlord to
recover attorneys fees madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative of
section forty seventy forty
seven gives prevailing feet
Refusing costs to the prevailing
party that the state shall and
that's for any action brought
under your phone resident
relations axo anywhere else in
the in the act talks about
attorney fees is somewhat
redundant since there's a
prevailing party for the
provision okay and that would
applies universally to the
entire at.
I mean if we're defending we're
professions.
The settlement.
Chair and representative.
I.
I still
I think that there's a couple
thank you for work on here would
be happy to maybe proposed
language through the we can do
that the leader if you live so
for that madam chair
representative I'm out of
questions.
Representative Chasey were you
did you.
Thank you madam chair I just two
questions I was making some of
my colleagues were.
We're going through it on.
Page three line
I.
I I think it does seem fair to
exclude the questions that the
government pays to the landlord
And Fund.
Page.
Six nine nine that little
subsection there is about
returning the deposit it's not
about
any other charges so it's what
the the
the tenet is going is entitled
to get back and I know I
certainly hear from people and
I'd I don't do this kind of love
it just in constituents about
never getting a deposit back so
I I don't want to lose sight of
the with all of the underlying
additions to the line here we've
we've for to the deposit within
a specified time frame
And it I correct me if I'm wrong
but on the bad faith issue on
page seven where you have strict
in bad faith you've added
An element of men's raha when
you say knowing that retention
to be in violation of the sex so
I think that replaces bad faith
that's the way I read.
So just that's my not sufficient
to make.
Calling here from.
Chavis and it seems that you
Try to make throughout the
proposed statute some.
I do.
Adjustments for the landlords in
increasing or decreasing the the
time that they have to wait for
Some kind of
Payment.
So one of the questions that I
have had from constituents so on
page thirteen so we'll be that
subsection under six about.
The rest of how the resident
priests retaliation.
So what I've had people tell me
is that.
This is the air conditioning not
working and it's the summer and
their landlord is receiving a
subsidy from a governmental
program.
And
These are.
Educated people who just don't
have a large retirement and
they're not necessarily able to
afford their own homes and
they're in a situation but if
they complain about the the
Evaporative cooler not working
or something like that it's as
if they're getting a reaction of
so what.
I mean that's what I'm hearing
from my constituents and I don't
know if this remedies that
Senator Representative of then
leader we just struck that out.
So you can't filed a retaliation
claim on something that you just
product.
Okay so that's what to.
Right that was on page fourteen
madam chair legislative section
it has to be struck out.
That doesn't help
of my constituents okay and.
I know that we're trying to do
trying to build more affordable
housing a lot of that is like.
Family dwellings and not rental
property so I I just think that
we can certainly have a long way
to go to house our our on host
population.
Ahead and notes.
In here.
You start the whole section
eleven on declared emergency I I
was thinking presumably in a
declared emergency there may be
as there were during the
beginning of the COVID emergency
some
Revisions by.
The courts or others to try to
mitigate the
The potential for people in a
health crisis being placed out
where not only would it.
Exacerbate the crisis they would
be on house so that's out of
here but presumably that would
be provided for in an emergency
so I can see not keeping it in
the the law because it's almost
as if we certainly.
Police I don't think I could
have predicted this maybe
president George W. bush could
have because you started
worrying about it in two
thousand and four I believe
maybe earlier
it if you did that I'm he's the
only one I.
I didn't hear about it and I
didn't get worried about it but
my goodness I mean who could
have predicted not so I.
But madam chair I I will support
this but I also think it's good
because we did have people
trying to work together all the
size I think we should try to
continue that dialogue as as
time goes by thank you madam
chair thank you.
The
mid pick a little bit of madam
chair if you go to page nine.
On the line to the next I think
after position I think we need
the word for.
In there but that's just
something you can do if you want
to
I just think it needs to be in
there.
On page on page nine line to act
and.
It is voluntary deliver petition
condition termination in court
Garcia okay.
That the or that we need to have
to take both steps.
That is you choose your choice
to do with one or the other you
just gotta do about.
One
of the three is the third would
oversee does does give you the
or of the third one.
And the on that you can fix that
if you want to add to that
medically
But I do have the heart bird and
you know that magistrate the the
of the three days a restitution
the three days to leave the on
page nine loans they do this
when they were going from three
to twenty one.
Anonymously.
I think a.
Three was never I mean this is a
job that there's just no way
that I felt the three was the
right number of days.
Our but that I think twenty one
is a little extreme because a.
If you look at okay look at the
magistrate court right was
serving you'd probably get a
hearing within two to three
weeks.
Okay.
If you go to a metro court never
occur cue a native this year
magistrate court to in the Santa
Fe that's cruises the we would
the committee wanted busy many
Gallup.
I read it you're not going to
get a hearing until maybe three
to four weeks maybe even more
than that for the landlord is
not going to come before the
court to allow more three to
four weeks after they filed the
paperwork and then the judge is
going to ask Miss people to
leave the premises.
And now after that they have we
one days to do so.
They don't the the other thirty
one days to do so or paid the
money Hey.
That they don't pay that money
within those twenty one days
that land orders already out.
Almost two and a half months of
money.
So I.
I I honestly think that the
rules three if it was extremely
with I mean I always had
heartburn over that one that was
sent them to court.
But I think twenty one is a
little.
Little extreme and I I I would.
I'd say this should be done
within the the state and if you
can do this within thirty days
you're not going to do it.
Madam chair representative we
could clarify what you're
talking about I think we might
be conflating two separate
issues hello you have that type
of kids on you're looking at the
age of nine.
One little talking about where
the judge has to do with three
days or.
Come up with the money within
twenty one days instead of three
days.
Madam chair go ahead if we could
clarify what you're looking at
Madam chair representative this
is this is a a very limited
application this is where the
tenant withholds rent because of
a broken air conditioner or heat
or whatever and they go to court
and the judge says I'm sorry you
did fulfill the this the
You were not permitted under the
law to withhold the rent like
you did but it was I see why you
did it was in good faith in the
twenty one days to pay it back
and you can stay so we want we
don't want people to be scared
to enforce their rights to
withhold a small portion of the
rent or third of the rack fifth
thirty two broken or they have a
flood or what have you and the
owners not fixing it and this
gives them a cushion.
to say look if you withhold that
rent save that money and if the
judge finds that you weren't
right in withholding the rack
you can pay that back to the
landlord and state that only
applicant that only applies
there and so
that's why the one above the
says resident has abated rent
pursuant to section what have
you for subsection to the owners
allocated run by paid by
residents paying for damages is
only applying constituents
feel along with the rest of the
test not satisfied the judgment.
The judge will issue a COVID
restriction without further
notice.
Correct is that correct so it's
kind of.
A little bit on the long side as
far as I'm concerned.
Leave it at that then to.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
so madam chair.
Page three years one or stand.
The context here so.
The.
Like if let's say section eight
housing so typically I think the
way I understand the reasons the
government basically direct
deposits into the owners count
every month is that right.
Chair representative and so
madam chair not time just in our
word the owners out a hundred
percent rent there only out
whatever percentage the the
tenant fill the come up with I'm
sorry chair for later yes okay
so madam chair I think in that
context knowing that the the
landlord is getting what report
from the government less there's
a contract dispute between the
owner and the government which I
think is a different issue that
I think that that change make
sense to me
I want to ask on the.
Page I.
The changes here.
Now we're talking about.
Madam chair what that.
What the owner.
If if you're she makes any
deductions from the deposit what
they have to disclose the ten is
that the context of this
paragraph for paragraph C..
Madam chair representative yes
okay and so madam chair.
The way I understand current law
is you as the owner.
Are entitled to withhold rent
and late fees.
and you don't have to put that
in the thirty day I'm
institution letter is that
correct.
Madam chair representative
correct and utilities and
accuracy out away Representative
the madam chair and that was
gonna be my next question so I
appreciate that I in my mind I
had thought you to is because
their of their injective amount
for us you know cleaning or
repairs or whatever I think
our can be abused so madam chair
at but this changes or the
structure of that law correct so
if if I'm a landlord I attended
who fails to pay rent
and let's say rents a thousand
dollars a month the deposits of
thousand dollars a month.
If I don't send out of and I
don't deduct anything for
cleaning or repairs or anything
else.
And I don't send out a thirty
day items session letter saying
that your deposit is gonna be
deducted from the rent that you
failed to pay.
Then this would prohibit the
land or from keeping that I
payment is that correct.
It's on the landlord still may
keep the of rent.
Through the date of termination.
So madam chair.
So the waves I think these
typically let's say a rent's due
on the first month.
So the tenet Mrs the January
payment.
Then I send the tenant
And I think under this bill now
is that a.
It's a ten day notice of
nonpayment right now the three
day notice so it's in the ten
day notice of nonpayment.
The tenants still doesn't come
up with the.
Payment so tell attended either
move out or I'm going to file an
eviction action.
Defend the the tenant vacates
the premises.
And so.
Madam you're saying that I could
keep the right up to the date of
move out.
But not anything past that if I
don't send the thirty day and is
this letter.
Madam chair representative
correct okay because that's not
how I read the language can you
walk me through.
Where they're at and where that
new on success because I don't
think that's what it says.
Madam chair representative I'm
looking at I.
And.
Eight six.
In its line
Four through four thirteen.
And it says that if the owner
fails to provide the list
timely.
the owner forfeits the right to
withhold any portion of the
deposit for any charge including
rent other than the minimum
minimum periodic pent payment
due under the lease for a
dwelling accrued to the date of
termination a resonant departure
whichever is later so it.
That that that
That forfeiture does not apply
to the rent that's due through
the date of departure.
And so madam chair what about a
scenario for under a you know a
month to month tenancy for
example
and let's say rent is due on the
first of every month so January
fifteenth.
I decide I'm just vacate the
premises under the law I would
be I would not only January rent
but February rent as well is
that correct.
I don't know that I could say
what you will in that situation
madam chair representative madam
chair can explain why.
Depends on the reasons madam
chair representative depends on
the reason for departure I'm I
don't know okay Madam let's
assume that the tenant the
landlord is and is not in breach
lease there's no abatement
there's no other issues the
tenant participate Kate's
without notice middle month.
Does the and didn't pay
January's rent.
Does the ten January February
right in that scenario.
Chair representative if I were
the owner I'd so I would make
that claim in court.
And madam chair does the law
currently support that there.
I think a judge would we might
awarded we awarded.
Madam I agree so my question
then is under that scenario what
you're saying is that I as a
landlord to keep rent general
one through generate fifteen.
But if I fail to send out the
thirty day item is ation I could
not keep rent for January
sixteen through generate thirty
one nor federal one through Feb
twenty is that correct.
I'm not sure I'd.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure if I'm gonna say yes or
no to that I think that sounds
like a good theory the manager a
no I'm this is making
substantive changes to law.
I think we we need to understand
because that that's just in our
that comes actually quite
regularly in my experience where
you have a tenant on a month
monthly lease and they pay Kate
without notice middle month
And so you have you have the
scenario where the landlord up
until this point.
they absolutely have to put in
at thirty to Ms ation letter if
they're going to the doctor
repairs maintenance cleaning.
Up to this point you don't have
to deduct are put in the thirty
day I'm musician letter the non
payment of rent.
And what we're saying is now you
have to and so I think we need
to have an understanding of what
what exactly do I have to put in
a thirty day activation.
Do I have to include the fifteen
days for us to January and all
February in order for me to
deduct that from the deposit.
Madam chair representative I
think the thought here was the
the requirement to give a bill
within thirty days is extremely
low threshold and owners no
we're in the business they know
what they're going to charge
when the tenant moves out so put
it in the item I statements and
thirty days it's quite easy to
do and very few owners Phil to
do it but some do.
Madam chair is a yes.
I'm not sure what the question
is not about Madam the question
is do I have to put the fifteen
days plus the next month and
item is ation letter.
Yeah Madam chair representative
you have to put which your
charging the in the item is item
is ation.
Madam chair and that would
include if I'm going to the
doctor for those misprints
correct correct okay.
So Madam my understanding
resources that away the reason
why the courts carved out that
exception it's not because
there's an absence of statutory
authority it's that these are
objective numbers right so if
I'm a tenant I understand what
my monthly rent is that's in my
contract with you.
I don't know what the cleaning
costs are I don't know what the
repair costs are those are
squishy numbers and I think
landlords can abuse those and I
and they do at times.
But when it comes to rent owed
late fees and utility bills
those are objective numbers so I
I don't agree that landlords are
sophisticated across the board I
think when you talk about
corporations that own multi unit
apartments yes they definitely
are.
But in my experience at least in
small town America you have a
landlord who owns one house they
probably live in the house for
twenty years.
And now they decided they need
some supplemental income in
retirement and so they buy
another house to move into that
and they rent out their previous
single family residence and you
know in my little small town law
practice you'd be surprised at
what mom and pops do when
they're trying to rent these
things out and so the idea that
I think everybody is aware of
this that you have to send out
the item is ation letter because
they'd missed rent and they
vacated without telling you I
would submit you're gonna take a
lot of people off guard with
this so I'm just wondering
what's the underlying rationale
when the court said if it's
objective like non pay rent it's
not a surprise the tenant why do
you need additional letter in
order for the landlord to
withhold.
Madam chair representative I
have a personal story about this
as a landlord where I had a
tenant that I withheld briefly
thank you madam chair where I
withheld the the th.
The deposit because of the
repairs that needed to be done
and because of the late payment
of friends and that was all
itemized within a list I mailed
that letter to the tenant who
moved out and then that tenant
came back with a summons to go
to court.
They went to court improved that
the I needed to have repairs and
that it was for unpaid rent and
the court and awarded me funds
for that unpaid rent and for the
repairs in addition to what I
had put into this statement and
purvey provided exhibits for and
so not expecting pretty much
anything at that point actually
ended up getting a benefit of
that and in being able to go to
court and have that position so
in all fairness this creates an
ability for both sides to
present that case and to be able
to create the itemized list so
that's in the law.
Madam chair so I mean what we
say that's.
When we say that's in the law I
mean what what's in the laws you
gonna put an item is ation
letter the the damages the
cleaning the the soft number so
that way if you're gonna drive
the tenant has notice of that.
It's not a law currently is that
you also to include rent and non
payment of rent and so I'm just
afraid then sure that we're
putting you know essentially a a
mine field in the statute that I
think are.
Are unsophisticated bomb pops
are in understand so.
I think rate seven times when
bad faith in knowing I think
that's been flushed out.
Page thirteen.
So.
On the on the subject to
retaliation.
Madam chair there there's a
section in here that we're
introducing that I I have a lot
of concern with so I understand
that if you do any of these
laundry lists described in
paragraph two.
and then as a result.
You you know you threaten to
bring an action for possession
or decrease services that make
sense to me increases rant I
think beyond the way that you
could justify subject really
that makes sense to me to call
that retaliation
Serving notice of termination
that makes sense to me as a
basis for
retaliation the madam chair what
I struggle with is now we're
introduced this concept refusing
to renew a rental agreement.
So in that context you have a
contract between the parties.
It has a specific term.
That term is expired.
I as the landlord have a
contractual right to either
enter into that agreement again
or not.
And so madam chair what I'm
concerned with is now if we
introduce the mere fact of me a
me refusing to re enter into a
contract that expired with you.
As a basis for retaliation.
Can you explain to me why we're
introducing that Khan concept in
the law.
Madam chair representative this
reply to the situation one
person one of a one year lease
and the of the of the landlord a
seven day notice to fix the heat
it's not working and the
landlord says how there you
asked me to fix the I'm not
going to renew your lease just
as a letter is not
is not allowed to fail to renew
the lease because of the tenants
race the tenants disability
it seems fair to of not allow
the tenant the landlord not
renew the lease because the
tenant in case and protective
activity to request repairs
under the informant reservations
Act madam chair I guess the
biggest question fairly who.
I mean we we agreed to enter a
contract for a specific term
right and now that terms expired
or soon to expire as long as I
comply with the notice
requirements built into the
lease
or I mean even worse let's say
we the one year leases expire in
our operation a month to month
tenancy
I mean what's the time frame for
this I've in my allowed ever to
not renew under a month to month
tenancy
Madam chair representative six
months okay madam chair so again
that concerns me that we're
going to force landlords into a
contract for the not otherwise
required to be part of that and
I would submit that's a new
concept within the loft.
That I don't think we'll be.
well received and then madam
chair just a question of
language on page fourteen.
So.
If the tenant.
Isn't this is the subparagraph
all I.
All the maybe three numbers age
now.
If the tenant
Request a reasonable
accommodation for disability
and.
I'm assuming the context here's
either was denied or the
landlord.
was not happy about the request
but when heading complied.
regardless is that the context
here with the retaliation claim.
Madam chair representative yes
so madam chair I just wonder
when we when we talk about we
use the word requests.
it seems to me a better.
Language should be if the if the
ten something like the tenant
was entitled to a reasonable
cost accommodation but was
denied
Or was entitled to and received
either one but the more act
making a request in and of
itself should not be enough if
I'm not entitled to the
accommodation and the way this
is written right now I think the
request is enough.
So am I missing something here.
Madam chair representative I
mean we're getting in line with
federal law and being able to
ensure that those are those
accommodations are made for
those under the special
circumstances disability
being that that is the federal
standard that we're trying to
meet the request made based on
that federal standard is what
we're trying to protect the
chair and again I to me it's if
the tents entitled to original
combination that accommodations
denied.
Next complete sense of the ten
is entitled to accommodation and
even if it's given but we're not
talking about that we're talking
about making a request and and
if that happens whether entitled
to or not.
And the landlord decides not to
renew the lease I think based on
the plain language of this bill
that would be a basis for
retaliation.
Chair representative correct to
the idea is to to give the
tenant of protection give them
comfort to make the request so
if you enter decides to not
renew the tendency for other
reasons
that's okay but if Unisys I
don't like you making this
request whether the request is
ultimately
for tutor not
the owner is forbidden from
thank you under this language.
I'm sure that actually is.
It's troubling to hear that
answer.
because if they're not entitled
to the request.
For the not entitled to the the
accommodation.
And the more act making the
request now prohibits me from
renewing the lease otherwise I'm
subject to retaliation I think
that's a dangerous concept so
again I think this language
needs to be that they're
entitled to the request.
Are entitled to the
accommodation and the request is
made if you divorce those two
concepts I think that's that's
dangerous ground so madam chair
you don't is the I think we've
gone over this ground.
And so madam chair and this is
the last piece that I'll ask
question on just so.
The.
Under the amended bill it's
forty five days under so the
time frame what what's the time
frame under current law without
this bill.
From the notice of nonpayment
to.
when when a tank can be removed.
Chair representative twenty days
twenty eight maximum.
So madam chair for.
Introducing about three and a
half weeks.
Twenty twenty five additional
days.
Madam so.
Again I think that just
highlights for the central issue
with the bill is.
We have the state were many of
our rentals are single family
residence.
not owned by major corporations
many of these these rules are
have mortgages catch them.
And we extend out the.
it for non payment from.
Twenty days to now a month and a
half and then you tack on the
fact scenarios there's there's
actually thirty days a non
payment that led up to that
notice of nonpayment somehow
Representative seventy five days
two and a half months.
Of non payment.
Plus the expense report and the
the stress of all that I just
think it's it's frankly going to
exacerbate the rental problem
not help it so a manager with
that I'll I will stop asking
questions thank you thank you
any other questions happy to
entertain a motion.
Motion for do passed
Representative Chasey we have a
second.
Second second.
We call the roll please.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez Representative
McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert no.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm the next
one.
Representative Penske.
Yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Would you like to explain your
vote Representative Madam chair
when this past last year I at
Senator constituents called me
to
have a rental properties just
you know forty around just how
like Representative one said you
know that low income coming in
and they said it is good and so
hard to go and ran we've got to
increase our deposit so much in
the course of market which I
they just said we're done we're
gonna sell just and what it did
or what it act exacerbated is
the market to rant for winter
state actually go to so I think
you need to consider in this the
as you make this longer to go in
for someone out your job some of
the people are just getting out
of the market and supporting the
people you're trying to help
thank you madam chair you're
welcome.
So we have a title.
Thank you Representative thank
you.
Next item.
Is.
Senate Bill.
One thirty three.
Welcome representatives.
Madam chair members of the
committee I missed you guys.
Okay who.
Okay.
Please proceed thank you very
much Representative Hernandez
and I are here to present Senate
bill one thirty three this is a
bill.
That puts them restrictions on
selling catalytic converters
we have seen a sharp increase of
catalytic converter theft in the
state people with the medicals
and go to sell them to
Recycling plant for the rare
earth minerals and metals that
are in catalytic converters.
And this is just strengthens the
requirements of proof of
ownership for the sales on this
catalytic converters to go
through and if you will allow me
a small point of personal
privilege some of you've heard
the story before
you might say will
Representative and in order to
the sounds a bit like a crime
bill what are you doing on it
well my father was an engineer
at General Motors in the
seventies is actually on the
team that developed the
catalytic converter so this as a
very personal meaning for me and
Representative Hernandez if
there's anything you'd like to
and so
I'm in.
For those of us that live in the
metro area we've seen a sharp
increase in catalytic converters
getting stolen
and it's not cheap and usually
is not something covered by
insurance we have I mean it
because in order to in two and
three thousand dollars per
vehicle each time I want to
resist and analytics wealthier
parts in and it takes awhile to
get labor and so it's it's a
real big problem we just
recently heard a story of a
person who was killed by being
run over by a vehicle while they
were in the process of suing
catalytic converter so it's not
just stealing it it's now
turning to lives lost and
everything else so
Twelve to send food and with
that we stand for questions.
Thank you before we go to the
the committee let's go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in support of the bill
wishing to speak please raise
your hand okay.
We will do that.
Find a thank you to keep your
comments to.
Ninety seconds and
keep it free for if you can
thank you.
I just want to.
Yes Sir.
Madam speaker members committee
my name is deputy chief Matt
rooms New Mexico state police
department public safety we
stand support of the bill thank
you.
You madam chair members of the
committee had was going to with
the circle of you're gonna
chapter representing a thirty
five thousand members I'll be
really really brief we support
this legislation to help the
skirts a robbery of catalytic
converters hybrid vehicle
catalytic converters require
more precious metals to function
properly and this and they're
more subject to theft so we
support this piece of
legislation thank you thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee that Douglas
Michael Chun my wife and I own
two previous automobiles and the
catalytic converters were stolen
off of both of them in one night
anything that you can do to make
it less profitable for people
additional catalytic converters
would be very much appreciated
thank you.
Have a good afternoon thank you
madam chair members of the
committee David Hotmail I'm
registered lobbyists for the
City of Albuquerque the City of
Albuquerque stands in strong
support of this bill the city
has tried to locally pass
ordinances to address this
significant problem in our
community it's a but it's a
problem throughout the state and
we're glad that the state is
taking action on it as well
thank you.
Madam chair committee members
arranged train Representative in
Representative The New Mexico
automotive dealers association
this is been a problem for the
dealers people literally
breaking into the back lots to
do these things so we definitely
support this bill thank you.
I would just like to address
some of the changes that were
made in the substitute in STC.
I'm.
It's
amended the document to require
that secondhand metal dealers
upload any intake of catalytic
converters they have to the
database within two days of
receipt and also sorry
transferring to when you say a
substitute of the it was this
Judiciary substitutes so it was
done in on this.
I'm sorry sorry I apologize
you'll in front of us renewable
no okay we're just going with
the things that the Senate
Judiciary just.
That we're going to if I'm not
sure you need to do that yeah
yes.
Just to be added that with the
time frame of improvement from
the secondhand metal dealers
that to upload to the database
if that would have been helpful
in your regional presentation.
And that was the okay so as the
questions Representative a cone
and then.
Let's do that so this is the
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
thirty three.
Usual to see a Judiciary
Committee substance.
Okay we have a motion
secretary the.
Seven.
Okay we have a motion.
Of a do pass on Senate Judiciary
substitute for Senate bill one
thirty three.
And it's it's seconded by
Representative Nibert the
company.
Do you want to be the second
chair I can switch and I don't
think you need.
Okay so seconded by
Representative Nyberg
Representative review do you had
your hand up okay
Representative Rehm yeah Madam
chair representative are these
the same criteria the.
For the metal recyclers.
I'm it is my understanding
representative madam chair that
yes the language that was
amended to the original.
Statute is just
The knowing of what is a state
knowingly purchased or otherwise
receive was the only language
added to the original statute
regarding receipt of recycled
metals and then subsection D. on
page three is the new language
specific to receipt of catalytic
converters that there's
something more than that texter.
Sure and the
Representative.
Explained what the high cost is
in the catalytic.
What makes the.
So
madam chair and representative
so in most catalytic converters
the high value precious rare
earth whatever you would like to
call them our plan which we all
know expensive radium.
And or rhodium
And so what they're doing is
they're stealing on to the end
of our secular getting three
four five hundred dollars for
and then you have to pay to
replace it at a cost of you know
for five times that.
That's the that's really what's
at.
The
experts of.
The manager were have a lot of
problems.
the LFC
New Mexico.
One person gets a
good one of the other person
gets under our it solves all.
Thank you.
Representative if I may cite not
actually no we're trying to move
our kids together come.
There is a problem we get it.
So let's try to move along okay
so anyone else on in the
committee wishing
Madam or have a question sure
Representative read madam chair
Representative sorry I'm kind of
I never heard of one of these
things the end of us I was
asking her a lot of questions.
Again no one drives a Prius in
Clovis so.
I I just know what this is
secondhand metal dealer Madam
chair representative this Madam
chair representative so in the
metro area you drive down on
south Broadway and there is
about a mile of used cars that
are crushed and they take parts
from an the by metals copper
anything like this that they can
either sell the parts or sell
the
metal to someone who that melted
down and makes it into something
else
they're not everywhere we don't
have one in Rio Rancho but I
drive I am on my way everyday to
work so that's that's
essentially what it is is they
take in scrap metal and then a
salad or melted and sell it use
it to make other things Madam
chair representative like a
recycling plant laid off
hundreds for wired yes same
thing yes all right it's just in
statute sorry madam chair and
representative has to be called
in statute it's called the
whatever whatever you said it
was there that the second hand
metal recycle yeah so that's
basically recycling the way that
they recycle used metal okay
thank you madam chair
Representative.
Thank you anyone else.
Okay we have a motion before us
made by Representative upon
seconded by Representative read
funding divers
would you call the roll please
thank you madam chair
representative of Oakland.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Penske yes.
Adam vice chair.
Madam chair yes madam chair with
a vote of ten yess you have a do
pass on Senate judiciary
Committee sub for Senate bill
one thirty three as amended okay
we're on house House Bill.
Thank you guys.
we're on house bill.
Fifteen before we okay was
Senator Duhigg is here and I'm.
Hey we have some orders.
There is no sweat
before we go to before we go to
the sponsor I wanna just the
spoke Senator Duhigg.
I'm here to do Senate bill forty
three before we do one eighty
either one way I think they're
going to questions about one
eighty and forty three and.
That build on and then moved to
the wells.
Well.
Fortunately I don't have to
explain those kinds of changes
so.
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair so this is this bill
essentially fixes the
unfortunate circumstance in
federal law that we can't meet
with our state law where
immigrant children who are
subject to abuse and neglect
currently counts seek a
basically an asylum or of these
in order to be able to gain
protection if they are over the
age of eighteen federal law
allows it to go up to twenty one
and right now that's all we're
trying to do is match federal
law to be able to have that
protection and with that madam
chair my experts Jessica
Martinez is here jewel just
introduce ourselves.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my
name's Jessica S. Martinez and
I'm an immigration attorney in
New Mexico immigrant law center
and I'm also one of the board of
directors of the immigration law
section of the state bar I work
in this particular intersection
of federal and state law as an
attorney in the children's unit
and miles C. H. B. fifteen as as
the sponsor mention is a
straightforward bill H. B.
fifteen aims to correct a gap in
New Mexico state law by aligning
with federal law special
immigrant juvenile status or for
short S. I. G. S. is a unique
form of humanitarian relief that
allows immigrant children that
cannot reunify with one or both
parents due to abuse neglect or
abandonment to obtain lawful
permanent immigration status as
required by federal law the
state court's role in the SHHS
process is to make factual
determinations for S. I. at S.
I. G. as eligibility I've
provided a little handy dandy
quick want to step so for you to
just see the the step process we
as in the state of New Mexico
have authority under step one of
the process which is the courts
have a we have authority to
actually make the findings of
abuse abandonment or neglect or
under a similar basis understate
law
currently New Mexico has an age
deadline of eighteen years of
age and the federal law permits
states to go up to the age of
twenty one so long as our state
law reflects that in statute
so basically yes I just
classification bill would expand
the state court jurisdiction
deadline of twenty one to align
with the federal statute for
context examples of youth that
qualify for special immigrant
juvenile status unaccompanied
migrant children who have left
terrible violence extreme
poverty and have have left
unstable governments there also
immigrant children who have
lived in New Mexico for years
that have faced dramatic
situations such a separation of
family issues.
Homelessness housing instability
and hardships all personal lived
experiences of each of these
immigrant children is unique but
what they have in common is that
they have a need for immigration
relief so they can no longer
fear deportation and so that we
can provide them an opportunity
to feel safe and secure and
ultimately this will improve
their overall well being the
passage of H. B. fifteen will
make New Mexico the eighteenth
state to align with the federal
law and provide positive
generational change for
qualifying immigrant children
I'm here to provide any
clarification and answer your
questions thank you again for
your time.
Thank you before we go to the
committee will go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Those wishing to speak in
support please raise your hand.
Okay.
Could start over here and.
Ninety seconds please.
I won't take that long Diane the
cash I think this is really
important as people approach
eighteen and things are delayed
I think that's a mistake and I
think that we definitely should
go with the higher age in that
would be lot more fair.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Michelle Maria it community
organizer in Albuquerque New
Mexico I'm testifying in support
of HB fifteen I found out about
the S. IDA when I was part of
the screening unfortunately I
was already nineteen and was
knowledgeable anymore in other
hand my brother this of me his
application at they before he
turned eighteen and did qualify.
I was not able to apply for it
because of me nine million it
existed and Museo paternity to
have more opportunities and have
a pathway to citizenship in the
future and I'm sure many young
people thank me have no clue
SHAC exist Mexico will become
the thirteen state support in
SAAC I know as an undocumented
woman of color that they are
very limited pathways to
citizenship this is one of them
so please let's stop putting
barriers through our community
and support or anything you have
to New Mexico thank you thank
you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Brian I'm a
lot of eleven I'm an organizer
with the New Mexico Dream Team I
have lived in New Mexico for
nine years I didn't fully
understand what being
undocumented wasn't all with
eighteen and entered a plea for
colleges and scholarships but I
couldn't because of the lack of
a social security number.
I just had a very limited work
opportunities where I would be
underpaid and overworked at this
age I was already too late to
qualify for the S. ideas program
I'm currently twenty years of
age and at this important
proposal passes I would have
been able to qualify for a
second time New Mexico simply
need so much federal legislation
at a federal level is ITX cases
are accepted until twenty one
years of age now I turned twenty
one next month and I don't want
any other any other immigrant
youth The New Mexico like myself
to lose out on this opportunity
twice that would have better my
life an opportunity to not only
opens a lot of new doors but
also works as a better way to
citizenship in the future I
deserve this opportunity the
immigrant youth in New Mexico
also the services opportunity we
owe it to them thank you madam
chair members of the committee
for your time today thank you.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is Naomi
Valdez I'm the director of
public policy at the ACLU of New
Mexico we stand and stand in
strong support of this
legislation not only is it
common sense and will bring us
up to par in terms of the
federal statute but is also and
strong alignment with our values
and how we treat our immigrant
brothers and sisters thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is has many
defecate Reese and I'm a senior
policy attorney at the New
Mexico immigrant law center I am
in strong support of this bill
as as the New Mexico merit Law
Center and we strongly support
our colleague Jessica Martinez
and pushing for this change of
mon I would have been eligible
for special immigrant juvenile
status when I was younger and
unfortunately I did not learn
about this until I was nineteen
therefore I was undocumented
most of my life until I was
twenty six and it wasn't until I
was eligible for daca but I was
able to obtain a work permit and
protection from deportation as
you may know currently Dhaka is
under attack and in litigation
therefore knew you were eligible
for daca cannot currently apply
this is a very important type of
immigration relief for you who
would be eligible because their
abusers manager they collected
let us help more youth be
eligible for a pathway to
citizenship by making a bad
situation into a better one
thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in support.
Those online mission to speak in
support.
NM CLP.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is T.
Gonzalez from New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty and we think
the sponsor for this bill we
stand in support because young
people should have the same
opportunity in life no matter
their circumstances we stand in
support of this legislation
because it creates a path of
opportunity for use who would
either by otherwise be excluded
due to their immigration status
the bill makes a common sense
change to our law that aligns
with federal law to support the
health and wellness of young
people use to obtain SIG status
can access health care benefits
like Medicare and other
federally funded programs that
support their health and well
being providing full access to
S. I. G. S. maximizes the use of
these federal funds.
Senator assists SIG status
eligible youth access Medicaid
benefits and we have seen the
life changing impact that
obtaining the status has on use
expanding their opportunities
into adulthood for all these
reasons reasons we urge you to
pass on H. B. fifteen and we
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you for.
Jessica this popular thank you
thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Jessica with the argument I
am an immigration attorney with
some of the dreamers project and
I'm pleased for I. public
comment installs four H. B.
fifteen about half of our
organization.
Ensuring that this bill becomes
law is paired up and use of New
Mexico were often the most
vulnerable unfortunately due to
a lack of legal service
providers who specialize in
immigration law often when young
individuals present themselves
inquired about immigration
relief it is already too late by
matching the already existing
federal scheme we as a state can
insure that marginalize you have
an opportunity to access legal
protections that already exist
for them but are unable to
access due to the current
limitations in our law thank you
for your time consideration
thank you.
Jason Castro.
Jason.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jason castle of a community
organizer in Albuquerque New
Mexico I'm testifying in support
of house bill fifteen I found
out was a legible for SHS one
day before my eighteenth
birthday this is this was a huge
impact on my life cell is on
thanks amazing people from like
New Mexico immigrant law center
that contacted me they before
and help me out.
With my whole process now I'm
able to work travel go to
college and make my dreams come
true.
I know as a person that comes
within an document the
background that it's really hard
to grow because of the lack of
opportunities and resources for
our community.
One of the places that I would
love for them to be able to
qualify for SIG as as my sister
we can we have was also present
today in your committee.
And because of her age other
times to wasn't able to apply
for this program this is an
amazing opportunity that would
create a new mac that would that
would create new live
opportunities for many using New
Mexico just like it that to me.
This is the reason why I ask you
today the bass house bill fifty
the senior Mexico create
opportunities not chances for
yacht for our youth.
Thank you.
Thank you and lastly Ingrid or
den or dozens.
The grid so madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is in good are going yes I am an
educator in the south valley I
have been working with middle
school students and high school
students sense twenty seventeen
I am on SCG as recipient I was
able to apply when I was
eighteen years old and it
completely changed my life it
allowed me to be an educator and
come back and teach in my
community I think it would be
really important for a house
bill fifteen to house in order
for more people to have the
opportunity to give back to the
committee and
just have the opportunity to of
work and be free and to be able
to give back and so I urge you
to be able to pass HB fifteen
thank you so much
You thank you that concludes our
public comment period.
Any brief comments before we go
to Canadian center questions
chair very good we'll start with
Representative lane.
Thank you madam chair.
So madam chair.
Of page four of the bill.
I'm curious the.
If if the child is abandoned and
neglected who's the petitioner
in these kinds of cases.
Madam chair and representative
the petitioner is usually a
guardian a could be a kinship
guardian or usually up a single
parent usually for these types
of cases.
And madam chair
I guess.
I'm curious as for the need for
this is this to allow these
children to be able to qualify
for state services state
programs is it is along those
lines are what's the need for
the adjudicatory process.
Madam madam chair and chairman
Mr presented the the need of
this is that we already first
what we're is to be able to find
the determinations court
determinations of abuse
abandonment or neglect which is
at four under some a basis
understate law as required by
the federal statute we we are
within the first step which is
to get those findings the court
determines those findings and
then they can then apply with
the federal accretion agency for
status.
Madam chair so this is this is a
process for obtaining legal
status and it's not in other
words there these folks are
still entitled to receive state
services or they're not just out
on the street for example I'm
just trying to understand like
what what's the basis for this
and what is what's the end goal
that we're trying to make sure
it's accomplished.
Madam chair and representative
the end goal is to help them
have a pathway to achieve status
but it also protects them to be
able to have a legal guardian
for example so that they have
protections to be able to
further you know have a work
permit to it's not have
deportation to be able to
qualify for other protections
within our state as well but
these this basis of this statute
is just to have a streamlined
approach that we can actually
help get those determinations a
simpler.
And madam chair so it my
understanding is once you go
through this process and you
become independent of the court
and then what I understand from
that is is basically the point
the court point somebody with
legal authority to help in net
help you navigate the system and
to legally be able to act on
your behalf ensure miners that
correct.
Madam chair representative that
is correct and madam chair so
we.
Currently doing this process for
eighteen under were extended to
twenty one is that right.
Madam chair representative and
madam chair the and if I
understood The presentation
right the reason for the
extension in that age is because
that's what the feds are doing
currently is that right correct
chair for so Madam chair what.
We have as after age twenty one
we just I guess some people are
old enough to navigate the
system on their own
Madam chair representative
unfortunately that's the limits
of the state of the federal
statute twenty one is the cap
okay.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you madam chair just very
quickly this is consistent with
our children's code because we
have in recent years extend the
eligibility of youth who've been
in foster care to receive
services up to through age
twenty so the state it's not
just comply with federal law
that it is now consistent with
our children's code thank you
madam chair thank you
representative Representative
read.
Thank you madam chair
representative I just on page
five of Representative Lane
answered for us to the question
about dependent on the court I
had a question about that but
that was the answer
but madam chair representative
number two child is abused
neglected or abandoned or a
separate similar circumstances
Madam chair representative I'm
assuming this is probably stated
language in the code but could
you explain what that would
mean.
Suffered similar circumstances.
Medic madam chair representative
similar circumstances under
under the federal statute it
says that they would allow a
similar basis understate law in
similar circumstances or facts
that are similar to abuse
abandonment or neglect and so
that would have those facts
would have to align with those
definitions and would have to be
evidence that proves of
definitions and were to be met
under state law Madam chair
representative expert thank you
I'm and then I'll on page six
line to access interest of the
child is that the state madam
chair representative in line
with the definitions in that
code.
Current okay and then Madam
chair representative an expert
just down to line sixteen
liberal interpretation the
actual be liberally construed to
carry out its purpose Madam
chair representative could you
explain what that is.
Madam chair representative that
means that we are putting under
statute that we are going to
align with the federal statutes
so that we can ensure that the
intent is matched by what
Congress has a law authorized us
to do which is to protect abuse
in abandoned neglected children
within the state of New Mexico
Madam chair representative
expert so that's that aligns
with what's in the federal law
that that aligns with the intent
of federal law and you yes R.
and madam chair and
Representative an expert just
lastly in section six
find line twenty two provided
that the petition is subject to
denial or revocation by federal
immigration agency can you
explain that to me.
Madam chair representative yes
so think of section six as a
savings clause essentially there
is a it is a little complicated
but essentially there is an
exception with in chapter forty
which which which were adding
here that chapter forty allows
immigrant children currently
that are eighteen years old that
are still in high school to to
be dependent on the court and so
we've had immigrant children
that have been able to get the
requisite findings under court
order David Abbey apply to
immigration the immigration
federal agency that gives the
status and they've denied it
because our state law does not
reflect beyond eighteen eight
and so they didn't they they
obtained it eighteen and a half
nineteen and so what this does
is as long as we put in our in
our law that we are we want our
state law to be honored that
that immigrant child that was
denied and then appealed and got
the denial can then come back
and say Hey what we there's a
statute here we have allowed up
for our state is a lot for them
to be able to qualify at this
time okay thank you madam chair
Representative think question
thank you Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative will
this be the only statute which
we define child as being someone
between the age of eighteen and
twenty one.
Madam chair representative not
sure
Madam chair representative I I
believe our Y. know that there
is under under the children's
code beyond eighteen but this
would this definition we it
taken directly from the federal
statute to place in chapter
forty so this would be the only
one to my knowledge but it it
could exist but I know that
there's language that does go
beyond the age of eighteen.
Madam chair representative with
this.
The special category we're
creating.
Of.
Adults who would be treated
somewhat as miners it would be
limited to this application of
law would it not the current
share it and so I do have one
question you said that the
guardian or someone else will be
filing the petition but.
In our state anyone eighteen
years of age or over has access
to the courts so why can't the
person file their own petitions.
Madam chair representative as
you can see on page four on your
line line eighteen to twenty two
for for the purposes of special
program juvenile status they do
the petitioner which has to be
basically usually a guardian or
a parent in these cases because
it has to be in conjunction with
the petition for termination of
custody and care of a child and
so they would have to be
dependent upon the court
independency would mean that it
would be in certain type
situations that would require
them to go with a petition for
for example kinship guardianship
that would be a petition that
would have a guardian a
petitioner would have some type
of guardian or a parent for
custody purposes so because of
the dependency requirement it
would be hard to prove that
individual child could that
qualify on their own.
It just seems odd to me that
that a person who could avail
themselves of the court could
not avail themselves of the
court for that determination and
that they would have to go
through
a guardian or.
Thanks our parents would be
disqualified in many instances
here because you're.
They're supposedly the the
abuser so I I guess in most
instances you would have a third
party person having step in
those shoes but it just seems
odd to me that they could not
avail themselves of the same
determination of through our
court system
we're here to answer madam madam
chair representative there could
be an argument to be made which
I may argue if through this pass
hopefully that emancipation
should qualify
so I think it could be just
could construe that way which is
why the leading petitioners
important because that opens the
possibility for for other types
of cases.
And Madam chair representative I
understand that.
Some of the effort in crafting
this bill was to
deal with federal supremacy
issues could you maybe explain
what some of those were and how
you crafted this legislation to
avoid that application Madam
chair representative we there
were no federal there were no
supremacy issues to to begin
with because this this is a
federal statute that authorizes
us to grant these determinations
and so essentially because
Congress has already spelled out
that they have authorize us to
do so we are within within our
authority under this under that
statute as well as how they
define what a juvenile court is
to be district courts of New
Mexico for example to make these
determinations we are within our
authority under state law as
well as federal of.
Madam chair and representative.
Most states have.
An eighteen year old the age of
majority.
And so the.
Certainly New Mexico's not
unique in this have other states
passed similar laws and and the
is this crafted may be in line
with some of what some other
states have done well maybe some
of the other states Madam chair
representative thank you for
that question there are a total
of seventeen states that have
already aligned with the federal
law here I will name them off
Washington Oregon California
Nevada Colorado Minnesota
Illinois Maine New York
Massachusetts Connecticut New
Jersey Maryland why Virginia
Florida and Mississippi.
And with the application of
those laws have there been any
problems with the federal
government the
Given that status to these
individuals of that would
otherwise qualify.
Madam chair representative to my
knowledge no there have been no
issues because though these have
already aligned in terms of
jurisdiction up to the age of
twenty one.
Okay so really what this does is
it allows nineteen twenty.
Year old.
Immigrant children for calling
on that to secure benefits at
the federal government would
then allow under federal law and
it really doesn't affect their
majority status as an adult with
respect to any other law in the
state of New Mexico would that
be an accurate observation on my
for yeah that would be
consistent okay.
Thank you madam chair
I.
I think of this legislation if
it to provide some benefit to
those students probably a good
situation so thank you
Representative Penske.
Madam chair it's like to make a
motion for a do not pass on
House Bill fifteen and a do pass
on House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House fifteen.
We have a motion for a do not
pass on house Judiciary
Committee what a excuse me a do
not pass on house bill fifteen
but I do pass on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifteen made by
Representative Sapan ski and
seconded by speaker Martinez
Madam chair yes question do we
do we do not pass a bill that
was never from us in the first
place if it's not our
substitute.
In because it's a dummy Bill
situation.
this with with my posters that
those a Senator.
We actually they're called chair
bills right hello.
So
Teligent bill so I have thank
you.
I think the rule is if you make
the motion you don't speak so
Representative leader Martinez.
Thank.
You can.
Yes correct but we have some
other people still on the list
so you Representative leader
Martinez you were on the are you
just a second okay all right
cool sorry about that
Representative every thank you
madam chair and
of Representative I'm trying to
kind of understand you know so
it's an eighteen to twenty year
old we go to page six and winds
two to four so.
We you know at eighteen year old
could make the decision.
What they wanna do
of it when I see the language
here do we even contact their
parents and save.
Do you have any feeling or your
eighteen year old so you make
the decision.
Matt Madam chair representative
can you repeat your question you
madam chair and experts so when
you go to page six we go to
wants to to for
so you're eighteen to twenty one
basically you can make a
decision whatever you want to do
you know you want to stay here
or or whatever.
and we don't contact the parents
of that child.
Madam chair representative it
under this premise that this
would mean that the child would
be dependent this trial would be
dependent upon the court in the
circumstances if they qualify
for this particular sense but in
terms of the process parents are
always given notice that there's
a hearing against them always.
Okay and.
Madam.
Madam chair at it do we have an
estimate of how many.
How many of these are because on
page sixty of one twenty it's
going to why retroactively.
Madam chair representative in
terms of the retroactive
application we're looking at a
handful that would meet that
criteria because again the
savings because they have to
have been denied an application
at the U. S. C. I. S. level the
federal agency that gives the
status then they have to have
exhausted all of all of the the
exhaustion argument which is
they have to appeal it then also
be denied the appeal at that
point be based on the law
passing then they would have the
remedy to go back and say though
it'll state law now reflects the
age up to twenty one so those
would be just a handful if that
that would be able to meet the
that criteria for section six
does that answer your question
up madam chair yes I'm I'm
trying to figure we don't have
an FIR so I'm trying to figure
out the universe that we're
talking about.
Madam chair and representative
so just for the sake the section
of road traffic at retro
application which is section six
that would be a handful of
immigrant youth that would meet
that criteria in terms of the
overarching purpose of this bill
there it that the amount would
be not determinable because a
lot of times we we end up as we
end up finding out who qualifies
through you know medical
professionals teachers rural
communities and we we meet with
families and children and that
that point we identify that they
may qualify do a full on
assessment of a consultation and
then we realize that they
qualify and that's why we're
finding that a lot of immigrant
children that are eighteen come
to us and say I'd like to work
I'd like to go to college and
then unfortunately knowing that
they would qualify under federal
law but unfortunately limits our
state law I have to tell them
they don't qualify and so that's
where we're trying to address
that gap I can't tell you an
exact figure I can say that
these are very specific cases
they have to meet all these
requirements and so it wouldn't
be very many that would qualify
but it would be meaningful for
those that do.
And madam chair and expert so
once they qualify are are we
providing services and they look
at your own or the being
assigned to a family.
Madam chair representative it's
all case by case depending on
the facts so what happens is
when we identify for example and
accompanied minor a lot of times
as a guardian already assigned
but they just haven't had the
legal status as a guardian so
then we help them obtain legal
legal guardianship of of the
child that is in a position of
needing stability at that point
we find that but peak because
there are some that have already
aged out we're finding that it's
harder to do that and they
there's no way we can do that
without this bill so that would
be one scenario in other
scenarios there immigrant
children that live here that
are facing homelessness or
something like that we help
identify other resources New
Mexico Law Center particularly
is is very proud that we are not
just a legal service provider we
actually provide holistic
services so we partner a lot
with medical professionals
social workers.
At in educators to try to
educate about the types of
facilities are available for
help assistance all of those
types of needs as well.
Okay thank you madam chair I I
was I was under the impression
most of them and I I thank you
said that are sent to relatives
you know and and help to get
over there thank you madam chair
thank you
I have a question and that is on
page six.
There's this line sixteen
through eighteen liberal
interpretation.
I'm not sure I've seen that
before and and our statutes
what's prompted you to put that
in in our and this bill madam
chair and and Representative I I
have seen this language in other
bills before for before the
legislature and this in
particular is is is in place so
that we make clear to the
federal to to the federal agency
that makes determinations that
under our statute that we are
making clear that we want to
align with the intent of federal
Congress which is to ensure that
we protect immigrant children
that are abused abandoned or
neglected and so this
essentially is in there so that
we make sure that they they
understand our intent behind
this legislation.
I have some concerns about that
because.
You know truthfully this will
give you some trouble I'm sure
in the Senate.
I can just I know how Senate
Judiciary operates that I do not
believe that this would you know
that they would be taking this
out Madam chair representative I
I have spoken to several
senators that said that the that
the believe that this will will
succeed because I've seen this
and they've actually for some of
them have also said that you
know that this is passed several
times and other types of
legislation just I just happen
to know Senate Judiciary operate
citations they probably weren't
senators on Senator Judy on
Senate Judiciary it's my
recommendation.
Consider taking that I won't
hold off.
I can tell you it will hold the
bill up if you go forward with.
Permit chair representative no I
sincerely appreciate your your
triggering of of this language
it was a few senators from
Senate Judiciary particular that
said to leave the language in.
I don't think we need to have an
argument about that I'm giving
you some advice that I would
suggest you might want to follow
up on Representative so if
there's no other a quick
discussion would you call the
roll please thank you madam
chair Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Speaker Martinez yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes.
Madam chair with ten test is you
have a do not pass on house bill
fifteen and a do pass on House
Judiciary Committee sub for
House Bill fifteen.
Thank you thank you thank you
thank you.
So I would like to move to help
Senate bill forty three and that
will be Senate bill one eighty.
I.
My phone.
Office.
Senator.
Thank you madam good this good
to see you if you could quietly
move those of you leaving.
Madam chair home that you are
spot on in your comments about
that language and.
Yeah
I think that you're right about
that.
Senator we're on Senate bill
forty three yes.
Thank you madam chair so under
current law if someone is a
voter or a washer or challenger
and hi someone seeks to
intimidate them you tries to
induce fear using threatened use
of force violence infliction of
damage harm or loss or any for
of economic retaliation for the
purpose of and PED in their free
exercise there finishes I would
like to franchise or the
impartial administration the
election code that is a fourth
degree felony what this bill
does is it extends those same
protections to the people who
are actually running our
elections the secretary of
state's office employees and
agents are county clerks are
municipal clerks and their
employees nations.
And with that I will stand for
questions and I have that are
secretary of state here to last
year.
Thank you for that brief
presentation homeless.
Let's go to the audience anyone
wishing to speak in opposition
the Senate bill forty three
please raise your hand.
You want online wishing to speak
in opposition please raise your
hand.
I see someone.
In a hard time reading J. O.
Jill UNM perhaps of.
The letters are hard to read.
Hello.
Jill you you need to and you.
Jill okay well I think we're
gonna need to move on those
wishing to speak in support of
the local.
Hello are you speaking in
opposition to the bill.
Opposition okay you have ninety
seconds.
Well be very proud
our opposition to this bill
since current law already is
extended.
to anybody work from election on
top of that.
it will open up a can of worms
for.
Are people just expressing your
opinions.
Are there be no the problem with
that most will action news.
Our people get instructed at the
polling places are not so
control worms are opening up if
you pass this bill thank you
thank you.
person name Siouxsie.
Susie.
Hello yes can you hear me yes.
Yes I am since the
Yes it is a pretty some claim to
I'm speaking to oppose this bill
so whenever it comes to are you
mentioned you know people have
questions I always have
questions and the so you can
make things like you know hi to
questions although not great but
the next office as as a crime
then last night yeah you open up
a whole
thank you what what is the
but I just do but they should
not that's become more dangerous
area there so again on yeah I'm
not I'm not speaking out opposed
this bill thank you thank you.
Those wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand okay
Richard Mason.
Dick Mason just then chairman of
the committee my name is Dick
Mason about elections directors
league of women voters New
Mexico the lady stands apart SB
forty three thanks to sponsors
for bringing it forward.
Long history of advocating for
legislation and systems that
allow all qualified voters to
participate in all elections
recently they have been attempts
to threaten election workers
naked photos off the coast of
all the participants election
administrators and workers
should be praised for their
contributions to democracy and
not directly so the extensions
transported SB forty three
energy to give it a do pass
thank you thank you Mr Mason.
Dr Amanda Lopez.
Hi good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee Amanda
Lopez ask in doing and county
clerk I also stand in strong
support of this bill I have been
personally threatened many many
times unfortunately in the past
several years and on some level
elected official I'm aware that
criticism you know.
Those kinds of things come with
what we do what I would like to
offer to election officials that
work for us that really offer
their time and you don't get
paid enough to do it and they
really are doing it to serve the
community that we offer a
comprehensive support
protections to them and that
would opt for them some hope we
encouragement and incentive to
continue to work with us we
literally could not run our
elections without our community
and anything that we can do to
support them and protect them I
believe we should do so I hope
you look forward thank you thank
you.
Calf Kathryn Clark.
Hello madam chair thank you
members of the committee I'm so
sorry my voice is it's Jennifer
season I'm the Santa Fe county
clerk I stand in strong support
of this bill
colleagues all over our country
ours are reporting just rights
and other threats that's a
lecture Fishel's I personally
have been followed by someone
who is strong believes Federal
Election as a method of
intimidation I've had a poll
worker presiding judge followed
within three inches of her
bumper as an attempt to
intimidate her and a colleague
and our state had his I was
docks on the internet and people
were
At submitting just rights to his
email on his phone number yet
change our own number and so
we're seeing this every day and
I and I hope that you will
consider voting thank you so
much thank you.
It is universities person name
Mason Graham.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Mason Graham
kamikaz New Mexico we have a
question strong support of this
legislation that's going to
continue to expand protections
for county clerk someone Nina
school clerks as well we would
want an election protection
program here in New Mexico where
we have volunteers trying to
find the acts of intimidation it
happen at the polls but as we
all know that these accidents
imitation and threats are going
beyond that at this point so I
want to thank the sponsor again
for doing this important work
and just want to echo all the
reasons that you've just heard
thank you.
Thank that concludes our public
comment period any concluding
comments Senator before we go to
committee no mentor look for to
the discussion okay great
Representative McQueen.
Madam chair I would move it to
pass when you're ready.
I will be ready at some point
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair of.
My questions are probably more
with respect to the existing
statutes but
I appreciate the expansion of
the coverage of the intimidation
statutes but I just wonder why
when you were looking at this
you did that.
Change the standard between the.
Inducing the actual act verses
the attempting to induce the
same light two different to
different actions and frankly
ought to have the in most of our
criminal statutes have two
different
Sets of penalties associated
with them but yet in this
statute.
It's a fourth degree felony for
both and so I since we're making
changes I wonder why that wasn't
a part of the changes we're
seeing.
Madam chair and senator Madam
chair representative this is a
discussion I had with
Representative Rehm as well
you're right usually an attempt
is is is treated differently
than I completed violation
But it appears to me that it was
the policy of the state that
when it comes to elections that
both retaken equal taken
seriously on an equal basis
I think because.
This is.
Because of the even the the
attempts to intimidate can have
such a fundamental impact on
someone's.
Someone exercising their
fundamental right to vote
so I I understood that to be the
policy of this body from back
when this was first enacted I
can't even remember when it was
a long time ago and and I that
policy made sense to me and so
we continue to.
Sep and again the expansion of
the people who would be
protected if you will by the
Mended language to the statute
of it's only in connection with
their roles with respect to a
specific.
Alexion is that not it's not
just you know I wouldn't do this
but threatening us the secretary
of state on our way down the
hallway have nothing to do with
the election that would not
subject me to the penalties in
this statute at the related to a
specific election of them would
it not Madam chair
representative yes you have to
be specifically trying to keep
that person from at their free
exercise of of elective
franchise or in part impartial
administration of the election.
Again madam chair center of.
Four degree felony that's a
that's a felony act I think it's
serious
punishment for engaging in this
type of behavior I I wonder if
we ought to have maybe some sort
of misdemeanor for the
attempt the failed attempt if
you will of inducing fear but
the madam chair that's all the
questions I think.
Representative Lang.
Thank you madam chair.
Of so madam chair as I read the
statute it expands I think the
class of really employees that
this protects is that right.
Madam chair representative it
definitely spans the universe of
people that the supplies to
absolutely to to so that it's
applying to our actual the
people actually running the the
election.
madam chair because otherwise I
think it's it's more focused on
for the both the board the
challenger the watcher I don't
know that it's groups and all
the.
All the governmental employees
it seems like this would do
that.
One Madam chair representative
it's groups in all of them if
this is done against them to
prevent their impartial
administration the election cuts
so if if there's a janitor at
the secretary of state's office
and someone and you know is
threatened use of force against
the janitor again having nothing
to do they don't think that this
person runs the election they're
not trying to interfere with
their impartial administration
the election it would not and
that apply to the janitor in
that case now if they did think
that the janitor was run in the
election and they're trying and
their intent was to prevent them
from doing so that it could
apply to the janitor.
Madam chair representative in
the language changes make sense
to me is there something that
was there at this for this were.
I'm seeing.
What what what cost.
Madam chair representative there
is been a market increase in
threats intimidation against
election administrators
throughout the country and here
in New Mexico since the twenty
twenty election including our
secretary of state being doxxed
I believe.
so madam chair I guess the.
The inducing attempt induce fear
would would capture.
Because as I understand doxing I
think that's like online is that
how that works.
Madam chair representative yes
with the intent to.
Encourage individuals to.
Commit acts of violence against
me and and other election
officials who were on the
website there was at.
Six point bounty being collected
for the payment the potential
payment to folks to commit acts
of violence against us madam
chair and representative.
Okay yeah what thank you madam
chair those my questions.
Any other questions
Representative of Oakland.
You madam chair okay this kid to
ask this question because I know
that has got all the way to the
Senate floor and to facilities.
Of our or another eight doesn't
seem right to me when I'm
looking at page twenty.
Exist including attempting to
induce fear in.
The secretary.
The proposed to be up on or on
how does the word is an
interpreted in their.
And and Madam chair
representative that's that's
existing language so it would
have read otherwise in the.
The the member of the the
election board voters the
calendar isn't in the you will
in the member of.
The use of the institution
troops within their own.
Okay thank you madam chair does
that make sense to me.
And I don't know what's going to
happen here.
the object I think.
What would you make is motion
I'll connect you madam chair I
move it to pass on central for
three.
Second so we have a a do pass
motion on Senate bill forty
three made by Representative
McQueen second by leader Chasey
now we'll go to Representative
Rehm yes madam chair and the
good senator and I have already
spoken about the tempting I I I
really think we need to change
that but madam chair and madam
secretary on the internet of
threats did you contact the Feds
okay because they have
jurisdiction thank you madam
chair thank you anyone else
to call the roll please thank
you madam chair Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Speaker Martinez this.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Penske yes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with ten test is you
have a do pass on Senate bill
forty three thank you have a do
pass now we'll go to Senate bill
one eight election change Senate
bill one eight.
Thank you madam.
I just I can't be quite as fast
with the intro on this one.
And I'll do my best and manager
this is a bill that that
probably looks awfully familiar
to everyone because I you saw
this is just a pared down
version of Senate bill six from
last year
And the.
The I'm just this is a really
long Madam chair some I'm gonna
hit the high points and I assume
we can get into more nitty
gritty in the discussion if
you'd like to.
Some of the most critical
changes in SB one eighty that
have been identified as critical
for account for the county
clerk's is moving the date to
reopen the registration box
right now it's thirty five days
after the election this moves it
to the Monday after the county
campus.
Increasing the cap on what
clerks can pay poll workers on
election day right now it's two
hundred dollars this moves it to
four hundred dollars which is
essential both for that
recruitment entertainment of
poll workers also that these
people are working really long
hard days we want to make sure
they are adequately pay for
doing that.
it's reinstates sometime ones
that have this body adopted in
twenty twenty for absentee
ballots being sent out so that
we can make sure their timely
delivered to voters and get back
to the county clerk in times of
the all those votes are counted
and it also clarifies the
interplay between public records
elections and protecting our
national critical election
infrastructure as well as voters
personal information so that
we're balancing public access
with our election security and
our constitutionally protected
right to secrecy of the ballot.
And I mentioned that some of
this is adopting some stuff from
twenty twenty for absentee
ballots the time lines was one
but there's a number of other
security measures that were
temporarily adopted and for that
election that are made permanent
here things like having people
use the last for their social
security number as their ID
rather than their year of birth
and and name and address because
it's pretty easy to find that
information out but it's a lot
harder to find out last four
some of social security number I
also providing for secure pre
processing of mail ballots by
county clerks staff giving
voters an opportunity to cure
errors if there that sums but
got messed up on that outer
envelope and setting reasonable
working hours for the people who
are handling those ballots so
that they're not working late
into the night when we're all
likely to make more mistakes
another twenty twenty temporary
fix that this makes permanent is
establishing voter convenience
centers in every county which
was very successful twenty
twenty and has been friends ever
since two thousand eleven when
we started with the C. C. is
this bill also make sure that
vote tabulating tabulators those
machines that the all the
ballots are run through our
checked after every general
election that we have after
three statewide elections thank
you statewide election right now
it's only after every general
election this to make after
every statewide election which
effectively means every year
because we have a statewide
election every year with local
election
this requires that a
notification mailer to be sent
to voters prior to every
elections they know all their
options to participate in our
democracy and it requires
mandatory training for
challengers and watchers which
will be conducted by the county
clerk's using curriculum and
resources provided by the
secretary of state so the in the
smaller counties where they
might not have the staff to
spare to put that training on on
bill simply have a video from
secretary of state that they can
find two washers and challengers
who kind of do a self service.
Training on that.
And finally there is a two two
more things
this bill makes permanent the
election security programs that
already exist and in this office
of the secretary of state but we
want to make sure it's there no
matter who happens to be in that
position
and finally in Senate rules
there was an amendment added by
Senator Moores that has the
secretary of state develop.
Voluntary opt in program for
elected and appointed officials
so that you can say I don't want
my home address publicly
available on election and
financial disclosure related
paperwork so it they have the
home address would still be on
that paperwork going to the
secretary of state but if
there's an April or if is put up
on the website it can be
redacted if the if if you opt
into that program.
That is a high points thank you
thank you madam secretary did
you want to add anything super
briefly madam chair and
representatives members of the
committee this's my office's
number one priority legislation
this session these changes are
absolutely necessary for the
conduct of elections and we
appreciate your support madam
chair and members thank you
let's go to the audience.
We have before we do that we
have a committee so sentiment
okay now we have amendment that
I'm aware of.
And madam chair if that's the
amendments
we are not moving that we do not
need okay.
Which meant.
We'll go to the audience those
wishing to speak in opposition.
Okay you have a microphone over
here ninety seconds please.
Good afternoon chair Chandler
and committee members my name is
Ramona goals be and I stand in
opposition of SB one eighty
during previous hearings this
bill is touted as just co to
provide changes that were made
in twenty twenty.
Not much to see here wrong
there's a lot to see here if you
haven't read this hundred and
seventy six page bill you should
there are ten new sections in
this bill along with amendments
to current law this should scare
you this bill is going to
severely restrict the rights of
people to audit and inspect our
elections and election process
in establishing it establishes
in Mexico the election security
program to further cover the
election system in secrecy not
security you may want to review
the recent extensive a news
article on the subject.
They are proud of the increased
audits in this bill I have
looked at the audits in the past
and I have concerns I have it
for the ballots for my precinct
which I can do currently I was
told they are unable to separate
ballots by precinct how do they
audit by precinct if they're not
able to separate the ballots out
by precinct because a voter
convenience centers you should
be asking why was a a sample
size so small if they what was
the sample size so small if they
really want a robust audit and
if you are going to use sample
size that small there should
have been zero errors but they
were errors found in the last
audit hype kannst I ask you to
consider this bill.
And with a do not pass thank you
so much thank you.
You madam chair and
representative my name is David
K. Lujan candor I am a concerned
New Mexican that strongly oppose
this bill.
New Mexico requires candidates
and elected officials to live in
that district to qualify for it
You Like It office the amendment
in this bill proposed to to keep
home addresses confidential now
I believe all of this you must
be state any potential political
retaliation however we need a
mechanism in place to ensure we
do not get grifters who you
through the political process as
a way to enrich themselves.
In order to ensure compliance I
think we verification must take
place C. address it in fact a
residential location that match
it with the N. B. D. licensing
and it is within the district
verification can be done by a
combination of bonded elected
official New Mexico B. B. A.
required to back with the name
change after the change I must
be available to the public with
the act to be tactic under.
The most disturbing thing about
this bill It is out major about
quarter profit via a show costs.
Schildkraut would be required to
get any action record that does
not comply compromise voter
identity what do you have to
hide.
This is where you will feel
immoral thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition Erin Clements.
Can you hear me yes I can't.
Thank you multiple polls have
confirmed that more than sixty
percent of the population do not
trust our election system as it
is right now this number is
growing and it contains people
from all parties this is a
crisis and all of you on this
committee should care about that
people have been crying out for
commonsense reform like voter ID
and getting rid of internet
connectivity pull books in the
state thousands upon thousands
of people in New Mexico have
contacted this legislature in
opposition to this bill the
complete failure of most of the
members of this legislature to
address these concerns is only
going to fuel an increase in the
distrust of our election system
that already exists this is not
just a pared down version of SB
six from last year has been
pared it over and over again
this bill has a dangerous
addition that we're move the
voted ballots in all election
records as being public record
and make ordinary citizens file
an ex expensive lawsuit if they
want to see any election
document for themselves and even
then they're not guarantee a
positive outcome they currently
have the right to see these
election documents just as a
public documents request Maggie
Toulouse Oliver lied to the
previous committee about this
fact and she stated nothing was
changing a ballots has been
pacified public documents please
do not be ma'am okay she
misstated the facts and.
I'm confronted.
Are you when confronted with our
the fact that this the law is
indeed changing us.
Stop.
Thank you Leri Sonntag.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee Leri Sonntag
I'm with the better together New
Mexico and you see group and as
previously mentioned we're aware
that you're in boxes have been
filled with thousands of New
Mexicans who are opposed to
Senate bill one eighty I know in
particular you that thirty six
thousand six hundred and twenty
six emails in opposition.
The bill has some positive
points but there are so many
flood areas to include section
twenty two F. the section eight
section takes away the right to
privacy and voting and does
nothing to stop third party apps
and develop requests section
thirty one B. there should be a
finite reason stated for any
rejected ballot and this
information should be available
for review ask for the record
have another example section
sixty two C. four and No time we
should have grants or funds from
outside of the government
involved in federal or state
elections should not be accepted
for the elections itself for the
of systems or for the election
equipment for these reasons and
others do not feel that this
would be positive for election
integrity in our state I posed I
urge you to oppose Senate bill
one eight thank you thank you.
Michael.
Michael.
Yes thank you good afternoon my
name is Michael lead and I am a
Green Party voter a long time
Green Party voter and activist
and although I am in favor of
the vast majority of this bill
there in regards to language
that has snuck in that seeks to
increase signature requirements
for minor parties and write in
candidates I would like to urge
that this bill be amended to
remove this language.
this language further limits
voter choice it does not serve
democracy.
New Mexico ballot access is
difficult as it is already
regarding our voter density.
We also are in a disadvantage.
due to
funding inequalities and media
attention and qualities so I
would like to urge that this
bill be amended to remove that.
That increasing the signature
requirements which is
essentially a doubling which
also did not.
Apparently deserve mention when
you are doing going to the
highlights so thank you very
much thank you.
Susie.
Yes.
Thank you yes also my name is
Susie I have actually we need
more we skated to a communist
country or ten years ago to
check me over ten years of hard
work to our my US citizenship so
I'm here today and speak to a
post I just be one eighty so
just be want that'll be next
transparency is B. one eighty
six to in our make a more
difficult to obtain any
direction they are not from so
so as many make the inection
Committee OPIC public schools
community this bill is a
disaster type of the integrity
and transparency it will cover
up any mistakes honest mistakes
or intentional wrongdoings
Jareth off interconnections.
So so why and how to make laws
for currently next and mistakes
or want to ease your actions
would have lost their actual
purposes and become more
questionable so instead of
actual democracy.
Will be degrading to a communist
dictatorship and state led the
country I came from so I would
urge you to vote.
Propose this bill with this bill
has some some good things that
they there's so many very very
questionable aspect of the bill
thank you hide caption data.
So I am going to here's a wise
is a fountain those are working
ever date New Mexico citizens
and some are just paid to
special interest groups so thank
you thank you for our service.
Thank you.
J..
Mom one day.
Hello J. O. yes.
Yeah my name is Leri Leri how.
Thank you committee members and
madam chairman
opposed to SB one eighty US
cents New Mexico elections will
be the facto federalized through
this legislation through the
election security program.
Department that'll be under the
secretary of state under the
pretext of.
Monitor in New Mexico elections
I think we went fifty one eighty
will allow funding federal and
unnamed intelligence agencies
broadband internet connection to
one central New Mexico database
and your bill located in the
department of secretary of state
this the database will control
would consolidate all New
Mexico's tequila connection all
accretions to the New Mexico
secretary state through the
internet.
Enter one possibility is for the
funding federal funding
intelligence agencies to.
Synchronize their the New Mexico
database in real time and it'll
be updated to the broadband
internet suggested in the bill.
This opens the door for are
agent provocateurs within the US
government two minute minute
delayed election data in real
time are requirements that is
necessary for artificial
intelligence software to work.
Thank you committee members and
madam chair thank you Aaron.
Laments.
You're the to to okay we already
heard you Richard winger.
Richard.
Hi Act which I published ballot
access news New Mexico is the
only state in the country with
the double petition requirement
for minor parties is the only
one that requires first the
petition to qualify the party
and then after that is approved
a separate petition for each of
its nominees the only other
state that ever had a law like
this was Merioles it was
declared unconstitutional by the
highest state court.
Now you're not only keeping
this.
Senseless petition requirement
on nominees should be deemed to
have enough support because they
were nominated by a ballot
qualified Party but you're
doubling it I I and Furthermore
there hasn't even been a one
percent petition submitted since
twenty twelve in New Mexico if
its use that sell them what
sense does it make to double it
thank you thank you it's
something called called in user
one.
Call in user one.
Okay well I can't hear you need
to underuse or we're gonna have
to go move on.
Okay well I'm I needed yes can
you hear me yes okay hello I'm
not sure if we're in the opposer
of the four categories whatever
this is home and could you give
us your name please.
Yes my name is Jim ward and I
wasn't sure where it was I think
just got into the meeting and I
just want to make clear that I'm
requesting an amendment section
forty two ma'am not the
wholesale going down this is
public comment so if you wish to
comment on the bill.
Yes section forty two of bill
one eighty is problematic
because it's doubling required
then for minor parties petition.
Solutions.
We can't hear you with.
Your muted.
Right those meeting.
Your mute you're not you're
still muted.
Ma'am well I I keep getting the
message that I'm unmuted so the
messages please remove the
language in section forty two of
the SP one eighty that increases
of ballot petition or petitions
acquirement for minor party
candidates also remove the
section for write in candidates
that request increases those
confusion requirements as well
thank you very much thank you.
I see no other hands let's go to
the audience those wishing to
speak in support please raise
your hand in the audience okay.
Yeah stand up here and will
A COVID.
Each one hello is this working
yes right one is Elizabeth west
and I I was a poll worker at one
point many years ago.
Most people who know me do not
think of me as a person who's
easily intimidated but I have to
confess after hearing some of
the stuff that I had a wobbly
moment and I still feel mildly
guilty about not addressing it
it wasn't terrible but I it was
A long time ago when I think
well anyways a long time ago
when I got to thinking this is
my chance to admit that I I
grooved I didn't speak up when I
should of and so.
I also am very interested in
third party stuff but I am in
favor of this bill.
I want to pass even if it's not
perfect and I expect to hear
with your discussion later on
and the responses from the
people here.
To explain some of the things
that I think are inaccuracies
anyway I'm in favor thank you
thank you.
Catherine thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Katherine Christiana and I'm
the registered lobbyists for the
New Mexico counties the skews me
the counties are neutral on
Senate bill one eighty however
it does contain all of the
clerks priorities and these are
priorities at the clerk's
affiliate actually selected
specifically the a preppy saying
clarifying election documents as
they relate to IPRA is a huge
problem clerks are unable to
complete canvassing process to
get through there are elections
are being inundated with a pro
class and the clarification this
bill goes a long way to helping
them complete their jobs thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Austin we I can I'm here today
with the ACLU of New Mexico and
we stand today in strong support
of SB one eighty at a as it is
good common sense a good common
sense piece of legislation that
ensures our poll workers are
county clerks and a secretary of
state have the support and
protections they need to improve
with modern technology to
continue to safely administer
our elections I thank you for
your committee your time and we
urge to pass thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak on the bill all
right let's go online.
Dick Mason Richard Mason.
Okay
madam chair members the
committee my name is Dick Mason
I'm voting elections director
for the league of women voters
of New Mexico the lady stands
for strong support of SB one
eighty thanks to sponsors for
bringing this legislation
forward for the last hundred
three years of the district for
effective fair and secure voting
system and that allows maximum
opportunities of qualified
voters to participate as a
sponsor noted just be one eighty
is consistent with that we
appreciate you we appreciate the
on going efforts of the
legislature and the secretary to
a continue to shore the
necessary changes that may be
made to ensure the New Mexico
five voting systems remain one
of the most secure in most
accessible in the country
suddenly stands and transport of
SB one eighty eight urged you to
give it to pass thank you.
Thank you.
Kathryn Clark.
You madam chair members of the
committee and Catherine carcass
at the town clerk I want to
thank so much the sponsor for
sitting with the clerks for over
four hours to discuss the future
is the bill as categories yadda
mentioned all four of the
features that we voted on all
thirty three click support is in
the bill I personally in my
County one
point out that the risk limiting
audits that would see for the
general election will not be
available for all of our
elections which is an excellent
security feature some of the
features we saw in the twenty
twenty pandemic which made
Alexion ministration more
efficient and more technically
correct are coming back and I
hope that you will support the
bill
I'm so sorry.
and finally I want to say that
we are coming up on a
presidential election and these
changes that we've been trying
to get through at least three or
four sessions I hope you will
support the clerks and the
secretary of state and all of
those who are trying to
administer elections in New
Mexico will pass this bill so
that we can be ready for the
twenty twenty four presidential
election thank you so much thank
you.
Robert Serrano.
Robert.
Good afternoon madam chair can
you hear me yes.
Good of new money chair members
of the committee my name is
Robert strong of the third the
one with the county clerk which
is a class B. County I'm
speaking solely on behalf of my
County I'm in full support of
just the one eighty four.
I'd recommend I am recommending
a do pass this particular
legislation and administrative
assist my role office and it
could be my staff myself and to
others with enterprise the more
so during elections and with
post election duties so I'm
recommending it to pass madam
chair thank you thank you.
Andrea Serrano.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Andrea Serrano and I am
executive director at a lady we
stand in full support of SB one
eighty and thank the sponsor and
secretary of state
Representative this legislation
forward.
Thank you.
Shannon Kunkle.
Thank you so much madam chair
and members of the committee
apologize and dealing with a
little bit of laryngitis I
appreciate you allowing zoom
comments my name is Shannon
Kunkle and outreach and
development director of common
cause New Mexico we support as
P. one eighty and appreciate the
Sanchez the secretary of state
and the clerks for their work on
this bill our democracy would
fail to function without our
election workers and we support
increasing rate for these
essential workers we also
support the enhanced training
for poll watchers and
challengers as well as as B. one
eighty he's careful attempts to
balance the need for privacy
with the need for transparency
which we think this bill strikes
by codifying the purpose
provisions enacted during the
twenty twenty elections during
the height of the pandemic but
does the secure monitor drop
boxes of voter convenience
centers in every county as well
as clear and feasible deadline
for absentee voting we can
better ensure access to the back
of the lead and a simplified
process both for voters and for
election elections
administrators so we stand in
full support and did you pass on
this thank you very much thank
you Naomi my Estes.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members the committee my name is
Naomi may assist in the county
clerk to Los Alamos County the
only class each county in the
state but a very potter centric
community the comments I made
today reflect my position to be
clear I am not speaking on
behalf of the Courts affiliate
as county clerk was administered
elections for the for less
almost the last six years and
was worked in the office since
two thousand five I would like
to express my support Senate
bill one eighty as it helps to
streamline and improve the
efficiency of administrative
processes leading to better
outcomes for all involved Senate
bill one eighty includes needed
measures that will assist in our
ability to continue to serve our
communities securely and
transparently for instance
through the post election.
Voting system checks and after
every statewide election.
What supporting motor disability
and of excuse me and supporting
voters ability to engage in our
democratic process I ask you to
recognize the needed measures.
And the very important
administrative changes I support
the tradition of great election
administration and our state I
voting in favor Senate bill one
eighty thank you all for your
very valuable time thank you.
Dr Amanda Lopez.
Hi good evening madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Amanda look with us and I
served in the county as the
county where we are the second
largest county serving
approximately a hundred thirty
five thousand registered voters
we're also proud to support line
secure containers otherwise
known as drop boxes the most of
any county in the state I'm
solely speaking on behalf of my
County and Raul elected official
and I am speaking strong support
Senate Bill witty I truly needed
an election administration bill
that would assist my office in
operating administrative updates
of the support our work and
running three fair safe and
accessible actions on the
testing deadlines to make a
realistic Rhapsody voters to
allowing trucks office staff to
process the registrations as
soon as possible after election
these changes will operate New
Mexican voters additional access
support their voting experience
our office just completed voter
registration in the southern
part of our county and gas
Independent School District for
high school seniors graduating
this year we registered more
than three hundred high school
seniors I look forward to them
voting in their first election
there in the fall and their
helpfulness and energy was truly
inspiring these new voters like
all New Mexican voters will
benefit from the changes and
underscored the fact that New
Mexicans should be proud of how
voter centric and well
administers administered our
elections are thank you for your
time and I urge you to support
Senate bill one eight thank you.
When the.
Okay dreams an Action New
Mexico.
Yes thank you madam chair
members the committee my name is
selling cost a lot of complaints
and program director with
transaction in Mexico and I
sent support of SB one eighty as
it continues to modernize
democracy within the Sanchez for
bringing this important.
Piece to the table and we hope
that you vote in favor thank you
so much thank you.
Molly Schwank.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Molly Swank and I'm the
campaigns and program director
with the center for civic policy
a nonprofit that is nationally
recognized for civic engagement
work as part of a coalition of
over forty five organizations
working in communities across
our state we support as the one
eighty and are asking for your
support as well because we stand
behind our local election
officials who play a huge role
in provide a major service
toward democracy communities and
people across our state and SB
one eighty will help them do
their jobs more effectively and
efficiently thank you so much.
Thank you and lastly Wendy.
Good evening hello my name is
Wendy at city and I'm a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico native of I would like to
thank you madam chair and
committee members and a sponsor
for this bill as it allows
better better access for our
elders and people with
disabilities I am in support of
Senate bill one eighty thank you
thank you.
That concludes our public
comment.
Senator any comments committee
only that I I want to thank my
co sponsor on this leader Chasey
and I might get called in to
have to go vote and senator
sherry if I do I will hand it
over to to leader AC okay very
good thank you stuff
Representative Chasey first on
the list.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you very much Senator and madam
secretary I wanted
The that you corrected some
misunderstandings in the last
committee and some of those were
repeated in the public comment
regarding the signature
requirements for minor party
would you clarify that because I
would like these people to feel
a little more comfortable with
what the actual
bottom line is madam chair and
later Chasey and I do hope those
individuals are still listening
in this time I don't know if
they were last minute we're not
raising the signature
requirement for minor party
candidates in this bill what we
are doing is providing a path
for minor party candidates to
get on the ballot that currently
don't have a path because if you
don't have enough register if
you don't hit that threshold of
enough registered voters madam
chair in your district then then
there's affected we know passed
to nomination and so what we're
doing with this bill and madam
chair and leader Chasey is we're
just saying that if you don't
have enough registered voters in
your minor party in your
district then you simply collect
the same number of signatures
and and independent candidate
what neglect to get on the
ballot and so there's not an
increase madam chair in fact
we're going from in some places
where there is zero way to get
on the ballot as a minor party
candidates now there is a way
madam chair and representative.
Thank you very much madam chair
and I'm secretary and senator
and.
Is this.
We we do have some election
bills but regarding the
collection of nominating
petition signatures is there
change here.
Yes Madam chair representative
so
this was a program that that was
actually started in Albuquerque
when when I was the city clerk
there that we work in
conjunction with the secretary
of state's office so that folks
could gather petition signatures
using an online application that
instantly checks to see if the
person is a registered voter in
that district and you can't get
to step to to sign if you're not
so in this will reduce petition
challenges the school the
everyone will have will know the
anyone who is signing their
petition using this on
application you know those are
all good signatures.
Thank you very much madam chair
and and senator secretary that's
all I have to clarify those two
things thank you Representative
representative of Nighbor.
Thank you madam chair we forget
started I can have kind of would
like some directions are we're
supposed to be at the floor and
about fourteen minutes and I
know I probably have more than
fourteen minutes worth of
questions so how how would you
like to proceed you want me to
start and see how far we go.
We need to start and you know
with there will be some lag time
between and of course this goes
to the speaker's preferences of
course but and madam chair and
in person I would let my plan is
to go down there and open roll
call at about at about five to
six six o'clock and that usually
takes a little while ago and we
so we could go for a bit we
would go for a little bit but
but I I do plan on starting
right at six because we do have
a pretty heavy agenda tonight.
So so madam chair your images
per se I think we were
personally aware we got a test
and then we if we don't finish
will pick up Saturday.
Thank you madam chair and
senator and madam secretary
I'm probably would like to do
this in terms of subject areas
instead of just going page by
page so I'd like to start with
the secure.
Ballot drop off boxes if I may.
The provisions in this bill
Contemplate those types of
receptacles in each county do
they not.
Madam chair representative I
think you might be thinking of
HB for okay I'm glad you
clarified that so this this
piece of legislation does not
deal with the number of secure
containers or any for the
security measures surrounding
those containers so
That's good because that'll let
me to move on
The increase in the
Compensation the poll workers up
to four hundred dollars
Is the state picking that up
where is that going to be a
costs incurred by the counties.
Madam chair Senator Madam chair
representative the state is
picking it up the secretary of
state would be responsible for.
And if I read the provision
correctly the secretary of state
will determine what the
compensation level will be now
Madam chair representative it's
the county clerk's decision and
they tell how much just how much
they're going to be paying and
how much that costs and we give
them the money Madam chair
representative so so madam
chair representative or senator
what will be the incentive for
the county clerk to not go to
the maximum allowed by statute.
Madam chair representative I I
know that all of our county
clerks are struggling to get
poll workers so I'm sure they
will go to the maximum in order
to.
To properly compensate workers
so they're willing to come and
work in state.
That very much I'll just add if
I may madam chair representative
the only thing would be if you
know wanted to create a
differential
you know presiding judge
receiving them you know the
maximum amount and and the
clerks may be receiving a lower
amount depending on the amount
of responsibility in M. and many
clerks do that currently many
clerks make that differential.
And madam chairman and senator I
see and hear there's other
of election day.
People that get hired to do
things messengers will be one of
them with with that fall within
the same range and and
discounted clerk established a
payment for those folks.
So that would include the.
Sixteen and seventeen year olds
that would not be eligible to
vote could be hired to perform
certain tasks for the employer
is that correct.
Madam chair representative.
The.
Let's talk a little bit about
Absentee ballots are mailed
ballots to get mail them and
that process
Who.
Who can request the the absentee
ballots and is there a required
form that has to be utilized and
who would that come from madam
chair Senator so madam chair so
Representative one of the
changes that we that is made in
this bill is that all whenever
the secretary of state politics
official form for something that
is the form that must be used so
under this bill.
If anyone wanted to share the
form to request an absentee
ballot they have a first
amendment right to do so they
could do so but they would have
to use the official form or if
they're referring to the website
they use the the official
website that the portal for the
secretary of state so madam
chair and senator I hear your
Response rate we're going back
to the.
Old system where parties and
other felting groups can utilize
the official form and send those
absentee ballot request forms to
the county clerk to request an
absentee ballot where I thought
we had restricted that were only
the county clerk couldn't do
that for time.
Madam chair representative that
is that that is the current
system at eight any third party
can acquire or reproduce the
official form on and and put it
out there that that hasn't
changed I I do think that this
particular bill clarifies that
only official forms can be used
Madam chair representative so
madam chair Senators third
parties could send those out but
it has to be the form that the
secretary of state promulgates
okay.
And then when the absentee
ballot request form is is
submitted to the county clerk of
there's a time period for
processing those could could you
kind of go over what this bill
provides and is there any
difference in the processing of
those forms and under current
law Madam chair representative
please jump in and correct me if
I'm wrong but I think that the
main time kind of time line
change that we've done here is
saying that you if you can
request an absentee ballot you
need to request it fourteen days
in advance right now it's three
days in advance which just does
not give enough time for those
ballots to get folks in the mail
them to fill them out them to
get them back so this is one of
those temporary provisions that
we had had adopted during you
all had adopted I wasn't here
during the twenty twenty
election and it works really
well and so that's that's what
we're adopting permanently here.
And so is that a madam chair
center is that a.
Received by the county clerk
fourteen days course at a the
mail in the application form
within that fourteen day.
See the and madam chair
representative receipt so.
Five PM on the night fifteen
date midnight file Mel.
Office gets close to it I have
been most and so madam chair
representative we have a online
portal receive those online
application okay yes you're
right the physical balance would
have to be in by the time the
clothes and so adaptation and so
the application gets timely
submitted the ballot goes out
and and address to the
Qualified elector and.
What.
What happens with that ballot I
noticed in here there's there's
a couple things if the ballot
get sent to an address other
than the registration address
could you go over what happens
with respect to those requests
and then go over the ballot
going to the same.
Madam chair representative so
yes so if you'll recall and this
is what we did in twenty twenty
if you're if you're requesting
so many people do requested
absentee ballot to go to a
different address because
they're not at their house where
they're registered so when that
does happen madam chair
representative the ballot will
go to the address requests and
it will also go to the
registered a notice will go to
the register home address
leading.
Letting whoever maybe there know
that that ballot has been
requested to be sent to an
alternate address chair
representative okay and that's
to make sure that at least the
registration address gets
notified that someone has
requested it under your name
Yeah and then with respect to
the request to go to the same
address
there's no further communication
other than the ballot goes out
to that address as an actor
that's correct
Madam chairman and senator
I know we've talked over the
years a lot about the ballots
coming back to the county clerk
and.
Just to let you know that's
where I see the weak spot in our
system
The the security measures
attendance to those balance out
so with that.
Roof representation what in this
bill is required.
For that ballot to be not only
receive but also what managers
do you go through and what
information is required to make
sure that it's the qualified
elector who voted that about.
The.
Madam chair representative the.
The county clerk can receive
ballots up until seven PM on
election day that is the
deadline
so there is always a last a last
run to the post office at six
fifty nine on election day there
will be a last run to any ballot
drop box obviously any ballots
that are at the polling location
once the polling location closes
any ballots that have are in the
possession of the board so
anything that comes in after
that it is not counted and and
there always are unfortunately
Madam chair and representative
ballots that do come in late
the.
Identifier information on the
outer envelope is what's check
to make sure that it matches As
You seem madam chair
representative there is a caring
process now contained within we
did this in twenty twenty if
there's missing information.
Or of state as social security
last four digits got transposed
it has it happens to the best of
us the governor will be notified
and offered the opportunity to
care before the Friday before
election day otherwise it's
treated just like a provisional
ballot which is what the current
law says Madam chair
representative let's.
Well number one what
specifically is on the outer
envelope of the mailed in
ballots what what needs to be
there other than the address of
the county clerk Madam chair
representative so under that
privacy flap which will get
removed once it's received and
the office of the county clerk
it'll be the last four digits of
the social security number and
the printer name and signature
madam chair okay so so we're
maintaining the last four digits
of the social security is our
signature associated with that
Madam chair representative
signature and last for and if
either of those are missing that
ballot what happens to that file
that's one Madam chair
representative because through
that care process the county
clerk is required to as soon as
practicable so immediately or
the next business day notify the
voter that it's missing
information to give them
instructions about how to cure.
I to signature or the last four
in other words to have that
ballot count Madam chair
representative and if that
ballot comes in.
Close to seven PM on election
day that balance goes in the do
not count staff or does it go in
the do count staff Madam chair
representative it goes in that
let's notify the voter to care
and they have until the Friday
after election day and if just
as with any ballot.
That is in the do not count Pyle
for lacking information it then
goes to a bank gets treated like
a provisional ballots and so
there's a following at ten or so
days that you know you can go
through a a hearing an appeal to
have your ballots counted Madam
chair of.
And madam.
Madam chair and representative
or senator and madam secretary
is that the current law is that
a change in this bill.
Madam chair representative the
only changes that care process
is being codified right now
everything gets treated like a
provisional ballot okay so so
one thing this bill does and I
think everybody needs to
understand it allows for the
cure.
Not up to seven PM on election
day for what what time on on
Friday following the election
day.
Five PM Madam chair
representative close of business
okay so so people can cure their
mail in ballots from.
The close of business all
election or at seven PM on
election night till five PM on
Friday following the election to
briefly qualify that clarify
that Madam chair representative
from the moment they are
notified so if you got your
ballot in the week before the
election and it was missing
information the clerk would let
you know right away and so from
at whatever point you're
notified to that Friday
following election so that
would.
That would be.
That would involve anybody who
mailed in about they can cure up
to five PM on Friday following
the election correct okay and
that's and that's new.
Madam chair representative it's
only new for for these absent at
that the existing procedure for
provisional ballots that's just
having that care for the
absentee ballots match what we
already do for provisional
ballots.
Provisional ballots madam chair
and senator
Those are.
At the polling place.
Thank you for in a separate file
and get locked right.
And then they are opened.
Later in the process.
And you're saying that there is
a cure provision for provisional
ballots.
Madam chair representative I
think the senator was trying to
point out that we do have the
that we have the existing
provisional process it goes
until twelve days after election
day.
The cure process up to Friday
after election day is the new
piece Madam chair
representative.
met madam chair and senator
Wirth what what would be cured
on a provisional ballot they
they show up they both the
provisional ballot I thought the
only issue was whether or not
that what they were qualified
elector for that election.
Madam chair representative and I
I I I think I misspoke
I think my point was that we are
still process under our current
process we are processing
ballots beyond election day and
this would add curing Babson T.
ballots to that process that
extends beyond election.
But there's no cure of
provisional ballots.
Madam chair representative
there's the appeal process so if
your if your provisional ballot
is not qualified.
You were notified and you have
the opportunity to appeal and
provide whatever information you
can find to try to get that
balance Madam chair
representative.
Okay the.
That's a much different process
than just.
Coming in and and
Same here's my social security
number or here's my signature
because of the the two items
that would need to be featured
on the absentee ballot for the
mail in ballots
okay.
Are there any other
security measures of tips this
bill contemplates with respect
to mail in ballots such as
signature verification
technology use their of what
happened.
And as you know madam chair
representative I'm and I'm a big
fan of that idea but that's not
in this bill.
Madam chair representative what
is in this bill is beginning
take I.
That database to create the the
the secure verification because
we have to collect all the
signatures first so under this
bill all and the D. signatures
get sent to this secretary of
state database to start building
that up so that someday we can
do appropriate signature
verification and madam chair and
senator you've heard me are you
before that to you know as we.
Start to move in in that
direction or have moved in that
direction or people taking
advantage of mail in ballots and
we have precincts that are
hundred percent male and presets
that we do need to of.
Employ that technology to ensure
that it's a qualified electors
ballot that's that's actually
coming in to the county clerk's
office for for accounting and so
I I certainly encourage you
madam secretary to continue
continue that effort maybe one
day we we can employ that
technology because I I I do
think that that security
measures important for not only
the state but to give some.
comfort that every.
Every qualified electors ballot
counts the same as every other
person's ballot so I appreciate
that
are there any provisions in
Senate bill one eighty that deal
with cleaning up the voter
records because as most of us
know that have sent out letters
to our constituents and abuse
those databases we get a lot of
letters returned is there is
there for are there provisions
to to deal with the clean up of
the voter records and and to
deal with those issues.
Madam chair representative on
this one but there wasn't H.
before.
That's not part of the.
That's right.
Madam chair representative so in
addition in addition to HB for
and and at this point you can
forgive us for everything
bleeding together well at other
for you to the.
we do we we basically codified
the creation of a general
program to do list maintenance
it's something that we already
do but this is gonna help us
sort of clearly defined what
that is and so in between every
now with the passage of HB for
every voter ID medically being
registered we also get address
updates from NVD which is very
helpful so if you're already
registered voter but you change
your address and then as you all
are probably aware we are member
we're in Eric state anywhere
against is kind of a hot topic
right now the electronic
registration information center
but we we are actually looking
to double down on our list
maintenance we can we can update
our losses as frequently as
monthly it's really about what
what a reasonable workload is
for the county clerk's but with
interstate changes cross state
changes social security master
death file we get all of that
data we do do regular less
maintenance but will look into
to kick that up a notch madam
chair representative.
Thank you madam secretary madam
chair and and senator of.
With respect to.
The funding of these elections
from indicated you know payment
of of the whole workers and what
have you one one complain I've
gotten is that Travis county
still has some money from the
last general election so I don't
know if that's true or false I
just hear the complaints but but
if if there's some mechanism to
get those things more promptly
paid I'm sure the counties would
appreciate that
Madam chair representative also
added this body can
appropriately funds elections
are secretary of state's office
which we have not ever done and
that would probably make all the
clerks get paid far more
promptly so it seems like we're
maybe get a little off track
regarding them talking.
So for instance well they were
just worry about getting getting
paid there's a variety of things
that have to be paid for under
this chair representative I'll
just let you know we we actually
had to go get emergency fronts
from the board of finance to be
able to pay those monies due to
the clerk from last year's
election because we were not
adequately funded we got that
emergency funding this payments
went out this week Madam chair
representative state.
This bill provides for a lot of
measures dealing with the.
What I would consider addressing
some of the concerns we heard
from the people that were
against it and and from.
Doing the technology making sure
that it's running properly
testing machines and and and all
that and and I think that
some of that's probably
important for the public so
could you discuss a little bit
about some of the measures that
are provided in this bill that
can give the public confidence
that the machines are being
program properly that they
counted the ballots properly and
that when I stick my ballot in
it's going to vote the way I
chose to vote and not to not to.
Alter those those things and and
there's also there's as I read
it there are opportunities for
participation by the public to
see those things so could you
you go into that a little bit
because I think we heard some
concerns about that in the
testimony Madam chair
representative so a lot of what
we do is already an existing
loss I'm not going to go into
that as much as such on what
we're doing to enhance that on
this bill.
we are for you know first of all
we do a a mandatory post
election audit after every
general election currently we
will now be doing it after every
statewide election there is a
formula set out in statute that
says if you have outcomes that
are very close you are more
precincts if you have outcomes
that are very wide you on if you
were in the reason why that is
is because to change the outcome
of your in your race you have
more potential opportunities so
we have to audit more so it's a
formula that support in statute
we did that about fifteen years
ago at this point it's worked
for us
so we'll do that in every county
and that excuse me after every
general election statewide state
sorry.
Statewide election apparently
it's pretty it class
and at you know the other thing
to note is that we're actually
expanding the window after an
election in which people can ask
to look at certain kinds of
documents we already have post
election processes for RigCount
we have automatic recounts we
have re checks we have
inspection of the ballot
empowerment and expect
inspection of the ballots
election contest and we're
actually expanding the window
for that after the election up
to sixty days instead of forty
five however we are also saying
that after that point.
You have to show that cost to
look at your ballots and that
sort of thing after that point
because what we're seeing is
this sort of re litigation if
you will going on and all the
counties around the state while
they're trying to do their jobs
and they don't have enough staff
Madam chair representative when
Madam chair representative one
other thing that we're doing as
so right now the public can go
watch the tax of that the
tabulators but we're codifying
that here so that that is very
clear to everyone and everyone
knows that they can go see those
themselves that's right I am
brief answers would be super
helpful and madam chairman and
senator of.
I think one statement was made
that
About the internet none of these
machines are tied to the
internet are never Madam chair
representative.
over a page twelve.
There's some language here that
the I'm not sure is intended but
we talk about the county clerk
and four point qualified
residents that meet the
qualifications set forth in two
through four.
Of the section in hand to says
be registered to vote and and
then in paragraph three B.
sixteen or seventeen years of
age twelve sixteen and seventeen
year olds are registered to
vote.
At the time of the election.
So I'm a bit confused why the
word and is there so madam chair
representative that to be
registered to vote potentially
was taken out in an amendment in
the Senate at the request of the
kind of collectors okay so so
the county clerk's can employ.
Sixteen and seventeen year olds
to perform certain functions for
them on election day and and so
that's taken care of but then we
was there any change to like
lines twenty and and twenty
three is that still stricken
language the to be a service
except for both your minor
parents and things of that
nature Madam chair
representative we did not put
any of that language back in if
you're a qualified resident
you're already going to be a
citizen
I the the did not put language
in about getting the approval of
of minors parents because the
less roadblocks we put in front
of teenagers who want to get
involved in our democracy and
develop a lifelong habit of
voting better that's right so so
the definition of qualified
resident necessarily
requires citizenship okay so
that's what that was taken out.
And I can do so whether they get
their parents permission our not
so the civics class at all high
school kids all volunteer on
election days of through through
perform certain tasks but then I
saw later on about the.
The use of minors for for saw
that certain of.
Requirements and I thought I saw
where they had to be again
register to vote for pre a
qualified elector and that would
go against it and maybe I was
reading it wrong with them like
there were we're certain
no person shall service
messenger on page sixteen line
twenty no person shall service
messenger less a person would
also meet the requirements to be
a challenger and my
understanding to be a
challenger.
Is that you are a qualified
elector in the county which are
serving to be a challenger.
So.
If you're serving as a
messenger.
And your sixteen you can't be a
messenger.
And and Madam chair
representative so you got a
right to the end of that line
because as pursuant to
paragraphs one through four and
six subsection C. of that one to
twenty two and what that's
referring to is PEUC you can't
if your spouse's is on the
ballot or it's it's very
specific qualifications that
would apply to a challenger
watcher observer that if those
specific ones also plan to you
you can't be a messenger but
that's outside of being on the
sixteen or seventeen okay so
it's not.
Because I would think that most
of the.
Teenagers are the sixteen
seventeen year old that would be
higher they would be more in the
messenger type the category then
maybe other
Jobs that would be associated
with the the election process
but
okay that clears a.
Also one thing that the county
clerk's I've I've heard some
pushback but one thing I really
like about the bill is that the
county clerk's will provide
training for challengers that
way the challengers are getting
direct instruction from.
The most qualified person about
the elections in that state
election officials at the county
level and and so it seems to me
that that's an important aspect
even though I know some
accounting clerks are pushing
back on that I think that's an
important point they're saying
well the party should do that
but if the parties do it people
are getting trained differently
and they're getting told
different things of the county
clerk says that that everybody
understands what the rules are
And again the challengers have
to be qualified electors in the
county with state serve and
that's I think current law on
that still I know this is it
says if it's under line language
here but the that's current law
as well right.
Yes.
There was one question asked
during the
Comment period about the a lot
of these precincts.
Can we do that with the current
way that we no are County we've
we've gone to all
We've gone to all voter
convenience centers and so.
Thank you can we do that or is
that changed in this bill Madam
chair representative we can and
do audit to the precinct level
okay I think that that was
perhaps a misunderstanding okay
so chair representative we sort
you sort you just sort the
ballots Madam chair
representative and then you take
the ones that are in this
present thousand backers saying
Act and economic audit make sure
that the total number comes up
with the machine number of all
the.
Madam chair of.
If this is a long long bill it
has a lot of things that that
are like you have some things
that I don't think the the
it's tough to get your arms
around all of it but the.
I think that's about all the
questions I would have so thank
you madam chair other questions.
So let me first find out do we
know where we are in terms of
the floor.
The wind on workforce.
Have we started to splinter of
the local.
Okay.
Okay okay so Representative
every yeah madam chair and the.
Have secretary you all the
county clerk support this.
Madam chair representative I
think you heard in the testimony
that there are priorities
contained within this bill that
have unanimous support their
individual clerks that do
support the bill and that as an
affiliate there neutral.
Madam chair and
Senator.
Eight seven.
We're talking about this online
application.
So the let's say that I'm gonna
go sign and online application
it's
it's automatically going to
verify the medium of Fodor.
In that election okay and madam
chair and senator is it going
to.
Then preclude me from signing
another candidate in that same
elections petition.
Madam chair representative we
could do that I don't think it's
it's been set up that way so far
but sounds like it's would it be
could be set up that way in the
pilot program madam chair
representative so at the city
level you can find anybody's
petition but we can set it up in
our system manager we can just
do that by real promulgation and
that's a good catch will do
that.
And
And madam chair
Secretary one of the things that
I think is yeah I mean well I
want to I think the problem is
that it's going to do but when
we look for candidates for life
governor lieutenant governor's
state offices we get a lot of
people to.
go ahead and say they're running
with the online petitions
they're gonna be able to get the
signatures and so I think that's
going to make the ballot very
long.
Do you agree or Sir get a filter
out someone is here.
Madam chair representative you
know I think there might be some
folks who who that might be some
increase in and folks who
qualify but to the extent that
all those folks are doing is
sending out email blasts to get
signatures those aren't willing
those are can be very strong
candidates.
The Madam chair representative
in the Senate agree with the new
about them not being
a real strong candidate but
we're gonna have to.
Full list them on there if they
come up with that and manager
secretary so how we get a
warning quarter.
Is it based on the number of
signatures for the
party went ahead and said Hey
this person is our first choice
or whatever.
Madam chair representative in
existing law if you're pre
primary doesn't me you're you're
ranked based on the.
Number of votes you got during
the pre primary convention if
you are not a pre primary
doesn't need we've created and
we've done this the last couple
of election cycles the election
off of that and and we your you
it's literally based on so we
selected a first letter random
the letter C. that's the first
you know the letters these next
letter are whatever yeah okay
and madam chair and
Senator so.
if we do the page seven down and
winds twenty one twenty five the
disclosure and nondisclosure.
What we speaking of their.
This is something that you can't
yeah bro.
You know I don't quite
understand that.
So Madam chair representative
this works in conjunction with a
later section where we're we're
balancing public access with
protecting our our critical
national infrastructure and so
we find a process so for those
those records that there is a a
security risk with with folks
accessing them or at risk to
revert.
Violating the privacy of the
vote if folks will need to show
good costs to to get access to
the house.
And madam chair and senator have
a problem with that
that's not anywhere else the
more impressed statute is it to
show good because.
So Madam chair representative I
I think so it has a catch all
exception at the end which says
as otherwise provided by law so
I don't know throughout our
statutes what where else we've
we've inserted the the good
cause requirement
but.
Risen provision right right
there's there there's there's
all sorts of stuff throughout
our our statutes that that
protect information that that
should be appropriately
protected and here we're
building in a court review to
make sure so if someone needs
and they have a good reason for
anything that a judge is going
to put eyes on it and and assess
that for for good costs but all
all know chair and members
Fund has not objected to this
language at any hearing
throughout the process.
Madam chair the secretariat of.
I think that's problematic cute
and and I see that and.
Please on I'm not a collection
of your.
But we have a perception in the
public by some not all that we
have Alexion that is not fair.
That we have an election that's
not fair.
And if you've got to go to court
to go ahead and show because
good because to go ahead in if
for us something I really think
that's problematic it it just
adds to that.
Of belief.
Madam chair representative we're
talk about two types of
documents one is election
security program we're not going
to give away the keys to the
castle we're not gonna give a
potential hacker the information
they need to get into our
systems we're not going to make
public our vulnerability
you know our our out facing
vulnerabilities that that would
be one the other would be
anything that compromises the
secrecy of the bill that would
be it Madam chair representative
this to think.
Okay so madam chair and
secretary if if I want to get
all the votes and whatever
lection and I don't want to know
about all the security stuff
than I could I could still up
for that I'm sorry I
misunderstood so.
this is.
Madam chair and
Senator we spoke about this is
in prior meetings to go to page
eleven and we go down to one
twenty five so can't be a spouse
domestic partner parent you know
all that in I suggested what we
I do include is a roommate.
And that's not in there any
reason why we don't want to do
that.
Madam chair representative I'd
be happy to care that bill next
session that that it.
Okay.
The.
Madam chair and of Senator would
that be a friendly amendment or
to us Madam chair representative
now we're talking this.
Our.
I think I think you she was
saying it's not from is not
friendly at this time.
Do you have many more questions
yes madam chair do so the floor
session has started that's why
I'm asking so we can we can wait
till tomorrow okay do that think
this is going to go much longer
I think we're going to need to
test the work like page okay
right.
So.
I appreciate the presentation
appreciate the work you've done
we'll be coming back tomorrow
morning at nine AM we'll take up
the question again with
Representative Rehm
and for other folks will have
coffee and and send them off and
that kind of thing in the
morning and lunch is being
brought in okay.
Senator.
Very.
Might need to hand it off to my
my co sponsor tomorrow I don't
think centers around as is gonna
let me get away with
disincentive yes and I missed to
build presentation of your
building yeah and I appreciate
that.
My gosh.
Yes.
Both of those rolled over and I
was talking to get together over
here yes and.
Yeah.
So
yeah we'll have someone sit with
