Interested in Senate bill fifty
three and I know there are many
of you we will hear that bill on
Monday it will be the first bill
on the agenda I'd like to try to
get through these items are as
we can as I said so that's
what's going on with with Senate
bill fifty three
with that perhaps we could talk
about the consent items what we
call the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane there.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen here
Representative Nibert here
Representative Lee.
Representative Rehm.
Representative suspense here
madam vice chair here madam
chair yes here we have a quorum
thank you and one other thing we
inadvertently left off H. B. for
sixty two which is a roll over
from yesterday so just add that
to your agenda that is leader
Casey's bill and we'll of course
wait for her to before we get to
that bill so happy is there any
objection to the two items that
are on consent.
I don't see any objection happy
to take a motion on the two
items on consent.
All.
Of the of Bill two eighty eight
and yes to twenty four percent.
Sir second.
It's been moved and seconded
that we approved as a matter of
consent house bill two eighty
eight and Senate bill two to
four would you call the roll
please Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes Mr
speaker Representative McQueen
yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Lee yes
Representative ring.
Representative so thanks again
yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
I.
Of seven to zero we have I have
to pass on this bill to eighty
eight and a do pass on house
bill two twenty four great well
thank you we now back on
Senate bill one eighty.
We have secretary of state
Maggie Toulouse Toulouse Oliver
I know that Senator Duhigg was
in another meeting so maybe we
could just one of our members to
set with
With
Yes we are at now are expert are
wonderful expert and secretary
state.
Here to current.
This.
So we have some Representative
Rehm had been asking questions
he's in another committee so
anyone else wish to ask
questions Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair.
Excited to a.
Figure out Representative
Romero's extensive knowledge of
this bill now this morning.
is here for you.
Chair so I.
I had some notes and I I I
actually destroyed those so I
but I have some on the bill
itself so it might take a little
bit for me to.
To track those down so I
apologize for that but.
madam chair can can I understand
just sort of foundation what is
the difference between V. six
and just that's B. one eighty
and why are we running them as
separate bills.
Madam chair representative HB
six age before I think of sorry
that's okay it's a policy bill
it's it's.
Addressing election policy Madam
chair representative.
Senate bill one eighty is a is a
technical bill we're we're
talking about sort of the the
inner workings of the election
code and and tweaking them so
that we can run elections more
efficiently and.
That's that's the the two second
version I guess thirty second
version Madam chair
representative okay and madam
chair are there any conflicts
between age before SB one
eighty.
Madam chair representative.
Hundred seventy page bill no
conflicts that's present.
All right and your page seven.
I understand this section three.
New paragraph the.
That we're gonna and issued a
process for gathering electronic
signatures on petitions I
understand that right.
Madam chair representative madam
chair can I get some just some
details on what that would look
like and.
Sure Madam chair representative
so as I know you I know you you
miss this part of the discussion
last night so just briefly
Senator Duhigg talked about
we've already developed an
application with the City of
Albuquerque with the City of
Santa Fe for electronic
signature petition collection
and basically what it does is it
allows a candidate to go out and
collect signatures
electronically the voter will
give at some personal private
information to confirm who they
are it will check that
individuals information against
the voter register the statewide
voter registration database
verify that they are a
registered voter in the district
and that signature will
therefore be electronically
collected Madam chair
representative and madam chair
so when you say collected return
about in the version of the in
some kind of an app for act
Madam chair representative.
And I know you haven't built
this ship but this does sort of.
Assume that this process is
coming so.
It'll be a I guess you could do
a hybrid Representative paper
signatures or use the app I
assume that's correct madam
chair representative word we're
not getting rid of the paper all
together.
And madam chair there other
states are doing this.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure I I actually don't know
very much I I will be the first
to admit about how petition
signature collection works in
other states.
Chair I am intrigued by the the
potential I I like utilizing
technology as any good
millennial would but
Also need to balance so just
making sure that obviously that
we're collecting good signatures
and and everything so look for
that rollout of page eighteen of
the bill.
So the.
there's a new separate paragraph
B. as in Bravo.
And the challengers.
Verses watchers
so.
What's the thought process
behind having challengers the
voters of a precinct but the
watchers can be from any
precinct in the state actually
and I'm sorry Madam chair
representative just to clarify
they just have to be from within
the county.
a precinct located in the
council to which the challengers
point okay chair so fair enough
but so why the why the
difference in town versus state
when it comes to challengers as
a watcher for talking about you
know folks who can interpose a
challenge to you know a percent
potentially casting their ballot
we're actually trying to expand
for watchers so what so what
this is actually doing is
expanding its not contracting
right now calendars and watches
have to be from within this
within the county to which their
point and and and now we're
saying well you can be a watcher
as long as you're a registered
voter here in the state of New
Mexico doesn't matter right
which county go to.
Chair to have a hard time
attracting watchers a take it
or.
No madam chair representative
it's just that in this is true
for both sides you know folks
have you know at attorneys
activists you know we have you
know nonpartisan organizations
right that want to be engaged
but they're not all necessarily
for Max County now we do have
some some of our smaller or more
further provide counties where
it may be a little bit more
difficult madam chair
representative.
Madam chair the next page page
nineteen.
So.
Talking about the voter
convenience centers.
The way I understand the current
laws it's discretionary
according to the local county
commission I think this move set
to shall.
Meeting its requirements so
Madam can I get some some
explanation as to the why from
we move from the discretion to
the requirement for these voting
convenience centers sure Madam
chair representative so a lot of
what's in this bill is are
things that were temporary
provisions and twenty twenty on
due to the COVID nineteen
pandemic
and basically.
Ninety I would say maybe more
like ninety five percent of our
polling locations are are ready
voter convenience centers so
this is just sort of moving it
from you know there there are a
handful of of what we call
standalone precincts standalone
plan places left in the state
and so we're just saying we're
we're basically saying look
everything everything's a vote
center now we don't have a
reason why not to have
everything be about center.
Chair representative so what is
if there's only five percent
that are not convenience voting
convenience centers what what
are those places they're stand
alone Madam chair representative
so in other words they only
serve the voters of that
precinct.
Okay.
The manager for the page twenty
five.
So here I think for FTE.
We're getting into
The clerks looking at.
voters who maybe are eligible to
vote anymore.
Can you describe sort of the
current practice of this before
you make the change conflict
here preppy sure and madam chair
representative what we really
are doing as for codifying
current practice that's not
spelled out quite so clearly
basically we we already we do a
couple of things but one of the
bigger things that we do is
we're members of the electronic
registration information center
which is that and interstate
data sharing consortium between
now thirty states and the
district of Columbia we shared
data about who's moved into our
state's has moved out of our
states we can reach out to
voters say Haiti want to update
your voter registration do you
want to cancel your registration
it looks like you moved to Texas
and your do you still want to
remain a registered voter in New
Mexico we also get the social
security math master deathless
data from this and so basically
what we're doing is we're just
codifying sort of uncodified
current practice but also I
think making it so that it's
more uniform chair
representative so that you know
what we do I have dates every
counties doing them you know
that with the same frequency at
center Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair so the way I read
the underlying laws your your
duty was to develop a manual as
secretary of state.
And then I I don't know I I
guess I'm guessing that each
individual county clerk would
determine how here she would
implement of the best practices
and it seems like there's
changes basically saying that
that you're going to develop one
policy.
That's apple to all thirty three
counties so so madam chair
representative yeah we I mean
obviously that that this the.
Ground level specificity of you
know.
Things like who who does a
certain activity in an office
that's that are at are still up
to the clerks what we're saying
is we don't have uniform policy
across the counties so some
states may some states excuse me
some counties may have maybe
doing their maintenance more
frequently than others right so
what we're just trying to
address is that you know we hear
often.
That we don't have clean voter
lists in New Mexico right we
want to make them as clean as
possible and madam chair under
this uniform effort how how.
How often does that review take
place or is it only triggered
upon receiving notification from
some other state we we have the
ability to do monthly monthly
updates from these other in the
the Interstate data consortium
lasts we may not do it might
that frequently depending on the
workload of the clerks that
there's an election coming up at
cetera but we have the ability
to do it that frequently.
And ventures so what will be the
practice for this uniform
policy.
So that is for us that is for us
to develop based on on which of
thank you Madam chair
representative that you get a
sneak peek.
I think you know we we want to
do it right now we're doing it
about every six months we want
to do it more frequently but we
do need to work with that the
clerks madam chair
representative to figure out
what what makes sense workload
wise maybe every two months.
Thank you madam chair.
A page thirty three so it I know
there was a thought about
amendment.
And I asked about whether is any
conflicts between this bill and
age before.
Because the way I read paragraph
in this is existing law.
but I'm wondering if this.
If we don't strike this if it
does in fact.
conflict with age before so this
says.
Every person is a qualified
elector and is applying for a
driver's license to renew
driver's license or for an
independent identification card
shall of qualified restaurant
restaurant with the consent of
the African the sentence and
register to vote.
That to me seems like it it has
discretion and I thought H.
before we're moving that Madam
chair representative HB that
particular portion of age before
that whole section on automatic
voter registration has delayed
implementation date.
So at this point madam chair
this.
This is what what we're gonna be
doing for the next two and a
half years I told July first
twenty twenty five and at that
and at that point that section
of of age before will take
effect Madam chair
representative so madam chair
is.
Don't those two provisions
complex so in two thousand
twenty five.
Madam chair representative what
will happen is that this section
is it will be repealed and
replaced is that managers that
in H. before that language
correct Madam chair
representative yes okay so.
If I'm understanding correctly
then for the next basically two
years voters have the discretion
and one.
If and when HB forget Santa laws
in in two thousand twenty five
it will replace this language
with what Senator before that is
correct okay forces.
madam chair that's I think
that's.
All I made notes on this bill so
I don't want to.
Take up time to to try to
remember what my questions are I
think all stopped there.
Thank you very much
Representative do we know where
Representative Rehm disappeared
to since nineteen when he with
revenue yeah.
A difficult question chair of
winter question okay
Representative McQueen on what
we look for Representative ring
the the chair representative
secretary of state
I I'm interested in the
electronic signature gathering I
I've done many of sunburn
standing outside the supermarket
knowing people trying to get
them to sign my sheet when
people do the electronic
signature signature is there an
actual signature or is it just
like one of those you click a
button and it puts in some sort
of script for you for the way
Madam chair representative at
the the existing application and
mind you you know that was set
up for you know city clerk's
offices so what we'll have some
developing to do but basically
there's kind of there's two
options Madam chair
representative one is that you
basically find certain
information and that auto
generates a signature so to
speak and that would be if your
baby like on your PC at home or
something like that but madam
chair representative we have the
cap the capability to provide a
mobile app as well
where you could find an actual
signature so this is a little
bit TBD we can do it both ways
Madam chair representative.
Okay it is Madam chair of course
you know if it's a mobile app.
That that's not really much of a
leap forward compared to having
people sign paperwork into
selecting from them to get them
to sign it is that chair
representative the the point is
to to to be able to offer sort
of maximum options right and at
to the candidates if you want to
be out there in your community
and collecting signature that
way the big difference though
Madam chair representative is
you're gonna have that signature
verified as being registered.
Democrat Republican voter in the
district at at the time of the
signature collection.
So but then chair and secretary
you won't have the signature
verified you to have the voter
information verified correct
madam chair so I've looked at my
opponents signatures I've had in
the past some my opponent to
fill together sufficient
signatures and you know we have
things where like you have a
whole sheet of signatures
they're all the same color
they're all the same script I
mean they're clearly bogus
it might be harder to do that in
this circumstance but you also
went actually have that
signature to compare to the
voter registration signature is
that correct Madam chair
representative you if your voter
signing a petition under this
application you're going to be
providing personal private
identifier information that is
going to verify you as the motor
and so madam chair
representative the whole goal is
to get away from the funding
Frank petition signature
challenges and I will say and
the two hundred or so that I've
done in my sixteen years of
election administration very
rarely does a judge threw out a
signature based on that
signature right because nobody's
ever signature expert Madam
chair representative Madam
chairman secretary I I think
that's exactly right and I mean
I think I'm just kind of
thinking about how this how this
works but I think it's it's
definitely a significant step
forward from from that
perspective thank you madam
chair thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
I just have a couple dollars us
into the future yeah I'm sorry.
Here Representative.
This year is.
And madam secretary on the.
to.
That this is.
So madam chair representative it
is monitored we have a third
party contractor that engages in
active monitoring you know the
thing to keep in mind as the
video is is sort of a back up
right if we know if there's a
report of an issue at a drop box
if we if one of the sensors goes
off in a drop box right that
it's being tampered with that
center at that video is meant
for us to capture and really be
able to go back and see what was
going on or who was there at the
time Madam chair representative.
Madam chair of.
The problems.
I want to.
For this.
That is I don't know what a.
Dropbox he looks like the
possibilities fortunately the
world another box not mine.
So what do we have Madam chair
representative I mean the to
your point I have I have keys to
and and Mike he could
potentially open your door but
I'm not going to try that.
Representative.
I hope it doesn't that would be
weird.
I read your take on the actual
act.
That that shows that constitute
what do by the way this is just
I mean that's in your pocket and
I think you really.
Try the settlement.
and.
Ortiz of course for more logs I
have no idea what.
Dropbox he looks like.
Anyway madam chair that's all I
need is the census education.
Anyone else with questions on
Senate bill one eighty.
I am happy to entertain a
motion.
Madam chair with move it to pass
on Senate bill one eighty.
We have a set.
Second.
It was a little voice that.
So for.
Still waking up okay so we have
a motion for a do pass made by
Representative Representative
semansky second by
Representative Romero would you
call the roll please
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
No.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Lee.
Representative green no ma'am.
Representative Sapolsky yes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair yes by a vote.
Thank you very much madam chair
members need to.
But.
Is he expected.
Well yes but this.
What's the I see it.
A
great.
What food in there there's food
in the next ten.
Madam chair for sixty two does a
few things but.
A couple of the things are to
make it fall into line with the
fines and fees contemplated the
changes primarily what this bill
does.
Is that when someone gets a
ticket from a red light camera.
It allows the person to sure
that four yield it without going
to court so it allows them to
for example
with the City of Albuquerque
what they have found is so
basically I sold that car.
All they have to do virtually is
is yield it find the bill of
sale and it's gone but right now
they have to go to court so that
is in in not shall what this
bill does is even with us yet.
Yes the.
It took us a little while to
draft the bill which is why it's
kind of late because we were
trying to make it
compatible with the fines and
fees changes but also my chief
of staff thought maybe other
similar larger municipalities
might want to participate in in
fact Rio Rancho did so that it's
drafted so that another
municipality may opt into that
particular.
Scheme of things and it is
really just to it's it has
nothing to do with imposing
fines as just giving an
opportunity for of a an appeal
without going to court thank you
your experts name is nations and
Sen.
And Watson yes I even do you
have anything you'd like to add
madam chair members of the
committee thank you from Watson
city clerk with the city of
Albuquerque I would like to
thank leader Chasey for bringing
this forward I think she's
captured everything under
current law the only way to
contest a speed camera citation
is through a live hearing either
in person or on the zoom
other state this is time
consuming for city staff as well
as for the individual seeking to
contest the hearing other states
do allow for sort of an on the
record yield where someone can
submit an appeal online if the
car's been stolen or sold and
this would this bill would
basically allow us to offer that
options to the City of
Albuquerque city and citizens
anyone who's really ticketed by
a speed camera
and we're really excited about
this I mean we're excited to
offer this option because it
will increase it will reduce the
burden on citizens and reduce
the burden on us for these
appeals great thank you let's go
to the audience those wishing to
oppose this bill please raise
your hand.
Those online wishing to oppose
the bill please raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
support the bill please raise
your hand.
Those in the online wishing to
support the bill please raise
your hand and I see two hands
raised J. I. L. U. N. M.
I think I'm we heard from you
yesterday as well the.
Sir.
J. I. L. U. N. M..
Could you you yourself.
We're gonna move to the next
person this is for.
Oh okay.
J. I. L. U. N. M..
Yep Blair my name is Larry Lee
how are.
Thank you madam chair.
Committee members I am not
position to this bill.
I think it's a.
Very sneaky to do this.
Mr followers in a minute ago so
I'm sorry we've we've already
been through opposition so
Oscars Empson.
Oscar Simpson.
Yes yes ma'am thank you madam
chair members the committee
Oscar since sometime resident
Albuquerque New Mexico this
makes it very good
administrative change to the.
Camos please support this bill
thank you thank you Mr Simpson
anyone else in support of the
bill please raise your hand on
line.
Okay.
Back to the sponsor anything
concluding come before we go
madam chair I wasn't sure if
they'd be here this morning but
it and the last hearing both the
City of Albuquerque and city of
Rio Rancho student support.
A good.
yes Representative McQueen
Senator I actually have
The question and it's a contest
that has little to do with the
substance of the bill I read the
title I rested the hitting I was
expecting a property built I was
expecting applaud notices bad
odors dust I can't think why is
this a quote unquote nuisance is
it because it and knowing will
feed or is there what what is
the terminology.
I think
Mr Watson will have to answer
the.
Madam chair representative my
understanding is that the way
that the state has elected to
regulate the city's use of speed
cameras is through state law
regulating nuisance fines and
fees because that's how it's
treated
at that's all the insight I have
on it as well but that is the
provision of the code that
regulates the city's uses and
all municipalities use of speed
cameras.
If you look at section one madam
chair it is
three eighteen seventeen
nuisances and offenses
regulation or prohibition.
The.
News thank you madam chair thank
you anyone else Representative
lane and and Representative.
And in line for you sorry of
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair good morning floor
leader Chasey.
so the I think the updates to
the the auto cameras make sense
I I don't like those things I
confess.
But I I like statutory changes
that the thing that I think I'm
concerned though is in section
one.
so in this context of nuisances
were allowing municipalities to
define sort of what a nuisance
is.
And in my experience at the
municipal level the local level
they to provide nuisances as a
whole host of things
and I think what this program if
one does it.
It goes beyond just sort of the
the auto cameras.
and it would prohibit local
announcement minutes pallets
from imposing fees and costs for
anything that they define as a
nuisance.
so madam chair is that what the
effect of that language does.
And madam chair I will defer to
Mister Watson but I I that
changes in the legislation on
fines and fees related to the
whole scheme of changing fines
and fees with in conjunction
with AOC but go ahead Mr Watson
to an address that.
Madam chair representative.
I believe the section really
only relates to specifically to
speed cameras I and I do know
that the city has the ability to
issue fines and fees on other
types of nuisances
and then I think that's
municipal fees are otherwise
capped at five hundred dollars
but I I know this specifically
relates to speed cameras and
that this and that provision of
it is actually just existing
law.
Madam chair except for were
striking within the existing law
on page one fees and costs.
And so I.
I just get some understanding as
to why this would just strictly
apply to.
Speed cameras because it's it's
talking about whenever a
nuisance as defined.
And I don't see any limiting
language to that.
Thank you Mr Watson chair of.
Madam chair representative I do
believe the section although it
does have language about
Defining nuisances does really
just relate to speed cameras and
the maximum fine we can charge
in relation speed cameras is a
hundred dollars and so
you know we have not been
assessing fees and costs in any
event and so I didn't didn't
view that changes specifically a
significant.
is it wasn't something that
we're doing.
Madam chair so the the way I
understood the presentation on
the fines and fees bill was that
local municipalities could still
by ordinance pass.
And and impose fees or costs.
And so I think that's how it was
C. and the Supreme Court
instruction there bill I just
wanna make sure that we're not
going country to that with this
approach and.
But I guess what the experts say
is that this is strictly limited
to these are cameras is that
what I'm hearing.
Madam chair representative as I
understand this the section it
really does only relate to the
out of speed cameras and I'd.
I do think it makes it.
As I understand it it does bring
it into alignment with the other
changes that are being
contemplated by the in relation
to courts bill
And so yes.
And madam chair I guess just
last question just kind of.
I shut my concern the way that I
read.
The existing wall on page one
paragraph eighty this allows
municipality by ordinance to
define a nuisance Abeyta
nuisance and impose penalties
upon a person creates or allows
a nuisance to exist.
And then this language provided
that I think that's were you get
into the nuances of the these
are cameras but then we have
this new paragraph two on page
two that says no fees or costs
shall be imposed pursuant to
this section.
And I read this section means
statute three dash eighteen dash
seventeen.
And so what I'm wondering is if
if we.
And tend to not allow.
Fees and costs on the speed
cameras that's one thing but I'm
afraid that we're capturing all
of paragraph a.
That allows municipalities to
define a nuisance so
madam chair can the expert
address that please.
Madam chair go ahead Mr Watson.
Madam chair representative I.
I do interpret this is just
applying the context of the
speed cameras I don't view this
is impacting
the ability of.
Fines or costs to be imposed in
relation to other nuisances
and I think in any of New well
sorry fees and costs to be
charged in relation other
nuisances and event
municipalities can still charge
fines.
As noted above in section one.
Madam chair I'm unaware that can
impose fines so I'm just.
The way that I understood for
the.
The the other fines and fees go
again is that we're accepting
out installers they could still
buy orders compose.
Using costs provide the cost so
this concern this is is doing
with that so thank you madam
chair.
Representative I have
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and of
madam chair and Representative
Chasey so the show up to the
city or the city where the bill
of sale is that's what I heard
you say most people don't keep a
copy and you're not required to.
Or can they do an affidavit I
sold the vehicle Madam chair
I just use simple and I don't I
I totally believe you I'm sure
you're right but the people can
find in a letter Mr Watson tell
you how they can find that they
don't even they weren't driving
with a you know it's not theirs
anymore or it was stolen so Mr
Watson you want to indicate to
the committee how one could
exonerate himself or herself
without.
Virtually.
Madam chair representative I
think if they want to present
that the affidavit that would
probably be fine and I think
there are just a number of
instances where a person
challenging SB chairman citation
may have a very clear argument
for why they were you know
should not be held responsible
for that citation for example
the ones that we're discussing
is you know they sold the car if
they don't have a bill of sale
but they do want to supported by
affidavit
I think that's definitely
something we could consider and.
You know a bill of sale will
obviously be better that would
be probably the best evidence of
it but if we can also if I can
also be verified by other means
that's great too so I do think
it's these kinds of examples
that we're trying to address
this type of hearing this sort
of on the record hearing where
there's clear evidence that the
this basically undisputed
evidence that
You know the citation should not
have gone to that specific
person yep
madam chair and Mr Watson and
hand up Representative Chasey
I'll give you statute number you
ought to write down.
Sixty six dash three dash one oh
one and it deals with the
transfer of a of a vehicle and
for the public you are to keep
the plates and if you don't keep
the plates this is what happens
so anyway thank you madam chair
representative representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair and former madam
chair.
The.
Discussion that the was had
regarding page two lines eight
nine.
I believe your experts wrong
section refers to this entire
section of law.
If we given the chance to what
he stated in only once that's
Paragraph to the reply to.
The cameras then we need to say.
pursuant to this subsection Hey.
Or something to that effect
because otherwise you are
prohibiting the imposition of
cost and fees to what.
Representative from Santa Fe
would consider regular nuisances
and that's paragraphs the and
see.
Or subsections BMC on page
seven.
So madam chair.
If you would entertain a motion
to give effect to Mr Watson's
comment I I I would move that
online line of page two.
We insert.
Are we strike the word section
in in lieu thereof put
subsection.
Capital a.
Madam chair representative
Nibert then would you be
referring to line twenty one of
page one.
That that is the subsection yes
ma'am that's what you'd be
referring to but it only
captures the of.
Cameras the the the Mr Watson
was talking about it would not
capture B. and C. on rate of.
And that was just stated intent.
Right it is and if that and
So Mr Watson.
if that cures up and the.
Ambiguity I'm inclined to accept
that and how do you feel about
it.
Madam chair representative I
think that's that's fine if that
makes it clear in the minds of
the committee than that I think
that's fine I don't think our
intent is to affect all
nuisances I really just I'm
trying to I I understood the
fees and costs provision as
eager as aligning with
Revisions from the.
From other bills and
We don't do fees and faster
speed cameras anyway so that
makes this clearer than I think
that's fine okay so would you
restate that for for me and for
the committee and and it will be
a friendly amendment so madam
chair and and.
Majority Leader on page two line
nine.
Strike the word section.
And in lieu thereof.
Insert the word.
Subsection.
Followed by capital a.
So would re no fifty fees or
costs shall be imposed pursuant
to this subsection Hey.
Thank you madam chair with
that's fine.
This is.
Happy to take a motion.
I made okay okay sorry about
that second made by
Representative neither second by
Representative Romero any
opposition.
To the motion.
I don't see any you have a
amended bill okay later.
Madam chair that's all I have on
okay thank you Representative
Alcon.
Thank you.
We can there's only pertains to
I guess two these or a business
about these are two hundred
thousand or more in population
is that correct.
I want to be sure to get this
right because we started out
with Albuquerque and then try to
include Rio Rancho so I believe
that's correct
Mr Watson can you comment.
Madam chair representative it is
for municipalities with greater
than two hundred thousand people
we are essentially required
under this bill to offer the
paper yield for municipalities
with fewer than two hundred
thousand people they have the
option of offering it that was
an amendment that came up in on
the last committee and so it for
it's not compulsory essentially
for municipalities of less than
two hundred thousand.
Where a thank you madam chair
and representative
Well in the where where where
where does it tell me that the
the the disabilities a.
That are under two hundred
thousand.
Can do anything different.
If.
Chair of Representative own
clone.
I I see on page four line twenty
one.
The.
Municipality has David is added.
On page five one eight.
And unfortunately.
The librarians are quite here
yet
to the staff do you have it.
You Mr speaker in the it's an
amendment that we did in house
government.
To see.
Okay we see we satisfied
representative L. column that's
a good.
Thank you so rare.
Right okay anyone else run on
house bill four sixty two.
Any other questions.
I'm happy to entertain a motion.
Madam chair of a move that house
bill four sixty two as amended
to pass our reserve.
OK a motion for do pass on house
bill four sixty two made by
Representative Romero seconded
by Representative night Burt to
call the roll Representative
Alcon yes.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative reeve yes.
Representative green.
Representative is a Penske yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam
chair.
Yes.
I.
Next on our agenda is Senate
bill eighty four.
And I've I believe
assistant Austin handed out
those those bills is that right
Austin okay very good can you
clarify is the appropriate bill
to consider the Senate bill's
substitute for your at for
eighty four that's which one
Madam sent yes Senate Judiciary
shares of the substitute as
amended in C. pack.
As there's an amendment.
To.
Okay.
I will read that to to number
madam chair let me find it okay
in Austin
with which we could you give me
more another set of copies since
way with money so.
Okay.
It's Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four is that the version
we're supposed to be looking at
it to to to to be more.
treatment for.
I think they're called I hope
that became the kind of
insurance even the two two four
nine eight five eight and I can
confirm that yeah I think we
want to be sure we're working on
correct hello is it point one.
One yes.
There's a little bit.
Madam chair there was an
amendment adopted in C. pack.
But C. pack would have come
before Senate Judiciary
Committee is that am I wrong
about that.
After both houses ari of house
C. pack notchback correct okay
what.
So this is
that we to madam chair that C.
pack of the house C. pack
amendment basically replaces the
floor amendment because the
Senate floor amendment had a
mistake in it and that was the
function of the amendment in the
last committee.
Madam chair to.
Not necessarily.
There's the amendments in
contests in the.
I.
Well.
Thank you.
Not everyone has their computers
that we need to have printed the
perhaps the amendments in
contacts with that help
everyone.
Close to.
If you wanted to send the for
the.
Of the printer okay.
Okay so let's do this obviously
we don't have the entire thing
before us what we'll do is we're
going to have that the bill
that's in printed in context you
know with all the amendments
printed for us and we'll hand
them out
in the interim why don't we go
to your other bill okay that
does that make sense voters
Senator.
Yeah yeah we want to work on a
geriatric bill at the special
request yes Representative.
So Hey Siri after.
Okay thank you sorry for the
confusion out with that I'm sure
sure no it's not your fault and
we can be my fault okay we'll
make it your fault but I'll feel
better so very.
Or if you need.
very.
The earliest saying just a clue
people in we are now on Senate
bill twenty nine as we wait for
house and Senate bill eighty
four materials so Senate bill
twenty nine okay thank you madam
chair so members Senate bill
twenty nine essentially provides
that if you are over fifty five
and you're gonna die and you
haven't murdered anyone then you
can be released to spend your
final days with family so I have
here and.
Douglas cover who will and much
more professional way I describe
this bill thank you.
with the sentencing commission
thank you madam chair Senator
thank you members of the
committee my name is Douglas
Carper I'm deputy director of
the New Mexico sentencing
commission on this the
commission mostly for folks at
home because you are familiar
with them it's a twenty seven or
twenty seven member state
commission Representative with
representatives from across the
criminal justice spectrum of
victims advocates are
represented the dust a geo CYFD
department of corrections
disappointments from both houses
from both chambers on the
leadership from both chambers
the governor appoints the chair
I'm sure missing a couple of a
or C. is on the commission as
well this bill came out of the
sentencing commission was also
endorsed by the courts
corrections and justice
committee over the interim and
essentially what it does is it
brings up to bring to statute to
be current with the current
processes of the corrections
department for medical geriatric
parole we've had a program on
medical geriatric parole since
nineteen ninety four I believe
for some odd reason in ninety
four when they pass that program
was put into different sections
of wall so part of what this
bill does is bring consolidate
those sections into one place
why does more underlining thank
you might expect part of what it
does is to bring these processes
in line with how corrections is
handling these inmates already
the bill was drafted in
conjunction with the corrections
department and the hat the then
head of the parole board
and then brought to the
commission passed by the
commission and actually the last
three years the commission's
brought this bill forward I'm
happy to go into details on
anything on the bill if you want
madam chair I know you have a
busy agenda many of your members
have seen this before and and
madam chair I would emphasize do
you have any idea.
Hard it is to have the victims
the dust that public defenders
agree on a on a reform and so
this is where this bill resented
from from the sentencing
commission but three years ago
and so with that we stand for
questions of thank you senator
before we go to the committee
let's go to the audience those
wishing to speak in opposition
to the bill please raise your
hand in the audience.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of the bill
please raise your hand okay
we've got a few hands race we I
think we need our money
I think there.
Okay we are.
There's no Mike all right.
To.
Okay very good.
Thank you.
Not quite sure that you might
have my appreciate it.
Mexico here people could limit
their comments to ninety seconds
or less.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender and I am one of
the members of the sentencing
commission committee that worked
on and endorsed this bill on
behalf of the whole committee I
support this and as a public
defender I certainly do I will
just related very brief anecdote
I have a client right now who is
extremely ill and needs of
specialty surgery operation and
is really struggling to go
through the bureaucratic process
of requesting medical parole and
I think that the changes in this
legislation would help
facilitate that for people who
are particularly in a difficult
position to advocate on their
own behalf so please support
this legislation thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name set by
Jodhi of a community engagement
specialist with the ACLU of New
Mexico speaking in support of
this bill today I'll just say
that I think that this bill
helps individuals and also
families to to get closure and
to have that emotional healing
that they may need when they're
living with the level one who is
incarcerated so please yes on
this bill thank you thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Melanie Martinez I'm the
director of adult probation
parole and we appreciate the
sponsor bringing this forward
and we fully support it thank
you thank you.
Anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in support.
Those online wishing to speak in
support
Diane my cash.
Diane.
Let's go to the next person loop
got here Luke.
Hope for our system is worth
concerns okay.
Luke Graham got terrible excuse
me loose please on.
Forty chair when we got here
with Americans for prosperity
registered lobbyists Committee
interest rector we appreciate
the sponsoring for this bill we
are in support we recognize that
having compassion for
the offender as well as the
offender's family so they can
have closure to end of life and
we thank you for thank you all
try to I am one more time Diane
my cash.
Diane how they are on mute.
Finally thank you so much sorry
any cast that's okay thank you
chair committee I support SB
twenty nine medical geriatric
parole energy to vote yes on the
bill this bill allows for
compassion and common sense and
allowing parole hearings and the
possibility of going home for
older or infirm individuals who
are found to not pose a danger
to themselves or their
communities we need to be
judicious and deliberate when it
comes to conservation we need to
be mindful of when continuing to
cover incarcerate someone make
sense this is a humane and
fiscally responsible legislation
piece of legislation I ask you
to pass this bill thank you so
much and thanks for coming back
thank you
back to the sponsor any.
Concluding comments before you
know okay
Representative reeve and then
representative will come thank
you madam chair Senator I just a
couple questions I don't think
I've actually seen this bill
before what was the reasoning
madam chair and senator an
expert from lowering that age
sixty five to fifty five.
This
ThinkCentre thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
than to spend that questions the
one that's always ask of the
reason there were a couple
reasons behind lowering that age
one people say fifty five that
doesn't sound geriatric to me so
let's just address that right
out of the gate
but people aged physiologically
people age faster when they're
in prison that's very well
documented so fifty five for me
which is in my rear view mirror
setting
versus fifty five for someone
who's been incarcerated is a
much different thing.
Most states that have a
geriatric parole program of this
thirty seven or so I believe
NCSL used to have a great
website on this but when they
update their website it
disappeared most states have
fifty or fifty five as their age
so in the conversation amongst
the members of the sentencing
commission and the compromises
that were made as they discuss
this legislation it was felt
bring it down to fifty five
would be appropriate it brings
us in line with most states that
there are some states that are
younger at sixty five New Mexico
was a real out liar in the age
for care after parole and I also
just want to stress really
quickly it's not fifty five and
you're on the fast track to
release you also there's all
those other conditions which are
all an existing law that's part
of the existing law that got
moved in the statute so those
other conditions in those
definitions for geriatric and
made permanent incapacitated and
terminally ill for all existing
law the only thing that's
changed has been that drop in
age Madam chair representative
okay and madam chair Senator an
expert.
Is there any type of formal
parole hearing when you're
deciding this service at a
different process
madam chair Representative what
it is is essentially excel words
the process a little bit what
the statue what the statutory
changes would do is put in some
form deadlines that corrections
has to meet what they're doing
now in these cases
but the process just very
briefly is an inmate can apply
it's initiated by the inmate
and lesser cases where the
inmate is too infirm to initiate
the process and there's
provisions for that in the bill
it has to be reviewed by the
department the department can
afford or medical examinations
etcetera they make a
recommendation to the parole
board parole board has thirty
days to decide fifteen days for
terminally ill inmates and there
will be a hearing and I've been
in conversations with ms
Martinez about this and they do
one concern is often that's
often expresses is there the
outreach to victims to our
victims notified all that
happens that'll happens in the
current process what this is
doing is providing a structure
that that present secretary of
corrections has put into place
providing that structure in
statute but they're still
getting the on the outreach the
of the full hearing etcetera
that would occur in a normal
parole circumstance okay and and
madam chair Senator an expert is
there any minimum amount of time
that someone has to survey let's
say they are put in prison at
age fifty fifty I mean what do
you do in a situation like that
is there any like exception that
you have to service certain
amount of time your sentence or
does that not apply madam chair.
Madam chair representative there
is no exception like that but
again
you have to show first you have
to be suffering from
debilitating chronic disease at
cetera and not be a danger to
your own self for society
If your guests been
incarcerated.
Chances are you don't have any
kind of track record through
working with the corrections
department working with
counselors and other help that
they might give people to show
that you're not danger you can't
make that representation so the
department won't release anyone
unless they can make that
showing
there is no you have to serve X.
amount of time before release
provision in there.
But if you've only been in a
short period of time chances are
you won't have demonstrated that
you're safe to release yet and
it's also important to remember
that when you're released under
this program you are free and
clear you were still
for the duration of what your
sentence would have been you
were still under the direction
of the probation parole
department so all the check ins
at center that's like that has
been some misunderstanding in
the past that you we get out of
than who you know you're often
you make your health gets better
or whatever you were still under
the supervision of probation
parole Intel your sentence ends
and there won't be any
diminishing of time for good
time so like there is when
you're on the inside with good
time you get credits depending
on your crime diss to
proportions when you're out it's
just whatever time is left
that's how much longer that
you're under supervision of the
department Madam chair
representative and madam chair
Senator an expert so in the
situation he said at the less
they get better I mean who's
going to make that call and was
a process to get them back in
prison.
madam chair Representative.
I don't know that there is an
established process we could ask
director Martinez if there is a
status process because they have
the release of a very small
number of people per year and
have from the last many years
under this program if people get
better I don't think there's a
whole back provision necessarily
but madam chair I don't know if
if if I can to you know you have
to be terminally ill terminally
ill and has to be verified
diagnosis so if you're talking
about a situation which I I
don't know would be really
realistic and coming up and just
keep in mind again there's all
kinds of safeguards you know
corrections would not remotely
let somebody out chair after
parole if if it wasn't if they
had looked at a very close and
then you've got the parole board
you know that they lose sleep
over public safety issues so I
just feel confident that there
are plenty plenty of safeguards
but the the opportunity for
gaming this is just minimal
minimal so thanks madam chair
and I was questioning because he
said if they got better under
the impression that we're have
to be terminally ill however I
guess madam chair senator and
expert I guess you can be
terminally ill with cancer and
all the sudden you know the you
know cared then as we see it
happen frequently so I just want
to make sure there was a process
if that were to happen how you
deal with it so I eight feel
that's kind of lacking in in
this sept bills but are there
Madam chair Senator and were
expert any crimes that are
excluded under this like murder
forced sex offense or anything
like that Madam chair
representative first degree
murder is excluded as is the
case and current law in part of
the negotiations over age madam
chair representative involved
whether to expand it to
everybody there are members of
the commission who said we have
people with first degree murder
are probably going to be in
there the longest.
And why do we not open up this
compassionate
program and you don't look at
compassionately or present
economic relief program for the
department either way either had
but other people said no we
won't go for that so part of the
give and take on our twenty
seven member commission was to
agree to a drop of the age but
keep that ban on first degree
murders no one else is excluded
under the law but again there's
certain offenses and sex
offenses and that cut question
comes up quite often hi Mr chair
representative I saw that was
probably gonna be a next
question
obviously you have a high bar to
crossed before released as a sex
offender so you don't have all
the stars aligned in your favor
as a sex offender where you also
are gonna be danger to someone
else
It's highly unlikely can
theoretically possible yes but
highly unlikely Madam chair
representative in my last
question madam chair and senator
and expert unit said most states
are fifty to fifty five I mean
how many states are fifty to
fifty five when you see most
madam chair Representative
unfortunately as I said the NCSL
website change and can't access
their beautiful handy chart that
they used to have when I did
research on this two years ago
when this bill had a good run
through the session it was we
was thirty five or thirty six
states
and I believe all of those
except for New Mexico all those
except for New Mexico or under
sixty five there might have been
a sixty in there and the other
states are fifty five or fifty
okay thank you madam chair of
thank you Representative.
Resented Nighbor.
Thank you madam chair and
senator of.
I too have.
Some concerns about the
Provisions on page three of
basically.
One nine through fourteen or
thirteen of.
Because I think.
We all have seen people with
terminal.
Illness diagnosis and
They have.
For lack of a better word
miraculously
Input information and and in
some cases have have
a long.
For much longer life than they
had ever anticipated and and I
think one hole in this
Is what do you do.
When that reasonable medical
judgment.
Does not come to fruition and
and someone
You know
Overcomes their terminal illness
and and
in many cases could could live
many more years even decades
longer and you have victims out
there that.
May.
See the compassion.
But may be troubled if.
That were to occur and I see
that you know ten years down the
road that person's not serving
the sentence that they were
sentenced to.
I think that that's a hole in it
but I'd like to focus on one
thing
In light of the Lynn and Erin
compassionate the.
Use act which allows.
People who are terminally ill to
Take medications to in their
life.
How to use sure that with the
provision that says that they
would not cost to the danger to
their own self.
Madam chair representative that
is a excellent.
Question
to which I have to admit I do
not have an answer I was reading
this is actually become
I was reading and I believe is
some is at the bottom of the
Netherlands on the low countries
are struggling with that very
issue with how to deal with
people or cars rated
which develop themselves of that
my belief I'm not of entirely
familiar with that act is that
It's quite possible that framing
of
the compassionate use act.
Is just not seen as a harm to
yourself.
I don't know the legal standing
of that so I don't have a great
answer madam chair
representative to your question
on that I to questions that come
up before in of actually
don't know the act well enough
to see how those two
would intersect Madam chair
representative if I may
Representative I mean again it
can just keep saying this over
and over again there's so many
safeguards on this it's not
automatic I mean we're talking
about you very specific
situations I don't know if miss
Martinez wanted to weigh in on
whether that's ever happened in
you know in terms of somebody
miraculously getting better you
know they've been doing this for
a while I don't know if if she
feels comfortable talking about
it but my new ally
on this one.
The yeah for.
Make sure we understand that
Representative yeah this is one
of make sense that the
the terminally ill definition
that's in this bill is actually
in present statute so the only
change that that actually
wouldn't be changed at all
because that fifty five ages
only under chair after parole so
this termina el Language is what
exists now in statute it's just
been relocated so that's why we
see it underlined here Madam
chair representative.
yes anyway and thank you yes
thank you madam chair and
representative so we have had
individuals who were released
and you know they they recovered
but they have to have an
approved propensity getting out
so they're still on supervision
they still have to follow
requirements of parole of the
pro aboard does that happen
often no and I can tell you
probably once or twice you know
since I've been in this role
and.
That the recommendation comes
from the medical staff not you
know that the in making put in
the application but there still
has to be some sort of medical
recommendation prior to it going
through all the levels of
approval then it still has to go
in front of the pro word in the
still have to have an approved
propane so the probation parole
officer goes out to check the
location within a parole to and
to make sure it's appropriate to
release not Madam chair on that
that issue
Senator again I'm I'm trying to
think about the the victims and
their view of it and it just
seems to me that there's a whole
year and it may not happen.
Very often but but I know a
couple individuals and Ross will
through were diagnosed with a
terminal illness and they are
still walking and reading today
and and
I think we're going to see more
of that in the future I hope we
see more of that in the future
with respect to the language
danger to oneself you obviously
look at that language because
you did move it and people were
happy with it and I just simply
suggests that
Danger to oneself should be.
The consideration.
In my view of we do need to
protect society but.
Particularly in light of other
legislation we passed it seems
to me that the danger to
oneself.
Doesn't need to be an issue that
needs to be.
Debate it.
They meet this criteria.
If there are what out that
should not be one of the
criteria that may hold the man.
Because I may very well say I
want to take advantage of this
other act that we've passed and
it's lawful to do so even though
it would.
In their life so I would just
simply suggests that maybe you
want to take that language out
out of the bill completely
and I would also suggest that
you deal with the other issue of
what happens if.
You know the the patients to
goes into remission.
Recovers and
The.
Because I'm.
Thank you know the victims who
are looking at this and and you
know they're not going to be
to please that might have all
sent the video world and support
this.
Under those circumstances but if
they would cover they're not too
happy to see jondo walk around
on the street for a they were
released because of terminal
illness and then they.
Did not the.
right they recovered from that
for those of the the two full
for that I would see in this I
understand the the the madam
chair and senator
It's
I think if we could deal with
those with particularly the.
Recovery issue I would be more
inclined to support it thank you
madam chair thank you if I may
um Madam that's okay.
Representative Rehm okay
madam chair and senator
What what I think we're trying
to do is codify with the current
procedures are at
At the at the prisons is that
correct.
Madam chair representative it is
correct the existing statute as
I've mentioned is in two
different places is very vague
as center says correction shall
have this program into some
details in it so we're we're
working to codify current
procedures also set up some firm
timelines madam chair
representative in statute so was
clear to everyone involved in
the process what this process
would look like the reason Madam
chair representative we kept
that persons own self languages
and is that's an existing law
and I agree that you know I can
see the questions there that
Representative Nibert had but
we're trying to do minimal
changes to existing law.
And the Bounkeua the changes are
setting up a clear process so
that everyone who might be
involved in this process from
victims to attorneys to
obviously the prisoners
themselves will know what's
expected and how the process
might work Madam chair
representative and madam chair
and.
Mr Carter at you know what I
think what you might think about
is a floor amendment you know
addressing
Representative night birds
issues I would of also make that
the probation would be you know
would be closely monitored and
and I'm not saying that they
have to come in daily to the
facility that the
That the probation officers like
Kali number something you know
something like that I mean
clearly if there terminal
they're not going to be mobile.
Or that Google so
my experience as a when I was an
officer anyone that was released
really fit that definition you
know I didn't see what
Representative Nibert Pat but I
can certainly see with today's
medical advancements
that could occur but anyway
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Reem
anyone else with questions.
Okay.
Let's go how did you have one.
Okay sure.
The the the impact of.
We have a due to a we have a due
pass motion made by
Representative L. comes second
by Representative Romero would
you call the roll Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert no I'd
like to.
Representative read.
Representative green.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Sapolsky yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Representative madam chair I
would like to to support this
and I think if we filled in that
one issue I could I could get
behind but without that by.
I just can't get their thank you
thanks thank you Senator of life
it's a smart phone
or blackberry okay.
What has the keyboard which some
of us need to three dimensional
keyboard okay.
If you find it on eBay and loan
was known as we go to Best Buy
and talented back it's back you
know that's right I guess we
should bring that up in the
context of geriatric bill.
Just for you there you go all
right yes.
Hearing when it sends you an
email says that from my
blackberry.
Senator.
That's so cool all right.
thank you very much the vote
please account please by a vote
of six to to we have a due pass
on Senate bill twenty nine all
right now let's get back to
Senate bill eighty four we what
we did was we made a copy of the
amendments in context so I hope
everyone has a copy of that and
it's dated February twentieth
twenty twenty three
so Senator the floor is yours on
I think we're all on the same
page right good so okay so this
is Senator eighty four is my
graduated sanctions for Texas
technical parole violations bill
here's the problem here's what
we're dealing with as of now
there are fifty three hundred
prisoners incarcerated in our
state facility all right and of
those fifty three hundred nine
hundred and eight are there for
technical parole violations or
seventeen percent of our current
prison population is there for
technical parole violations of
in two thousand twenty two one
third of all prison admissions
were for technical parole
violations that these kind of
races costs the taxpayer twenty
million dollars a year but you
know the the point is what this
is not being soft on crime this
is being smart on crime what we
you know because what back when
I would work closely with with
parolees trying to successfully
complete their parole plan under
the context of Dismas House you
know it's almost always almost
always up of an addiction issue
it does is that these folks are
trying to stay clean you know
doing their best and and and at
the same time we know that
relapse is a part of recovery
centers out of the way it is now
parole officers and I or I just
have all the suspect in the
world for parole officers in the
field you know the way it is now
the analytical allow like two or
three thirty urine's but.
And there's no in between and
then at some point it's like
okay you're going we're going to
we're gonna violate your parole
because you can't stay clean
and so therefore the all these
folks go back for what however
longer sentences and and and
it's just you know what we're
doing here is presenting giving
people in the field some options
some more options so there are
you know consequences for for
testing dirty for relapsing I
mean you just can't
automatically Justin okay we'll
try again try again so there are
very real consequences under
this bill so it's
a person is sent back to county
jail for certain you know period
of time so they can really sore
the reality of what they're you
know they're facing if they
can't stay clean so it's
basically if you're comfortable
folks with you know when twenty
percent of our prison population
been in there for technical
parole violations not new
felonies
you know then this bill isn't
for you but this personally I
feel like we can do better I
know we can do better and and
this is not like in any way
jeopardizing public safety so
that's kind of my take on it and
Kimberly with the public
defender's office the appeals
division will for explain it a
little further thank you.
Thank you madam chair and I will
say this is been and ideas just
sort of it's context especially
for new members this is an idea
that's been percolating for a
long time and it goes back
Senator masters.
There is co sponsored the bills
because there is has been you
know taking leadership on this
issue for for that whole time
he's had to built to carry at a
It ways to address and improve
our probation and parole system
for many years including this
issue of technical violations
but there are so many moving
parts to that that passed bills
have been a little more
comprehensive and this bill is
born out of conversations that
came in at twenty twenty the
interim leading up to twenty
twenty one in the sentencing
commission where we were tasked
members of the sentencing
commissions criminal justice
reform committee were tasked
with identifying probation
parole reforms that there was
stakeholder consensus around and
this was the issue around which
there was consensus this is not
a sentencing commission bill but
the idea of imposing graduated
sanctions for technical
violations was the thing that
everyone could agree on so
that's where this this is why
this narrow bill is before you
and it is to codify statewide
what is in place and a handful
of judicial districts now of of
graduated sanctions and make
sure that that is the statewide
our system in place I have
clients from all over the state
in my practice and I do see in
the in the jurisdictions that
don't have a technical
violations program I do see full
revocations for first technical
violations regularly so we're
trying to address that and then
I just also want to very briefly
add that in addition to you
we're Senator o'neill's clear
passion for the issue is focused
around addiction that is not the
only reason to adopt this kind
of approach we also see people
struggle in reentry after prison
after prison term in a lot of
different ways and complying
with a lot of those sort of
technical conditions
requirements just because
getting used to being back in
the world can be a challenging
need a few opportunities to it
to make mistakes before.
Are you face those really severe
sanctions that come with
Representative replication so
other than that I will stand for
questions thank you thank you
thank you let's go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand yes miss
Martinez.
This through we have.
We have a Mike.
I just got this current.
Honeymoon is a hundreds of
those members of the committee
so a couple things I want to
point out which I think is
important for you all to know is
that the FY twenty two report
students the sentencing
commission provides information
but they don't characterize the
reasons for the re admissions so
I do have that information for
I will provide the reason for
returns Lee we had five hundred
and eight returned on new
charges we had three hundred
thirty three returned alright
funding and the remainder were
technicals tied to a sex
offender contract or someone
leaving a program that had a
positive controlled substance
yes so I think there's more to
the story that we we we all need
to be aware of it and we're not
sending everyone back on the
first positive you a
and I do want to point out
because I think this will come
up as far as the founders Goethe
it's not missing an appointment
our policy currently controls
the criteria that has to be met
X. excluding sex offenders
because once by GPS is cut off
we do issue the warrant
immediately otherwise we go to
the last known address we send a
letter contact emergency contact
go to the last place of
employment prior to issuing the
the.
Warren as well as the the
violation part so you know I
think you heard in the previous
bill.
Sure farm true true reform is
sitting down at the table having
all the stakeholders
we're not opposed to it at all
I'll be the first one at the
table and I think they know that
I respect both Senator o'neill
and New Mexico Chavez Cook
okay so that's it thank you
thank you thank.
Anyone else in the audience was
to speak in opposition to the
bill.
All right anyone online wishing
to speak in opposition.
I
don't see anyone anyone wishing
to speak in support of the bill
in the audience.
Yes if you could line up with
please.
Welcome back to Senator for okay
that's fine.
Is that is it working thanks is
that on.
The same yeah yeah and good
morning.
Members of the committee my name
is Bianca terrace on the
register lobbyist for the
justice action network and we
stand support of this bill thank
you for bringing it up again
Senator any all we've been
working with that center Maestas
in the past I mean back to
whenever he was the and senator
right had brought it.
This bill and we just want to
say that at least forty states
authorize graduated responses to
supervision violations in
statute common sanctions include
community service GPS monitoring
drug and alcohol testing
extended to provide supervision
terms among others in addition
many states have limited
incarceration for violations the
research research shows it is no
more effective the noncustodial
sanctions that reducing
recidivism and may actually
increase criminal behavior and
this is what this legislation
aims to thank you so much Sir.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Rikki Lee
Chavez on behalf of the New
Mexico called defense lawyers
association we also stand in
strong support of this bill we
appreciate the Sanchez continued
work on this program
participating in and completing
probation and parole programs is
difficult however we believe
that this bill strikes the right
balance of
addressing getting people out of
that system and the lowering
recidivism rates with public
safety and for those reasons we
encourage your support thank
you.
Thank you madam chair committee.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee sorry about that I
sat by Daddy again with the ACLU
of New Mexico speaking in strong
support of this bill as a
community engagement specialist
I work with crossroads for women
a lot and organization that
helps women returning from
incarceration and we were
preparing for our day of action
will be happening on Monday
advocates up here to speak with
you all about criminal legal
reform and one of the bills we
spoke with about we spoke about
with the women's what this one
and are you holding the Mike
down consistently it's not that
it's it's something else it's a
battery or something okay.
I think you're unable to okay.
Sorry.
Have better okay okay sorry
about that
Anyway it just to wrap up.
As B. eighty four it was one of
the bills that really sparked an
interest from a lot of the women
at crossroads because a lot of
them are are currently on
probation and parole I'm not
here to speak on behalf of them
what we'll do that on Monday but
I will say some of the reasons
they brought up is that you know
it would create a more open
communication between people on
parole and their probation
officers it would empower
probation officers to provide
real resources to people
struggling with addiction rather
than
faced with the choice of putting
someone back into incarceration
or letting it slide I think it
will provide a real opportunity
for more collaborative approach
you know we we've been trying
car serration as a solution to a
lot of things in New Mexico were
ranked one of the highest in the
world in terms of our
incarceration rates and it is
not quite working out I think we
could try a different approach
Just lastly it this bill will
improve outcomes for for people
who are on parole and for
probation and parole officers so
please vote yes on this bill
thank you.
Then thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is it been a
power and the chief public
defender just very briefly as
mistrust cook over the last
several years this the the ideas
in this bill have been
considered and debated and
brought into committees here at
the legislature
As we've talked to lawyers
around the state we we believe
this addresses a procedural and
systemic problem it's not just
about department corrections in
fact a lot of it is not it's
because there's so many
organizations working together
the who created the problem and
that is
the issuance of a warrant for it
technical violation the arrest
the waiting for a hearing and so
so often people end up weeks and
weeks waiting for hearing within
their get convicted credit time
served put back on probation and
that creates worse outcomes for
those people when they're meant
to be released we support this
bill thank you anyone else in
the audience wishing to speak in
support those online wishing to
speak in support Diane my cash.
I'm good morning again sharing
committee SB eighty four
addresses the really crucial
failing my opinion at current
practice for dealing with
technical violations of
probation and parole putting
people in jail for even a short
time can have tremendous
negative effect on the
individual but also on their
families and children I can
undermine a community called
interested supporting the
success of people ring the
incarceration I've been my own
struggle with that my own funds
Dr with the directors of trying
to build a life both in
Corporation finding housing
getting and holding the job
arranging transportation to get
to a job and comply with the
conditions everything thank can
quickly become overwhelming
mistakes are easily made and
sometimes as a result of
logistical barriers that you're
finding child care for your kids
they're negotiating that will be
arrested and jailed for any
length of time and have
devastating effects of the
probation or their family and
their children even a few days
in jail can cause you to lose
your job and I can't imagine
what it be like to worry for
kids sake the ari wonder if
you're gonna lose them
altogether I thought you all
people who are not a threat we
need to support not hinder their
success out here in the world
thank you so much thank you
Diane Luke.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Lou Scott
from which he Merican for
prospering while these and we
are in support of Senate bill
eighty four not only is it smart
on crime which is what we want
to be smart on crime
A graduate account penalty for
technical violations which can
you know consistent gotten phone
calls appointments using alcohol
or drugs although risky behavior
this behavior has no victims but
the parole The New should not
warrant jail time we believe
that this legislation for the
opportunity to the parolees to
see guidance regard personal
choices that we have to the
technical violations.
And will disrupt their
assimilation back in his
community so we are trying to
where this building we
appreciate your time and the
sponsor putting forward thank
you thank you.
loops held the Campos.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is
Christina Campos I'm a policy
director with both futures and
we strongly support just be
eighty four probation and parole
is supposed to be a phase in
people sentences where they
bring closure to their sentence
and receive support and
reentering society as we work
with people who are currently on
probation and parole we find
that it is often the opposite
individuals in these systems not
feel like they have a trusting
and supportive relationships
with our officers they have to
pretend that they know exactly
where they are to be at all
times they can they can't share
the real challenges that they
face and reentering society
challenges like not being able
to find a job fear of losing the
job not being able to keep food
on the table or contribute to
the family household maybe even
struggling to keep their housing
arrangement stressed and
overwhelmed with the number of
follow ups that they have not
having adequate transportation
to make it to their appointments
on time or at all not being able
to meet their own their families
for their officers expectations
and most importantly their
struggles with substance use
well this is shadowed by the
fear of going back to jail for a
technical violation we strongly
believe that minimizing the
violations that called for
incarceration of individuals in
the system can aid in creating a
much healthier and honest
relationships people who are
struggling to meet requirements
of probation and parole need
resources and support not jail
and for those reasons we
strongly support just be eighty
four thank you thank you
Senator that's the conclusion of
our public comment Senator one
with just quickly in terms of
folks absconding which is a big
part of this will often times as
a pro we will of secon because
here she knows are gonna yes
thirty and they know they're
going back so that's a big part
of that so thank you thank you
senator back to the committee
representative read thank you
madam chair Senator is.
Chavis cut.
Okay.
That's a start going through
this and I want to talk and
madam chair and senator and
expert about the difference
between the standard violations
and technical violations of the
kind of go through a
appropriations contract so I
let's start on page three.
And G..
and you to find standard
violation of parole.
Just basically anything that's
not a technical violation.
Okay so madam chair Senator
expert.
That seems very vague to me and
so I was wondering if you'd
tried to actually create a more
a better definition for what
standard means.
Madam chair representative I
think the the the clarity comes
from reading the definition of
the technical violation and and
you know it seems it doesn't
meet that and if not then it
would be a standard so the the
crux of the technical violation
definition is whether or not it
presents a threat what they're
conduct their violation creates
a threat to the provision or or
another person the amendments
that was done on first on the
Senate floor and then cleaned up
in C. pack adds also violating a
condition of no contact but the
and then obviously because
anything that constitutes a new
crime so that is that where the
specificity comes and then the
the reason the only reason
standard violation is not
further defined as because that
clarity is there in the
definition of technical okay and
madam chair Senator an expert so
creates a threat to the
probation or the poorly
for example we're talking about
controlled substances a
probationer
is using controlled substances
that could be argued while I'm
assuming that's considered a
technical violation under what
you guys want it could be argued
that their danger to themselves
that they're using controlled
substances so that could that be
a violation of the standard
condition of probation then if
the judge finds that Madam chair
representative I I don't believe
it would be for for use for more
use I think if you know someone
was showing a pattern of
overdose or something like that
we would get into the level of a
threat to themselves or others
or themselves we took that
language that definition comes
from the Louisiana statute and
Luisi and I've read them the
case law interpreting the
Louisiana statute and there it's
very clear in in that
jurisprudence which I believe
would be pretty informative to
anything that happened in New
Mexico since we took the
language from them that your use
of drugs is a technical
violation and is does not fall
under that threat category.
Okay so madam chair and
Senator an expert than I guess
why would you just put that in
there because I think they could
very well be argued that using
controlled substances especially
with fat and all these days
madam chair Senator expert that
that would be something that is
a danger to a probationer or
parolee and so I think that
school kind of vague and so I I
mean if you wanted to say for
sure it was any time you used
drugs it was a technical
violation by when it you just
say that in there Madam chair
representative I think the short
answer to not to why didn't we
just put it in there is because
there we we made a choice not to
enumerate every single possible
technical violation in statute I
think there is plenty of room
for that type level of guidance
in the rulemaking process where
things can be updated and
modified in a less
time consuming fashion then
coming back to the legislature
every time something needed to
be added to our stricken from
the list so the general tab
concept of creating a threat is
what was used as the statutory
guide post and in Louisiana
that's what they did is they
then turns to rulemaking for
providing greater specificity
and that's what we would be
anticipating what happened in
New Mexico as well and madam
chair Senator an expert but when
you say create a threat to
appropriations probably it's
very possible judge could
provide the using controlled
substances is a danger would you
agree Madam chair representative
I I I understand your concern
I'd I don't share that concern I
think that we have in New Mexico
with the technical violations
programs that we've had for so
many years I think it's pretty
well understood in New Mexico
that just testing dirty is not
going to be a standard violation
and I I would certainly it could
play out that way important we
would we would litigate that but
I I don't share your concern
that a judge would see it that
way okay in just going over the
standard order appropriations
madam chair Senator an expert I
just want to go through these
standard conditions that I.
No you're all familiar with that
okay condition one violating
state laws that's going to be a.
tech that's going to be a
standard violation of condition
right because you're basically
breaking the law all right and
then number two reporting madam
chair and senator reporting is
that going to cover your of
standard.
Madam chair and representative
this is again one where the I
think that the the choice in
statute was to use brought
enough language that there's
flexibility for case by case
assessment so if someone has
missed one or two appointments
then my my hope would be that it
would be clear that is a
technical violation and if
someone has you know left the
state and really thoroughly
absconded then that might
constitute a standard violation
but would be something that the
individual would would look at
the individual circumstances of
the case to see whether it rises
to that level of creating a
threat to the probation or
parole we and I would say that
let you know also that that
absconding in particular was one
of those things that was
litigated in Louisiana under the
same definition and they found
that obstante ng was a standard
violation where is Mr point
mints is not and we did
consciously refrained from
defining absconding in statute
that was as you may recall a
sticking point of the bill in
the past and so we wanted to
leave that to the parole board
or the court in individual
circumstances it madam chair and
senator experts because I I
agree absconding for the
majority of your probationary
period I mean.
You don't even serve any
appropriations so I understand
what you're saying that this
doesn't change the language and
all that if you of Scotland you
can have that appropriations re
tacked back on or the sentence
three tech back on practice
manager we're not touching that
existing law okay number three
Soto basically it seems madam
chair Senator it's I will get
permission before leaving the
county presiding change jobs
engaging in financial contractor
does would that be a technical
violation or.
Madam chair representative that
to me that sounds like in most
cases it would be a technical
violation I can imagine
hypotheticals where the changing
job would maybe be to a job you
shouldn't have for the
particular person that you are
in in that case there again is
room in the statutory definition
for individualized assessment
okay and thank you M. and madam
chair centered expert
association our association with
people that are detrimental to
appropriations or people having
a criminal record other
probationers and parolees and
victims or witnesses of any
crime now I I did see
The victim victim or witness
part so that could be a us a
standard violation basically
that part.
and madam chair and centered
expert what about the other
part.
Madam chair representative that
is a sort of the same answers to
the the previous condition which
is that that the definition we
Pat we're putting into statute
with the flexibility for
individualized assessment so if
it's just that you went to a
family dinner where your cousin
happens to be a felon and so you
saw him maybe the judge would be
able to see that that sounds
technical in nature but if you
were you know meeting regularly
with the same very people who
you previously you know maybe
committed your crime with that
that's going to be a much bigger
red flag and so that that that
individual assessment is is left
up to the the disk the educator
okay thank you and madam chair
and senator an expert the number
five is is one that deals with
completing treatment of
community corrections you know
intensive supervised probation
electronic monitoring those
types of programs so someone
just does not complete the
treatment program or does not
comply with the different
programs that are required by
appropriations chair centered
expert what about that one.
Madam chair representative
unless in those circumstances
the way that they failed to do
it somehow presented a threat to
themselves or others would most
likely be a technical violation
meaning that the first second or
third would get their graduated
sanctions and then upon the
fourth under this bill would
then be subject to the full
panoply of options that exist
under current law and madam
chair Senator an expert at this
so that one concerns me because
often we're putting these
probationers are pro is in long
term treatment programs for
their huge wait lists and then
they go to these programs and
they you know don't report to
what they need to do and then
we're going to bring him back
under a technical violation and
gives and community service so I
I have a concern about that if
madam chair you want to address
that.
I'm happy to Madam chair
representative I think you know
community services one option
there are other options it's
anything non custodial so you
know that what the court can or
the proboards can impose at that
point is to to alter the
conditions to maybe try to
identify treatment program that
will be more realistic for them
to order an additional
counseling opportunities so it's
it's really about using these
stumbling blocks of these first
through third technical
violations stumbling blocks as
an opportunity to more uniquely
tailored the person supervision
to to help them succeed and
madam chair Senator an expert I
mean.
Most the time before they even
get to court or get asked to go
to long term treatment or
anything like that they would
you agree of had many technical
violations that maybe never came
to a public defender's office or
district attorney's office Madam
chair representative I think
that's true so a lot of the time
I don't think that's always the
case that's part of why we
wanted to adopt a statewide
policy that is can be applied
more consistently okay well
chair just have some concerns
about that my concern about
expenses employment I see those
as technical
you can't obviously have any
type of firearm Madam chair
Senator while you're a
appropriations and so if
somebody's possessing a weapon
I guess that there Fallon that
would be a new cried Madam chair
representative I do believe
anyone under the following under
the statute would be a felon and
would be than guilty of felony
possession and what if you were
madam chair Senators serving a
deferred sentence or a
conditional discharge and you
had a weapon.
Madam chair I don't have very
much concern that a court would
not find that to be a threat to
themselves or others so I that's
that would fall under the
standard violation.
Okay and madam chair and senator
and
expert of how would you how
would that be a threat to others
like how would you believe
possessing a weapon would be a
threat to others.
Madam chair I believe if it was
ordered as a condition of
probation with the intent of
ensuring that they do not engage
in violent activity it is I I
don't I don't really see a risk
that a court would find that
that doesn't present any kind of
threat.
And then the
Madam chair Senator and expert
I'm not concerned we talked
about the drugs
Not reporting addresses number
ten is that a technical
violations.
Madam chair again I think that
falls under the most of the time
yes and perhaps under particular
circumstances where the
the person's not reporting the
arrest somehow presented a
threat to the safety of
themselves or others then it
would fall under standard and we
would allow for individual
factual inquiry okay and madam
chair and senator and expert
Mexico about anything but let's
get on the last one fifteen
alcohol
with that because a technical
violation Madam chair
representative I think with the
same copy outs that we discussed
around testing positive test.
And madam chair and senator and
representative expert this nine
hundred and eight people in
prison on technical violations.
I will say I was concerned when
I heard from miss Martinez those
the type of technical violations
it seems like the majority of
those were sex offenders people
who had absconded for long
periods of time when you do the
math on all of it because I
wasn't able to write it all down
actually how many are in there
for technical violations that
don't deal with the discarding
or sex offender violations Madam
chair representative so the nine
hundred and eight number
represents all parole violations
it does not include probation
violations at all and just for
to to put that into context that
seventeen percent of all prison
inmates on just the parole
violation side I don't have I
can't tell you what percentage
of those are actually technical
violations at all the LFC FIR
estimates seventy percent of
them are and again that's just
in the parole context there is
no data around probation
violations because when people
go back into corrections on a
probation violation it's not
logged as a violation it's
logged under their underlying
crime so I we have no data on
that except that in a UNM study
looked at this by opening every
single I have
That situation with donuts up
stairs and.
She's already cranky is too
much.
So I thought there was any place
that the little weakness.
One of the judiciary so everyone
is waiting for a bill to pass
your welcome.
Thank you best used Judiciary
Committee.
Anyway thank you you're very
welcome I don't know if there's
enough for staff.
I'm sure it was.
I don't
you will have one of
your FIR the with you have you
all find out.
You know this I can see what
happens in the committee I will
know who does it down.
You did that as a cop joke.
For.
Grade this year all right well
thank you governor we really
want to say that there delay yes
crafter thank you
all my.
Look at that my goodness.
This is.
School and that school.
S.
R..
And.
I
want to go there very busy can
you say how old you are you
sending Ezzell.
Thank.
So glad you could come and join
us this first early childhood
educator advocate that testified
before Senate finance so that we
can get all of that effort over
the finish line and no that's
how long you've been stuck with
me.
Thank you governor.
You'll need some help you.
That's okay that's how this is a
good bill.
Thank you so much I appreciate
it thank you thank you governor
thank you.
Okay
we're.
Talk about.
This.
where we're Representative re
but I think we all have the for.
Madam chair representative I
think I was rattling off
statistics Representative right
to wrap that part of it up which
is just to say that we have a
UNM study that actually cracked
open every case file to together
similar data for probation
violations and found an
approximate eighteen percent of
admissions there so it's about
equivalent so then we're looking
at thirty percent for violations
seventy percent of those
according to LFC being
technicals and you are correct
we don't know what that means
because it's not like there's
boxes being checked to that say
this one was for dirty way this
one's for missed appointment
this one was for standing so I I
can't give you an accurate
estimate of what that would be
but I I I think it's safe to say
that a significant enough number
of them would still be technical
under this bill to achieve the
goal that this bill is trying to
achieve which is to reduce
incarcerating people for
stumbling in their effort to to
to be under supervision it thank
you madam madam chair and
senator an expert I want to move
to the the part of the technical
violations that have that step
down for each penalty and madam
chair.
It seems to me Senator and
expert that the they seem very
light I guess I would say as far
as penalties go and Madam chair
representative Senator an expert
I I guess I have concerns that
we're mandating what the
punishment would be on a
technical violation and taking
that judicial discretion away
and prosecutorial discretion.
By people who really understand
the case madam chair and senator
an expert because I think we all
know that well I I know you
stated an example that we don't
see
your that sometimes people are
going to present on the first
technical violation and and and
I guess what I'm sure Senator
I've never really seen that and
we tend to as prosecutors not
see any violations from
probation or parole until
they're about their third or
fourth in and then the first one
comes to the port maybe the
court is seen it but surely not
these other agencies so madam
chair Senator and expert I I
have a big problem with just
three mute removing judicial
discretion in that area and I
wondered if you could answer to
that issue.
Reckon you know madam chair and
and senator thanks for this
question you obviously know this
terrain so well it's basically
as as our expert is said I mean
there's all kinds of flexibility
there's you know the room to
deal with the situation
individually I just don't see
you know people given up their
power with this basically and
again I all I can say is over
and over again you know so many
times.
You know and I'm Sikandar is
this not of Scotland the the
they know they're gonna yes
thirty they've been working with
the parole percentage they know
they've already tested very
tight so off they go so it's
basically what what we're again
I just I hate cliches but we are
being smart on crime and we're
it's being smart on this issue
we're given latitude for each
situation it's not at the
expense of public safety this
isn't like being soft on crime
again it's like to spend using
our brains and knowledge thing
for you know the reality of what
so many of these parolees are
down so I mean that's my long
winded answer to that and madam
chair and representative of I
can just add very briefly and on
your point of the what the
distinctions actually are we
pulled the sanctions from the
local rule in Albuquerque so
that's the those are the
graduated sanctions in place in
Albuquerque now and madam chair
and and senator and expert
another concern I have about
least technical violations is
sometimes probationary periods
are only eighteen months a year
or something like that so to get
to for technical violations by
the time you can actually use
that probationary period to help
somebody maybe who needs
treatment or whatever it might
be or to you know revoke their
sentence it really is a lot of
technical violations to get to
the situation where judge has
discretion to then maybe order
treatment or or what have you so
in my example previously madam
chair where someone was kicked
out of a treatment long term
treatment program and and then
they come back for a technical
violation where they get three
days community service or maybe
five days community service or
maybe even three days of
incarceration when that bed is
obviously sought after by so
many people in the state because
we don't have the treatment
facilities we need it just seems
a little I think again just I
don't know how we're going to
help these people if we have
this many technical violations
we have to get through before
anything actually.
Productive can happen.
And briefly as possible sure
many long term members I I don't
I did not to get in the weeds
because I cause for time's sake
and I met a number of reasons I
think that the judge would have
the ability to address that by
using treatment as the sanction
and and by extending the
probationary term as needed in a
particular circumstance they can
you know may impose an addition
if credit is granted they can
extend the probationary term I
think I just have a plenty of
tools available to them to
address that and madam chair and
senator an expert okay the
probably the biggest problem I
have with this bill the next to
those technical violations is
this language in the bill that
when a judge's sentencing on a
technical violation they can
only consider if I read this
right the technical violation
and not the previous underlying
charge madam chair senator and
expert can you explain why that
is in the bill and what the the
purpose of that is Madam chair
representative they can consider
it it's it is guidance to the
court to or the parole board to
make sure that the sanction is
commensurate with the violation
itself and not merely a
punishment for the underlying
it's not disallowing them from
considering it and certainly it
would be a factor in considering
the gravity of the violation
because you consider that
violation in context so I don't
think their hands are tied by it
is to try and provide further
guidance that we don't want to
we want people to have
opportunities to succeed on on
supervised release and a madam
chair and senator an expert I
that's a big problem to me
because I see a situation and
just doing prosecution as long
as I did where you say you have
a sex offender and those are
very hard cases to try madam
chair Senator as you know and
sometimes those are pled to a
suspended sentence because we
want to get the conviction the
registration and make sure that
we can at least get a
probationary period out of the
case because.
The victims maybe cannot testify
madam chair Senator an expert so
the way I read this bill and
let's say this individuals and
caught drinking alcohol which is
a technical violation
I think what you're going to get
into is the situation madam
chair representative for
prosecutors are gonna say
nothing's going to happen when
something like this happens so
we're gonna do our time on the
sentence and you're gonna get it
backwards result to where you're
going to have aggressive
prosecution Madam chair
representative Senator an expert
because no one's going to be
confident that there's any
judicial discretion in this and
so the time will come on the
front and it's said to given the
chance on the backend to do
better and so I I have a concern
that.
We are pleading these cases
because we have to and if you're
not going to take into account
because that's how I read this
the underlying charge whether
the murder C. S. P. or whatever
it might be
we're kind of.
Getting away from what it judges
posted consider which is the
underlying charges always but
the underlying charge and go
back to the complete history so
I see madam chair and senator of
the big problem with that
language
Based on the fact that how I
read that is that the judge is
really not supposed to consider
the underlying offense but just
the technical violation so I'll
go ahead and pass pass that but
I though I have some serious
concerns and problems with this
bill I believe that the
department adult probation
proscriptions that they hit the
nail on the head of the there's
there's some issues here for me
and I I just don't think I can
support this bill but I
appreciate the debate and
answering the questions so thank
you madam chair thank you
representative Representative
Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
I'd I'd like to begin on a kind
of a follow up on
Representative creeps pointy
particularly when I was a
detective I worked with
probation and parole on many of
the repeat offenders and I found
that probation and parole was
very.
Considerate on violations and
wax in that.
It took multiple times before
the court the for the individual
Reese was returned.
The other thing that I think we
need to keep in context is.
So let's talk about the parolees
they're in prison they apply for
parole.
There is a parole plan and they
agree that their eight will
follow these conditions of
parole.
And what we're looking at is a
bill that says we know that you.
Promise to follow these but if
you're going to violate them he
these are the sanctions.
And I have a problem with that
because the the con side as
Representative revisits that is
for the
prosecution to go ahead and.
Make the sentence or request a
sentence to be so long that the
parole could be very short.
And I think you need to leave
the latitude in the court for
that.
But madam chair and.
Representative one of the
comments was of from the public
about real resources for
parolees been at it you know all
the trouble parole officers I
spoke with.
They had to work with their
Karoli to get them into a into a
situation and give them
resources to try to make them
succeed.
The purpose of parole is not to
go ahead and set him up for
failure which is kind of what
I'm hearing from one side the
purpose of parole is to get them
back in reoriented into society
and become a productive member
well if they're not going to
follow the conditions of parole.
Then they're going to become a
repeat offender.
I mean that's what we see all
the time and
I want to.
At in madam chair in the agency.
Chavis I think I think we all
agree that the violations
currently for a technical
violation can go from using
drugs not staying with curfew
all the way up to murder so we
have a wide range I understand
that that's correct.
Madam chair representative that
is those would all constitute
violations technical violations
certainly wouldn't include those
that something like a new crime
yes.
And madam chair
In Mr let's go to.
Cage for so we're now we're just
talking about technical
violations and the new language
we're including drug use in that
is that correct that would be a
technical.
I'm Madam chair representative
if it would be under the intent
of the bill and and that doesn't
state drug use in the bill that
that would be yes that is a
quintessential example yeah.
Madam chair I have a problem
with that I think that madam
chair in Mr and and senator I
think we all agree most of these
people are in jail because of
drugs.
Drugs was closely related to the
crime that got them there and if
the returning to the drugs
they're starting down that road
again and you know what we're
trying to do is keep them from
becoming a repeat offender.
I think that we really need to
think about how we're going to
to look at that I want to I I
want to see him never come back.
Madam chair it was a.
And senator when we go to page
six and we start looking at the
new technical violations I'll
just pick one was picked.
Second technical violation of
five days of community service.
Are those eight hour days what
is to community service.
Madam chair representative that
would be up to either the
whoever's imposing the sanction
could set out the scope of
community service the these are
examples it's not mandating
community services anything non
custodial so it's a any non
detention sanction if you look
to the to the next the end of
that was a list of possibilities
and says or any other non
detention sanction so it's just
providing examples of non
detention sanctions that the
judge or parole board has
available to them.
Madam chair and miss cook I I
echo Representative Reeves I I
think the court needs to have
the discretion
are you.
The.
These are little slaps on the
hand if I look at it and
I think that currently the
parole officer has that ability
and I think that they use that
you know what you know well I've
contacted them on issues that I
knew an individual was on parole
and they would call then and
have a discussion with them you
know so I think that that part
is taken care of for me see if I
have.
Madam chair and
Of Misco Committee senator I I
think that we need to do a
little more work on this before
we get into it
before we change the law but as
it is I can support the way it
is thank you madam chair
representative madam chair.
Madam chair of if I may make one
other comment I meant to say
when we look at the tension
where they're actually going to
be detained three days five days
thirty days that's going to be
in a county facility.
And not in the state facility
and now it's a cost to the
county.
Thank you madam chair that this
the county is reimbursed by the
state in such situations that's
why the counties have not
opposed of that we don't need to
get okay.
You make your point
Representative okay.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair.
I would thank you very much
Senator and
and Kim Chavez Cook I really
appreciate this this is been a
high high priority since at
least.
Twenty eight to twenty when the
LFC did a study of what is it
costs the state for technical
violations of probation parole
it is staggering.
It's I think in in if anyone can
remember the exact figure I
think it was maybe as high as
forty five million a year maybe
forty three million and maybe a
little bit less but how do we
want to spend our money.
And I had a client who was of.
Poster child for this bill he
was in prison.
At a state facility.
He was my point in the civil
case in CYFD here was the parent
with whom his children will be
reunified would you successfully
completed his prison sentence.
Was on probation.
He had a he has a learning
disability and doesn't right
well so he's not able to get
like the very best possible job
he was students
in to see the screen he was in
prison.
Long enough to probably have
learned to read if there had
been you know people who could
teach reading to somebody with a
learning disability imprisoned
under our inmate literacy act.
But he came out and I am pretty
sure is a learning disability
because his children did well in
school.
But.
It was working the day work.
He was had trouble with this
phone he had a hole in his
living in it a nice little home
in Alliance at County.
But his phone would die his car
would die he could not take his
daughter's to the probation
office this is appointments here
we're trying to get a hold of
his probation officer and.
He ended up getting revoked
twice it disrupted his trial
home visit which disrupted the
entire CYFD system of services
when he would go to the county
jail he would immediately become
a trustee he would be helping
with the laundry I mean they
knew him because they knew we
could trust him they knew they
could trust Emily wasn't a
problem and so we get to court
and the judge says well he looks
on online and says well he's
expanded to drown he's sitting
right here.
And he's coded as of state
funding.
Is not using his not selling
he's just.
Basis disadvantaged in not
having enough support system and
he's getting out of prison.
So the second time.
It disrupted the trial home
visit it.
If the case went back into
foster care.
It was just a tragedy for
everyone involved and that's
what we're paying for and I
think I submit that the district
attorney is the public
defender's the courts would
probably rather divide up that
thirty million or twenty five
million or whatever it is they
were spending on technical
violations and provide treatment
so that people.
Will they get there is some for
their budgets but they also we
can also provide more treatment
we could work on getting better
housing so this is where.
It to me.
We really have to change the
system and I ate
am appalled that we don't want
to try to do that instead we're
I don't understand what the
state.
The state people have been
opposing it I don't get it.
Because it doesn't make sense
when we are looking at the depth
and breadth of the drug problems
in the state and the poverty
because in this case for my
client was really more of a
system situation of poverty and
one of the can get the car fixed
so I can drive down the
probation office so thank you
madam chair hi I did want to
Well I can't remember what my
question was of the Senator but
I really appreciate these
efforts and I hope somebody I
hope we can get it through I
hope the governor could be
persuaded to sign.
We could maybe give her some
donuts.
Madam chair.
Thank you representative of any
one else on Representative
night.
Thank you madam chair Senator
off I'm gonna focus only on one
paragraph and that's on page
four paragraph the.
Because I think the.
Changes if my understanding of
rules correct don't be made.
Maybe our maybe maybe not be as
clear as a.
So if if the board if there's a
vial of standard violation of
parole the board may revoke the
parole and I assume that means
your rules revoked if you go
back to prison.
Madam chair representative yes
okay so so madam chairman and
the Senator.
That's one thing that can do but
then there's a word and inserted
so they can be sent back to
prison and they can do the
following.
They can impose non detention
sanctions.
Or they can.
Pose a maximum of ninety days
incarceration.
I see a conflict there Madam
chair representative sorry I
spoke a little too soon
previously so revert revocation
can result in imposing a
custodial sanction going back to
current corrections or
revocation can mean I'm revoking
your supervised release and
here's what we're going to do
next so there's a statutes that
lay this out that upon
revocation the court can either
return them back to supervised
release or can impose any other
sanctioned that they want to
including full replication that
would send them back to
corrections so this is to say
that were they can once they
decided that you violated to
revoking your release they have
the option of imposing and no
detention sanction or whatever
other sanctions including a
maximum of ninety days this bill
also retains it that they can go
beyond the ninety days if if
provided that the sanctions
commensurate with the
seriousness etcetera.
Of madam chair and in this photo
how does that occur if we have a
maximum of ninety days
incarceration set forth madam
chair the or any other order it
sees fit provides for if this
thing if it's commensurate with
the seriousness of the
violations they can go beyond
the ninety days.
Then madam chair and miss cook
if that's the intent why would
you not just say impose not
detention sanctions comma of.
Incarceration or any other order
as it sees fit Madam chair
representative it's of sorry I
don't know if you're pressed you
see because because of the can
do anything it sees fit of your
own the even need any of that
but.
The ninety day a maximum of.
Seems to me that it would be
difficult for court could read
that as saying that's all they
can do is ninety days.
Madam chair representative the
the language serves to set a
basically presumptive maximum
but allowing them to go beyond
it if commensurate with the
visors this of the violation.
So if the board determines that
the parole should be revoked and
then there's that this person
needs to continue to serve their
sentence in
in confinement.
Then how does the last part of
that sentence mashup with that
because it says I'm not a
punishment for the offence of
for the incarceration I thought
if there's a revocation of
parole and they send them back
to to prison to continue serving
their sentence that's exactly
what we're doing is it not.
Madam chair representative so it
works a little bit differently
and parole and probation but the
that we often times when
someone's on parole they don't
they've already completed their
entire actual prison sentence so
the sanction for violate you
know you get a six year prison
term you serve all six years of
it and then you get released to
parole so that's a big
difference in prone probation
probation requires that you have
some of your sentence on served
and that's how you're on
probation so you're looking
specifically at the parole
section the the a person who's
being that is sanctioned for
parole violation may well not
have any sentence left to serve
so it is just a sanction for the
violation okay so parole is
after their service of this
summons correct madam chair
representative okay then I guess
I understand that I would
encourage you to look at that
and make it clear because it's
not the.
I see some of the problems with
justice center in language thank
you madam.
Thank you Representative I don't
see anyone else with questions
Senator chain a motion.
Second we have a motion for do
pass made by Representative
Chasey second by Representative
Sapan ski would you call the
roll please Representative
Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane no.
Mr speaker yes
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative of.
Representative re.
Representative green.
No ma'am.
Representative Penske yes.
Following vice chair yes madam
chair yes a vote of sixty four
we have to pass on.
Senate bill eighty four.
Thank you thank you so much and
thanks for the debate absolutely
thank you senator chair yes I
recognize vice chair chair elect
to make a motion to reconsider
house bill six it was a tie vote
would really like to.
Have a an actual vote on the
matter if we may subject to
are provided manual and
Representative just a minute
cells has also been.
we've we've done this and other
committees and
so we have a motion to
reconsider house bill six
is there a point of order
but for reconsideration has
three maybe five forty five of
the the majority of the I was
sorry because it was a type of.
Do you.
That's exactly how it works it I
think it's the equivalent of a
of a tabling motion because it's
still in the committee so I
think it's a proper motion is
our second.
Okay we have a motion and for
the second the the future of
fable motion and then somebody
would bring it off the table.
thank you for your guidance
Representative right we are
moving on the motion to
reconsider their discussion on
the motion that a substantive
discussion on the motion to
reset consider.
No Madam.
Just.
This is I guess now the.
One two.
Third time I guess this is come
up maybe the fourth time.
and I know the rules provide for
this I'm a little frustrated
that Representative outcomes
present but all the room we're
doing this.
I don't think that's right.
we've passed this bill many
times
so just wanted.
Voice my.
To stand for doing this right
now thank you.
It that I think it's the first
time this committee we've done
this so thank you any other
discussion would you call the
roll on the motion to reconsider
Representative focus on.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
No.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert.
I'm gonna vote on a motion that
can't be made.
No actually I think at a certain
point once the chair rules it's
a motion that can be made and
I'm sorry Representative that
you don't agree but I think if
you're present in the room you
need to vote.
And I vote no thank you.
Representative read.
Representative Rehm.
Representative kanske yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
The other six four motion to
reconsider prevails we have now
we have now before us house bill
six Representative Chasey.
And I
just hope.
Yes do not do we not have a
committee seven from this.
That was one.
Keep in the pool it's I believe
it's just as amended.
Amended.
It has mended mended Committee.
Okay we have a motion for a do
pass on house bill six and then
to do we have a second second.
Any further discussion on house
bill six.
But.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane no.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Ecker no.
Representative we have
Representative Rehm.
Representative thank you yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes by a vote of six
to four you have a to pass did
you say is amend as amended as
amended.
We have a due pass on house bill
six as amended.
Next on our the.
We have Senator Hermio.
Senate bill one eighty seven
certain drug possession a
habitual offenders good morning
madam chair members the
committee this is my first time
before you ever so nice to see
all of you and the thank you so
much for the state capital
offender statute currently
applies to all felonies except
Fallon D. W. I. removing simple
drug possession recognizes about
a person who repeatedly
possesses strides is not a
cordial fell and who needs to be
taught a lesson they're
suffering madam chair from a
health problem that requires
treatment not present now with
this bill for if anything else
will address is that extreme
extraordinary impact
criminalizing addiction has the
addict specially women right
across right about three times
the rate of then for simple drug
possession incarcerating mother
separates families and continues
patterns of generational
criminal system involvement
possession is simply not a felon
but belongs in the U. Patrol
offender act Representative
Cadena is joining us we assume
she can't speak right now
because she is ill but I want to
recognize that she's joining us
and allow me to expert witnesses
to introduce themselves with a
brief statement thank you madam
chair thank you thank you madam
the committee I don't really
have anything to add at this
time but I'm here to answer
technical questions that need.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Beth are on the chief
public defender
I'm.
I have both prosecution for any
cases in criminal courts for
many at all up over thirty one
years now at a I'm here in large
part on behalf of a lot of
attorneys who have dealt with in
struggle with a virtual offender
law and how especially on cases
of nonviolent simple possession
of often trace amounts of drugs
they are subject to mandatory
time in prison if if they are
convicted and if they had any
any kind of prior if Sony Spence
and so I'm here to answer
questions about that system and
how it works okay great thank
you let's go to the audience
those wishing to speak in
opposition to house Senate bill
one eighty seven please raise
your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand okay Diana loose if you're
here first to speak in
opposition.
Hi Anna.
Yes madam chair yes can you hear
me yes given ninety seconds okay
thank.
Madam chair members of the
committee judicial district
attorney dina loose I am here in
opposition to this bill I'm
there's already a statute that
allows simple possession to be a
conditional discharge and not
used for habitual enhancement I
judges in the fifth to not
revoke the conditional discharge
even on first and often second
probation violations often
position has is being applied to
because it's being reduced from
trafficking for purposes of
employee I believe this
legislation would have far
reaching effects far more
educated than what the sponsors
of the bill or intending
individuals charged with violent
and gun crimes are often have
these prior convictions in the
beginning they would we would
not be able to seek this
additional time thank you thank
you Thomas Clayton.
I.
Can you hear me yes.
Yes are good really good
afternoon ladies good morning
ladies and gentlemen my name is
Tom Clayton and the district
attorney for the for judicial
district and all I stand in
opposition to this legislation
in that there are already on
opportunities in the system here
in our district we have the
eight program we have the
prosecution diversion program
and as of this returning loose
indicated there's already in
statute the drug conditional
discharge which exams are
possession our first time of
possession from the help Vigil
offenders are enhancement
statute this legislature all
adopted the of a **** off and
act some time ago and that
provides opportunities to ensure
that individuals that are repeat
offenders are held accountable
that's what the statute talks
about and this this our proposed
legislation cuts that basically
at the needs we are trying to
attempt to make sure that repeat
offenders
are held accountable this
statute would take away a tool
that the district attorney's use
so I stand in opposition.
Thank you am on Toyota.
M. Montoya please on mute.
Forty.
Yes.
Committee members good morning
marks.
District attorney's office the
boss.
Turns thank you for allowing us
this morning what is it like to
comment on how this legislation
might have some money funds what
what I'm reading your microphone
because it's hard to hear you.
I just want to comment how this
legislation has unintended
consequences and what I mean by
that is often times individuals
are just what the session but.
Fine session search incident to
arrest and oftentimes will free
identify prosecution and by a
substance use disorder addiction
problem we deal with that
through the session are charging
the the other underlying reason
for the call or crimes are
dismissal let go and and we are
able to pursue treatment our
rehabilitation therapy
L..
I just want to bring that to the
committee's attention but for
all the reasons stated before
and some of these ones I just
that that you act do not pass
thank you.
Anyone else online Clinton
right.
Thank you I just my name is
Quinn ram the knights judicial
district attorney I'm in
opposition of this bill I think
the fundamental premise is that.
Possession of a controlled
substance is that it is
something that tears are
communities apart I've talked
with mothers in tears about
wanting their kids to get help
and.
We're trying to push re hat we
are that's nobody you'll not
find a single prosecutor who's
against the idea of getting
people the tools to help
themselves however you have to
have something that says if
you're not willing to change we
need to take you out of society.
Because you're you're hurting
your children hurting your
parents just the the.
The amount of crime that people
that are on drugs do is just
unimaginable.
And I've had more people to talk
to me about you know it was
going to prison that changed my
life I couldn't take we have
serious I couldn't I couldn't
over I had hit bottom yet risen
was my bottom the habitual
statute allows that.
And it gives the opportunity for
us as prosecutors to push people
as a you know I can't so to
speak to you they're going to
you can either going to try to
change or we will we will take
you out of our state question
and I I just can't say enough
help propose at I am as as the
district attorney to this bill
thank you thank you Mr right I
see no other hands will go back.
To the audience those wishing to
speak in favor of the bill
please raise your hands okay
gentleman and ladies if you wish
to come over here with the money
we'll.
The.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico come
with defense lawyers association
we stand and stop strong support
of this bill we appreciate the
sponsor and his work to address
the this issue we appreciate
this legislature's efforts to
change the conversation from one
of our criminal activity with
regard to substance misuse and
abuse to one of public safety
and public health and we believe
that this bill addresses those
concerns in a way that will have
the greatest amount of impact as
the sponsor said significantly
on our female population in our
prison system thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee David how to me I'm a
registered lobbyist for the drug
policy alliance and I think the
last district attorney who spoke
in opposition of the bill made
the strongest argument for why
this bill is needed prison is is
not a up a bottom prison is not
a rehab tool for addicts the
ability to be a **** will
offender us statute was passed
so that people who are a bit
chilly committing criminal
offenses would be separated from
society not addicts
in the it's just as simple as
that I was astounded by the
argument that prison is an
answer to addiction we all know
that prison doesn't have the
resources necessary to treat the
court diction so I I would say
that that argument really stands
in in in in just an almost
shocking of manner in so I would
ask you the path bill thanks.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is to nollie
Wilson I'm a staff attorney at
the ACLU of New Mexico and I
couldn't agree more with the
gentleman who just give COVID
that present and punishment is
not a successful tool for us to
be deploying in in response to
to addiction and I'm grateful
for the sponsors of this
legislation and other advocates
were involved for bringing it
thank you we hope you to pass.
So.
I thank you chairman committee
my son is an addict and at the
moment I am happy to report is
so very looking forward to
another chance to building a
life and as much as I have hope
for him every day and every time
he gets another chance turns
life around as a practical
matter I have to acknowledge
that so far he hasn't been able
to achieve a long lasting
sobriety is addiction keep the
winning every time he gets up it
takes it down again the hope I
still have for him comes from
the many people I've met who
have been successful in dealing
with their addiction and
maintaining secretary thank
propriety they keep telling me
not to give up you can get there
too for some of the Mexican
teller fourth decade my son just
turned thirty four I don't want
to do we have an example of why
we need to fill in for when he
should start using again as he
has so many times before over
the years of his affection this
disease of addiction my Senator
choir enough prior felony
convictions detractors that the
temperament as I have a bachelor
of the pool offender as I
understand the habitual offender
act if this bill does affect a
nextel in the possession charge
would add years to and I don't
want to have a I wanted to have
a decent chance to turn his life
around more time card duration
will get in there it could
totally destroy him instead the
previous password not for my son
to him of course but for so many
others who struggle thank you.
So the Campos.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is Lucy
that compass with chairs and
strongly support yes the one
eighty seven I grew up in
Espanola New Mexico and have
seen many of my family and
community members struggle with
the over policing and direct
targeting of our people because
of their substance dependence I
have witnessed my sister battle
with her addiction for fourteen
years and get caught in the
cycles of incarceration and
relapse over and over again I
can say with all sincerity the
jail has never helped her
recovery on the contrary as it
is true for many her recovery
did not begin with abstinence to
begin with reduction of you.
Our successful recovery began
the day that she had to leave
the city she was born and
raised.
She moved into a neighborhood
with little to no policing she
had time and space to speak
resources like family support
therapy expensive medical detox
General healthcare cultural and
natural healing that connected
her to her roots it is them that
she had the space to even dream
of creating a new life and
reclaiming her health if we want
people to have successful
recoveries it is important that
we recognize substance
dependence as a health issue and
not as a means the
criminalization target.
in our state we need housing
health care detox centers we
have some real opportunities for
our people to rebuild their
lives we ask that you please
vote yes on SB one eighty seven
thank you.
All right come back to the
sponsor thank you close madam
chair I appreciate everybody who
spoke today including those in
opposition now my door is always
open and I never heard from
anyone who opposed the bill this
bill to pass through to Senate
committees no one ever
approached me about the bill and
did pass on the Senate floor by
a vote of thirty to five and
without madam chair I'm ready to
take questions.
I.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator let's begin on page one
and let's talk about.
Sixty six dash eight dash one oh
two.
So this is R. D. W. I. statute
so what number of DWI
convictions not arrests
convictions do have to have
before it's a felony Madam chair
representative thank you for
that question I'm going to yield
to my expert witness.
Madam chair representative it is
fourth D. W. I. but as you may
know Representative this is
actually just codifying K.
losses already D. W. I fell in
these are already excluded from
the eventual fender Act.
This part of the bills not
changing law.
Madam chair in Mr Kirk so when
did the wanted this case what
come down.
Madam chair and representative
nineteen ninety seven state
verses and I have found that
prior felony DWI eyes are not
included in the eventual thunder
Act.
So Madam chair New Mexico
vehicular homicide in great
bodily harm don't are not
included Madam chair
representative those are it's
just the felony DWI that is just
D. W. why is excluded under case
law.
Okay.
Madam chair and miss Kirkland
David was focus on vehicular
homicide great bodily harm so
that could be madam chair and
miss cook that could be alcohol
or drugs is that correct.
Madam chair it can but this bill
does not exclude that crime
either just so you know so one
of two is just D. W. why those
crimes are contains six eight
one a one so this bill does not
remove thank you are on the side
right bodily harm from the
official thunder Act either.
Okay and madam chair and let's
Kirk my probably is
That these people can have
substance abuses and going in
and removing that from them they
could repeat and that in their
actions and we wouldn't have
We wouldn't have jurisdiction
over him madam chair and
miss coat the other one that I
want to talk about since we
remove marijuana as a schedule
Drug.
So this if you tested positive
currently for marijuana would
not count is that correct.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure I understand the
question about testing positive
or okay this madam chair and
miss cook under the current law
if you tested positive for
marijuana could you be of
receive the the tool fender.
Madam chair and representative
testing positive for drug
doesn't lead to a a possession
charge you have to actually
possess on consumes marijuana so
I don't think that that I I'm
not sure how well how that
relates to the bill
Representative I apologize.
Madam chair in miss cook what
I'm trying to point out is that
sense it is no longer a
scheduled drug and I'm talking
about marijuana
It wouldn't lead to a violation
under current law correct Madam
chair representative that's
correct cannabis is not
possession of a controlled
substance any longer okay thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative Representative
Penske.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator good great to have you
here
I just wanted to make a few
statements and then I had a
couple of questions
you know I think
One of the issues that that
always comes up are these kinds
of bills is the lack of
treatment resources.
And.
I am wanting to
If that that is presented as a
justification for lack of reform
in you know I think.
I was looking at this the fact
sheet that was provided and one
of the things that was noted
here is that it takes twenty
three thousand dollars on
average to incarcerate someone
for a year
and so you know I look at that
and I think
You know we we for twenty plus
at least twenty years that I
have witnessed we have bid
stating that we we're not gonna
invested in.
We're not gonna put our time and
energy into reform because we
don't have treatment resources
available.
But we are choosing by
continuing to
not involve ourselves in serious
reform to really just invested
in corrections and invest in the
incarceration system as a
solution for substance use
and you know I really appreciate
this bill because I think it's
narrowly tailored I think it's a
stab.
but I feel like we have to have
this conversation because for
for twenty three thousand
dollars a year you could raise
reimbursement rates for Medicaid
providers
to provide behavioral health
treatment we could be investing
in
ficit new facilities we could be
investing in new providers right
now there are a lot of
behavioral health providers that
don't even accept Medicaid
because their reimbursement
rates are low that would be very
easy investment that we could
make that would.
Increase the amount of treatment
that's available
in you know I think.
We can do a lot more to a bed
substance abuse treatment into
the judicial system it into our
criminal justice system and
there's a lot of
If unexplored territory there
but I also think that this is a
really important stab.
because madam chair and senator
what what is if you're a second
time ritual offenders to say you
are arrested once for a felony
the second time you are caught
with drug possession that
enhancement.
could you walk me through that
just the three levels of
enhancement that are in the
habitual offenders Madam chair
representative thank you for
that and you know I want to just
comment on the on your comment
first before the question
Representative Romero and I both
overlapping a district in a
community that struggling with
addiction and she and I have
both seen and somebody members
of families that jail to us just
doesn't help right family
members of people struggling
with addiction struggle to find
treatment beds for their loved
ones and we're seeing that in
northern New Mexico and with the
private get off of the waiting
lists only have their loved one
arrested again and back into
that cycle we're trying to break
this bill Representative madam
chair would dramatically reduce
incarceration making it possible
for people to get the help they
need and so I want to thank you
for your comment I'm gonna yield
to my expert witness for your
question.
Thank you madam chair
representative so that the
technical answer is that if you
have one prior and you are on
your second case you get a one
year mandatory sentence if you
have to prior is your honor
third cases of years and if it's
any more than that it's eight
years and we very often
especially in drug possession
cases see the judge say I wish I
didn't have to give you any
prison time I'll only give you
the mandatory times to spend the
rest.
And.
This time and also that is put
aside the fact that there is
still the eighteen months if you
were charged with possession of
discretionary time so by
removing the virtual fender
Hanson that doesn't mean that
somebody can't be put on
probation can't go to jail or
even prison it just takes away
the mandatory time on top.
In the thank you for that madam
chair and senator and experts
you know because.
The one of the things that is a
very positive thing that is
happening right now is it the
corrections department is to
fight is doing the pilot of
medication assisted treatment
medication assisted treatment
heart we have known that that
has is an effective substance
use treatment for I don't know
thirty forty years
and so I'm very pleased that
they're doing a pilot but we
also know that this has been
happening in correctional
settings for decades already
around the country so you know
and I just share that because I
don't think that people who are
incarcerated have access to
adequate substance abuse support
resources counseling programs so
the idea that we are would for
someone who has a medical issue
to hit bottom hi.
Going to jail or prison I submit
is a false assumption and I
think it's a
It's a reflection of the
punitive way that we have viewed
as
in it you know it pains me
because I feel like our state is
very far behind yeah I'd Utah
Oklahoma Alaska.
Politic very diverse politically
it is politically on the
spectrum very different from the
politics that we have in this
state have reclassed penalties
for drug possession to
misdemeanors.
And Oklahoma was by a ballot
initiative.
The voters actually selected
that as the appropriate penalty
for drug possession so I
I.
I think that you know we can't
continue to unintentionally and
vast and only corrections as a
solution for substance use and I
think this bill is a really
important step toward that
And so I'm I think just I have
to last questions one is what
would happen to people who are
currently serving.
Provincial offender's sentence
enhancements with they.
This bill won't affect them is
that correct.
Madam chair representative
that's correct we considered
retroactivity and thought it
might be too much to bite off
and chew it so by operation of
existing law the people it would
affect people whose cases are
pending when the law goes into
effect even if they haven't been
sentenced yet if their case is
already pending but they haven't
been sentenced yet or future
charges would be impacted.
Thank you for that madam chair
and senator and experts in if
you could just estimate my last
question is your could you
estimate how many people.
This could affect for ages to
any sense of what why.
Slice of the population this
might.
Address Madam chair
representative I I really wish I
could unfortunately but when
someone is sentenced to have a
total of under time the data
that New Mexico collects only
logs that is the underlying
colony so we have no distinction
in the data between Vigil
thunder time versus just being
serving the felony I can tell
you anecdotally that I believe
it would be very significant and
I don't I actually don't
remember if the FIR renders some
sort of estimate LFC might have
done some more crackpot math and
I was able to but we don't have
clear data on it.
Thank you for that madam chair
and senator
you know I think this is a
really targeted tailored bill
that is addressing people that
obviously have repeat issues
with substance use this
problematic and Hey would you
know encourage us to think about
this is is not just this one
bill but also a choice on
investment into other things and
freeing up resources for our
appropriations committees in
future years to be able to
reinvest the savings that would
be generated by this bill into
actual access to treatment which
we don't have thank you thank
you.
Thank you madam chair Senator an
expert.
Go through that there have been
offender act a little bit
because I I notice if spurs
stated that you would get one
here with one prior felony
offense madam chair expert
centers that correct.
Madam chair representative and I
I know where you're going with
this but I have a guess my
question is and and I think you
know that that is a
discretionary one year and that
the court actually has to make a
finding that both of the fences
Prior felony conviction and the
instant felony conviction or a
bowl for nonviolent offenses and
that justice will not be served
by imposing a mandatory sentence
of imprisonment and there are
substantial and compelling
reasons of the judge states is
on the record so
madam chair and senator and
expert I mean I tend to believe
what I've seen is in a first
possession case with another
maybe drug offense or non
violent offense that generally
is suspended in the best
interests of justice or the
prosecution withholds filing
that which you madam chair and
senator and an expert agree with
that.
Madam chair representative that
in my case is that has not been
my experience I'm I'm glad to
hear that from your jurisdiction
that has not been my experience
in most cases I actually find
that a lot of it doesn't even
come up the conversation is even
had in sentencing hearings that
being said I'm not the attorney
at the sentencing hearing on I'm
reviewing a record on appeal but
when I review those I don't even
hear that being requested are
discussed in the mandatory one
year is imposed almost every
time and madam chair and senator
and and representative of the
our expert the court would have
to make a finding though that
that these with both I mean if
there's two nonviolent violent
offenses I guess I should
rephrase there's the option that
it can be waived and they don't
go to prison.
Madam chair representative there
is the option of the judge makes
additional findings to make it
non to non mandatory and madam
chair and Senator an expert in
fact in the ad that on as
appropriated part to the
sentence correct chair
representative comes part of the
suspended sentence correct and
madam chair and expert and
senator when someone is arrested
for possession of a controlled
substance and that first one is
waived or even just arrested on
probation or parole isn't it
pretty much.
I would say no it's not
mandatory but it's pretty
extremely common that they are
given treatment options
screenings of all the different
things that appropriations
provides on a possession of a
controlled substance case
Madam chair representative I I
hope so.
Madam chair senator and expert I
can tell you I I know that
happens and so then when we move
on to the second offense
that's when there's a mandatory
four years that's a shall and
then also the the next one is
eight years and that's a shell
but madam chair and Senator an
expert all has to be within ten
years to correct.
If I may madam chair Senator and
Representative read within ten
years of the end of their
supervision so often that can be
eleven to almost fifteen years
five years probation at some
point for something yes the
madam chair and senator and an
expert that's why point me to
get a three year habitual it's
pretty hard under the new ten
year rule because it is the end
of the set so whether you have a
four year sentence and then you
have five years probation that's
nine years right there and it's
from the date you get released
from probation or parole correct
madam chair.
Madam chair and senator and
representative of it it may be
it depends on how you define
rare but we have the problem
with people who have substance
abuse issues is they may be
using now they may be using have
used three years ago and I years
ago and I I have a case of
spoken someone about in San Juan
County where they are facing a
four year Vigil their first
first possession charge was in
two thousand ten and so now
sixty one year old man is facing
prison which the district
attorney's office is bringing up
for your potential vendor for a
third possession charge and
madam chair and senator an
expert the filing the habitual
offender enhancement is a
discretionary role of a
prosecutor whether they choose
to or they choose not to madam
chair Madam chair representative
in practice it it plays out that
way but there is a statute that
says that prosecutors shall file
the supplemental information if
they are aware of the priors and
madam chair and as you said and
senator an expert as in practice
I mean that really doesn't
happen I mean they can withhold
the filing of the habitual at
least it happens all the time.
If I may madam chair and
representative of the may and
what we see is a wide variety
practices across the state where
in some places in the state
people are treated very
differently and much more often
go to prison simply on habitual
offender enhancement for drug
possession and madam chair and
centered experts in addition the
other option that prosecutors
and courts have is that they can
make the defendant admit to
their priors and then hold a
minute Vance and if they don't
violate their probation they
complete treatment than those
will never be filed against of
and so they don't go to present
is that also an option chair.
Madam chair and representative
of the it is an option and that
gets us to the probation and
parole issues that we've seen in
the lack of treatment resources
and sometimes the almost
impossibility of someone who is
on release who's been in and out
of incarceration actually being
able to comply with conditions
give them by appropriations the
district attorney in the court
at and if I may madam chair
representative but because of
that what we see is an almost
inevitability that they do
violate get the habitual
offender enhancement later on
and so what what that boils down
to then is that prosecutors have
a lot of power in plea
bargaining to say we're going to
withhold this mandatory
enhancement time enter this plea
and then people waive their
right to a trial waive the right
to appeal and jump on that plea
because it sounds really
enticing and then inevitably end
up getting the enhancement time
anyway and so that it's you know
it's I wouldn't say that in most
of those cases they end up never
serving the enhancement time I
don't think that's quite how
plays out and madam chair and
senator and experts but that is
a possibility it happens
frequently that the defendant
gets a choice to go to treatment
in lieu of going to prison or to
get the help that they need as
just an agreement with the with
the prosecutor.
And chair.
Madam chair the idea of choice
in this circumstance I think
it's something which we could
talk about it mmhm in a much
longer contexts for somebody
who's facing
substance abuse problems and we
are facing the lack of resources
and not just drug treatment
resources the resources for
themselves as individuals to to
have a car to get to treatment
to go to community service as of
things which are hanging over
their heads
in when they are on that kind of
appropriations.
And madam chair and Senator
experts and I someone did
mention on the call the soon
that and I would agree with this
and I want to know if you to
prove that you see distributions
of heroin and tracked at math
and fennel often played down two
possessions because there might
be a search issue a technical
issue possibly that prosecutions
just be an lenient so that would
in effect when you just have
someone who might just show a
possession of a you know
methamphetamine or cocaine madam
chair and senator an expert they
back could have had that played
down from a distribution charge.
Madam chair and Representative
reap does that happen yes the
experience of attorneys are from
across the state that I've
spoken with is that the vast
majority of possession charges
are just that charges of
possession with personal use and
just to clarify by possession
for personal use this can be a
residue in a pipe it could only
needs to be measurable and so
it's really scrapings sometimes
it's a small amount and the
position cases usually when that
is the highest charge what we're
talking about is somebody
driving a car with a cracked
taillight and that stop turns
into a search on bicycles were
stopped for perhaps reading on
the wrong side of the road these
are often some of the possession
cases there are also the other
cases where somebody had a
larger amount but sometimes a
larger amounts law enforcement
season is distribution it's
often something somebody with a
substance abuse problem we have
a fairly large amount because
the need to have several weeks
worth of substance for for their
own use over a period of time so
that's something that could go
to trial a district attorney
could charge that they could
take it to trial they could
prove that he was possessed with
intent to distribute or
trafficking and so madam chair
and Senator and experts I guess
my problem with this is we're
we're taking one felony I
understand the need to be wise
it never has to do to be why
because they're softening and
sing so I think that needs to be
explained the debate itself
enhance the more you get and so
therefore it's not included
under the eventual because you
know first offense second third
fourth and I just keep going up
in the penalties get higher so
that's why that separated out
but we're basically taking one
felony offense and then just
removing it as separate from
every other felony and I just
see this is is kind of a bad
idea when there's so many
options waving the.
First one holy men abeyance not
filing them all the options that
I see and I have seen as a
prosecutor madam chair and I'm
Senator and experts get over the
time that you know they are on
probation and I understand the
how drug addicts you know re
offended and that's a hard thing
to get a hold of but I think
that the effort is being made to
do that across the state I
haven't noticed in the years
that I've done it you know that.
They haven't gotten three
chances for chances the first
time three four chances the next
time and probably the same the
next time and then by the time
they actually do end up going to
prison it could be ten thirty
ways and and new crimes I just
think that that there are
options in this virtual funder
for the judge to hold hold the
first one in advance and
prosecutors to listen to
defense and do what they need to
do in order to give another
chance I just don't like the
idea of taking one felony out of
the habitual offenders Act
because I think that we're going
down a road where then there's
going to be wealth why should we
be filing when somebody does
this nonviolent you know
altering the vehicle plate is a
felony I mean it I'll just keep
adding in since we keep going to
keep going when I think there
are there are options that we
can still do as prosecutors and
judges and defense attorneys so
and it is hard to get to that
third of the jewel if it has to
be within ten years I Madam
chair Senator know this from
experience to get a eight year
official by the time the
sentence actually ends is is a
very rare occurrence these days
with changing it to this minimum
of ten years so for those
reasons I I will be able to
support this bill but I thank
you for listening to me and
answer my questions thank you.
Thank you madam chair just weeks
to the Sanchez we've been
working on this for many many
years and our community
desperately needs this
provision with that madam chair
I just want to move it to pass
on Senate bill one eight seven.
We have a motion for the past.
By Representative some pants I
just want to make a couple
concerts thank you my dear
friends Senator had a meal for
bringing this forward
you know legislation provides
guidance and values and I would
prefer that we start providing
guidance and values as to how
people are charged then give a
little less discretion to the
prosecutors I I was taken by the
fact that of those who called in
and so on
We're very clear that they liked
having this as a tool and I'm
sure they do because it provides
leverage for all kinds of plea
bargaining and so on and frankly
I don't think that's judicious
use of their time and I would
much prefer that we give them
guidance as to what we think's
important and what we think
needs to be addressed and in
this case spend way too much
time on small drug offenses in
our society and instead of
providing the support that these
individuals need we look to
punishment and frankly in
general I don't like a Vigil
offender type legislation in
general and in particular when
really this is not a good tool
for people who have an illness
often they're addicted and we
need to be for providing more
support along the lines that
representative semansky was
talking about earlier in our
meeting so thank you for
bringing this forward would you
call the roll please
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Chasey yes.
No.
Representative McQueen.
Representative banker.
Representative read about.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Yes madam chair yes by a vote of
five to two we have a two
thousand Senate bill would be
sent thank you thank you madam
chair thank you members of the
committee.
Okay.
We have
Now we're next on.
One fifty eight I think that's
the number can't read my own.
D. W. I. testing requirements.
Representative re.
If.
Committee substitute for.
Transportation it was in the
binder so we can give it to
them.
If
you want to.
Thank you.
Yes.
She's for that.
Title three this is.
Change
Representative read yours just
for everyone's edification of
some of its house transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee
substitute for house bill one
fifty eight has been passed out
is that the correct and it's a
point to version is that right
okay great thank you
Representative.
Madam chair of.
House bill one fifty eight is is
kind of what we call the
Burchfield fix this is a bill
that basically will allow
officers the tools down that
we've legalized cannabis to seek
a search warrant if there's
probable cause to believe
somebody's under the influence
of marijuana or another dried
currently under Burchfield it
first second and third offense
it's disallowed under that case
law that you could actually get
a search warrant and you can
only do it if it was a felony
offense which is the fourth or
there was an accident involving
injuries or death and so what
this does mainly starting with
the changes on page twelve
it goes into detail how an
officer can seek a search
warrant were they would have to
show probable cause in order to
get a blood draw for a situation
like this with me I have a list
but Johnson as an expert and
also deputy chief Matt brown
from state police to help answer
any questions that with that
madam chair would stand for
questions.
Let's go to the audience those
wishing to speak in opposition
to house bill one fifty eight
and I'm using shorthand
would you please raise your hand
and.
I don't see anyone anyone want
online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support of this bill
please raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
support
M. month toria.
Hello chair committee members
Marcus went to a judicial
district attorney president they
next to District Attorney
Association bridge field fixes
been a long time waiting and I
think anything to help law
enforcement with another
investigative tool to help keep
our roads safe is all the better
for communities so with that we
do support this legislation
thank you.
Thank you Thomas Clayton.
Yes a good afternoon madam chair
and committee my name is Tom
Clayton on the description in
the fourth Vigil district we
support this legislation our
community has suffered from D.
W. I. and the the.
Tragedy that comes from that all
early on in my career had a case
that we prosecuted on individual
that had the D. W. I and I
individuals killed in that case
and so we we understand the
tragedy that takes place with
drinking and driving and we
support this legislation.
Thank you Diane Dianna Luce.
Diana thank you madam chair.
Can you hear me yes thank you.
Can you hear me yes thank you
judicial district attorney
finally thank you madam chair
members of the committee that
specifically this bill adds
language to allow to expand who
can draw the blood in rural
areas of the state this is been
a problem I that's a necessary
changes to expand that
definition and we have a lack of
drug recognition expert officers
and so having this ability to do
a search warrant hi it has we
needed ever since of the virtual
case and the Supreme Court
United States I stand in support
of this bill thank you thank you
I don't see any other hands
raised so go back to the sponsor
any other comments before we go
to the committee no ma'am thank
you Representative.
Questions comments on the bill.
Representative Alcon and.
All the way over there.
Hopefully you.
Thank you madam chair
I am just curious because I know
that's kind of asked this
question before.
When
You go before the judge of
standard are you using to prove
that this person is
driving under the influence on
because of the use of cannabis
madam chair and representative
of a cone so what we would it
would be like any other search
warrant the officer would have
to show there is probable cause
that the person was under the
influence of cannabis from
basically there stop from their
driving from what observations
that they observed their fields
and if all defer to my expert
deputy chief of a major Tippy
cheap map for him he has
anything to add so madam speaker
Representative V. the standard
field sobriety tests we do with
every other other person
regardless of the under the
influence of alcohol cannabis or
controlled substances would be
the same tests the same problem
costing the reflect those.
The and the Madam chair and
representative even.
The chief I I understand the
process.
Okay understand how would you do
I mean the blood everything that
and how you do all the testing
and how to do the lock and
everything else I understand all
of that
for the judge how do you tell
that judges that this person is
under the influence of cannabis
what standard to use a cause us
to this person this did at such
and such a level of what.
It shows that this person is now
was driving under the influence
of cannabis Madam chair
representative I think what
first happens is they do the
stop and they they do the field
sobriety tests and then they
make a determination whether
they're going to place him under
arrest pretty to be wide or
under the influence of drugs and
that could be because they smell
of cannabis maybe they're not
smelling alcohol but they're
smelling cannabis maybe they
even have a drug recognition
officer out there on the field
I'm just the signs that they've
learned to detect when someone's
under the influence of cannabis
it would be at that point after
the arrest that they would do
the search warrant for probable
cause that you would have to
find is a magistrate judge that
that search warrant in basin
what they found is enough for
you to believe that the person
may be under the influence of
cannabis or another substance
and you would make that decision
whether to sign the warrant and
that's when the blood would be
drawn thank you you're still not
convinced with this person's
driving under the influence okay
I mean when you're.
Driving under the influence of
alcohol of course we know
because we've tested people at
what level they get the the
idrive intoxicated we have
noticed approve those who love
provided maybe that's a good
thing.
But we have no standard to say
at this at this level after we
do the blood this there was this
much cannabis in the air for
this person is intoxicated or
under the influence of speak and
madam chair representative of I
think that's what this all will
happen after the rest has been
made based on the officer's
determination that will be a
trial issue the the the blood
will be drawn the tests will be
done and then they'll be levels
of cannabis and ensure the
arguments and defenses maybe
that well how do you tell
someone used it the night before
for that day but it will
cooperate if the jury believes
it cooperates with the officer
saw in his stop it's a key piece
of evidence for the jury to
consider I I understand that
there's no standard like a point
oh eight yeah I know per se
limit Madam chair representative
but that is a trial issue it's
not a of I guess a search
warrant issue that all happens
prior to going to trial and then
that's when the defense attorney
can make those arguments and
experts will come in and
determine you know how high the
level was if it was consistent
with somebody who's impaired
under cannabis or maybe not we
you know.
So I I hope that answers your
question madam chair
Representative it's before it's
before it's just like a and the
for example representative madam
chair like if you were in a car
accident he smelled like alcohol
or and a D. W. a Y. that smelled
like alcohol that was a felony
level offense it would be the
same thing they're bringing it
to use and I smelled alcohol he
filled the field he was driving
badly I'm gonna get this yes and
then you would go to a prelim
madam chair and you won't even
have those results you know
possibly by the time the blood
draws back if that's what the
officer chose to do and then
it's something that's you know
used at trial so it's after that
manager that's that's a lot of
explanation of Madam dust
because I haven't gotten a
conviction.
That is to I just here's the
thing okay here is the thing.
Myself assistant chief every
week is development a lot of
money away because we don't use
it the minute that way because
open we know there was another
one that somebody was using
marijuana so therefore the same
thing with alcohol I mean low
levels the people that you still
levels above how can spell
somebody who's been drinking a
mile away.
So so that's why I'm saying that
there is no real way to say that
this person was guilty of
driving under the influence of
cannabis because we have no way
to prove that other than what we
see we did we draw the blood we
have no standard to say that at
this level that cannabis
affected that person's ability
to drive Mr Representative we
appreciate your interest in this
issue This bill relates to the
circumstances under which blood
can be drawn we recognize that
there will be disputes about
whether it accurately checks
impairment so but the
conversation is not on that it
is about the circumstances under
which and I'd like to focus on
the bill we have a long agenda
thank you madam chair and I
understand that but the fact is
that you're providing blood on
somebody you're doing it for a
reason and you have to have a
reason to do it.
So therefore if you have no way
to prove that somebody is
driving under the influence of
the undergrad of us there's no
reason.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and then check
and I can to promote and I don't
think you need to.
The bill is about circumstances
under which blood can be drawn
we can debate whether or not it
adequately addresses the
cannabis issue and another one
there's another bill on that
subject Representative Romero
thank you madam chair so just on
the technical issue of when we
do submit to a blood draw.
We did with the addition of
cannabis to this
to this.
Staff to we're now criminalizing
something that could have been
in the system someone system for
weeks or or perhaps months is
that not correct madam chair
representative madam chair Madam
chair representative I think
it's similar to the last
question I'll defer to my
experts.
Madam chair representative
Romero yes potentially only if
there had been observations of
errant driving and other
behaviors it is not per se just
actually like what
Representative Alcon was
mentioning there is no per se
limit.
Erin driving has to be observed
for forest often reasonable
suspicion has to be developed
and and probable cause has to be
developed before we can get the
board so there are a lot of
checks in place
In the process madam chair
Representative.
I think with all due respect the
the issue that we had even prior
to cannabis legalization was
that folks are being targeted
our weather at the smelled like
a right really hard standard to
reach whether it was in their
system or not again an
impossible standard to reach of
this time given the science and
now we're going to this by
adding this to the statute
saying if it's in their blood
and they've submitted to a test
they're now going to criminalize
for having it in their system
even if it was weeks prior for
whatever probable cause that
we're going to get to that my my
Posted to this bill is is that
we're creating the standard
based on the science that
doesn't match with what we're
trying to discover and now
criminalizing it even if they
may not have even perhaps even
encountered the substance of
their own you know they could
have been around it and it could
be in their system so that said
madam chair I just the we've
we've seen different versions of
this bill at before and
certainly and and consumer
public affairs and I'll just
continue to
stated this is this is really
not I think the standard that
we're trying to meet when we're
talking about what has been
targeted in criminalizing the
past and so with that I don't I
can't support thank you
mentioned thank you
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative and
expert so I I'm kind of.
Going on the fly here's
apologize for that
I have two questions first is
what what I'm hearing is that
you're activating the offense
based on the presence of
cannabis and bloodstream.
No no Senator no madam chair and
representative it is similar to
the drinking aggravated
basically if you refuse to take
the test then it could be
aggravated I'll defer to I think
it's about Surender stand the
question is your Madam chair
representative I'm a claim is
your question based on the
question the previous questions
pertaining to cannabis or is it.
Can you ask your question again
please.
Madam chair Representative
experts
Someone gets pulled over.
For driving a radically.
They're just to take a test they
submit you find cannabis in
there Blitzer.
What's the consequences for
that.
It madam chair and
representative I mean they may
or may not be charge depending
on what the results were and the
talking to an expert to see you
know what their opinion would be
as far as whether there would be
a case to prove you know at
trial that they were under the
influence based on that totality
of circumstances and then if
they're convicted they would
have the same penalty is anybody
was convicted under an alcohol
related D. W. Y. if that answers
your question and madam chair.
Representative I I guess that
that's my concern and I I think
I I am in my own
ineffective way trying to echo
Representative Romero that we're
that we don't have a cut we
don't necessarily have a cause
effect relationship between
those things and so.
I I'm I'm I'm troubled by that
and if I can defer to my
experts.
Because as it stands we can't
get it felt we can't get a
warrant unless one of three
criteria outlined the reason for
that one correct
we thought when we think about
how we get the search warrant we
go through the field to fill the
fill the test win for us for you
to be a we seek search warrant
charges first approve what our
tester making us believe that
you're under whether be alcohol
control substance cannabis.
No matter which one you're gonna
get arrested we'll give blood
the test we can come back in the
show you have whatever it may
been maybe maybe it's an opioid
they do this cannabis and
showing your system the way
cannabis comes back comes back
in in the blood tests because it
had for the come back like this
two one of two ingredients it's
an active ingredient and and
ingredients additional if you
have a past history.
If we have an active connections
back at the to the carboxy try
boxy that's the active
ingredient in marijuana so I get
a yes it shows that that might
to show you're under the
influence of possibly marijuana
or cannabis and I guess has
rulal back this as you have the
active ingredient of the of
cannabis then I can signature
under the influence of cannabis
time I rest I wouldn't care
about the of the by product of.
That just shows to me a small to
last week that's not what you're
under the influence of at the
time.
So convention question the same
way that would show with her one
or Alcon PAC.
Madam chair
Representative officer it it
does I have not heard that
before
So I have to we anticipate that
Madam chair representative are I
did technical question on your
bill
What are we changing in section
one of your bill because I can't
find it for to chair can I see
the bill.
One madam chair thank you one.
There's one small word and I
will find it the birth page
three point seven.
Okay Mister.
Kommentar.
Thank you.
Any I think a Representative re.
Yeah of madam chair one to try
to help clear up a little bit of
confusion so you know the
officer sees Aerith driving he
stops the individual he sees
signs of impairment he gives the
individual a field sobriety
tests that failed the field
sobriety tests and now he's
placed under arrest under this
bill so it's going authorise of
blood tests.
What that blood then goes off to
the scientific lab if we look at
cannabis it creates about two
hundred and thirty four
different metabolites some of
them last thirty days what
they're looking for is a
psychoactive metabolite that has
a short life of about three to
four hours in as a name about
that long that I can't remember
and the.
The technician who analyze the
blood.
Then must be equate the
metabolite he found to the error
behavior the officer describes
and that's whether it's cocaine
hair one or.
Of marijuana so this is just
authorise seeing.
The the search warrant for DWI
first second third.
Our offense that's that's where
our problem is if we have a
felony DWI they can already get
the warrant but DWI first
offense second and third and
most of those are done at the
hospital of drivers involved in
traffic crashes thank you madam
chair.
Okay anyone else wishing to
speak on the bill.
I guess what I would like to
express some concerns about is
this
and when I spoke to law
enforcement about the bill I did
have a conversation
with the secretary public safety
it was presented to me as a bill
that would help facilitate
testing can I get that but my
concern is as picking up
thoughts from my colleagues is
their concern about the testing
relating to the cannabis if this
were just a bill relating to
alcohol where we know people
feel comfortable that it's an
accurate test then I think there
might be more interest in
supporting the bill but I have a
feeling Representative you're
gonna have some no votes based
on cannabis space I don't know
if you'd like to consider
pulling out the cannabis and
just doing the alcohol
I'm just posing that is a
possibility.
Madam chair and
and Canadian I'd I think the
problem is is that we can
already you know alcohol as of
the issue because we can take
them to that we can do a
breathalyzer but I think we have
yeah it's the other controlled
substances which cannabis I know
is that name is a controlled
substance but it does it does
result in people dying from
impaired driving and it gives
them a tool and also a jury a
test to see that with officers
observing cooperates that yes
cooperates what he's been seeing
and I've noticed trying cases
where you don't have anything
you're just like you have
nothing it's you know those
people lock because a jury wants
to see a yes and I think.
Sure.
You can have one second.
To see.
I think we would be amenable
Madam and madam chair if we left
in the controlled substances so
the least you know and I I guess
I would want to and madam chair
that would be comparable to have
controlled substances currently
defined to exclude cannabis so
if if that's the question I
think we're amenable to it so
with that all.
The bill.
I guess it okay so let me make
this why don't.
Give you all the time.
Step out.
South.
Propose and then we can hear the
bill that's following you and
then we'll come back and bring
you so we can with the sponsor
how does that work okay okay and
everyone there is lunch in the
room across the way if you want
to grab a sandwich or something
one by one it's Chinese.
Okay Representative Senator the.
Always happy to feed you we like
it you when you're happy then.
It'll be a member and and the
manner madam and.
All right Senator it that we're
on Senate bill one oh to
improper use of traveling thank
you madam chair I I do want to
apologize because when I text
you from Syria the word please
was in there but it the scramble
to.
To bring that I'm sorry us in
the but when we heard before
fast legislature twice it was
pocket vetoed by the governor
and what this does it requires a
semis or heavy trucks to travel
on the right hand lane.
His native four lane road in New
Mexico increases a penalty of up
to two hundred fifty dollars
when they don't do that madam
chair and then the the
difference is of from prior
years bill this is all four lane
highways of the law goes away
when to enter a city so they can
move wherever they need to move
left and the right hand lane
middle lane to exit to make the
right corrections that they need
to do once you're in in the
city.
The interesting most interesting
thing here are the specifics
that are done by Pieper in DOT's
report and bring a copy of those
but the amount of trucks.
Heavy truck crashes over the
this twenty sixteen to twenty
twenty in December twenty twenty
was a year COVID has been a
fifteen percent increase on the
interstate
they fluctuate fratelli
fluctuating twenty nineteen
where they're seventy five Patel
you struck facilities in twenty
twenty with COVID there's only
fifty and not a lot of people
were on the road during the
COVID years
the state police in the severity
crash injuries from twenty six
to twenty.
Twenty sixteen to twenty twenty
are up about thirty nine percent
but this is a real life stories
and it's broken down by
fatalities by every city we can
get your copy of the report if
you look on the interstate but
madam chair and representative
was.
Representative L. Cole maybe
look at Matty but we drive the
interstate we know what happens
when when this when a truck
fidelity happens or truck
drivers moving to the left hand
lane try to packs another truck
at sixty two of the other trucks
going sixty five in just the
frustration and the way that
some eyes without in front of
you the way they slow down
traffic the for tell these in
the cost in lives in time.
People in Gallup New Mexico in
requests they get on the
interstate in a lot of people
from grants work in Albuquerque
and drive a hundred twenty miles
a day round trip we get on the
interstates thinking we're going
to go to a doctor appointment at
ten o'clock in the morning we
leave it at eight that gives us
two hours it's about an hour
forty five minutes driving the
speed limit and it it's it
happens in the time line that we
don't know works on the
interstates is could be two
hours could be eight hours we
could be up to six hours of
right outside in Gallup there
there's been numerous at
fidelity's I note of two people
that I know personally that have
lost their lives sitting waiting
on a rectus and I slammed into
them infidelity and that's not
the reason we're here but these
are for Televisa do happen but
the time it in the issue of that
happens on the interstate it's
frustrating local home a
currently has some eyes in the
right hand lane at a reduced
speed California has all truck
traffic weather pulling the
horse trailer or you drive a
semi in the right hand lane at a
reduced speed from flagstaff
Arizona to use Phoenix Arizona
it's right hand lane and reduce
speed this doesn't respond to
speak for the Sennheiser says
maintain the right hand lane
when you need to at that speed
we can't pull out in front of
everybody in and try to pass an
extra it's going sixty five and
you're doing sixty six and you
get ten miles of back up and
that happens and so with that
madam chair I will stand for
questions very good center thank
you let's go to the audience
those wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in favor of the bill
please raise your hand.
In those online wishing to speak
in favor of the bill please
raise your hand okay
Senator will go to the committee
now at first Representative
Chasey and then Representative
every.
Thank chair thank you senator I
I I particularly as to why this
matters to the construction
between Albuquerque and your
neck of the woods has been so
bad the last two years you but I
I was court appointed in
requests and I would go out
to fort there regularly and we
had at least during the time
that I was there
At least three major truck
accidents right outside just
east of requests and then also
right it would go to one time
and the Interstate backs up
forever I do not to mention the
loss of life in the danger and
so forth but everything comes to
a grinding halt.
Absolutely everything so thank
you I appreciate this I hope it
works.
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair and senator page two
of line twenty three and twenty
four twenty two and twenty three
please consider doing an
amendment to exclude within the
city limits it's a real problem
in Albuquerque we get a two or
three abreast side by side
nobody can get down so if I'm
fully in support of this bill
it's just really codifying what
current law is but
Are you if you to consider that
I'd like to remove that
the city limits of Albuquerque
you know or any city limits
where were they have a.
Anyway your thoughts on Senator
madam chair and and
Representative you cannot
restrict that within the city
limits because if you we don't
have these in New Mexico but if
you had a left hand lane to exit
the interstate or to drive to an
on ramp he could not limit that
but with redesign in Montgomery
I understand there may be some
of that talking to D. O. T. but
inside the city limits I think
of vehicle travel in whatever
laying the need to do if you're
coming in from Albuquerque and
you want to go straight through
to Santa Rosa you need to get in
the left hand lane because a two
right hand lanes divert to Santa
Fe Los crucis and so I think
there's two lanes are thrilling
to carry on after member I don't
think you could limit them
inside the city limits because
they need to do what they need
to do to stay out of the the
left hand lane is for faster
traffic and I speak volumes and
so I don't think you could limit
them within the city boundary
would become a lot more
difficult to do and then citing
a semi in the city boundary on
the interstate is very dangerous
not only for the officers but
for everybody else because of
what what happens when they stop
us on that I would not recommend
doing just because of the the
the need to travel throughout
wings inside city limits.
Yeah madam chair and senator I
take you to page two one ten and
I think that covers the guy that
we needs to turn left.
Madam chair and representative
but in preparation for a left
hand turn if there is an
accident or he sees an accident
or he needs to move to the left
hand lane for slower traffic or
some other reason within the
city limits I don't think you
should reasonably withstand
them.
It's a short mileage to through
Albuquerque maybe ten miles from
when you hit careers to when you
hit translate in your out of
town I don't see that as as a
family member are working to
mainly doing to.
The chairman and senator I think
the simple with the you know
there's crash and may have to
move to the left wing would
reply on the interstate but I
support this I just would like
to see it in Albuquerque also
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
I'm not really mad at you I'm
just really this but.
But if there were someone who
lives on the on the interstate.
I I really favor bill but
This new R. my question is do
with our neighboring states have
lost just like this or will it
to this
Madam chair representative
Oklahoma currently does had it
for a long time since I've been
driving better state California
has had it for a long time.
Arizona ge.
Arizona has it currently has it
from Phoenix to flagstaff for
flex Act Phoenix right hand lane
as sixty at a slower speed in
that area Colorado I do not
Colorado does not have this law
there's actually thirteen other
states are considering this at
this time
Let me madam chair.
Well yeah my concern that is I
mean I I wish we could have a
separate higher wages for semis
that's my dream but the madam
chair in the Senator my concern
is the village of Milan okay
pretty much exists because of
the truck stops that are there.
And if the truck drivers right
to figure out the way to bypass
the state of New Mexico just did
not have to follow this rule how
much would it affect higher tax
base in the village of Milan.
Madam chair representative
one interstate truck travel
there's two destination points
the port of LA right and back to
the east coast and they have two
choices on the interstate I. ten
or I. forty if they go to the
north in the winter they're
almost excess below and don't
get through and so their point
of travel is not going to change
the truck traffic doesn't change
from New Mexico to down to Texas
to deter divert around Oklahoma
they're going to go from point a
to point B. and then you look to
electronic log books that were
required for our drivers that
eight hour stretch from L. A.
actually lands in either in
requests for in Gallup so that
they have to lay over and you
know for those truck stops are
nice you can't you think the
parking lot at the pits packed
used every night the truck stops
there's hundreds of trucks
packed along the roadways at
night so the.
In comparison to other states I
can only worry about my
constituents and what happens
when you and I drive the highway
and and what happens to us but
in other states this is.
They can choose to do as they
please
madam chair I mean you all of us
just simple log give you as well
and Texas started messing around
with the should not trucks they
found other ways to go in the
state does not go through Texas
so there for the economy of the
the is the.
Why on that truck traffic we're
heard.
So that's my only concern is
that they say I mean I'm a vote
for this bill because I I I
spend more time in anybody else
here on the interstate but that
making sure it is what happens
if they figure out a way to get
around us as the bus that and
without any money that's out of
my concern is that I'm just not
a question thank you
next up is not is representative
of nine Burton and
Representative McQueen
thank you madam chair and
senator
Where's the budget of.
We thought we were done today
but
Let's get to the point.
That's what our goal here point
of.
The budget of madam chair and
and the Senator
this doesn't prohibit
eighteen wheelers from passing
slower vehicles doesn't on the
interstate no they can overtake
another vehicle as long as they
can overtake the other vehicle
and likewise does this bill
apply to our slow moving cars
that seem to occupy the left
hand lane for hundreds of miles
madam president Representative
you're talking about the
California drivers that usually
seen the left hand lane
it does not prohibit that all of
the state police there is a
limit they could cite them for
going under the speed limit but
I've never had a state policeman
cite me for going under the
speed limit our illustrious
going twelve miles an hour in
the Clampett's are moving from
from Tennessee to Hollywood
there might be a citation there
for traffic safety issue but I
have never seen them site
anybody for going under the
speed limit well madam chairman
and senator I would encourage
use of they shouldn't just apply
to trucks are not apply to
everybody because we do have a
lease from clients corners
Albuquerque I don't know about
the stretch further west but
from clients quarters
Albuquerque I am familiar with
and there is always somebody
doing about sixty five in the
left hand line which causes in
my opinion a lot more problems
and danger to the people on the
interstate that and even though
the quantity of trucks that that
happened to be there but those
would be like to come and share
and and Representative that's
the reason we took other
driver's license away.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair etcetera
etcetera I'm just curious is is
this bill different on the guppy
to difference is the penalty
increased and then
Representative Nibert from
clines corners all the way to no
Carlsbad this would also apply
in a four lane from Bernalillo
to Farmington and any four lane
road in the state in New Mexico
that is the difference and madam
chair center will.
Was that the sticking point will
get a better reception more I I
think that and the sticking
point was the sponsor.
Well as the.
Thank you madam chair doesn't
sponsor change.
A little shorter after house
bill two.
Okay
well I just want to say I
appreciate this bill I I agree I
think Representative.
About photo also cars sitting in
the left lane which frankly my
husband does and it just drives
me insane when it does it I'm
like move over here being
discourteous move over Senator
really appreciate the bill and
anyone else wishing to speak
they were ready for bills to
pass and Senate bill.
One or two.
Thank you.
We have a due pass motion made
by Representative Romero
seconded by Representative Sapan
skate to call the roll please
Representative also.
Yes Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative reeve.
Representative lean.
Representative so Penske yes
madam chair yes madam chair yes.
By a vote of eight to zero we
have a due pass.
Thank you Madam I'll make sure
certain text the correct okay
thank you a look forward to
that.
The.
Madam chair and members of the
committee of all if I can do for
all of our drafters an expert
discount over all the different.
Your in home will issue it out
as a sub well let me see what is
this no we don't we'll issue
ours and then okay.
Should.
Thank you madam chair for giving
us Corman
I.
You know I search the terms on
my laptop and found all the
places where they occur so we
should be missing any so we're
gonna start on page thirteen
line twenty two we're going to
strike the common the word
cannabis.
Okay line third page thirteen
line twenty two okay strike
cannabis got it the COVID and
the word okay comma got it.
then we're gonna go.
On to page fourteen line one
strike the comma and the word
cannabis.
K..
Then.
Fourteen nine eleven strike the
comma and the word cannabis.
Got it.
Page fourteen line eighteen
strike the comma and the word
cannabis.
And then.
The final revision is going to
be on pages sixteen and
seventeen it's going to be
striking subsection G. in its
entirety and that's subsection
that define the term cannabis.
Let me just flip through one
more time and make sure we got
everything.
Inflicted.
For discussions very good.
Anything else you wish to share
okay Representative McQueen.
Thank thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative of an
expert so peach fourteen point
eighteen.
we stricken over we're proposing
stricter word the common they
were can't Kevin this so on
point eighteen it would then be
intoxicating liquor or drugs in
online eleven it would be
alcohol or a controlled
substance.
Shinto terms be consistent.
Madam chair representative
McQueen ideally yes however when
we strike the common cannabis
that's current law so if you
would like us to amend that we
it certainly should be
controlled substance but that's
probably occurring.
All over the D. Y. code at this
point so so madam chair
For seven extra it you're
probably right I Masser scanned
through I see the other places
in the title several several
places I concern of course is
unless we have a definition of
drugs and maybe we do that
cannabis is still drug right.
I mean if it's.
It it press especially since
it's not a controlled substance
in the same way used to be.
But it is still drugs.
So service.
No I I I see your point
consulting.
That was my only question.
Thank you.
that I don't see anyone else
will question I just to clarify
Elizabeth
I think when you we spoke
earlier anyone you guys went out
I thought I heard you say if we
took out cannabis then then the
controlled substance to a
Phoenician when not encompass
that did I misunderstand you.
Yes because controlled substance
no longer at defined term that
includes the term cannabis.
okay yes so okay so I would have
said no to that but I think the
answer is controlled substance
in this context will not include
cannabis is that right.
Okay.
Very good we got it I just wanna
make sure we're all on the same
page okay so appreciate your
willingness to work with on us
on this Representative anyone
else with questions.
Did you have the floor and I
took it away from the I give up
the floor I I just want to make
it clear I I too appreciate the
willingness to work with us.
I don't think we're done fixing
the so as currently written I so
can support okay fair enough
thank you anyone else wishing to
comment on the bill as of what
we need to talk about the
amendment well then I madam
chair the additional amendment
perhaps just what McQueen
discussed online eighteen
striking out drugs and just
insuring controlled substances.
would that be a friendly with
all the other page page fourteen
line eighteen.
Import controlled substance.
Intoxicating liquor or
controlled substance.
For the week.
Yes yes Representative Chasey on
that point.
Talking about hello dollars yes
I need to.
Right I think.
Gather fourteen.
Yet page page fourteen line
eighteen.
Beef stricken out cannabis and
then.
And then have alcohol or
controlled substance consistent
with the.
Language and winds eleven of.
I see nice understand what
you're doing okay.
The only
bye madam chair so the friendly
that's being offered is on page
fourteen line eighteen we we a
in addition to striking cannabis
would strike for drugs and
insert their of
What was the word you are in
talks I'll subdistrict this
intoxicating liquor and the
input alcohol okay so line
eighteen strike intoxicating
liquor and alcohol okay.
And what four some comma Attica
no no no comments no problem
alcohol or controlled substance
okay yes yeah that's a friendly
man okay.
So page fourteen line eighteen
strike intoxicating liquor plus
the comma in at alcohol and then
strike drugs and had controlled
substance yes so it will read
while under the influence of
alcohol or controlled for a
controlled substance okay.
It's it's fund managers also.
Throughout the throughout the
yeah that intoxicating liquors.
Of yeah.
We don't want to if you're
impaired on cannabis that should
still be in the fence we don't
wanna write cannabis completely
out of the the code now but.
We're tinkering with were upon
the threat someone will spot as
it's connected to everything
that's what I'm concerned about
to I'm wondering if you really
want to make that a from lamb
and I think we might want to
leave it regional.
Senate compromises perhaps the
changes that there are
suggesting to not to be sent out
intoxicating liquor.
In this case law attaching to
all the.
There I think at this point I
think we might want to roll it
and take it and the only I think
madam chair the only thing
that's friendly strike is to
remove cannabis from this bill
right now
okay all right so the motion
before us is not to strike
intoxicating liquor or drugs and
not add those additional
languages but simply strike the
reference to
The cannabis okay so is there a
motion is there a motion to
amend it along the lines that
Elizabeth's expressed.
Motion motion made by
Representative Chasey is our
second.
Second Representative Nighbor.
Would you call the roll because
I think there's no debate about
this on the on the amendment
we're just on the amendment so
I'm.
Okay.
Would you call the roll.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair calling
role.
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Speaker Martinez yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Japan ski yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes madam chair you
have eleven yes is for to
document.
Further discussion on the bill
itself.
Then promoted to pass.
House transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee substitute for house
bill one fifty as.
We have a motion as second
motion made by Representative
Romero seconded by
Representative.
Nighbor to call the roll.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane yes.
Speaker Martinez yes.
Representative McQueen.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative read yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Penske.
Yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes madam chair with
a vote of ten yes is been one
knows you have it do pass on
committee substitute house bill
one fifty eight.
House transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee substitute for house
bill one fifty eight as amended
has passed thank you so next on
the agenda are the guardianship
changes and I believe Senator
Lopez is here.
And we re printed the previous
committee substitute Senate bill
thirty minutes Austin okay we
get to so
just to verify where when we're
going to the floor Mr speaker
we're set for one thirty is
that.
Okay well
Okay I would suggest we try to
get this one build on and then
I'm sorry John I know you've
been waiting the organ we're
getting closer to you're welcome
to stay but I have a feeling
sorry.
Yep well pretty close to one
thirty you.
Sorry.
Thanks.
Okay.
The.
The floor is yours Senator thank
you very much madam chair
members of the committee.
we are here in front of you with
Senate bill thirty one which is
a guardianship changes.
And some of you who are Chris
run the committee may remember a
few years ago I sat here in
front of you with this similar.
Piece of legislation that dealt
with the same issue that we have
although we're here with a few
changes.
what I.
Let me just go to that.
Through this other parks and we
are also in a hurry
madam chair members of the
committee what
this bill is
we just go back to law that we
enacted in twenty twenty
codified the process for
subsidized kinship guardianships
under the domestic affairs
statute where the kinship
guardianship Act is located.
However the funding mechanism
Federer Federer from the federal
government to subsidize kinship
guardianships requires that a
parent guardian or custodian
voluntarily place the child in
legal custody of CYFD by
entering into a V. P. eight
otherwise known as a voluntary
placement agreement.
VPA is a CYFD involvement with
families are under the purview
of the children's code which is
of course chapter thirty two
Hey.
so in order to achieve the
intent to madam chair members of
the committee this bill is
proposing some changes.
and what have here with me madam
chair I'm expert witnesses I
have chief judge Marie ward
whose chief judge for the second
second judicial district we also
have judge Jane levy who is also
with the family court judge in
the second judicial district if
I could defer to my expert
witnesses sure.
Thank you the helpful if you're
as brief as possible.
Madam chair
committee members were we're
honored to be here today it's I
will start with just noting in
addition to my role as the chief
judge of the second and it being
a children's court judge also
the chair of the children's
court improvement commission
that is a forty three member
interdisciplinary Commission of
the Supreme Court the
specializes in child welfare and
that is the commission that
moved work on this forward the
children's court judges
association also stand in
support of this change this is
essentially a cleanup bill this
is essentially moving the
language around voluntary
placement agreements from
chapter forty into thirty two a
where they belong under the
purview of children's court
judges because CYFD is involved
with these families in addition
this bill discussed some cleanup
and provides accuracy in terms
of notice process it allows for
the appointment of the attorney
for parents upon considering
signing of the PA can't
throughout the existence of the
BPA upon the signing of APA this
bill also appoint a guardian
Adlai item for the child
and this bill also
right to code chapter forty in
terms of the language in the
Indian family protection act was
passed last year
and with that I stand for for
any questions let's go to the
audience those wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Those online wishing to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak in support please raise
your hand.
Okay we have two people over
here if we could bring the might
go for.
If you want to come up hello.
Okay good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Erica Sanchez I'm with NM can
an organization that partners
with young people impacted by
foster care to improve their
transition to adulthood we have
more than a thirty year history
working in child welfare issues
we strongly support Senate bill
thirty one in our work with
young people who are in foster
care and young people who are
now parents we know that kinship
guardianships are important
option for families keeping
children with those they know
and love and minimizing the
trauma of removal and foster
care system we want to see the
intent of the twenty twenty
subsidized kinship guardianship
law fully realized and Senate
bill thirty one is necessary to
achieve that we support this
legislation its purpose how it
will positively affect families
in the inclusive way that it was
created with people with lived
experience young people and
parents at the table legal
stakeholders service providers
and others thank you.
Hello hello madam chair and
members of the committee and
good afternoon my name is Q.
Martine I am able to live youth
with lived experience and I'm
here today to advocate for
Senate bill thirty one moving
this.
I just moving some of the
legislation from domestic
affairs to the children's code
would clear up any
misunderstandings that would
have been experienced by
families thank you to vote yes
to please vote yes on Senate
bill thirty one thank you.
Madam chair representative my
name is Nancy Franchini I am the
president the district
metropolitan court judges
association the M. J. does stand
in favor of Senate bill thirty
one because it clarifies court
processes when they relate to
voluntary placement agreements
including timelines
confidentiality notice and
findings thank you.
Thank you those online wishing
to speak in support Care and
Canaday.
Karen.
Madam chair members of the
committee can Canada a with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we are in strong support of this
bill we believe that we that
children are better when placed
with can and we want to remove
as many obstacles to this
happening as possible thank you
very much thank you Bill Jordan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children I want to thank the
sponsors and the work of the
children's court improvement
commission for their work on
this bill we hope you'll support
the bill and our young people in
foster care thank you thank you.
Merry McQueeney.
Merry thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I merry McWeeny
I'm the chief children's court
attorneys for CYFD protective
services and CYFD stands in
strong support of this bill
we work closely in the
children's court and prevent
worker.
That you know alongside multiple
stay cold.
And you know we really
appreciate all of the
cooperative efforts that and all
the people that came together to
create this bill
I think one of the important
features is the enhance to
support for parents guardians
custodians
and and the children in that
they are getting legal
representation in this process
and also the all all of the
clarification to process for the
court that is happening in this
bill thank you thank you and
lastly a listen deal.
Melissa.
Hello good afternoon Madam
chairman members of the
committee my name is a lease the
deal and I'm an attorney with
the New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty each and for all the
reasons given here today we
fully support the spelling or
need to pass it thank you thank
you I'm going back to the
sponsor any concluding comments
before we go to the committee
you madam chair ready for
questions very good thank you
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and
senator.
Of.
When I went through this bill I
was.
Confused by why we're striking
for instance on page six lines.
Twelve through fourteen why
we're striking.
Guardians who may be
Pointed by the parents through a
last will and testament for
through a separate the.
guardianship.
Power and.
You're striking that enforcing
those guardians to pursuit court
proceedings to have the same
Right to intercede.
As provided in the bill so what
what why are we striking that
language in the occurs in
several places throughout the
bill.
Madam vice chair for me the
judge one Madam chair
representative Nibert
the purpose of striking that is
that this this provision would
not apply to voluntary placement
agreements and the federal
subsidies but that would be
available and so that's why it
was just removed from from this
particular section because it
would qualify for the voluntary
place to create subsidies.
Madam chair and and the.
Judge ward I'm I'm
I don't know what the federal
requirements are of the if a
guardian.
Can step place of the parents
and serves in that role wise why
can't the guardian who is
appointed by means other than in
quart capable of performing
performing those acts.
Madam chair Representative
Nibert
one of the issues around that
that power of attorney is that
those can be revoked at any time
and so in order to
qualify for this it has to be
something that the
Guardian are proposed guardian
has decision making authority to
be able to to okay let's madam
chair judge ward let's for let's
suppose it's through a last will
and testament parents are dead
they've appointed a guardian in
their last will and testament.
If we strike language such as
this throughout the bill.
That guardian.
Usually a family member that
guardian would have to to spend
money go to court and be a court
appointed guardian and could not
simply service guardian for
these purposes under your bill
and and I'm at a loss as to why
we would require that additional
step and it sounds like we're
dealing with people who probably
don't have the means to engage
in a guardianship proceeding.
Me
Iridian and Representative
Nibert so to clarify that
there's two sections one isn't
subsidized parting ship which
does require parents to sign
voluntary placement agreement so
that they can participate in
having their child placed into
thank you can you can see home
and that would come with the
subsidies the other forms of
guardianship are not negated by
this including the kinship
guardianship which often happens
with deceased parents were there
is no well or probate and
processes that can also happen
four formally so it won't negate
the ability for for instance if
both parents are deceased for
guardianship under a will to
continue to go forward for that
tooth this as it does now this
would just be the difference
between subsidized guardianships
which are percent of federal law
and have very specific terms
that they have to follow is for
instance the kinship
guardianship act which does
require quick process for
outside of the kitchen
guardianship act which often.
Either prior staff probate or
otherwise.
So madam chair and.
The judge if I hear your
response correctly.
In order to.
Comply with the federal
requirements.
It has to be a court appointed
guardians.
So madam chair Representative
Nibert to if that happens the
funds that are available and
that is pursuant to that on a
placement agreement and in the
general assistance agreement
which do have specifications
that are required in this act
that we're matching now and this
is to follow but federal law
requires or use those funds to
pay guardians who otherwise take
care of children without pay and
so that is the purpose there but
that would not negate other
forms of guardianship issues in
our state already that just off
of.
Madam chair judge I'm concerned
we're changing the definition
for the entire children's come.
On page six.
Winds eleven through fourteen
that definition applies to the
children's clothes.
because that's a double section
in the children's goes of line
for for page four line
seventeen.
And so if we're only changing
the definition.
For one purpose then we have to
be very careful because we're
changing it for the whole comb
and and I.
I would be very hesitant to to
do that
because it sounds like we're
going to create some legal
hurdles for people who the
parents have in trusted their
children to following their
death for instance so I'm Madam
chair representative Nibert the
children's code that generally
doesn't apply institutions where
both parents are deceased so
generally speaking that would be
either the probate code or
kinship guardians and those that
is the only changes really to be
kindergarten supposed here are
to remove the language that the
belongs in the children's codes
and remove that language and
then put in
Restored basically the
consideration back to the way it
was before it was changed in
twenty twenty so there are very
few changes the actual kinship
guardianship act which is exist
anywhere as a family court judge
I have a lot of cases where for
the both parents are deceased
and so we very quickly appoint
people through I **** orders
final orders each project basis
and that would not change this
imaginative.
So so madam chair and judge
you're you're telling this
committee that the this would
not have any impact on those.
Guardians who are appointed
through a last will and
testament or through a
designation by their their
parents.
It anywhere else and it only
applies to this one specific
federal program or whatever.
And it's not going to affect
anything else that's what I'm
here so madam chair and
representative Nibert
essentially yes there are
changes in this act to the
kinship artifact but it is to
restore it to the way it was the
only other two changes are to
include the family and the
Indian family protection act
language there and then to also
include that we refer to the
parentage Act uniform parentage
act would determining who is a
parent so those are the big
changes to the contributing
factors such as there are
previous to twenty twenty this
is the act that was used
primarily when parents were
deceased and continues to be is
primarily parents services
although they can also.
Which is also not modified at
all I just.
You madam chair and judge I hope
you're right but on I think if
you're changing definitions that
apply to a whole code.
We ought to be very careful as
we do that because we're not
supplied the whole code here
we're only seeing a few pages
that affected children's code
then we move into other
Sections law or other actors and
I can maybe go along with with
changing the definition on page
fourteen and I think there's a
subsequent one elsewhere that
are very specific to to the
program the.
The the one on page six.
It applies to the whole
children's code I'm really
concerned that we were changing
the definition that's going to
have broader implications you
tell me it doesn't with the I am
concerned about that thank you
madam chair.
Members.
Senate Bill central for their
committee so this is the.
The Senate.
J. Richard so okay okay we have
a do pass recommendation on
Senate bill thirty one.
Okay Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute presentable thirty
one.
The second by Representative of
the pants you.
Want to take over here a motion
made by Representative Romero
seconded by Senator Penske.
Please check okay so sorry
motion made by Representative
Chasey second by Representative
Sapan ski.
would you call the roll are
there any other common questions
and one okay would you call the
roll Representative Alcon.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Lane.
Mr speaker.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative Nibert no not
fund my vote Representative re
yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative semansky yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Chair yes.
Yes to explain this point will
you explain your most of the
reasons stated on most of the
children to make sure that that
that I thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you members of the
committee.
Thank you so I think the floor
session is starting
so what we're gonna have to
adjourn.
Real quick if if it's possible
is we can try to do for seventy.
Is it possible.
Very very quick yeah but we may
not be but we'll we'll see how
it goes but if you really have
to get to the floor we're gonna
have to suspend our conversation
understand okay madam chair
members of the committee house
bill four seventy looks like a
very big bill but it's not.
House Bill for seventy does
three things.
They're essential the first
thing that it does is that it
does a like the public to order
earlier today it doesn't
Burchfield fix however the case
house bill four seventy what it
requires is that the officer
first to a breath test.
The results of the breath test
have to be under point four.
So you've excluded alcohol as a
cause for the impairment.
The person that has to refuse a
chemical blood test.
They can get that worked.
The second thing it does it
blows a hole in the do we live
with a minor in the vehicle
there was a there was a
for member those made to make a
minor thirteen or under there is
no charge right now between
thirteen and seventeen with a
capital the settlement we also
had parenting classes if it's a
kid the third thing is.
There are three different
definitions of commercial motor
vehicle and the what vehicle go.
We'll find them all to the
federal definition which is very
important for federal funding.
For the state of New Mexico.
State police were here they
would say they supported the
margins page sports at.
I have a sob.
The only difference is that.
The our deed TRD identified
cross references.
And we put in those cross
references that's the only
change.
In the PED's office would say
they're very positively neutral
on this bill thank Senator up
can you tell us what for.
In front of us sure what you
should have in front of you is
two two five eight or four point
one.
Okay so we just handed out just
a bunch of bills that are not
accurate we we can hope that we.
It.
In New CSO Senator what we have.
It's a.
Yes it sounds like we're there's
confusion of over what version
we have it listed that what we
they're passing out C. packs.
When it just came from so this
should be correct because we do
have two two five five four nine
that's what we have right yeah
that's pretty three that's what
committed the committee than TRD
identified cross references the
only differences we did the
cross references that here the
identified can't we don't have
that information so we can look
at that got sent out on March
third well.
I get I don't know what to tell
you.
You analyze analyze that version
okay so what.
So it seems like there's a fair
amount of confusion we're not I
don't think it's appropriate for
us to move forward at this point
so we'll have to try to
reschedule it I know it's a
house bill which is not you know
optimal but
And just for everyone's
information we're gonna be have
hearing house bill fifty three
first up on Monday.
Senate Bill excuse me Senate
bill fifty three so if if we get
through that we can try to
resolve this and maybe a couple
other bills but sorry center we
tried thank you very much for
your welcome appreciate it
appreciate it sure okay.
Floor so.
