McQueen.
He
Representative Reeb here.
Leader Sapansky.
here.
Madam Vice Chair
Yeah.
Madam Chair, here, Madam Chair,
you have a quorum.
Um, thank you. Um, so the first
order of business will be
hearing what we're referring to
as our public safety package. It
is included in House Bill 8, and
I will be presenting um vice
chair Romero will be chairing
the meeting in terms of
structure of the discussion, all
of these bills have been vetted
in this committee and in
previous and first committees.
And as a consequence, I don't
think there'll be any need for
public comment on the bills as,
as I said, they've all been
discussed um and.
Talked about by the by members
and the public, so with that
I'll hand the gavel to my vice
chair.
And I'll take the.
Presenters.
Just as a point of order for the
committee, we have a committee
sub that um.
In is inclusive of all of the
various bills that we had.
Everyone has a copy of that.
They
Madam Chair, um, as you, um,
pointed out, we have a
committee.
So
For house Bill 8 and the number
is 0.230708.1.
what this committee sub.
Um, entails is, um, house Bill
4.
House Bill 38.
And House Bill 38 box switch
bill that we heard earlier this
week, I think. I'll spill 31 is
um.
The shooting threat bill.
The House Bill 16 is the
fentanyl distribution um bill.
House Bill 106 is DWI, um, blood
draw bill and house bill
vehicular, I guess you might
call it theft bill where kind of
consolidate certain kinds of
vehicle crimes, um.
All of those bills, as I pointed
out, were heard in first
committees and were heard in um
this committee either last week
or this week.
Um, we had full discussions on
those bills, so I don't plan on,
um, you know.
Going into great detail, I would
note that any amendments that
were presented and adopted in
committee, and there were a few
are included in in the package,
so those are all, all, you know,
combined and it it I think it
reflects the will of what the
committee has done previously.
Um, and with that, I am here as
is um Megan Dorsey, our expert.
parts of the bill and Mark Baker
on other parts of the bill, so
happy to.
Entertaining questions.
Does Somebody wanna move this
for discussion?
for discussion.
Um
82.
OK, um,
Oh, thank you, um, Madam Vice
Chair and um Madam Chair, just
on the changes, I think.
Just so I'm know that there were
changes to number 4, the
competency bill and
Changes to, was it number 50,
the theft spill would, could we
just briefly just describe those
changes so we know what those
are, yes, and in terms of what's
new from our last discussion of
them, um, with regard to the
competency bill after you and I
communicated we um.
felt it was more appropriate to
refer to crimes with a.
Firearm, it's remember there's a
list of crimes as potentially
violent crimes that a person
could be potentially criminally
committed for, um, we adjusted
that to refer to only serious
violent felonies with a firearm,
um.
When we thought about it and you
and I discussed it, um, Madam
Chair and Representative, um.
We, we could have swept in.
Gun felonies that were not
violent, for example, bringing a
firearm into a a bar is a felony
and.
I don't think that's what we
were intending, and I think we
agreed that that would be
inappropriate change. The other
change on.
Oh, is there more in the? OK, do
you want to review those for me?
Madam Chair Representative, in
addition on the competency
provision, um, there were
several.
Relatively minor changes that we
made in response to some
requests from the Department of
Health, um, to clarify that when
an individual is dangerous and
is secured locked facility and
just making clarifying changes.
Um, in addition, sponsors
decided it was appropriate to
strike the expanded evaluation
at.
For people that are in
competency full expanded
evaluation initially when
competency is reached.
OK
And then the other one was out
of chair.
Vice chair, Madam Chair, um, the
vehicle bill, I think there may
have been a change or something
in that one and for everyone
following along, it's page 33.
Yes, as to House Bill 50, which
we're calling the basically the
auto theft bill from
Representative Borego, um, there
was some.
Discussion in the last committee
hearing on that bill regarding
how the internal enhancements in
that provision, interact with
the habitual offender statute.
Um, you may recall that the
experts on this bill testified
that the amendment, or I believe
it was a committee substitute
that they were proposing
clarified how those interactions
would occur.
Um, the experts indicated that
the language they added was not
necessary and in consult agree
that that was true, so that
language was removed.
OK, and thank you, Madam Vice
Chair, Madam Chair, and um.
Dorsey, I, I think I missed that
many hearing cuz I was
presenting a bill, but is it the
idea that um they're already
self-enhancing.
And so the habitual.
Wouldn't apply. Uh, it may
apply. We were just gonna let
operation of law take care of
it. That's how I, yeah, exactly,
not exactly.
If I may, Madam Chair
Representative to clarify, we
understand under current case
law under State v. Lacy and
state v. Lineham that in order
for a predicate conviction to be
utilized to enhance, it can
either be utilized in the
self-enhancing process or via
habitual offender, but not
through book. And so Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, Madam
Chair, and, uh, that's the only
changes since we've heard the
bills, um, all this whole group
of those, um, I, I
should also say this is a
technical change, but in all
candor, uh the other uh sort of
change that was HB 50 was
responsive to counsel service.
And recognizing statutory
construction principles, um, the
way that the bill had originally
been drafted struck the penalty
provision for auto theft.
Um, and statutory construction
requires that we can't just, we
need to say that this is a crime
in that provision.
Um
I think that right now is the
only questions I have. I may
have some comments.
At the end, but, um, thank you.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
uh, expert what is him is that
emergency clause still in there?
Madam, last year, because
it was an emergency clause and I
think one of the bills it it it
it.
No, we pulled, we pulled the
emergency.
Thank you.
A representative Chavez.
Um, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair.
I'm looking over these and.
A lot of these bills are great
when I'm at a time, but is there
anything in this package that
addresses the delinquency code
for the juvenile crime.
Madam Chair and uh
representative, not in this
bill. I understand there are
other bills that have been
filed.
And they have not, as far as I
know, been heard by in their
first committee.
would not be appropriate to
include him here um in light of
the fact that they have not
received the vetting vetting um
process that these bills have
gone through.
Adam Chair, Madam Vice Chair. I
know I'm new at this, so let me
just ask this question if we do
hear them cause hopefully I, I
know we have one coming up that
didn't get voted on, um, and you
roll that into the package
before it gets to the floor, or
is it just gonna be excluded
completely.
I think it's incorrect to say
it's gonna be excluded. It is
going to be heard in due course
after it's gone through the
appropriate committee process,
it will not be in this package,
um, as I understand it. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair.
Are there any
Thank you, ma'am, Chair. Ma'am,
ma'am, chair.
And you just
That's why we're packaging
these. Um.
I can and others on the Kinni
may also as well, I think uh
this is in response to.
Public interest and our
commitment to the public.
to address um crime swiftly and
we are doing that through a
collection of bills that I think
are very meaningful and
impactful.
Much as we do with the tax
package, it's not unusual in
this, in the legislature, as you
know, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, the budget
is a package, isn't it? So, um,
not outside the norm um madam
chair and representative.
Man, chairman, chair, um.
The budget and all the standing,
um.
I, I struggle with the packages.
Uh, I voted against the last tax
package.
Because there were elements in
there that had not been
considered.
And that I could not support.
Um, there's at least one element
of this bill that I would vote
against anything alone.
And
Don't have the opportunity in
the package.
And
I certainly understand
prioritizing.
Public safety bills because of
Conditions in the communities
and concerns that we have heard.
Um
All these bills.
With one exception perhaps.
Um, I think with the past this
committee would have headed to
the floor.
Could be taken up
As priority bills
I just, I remain troubled by
Our tendency to package bills
that don't have a clear
relationship.
Thank you, ma'am, sir.
Uh, representative, uh,
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chara.
Trying to go through the bill
real quick. The, the
Or the the sentencing
enhancements still part of this
building.
Yeah, are you referring to the
fentanyl bill, yes, there's
still in the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative and still
Those enhancements are still the
same as they were in the Yes,
um, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair.
Bigger Martinez.
And Chery mover do not pass on
House Bill 8, but you do pass on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 8.
Uh, we have a Du pass motion,
does somebody want to suck up.
Second
Um, I, as a
My opportunity to just comment
as well, um.
Packages are hard.
Or, um, to vote on when we may
disagree on certain elements of
that as well. Um, I respect all
the folks that have brought
these different pieces together
and and trying to put the puzzle
together, I think in a in a
meaningful way and certainly,
um.
Grateful to, uh, Madam Chair,
or, you know, the efforts and
what we're looking at with
competency and and certainly in
our behavioral health system.
Um
So, uh, really glad we did get
to delivery upon these, um, and
generally wish we could do that
separately.
Um, and with that, we'll go
ahead.
Thank you.
Representative Abeta, yes.
Representative Chavez pass.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Hochman V. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Speaker Martinez, yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes, I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Reeb.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Leader Sapansky.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair
Yes.
Madam Chair
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Chavez.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Hall.
No, and I'd like the opportunity
to explain mine as well. Thank
you.
Um, I think we have several
people.
We should just go down the list
cause there's quite a few of
you.
We'll start with Representative
McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
There are lots of elements of
this that I support. There's at
least one that I don't, um.
And I'm just troubled by that.
Uh, I will vote to advance it to
the floor.
Um, my vote on the floor might
be different.
Thank you, ma'am, chair.
uh Representative Hall.
Madame de, my explanation for
voting no is.
I would prefer these to have
come through separate instead of
a package.
Mm
That's just my feeling on this.
Uh, issues. Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative
Chavez.
I just want to say
As a legislative body and
personally I just feel like this
crime package.
Doesn't go far enough to address
crime. One of the biggest
drivers is juvenile crime, and
it has gotten worse and worse
since my son was murdered almost
10 years ago this year.
And most of the
victims that I have talked to in
the last almost 10 years, have
lost their lives due to juvenile
crime and that really needs to
be addressed and I, I just feel
like this package doesn't go far
enough. I
I'm in favor of
Most of the bills in here, if
not all, um.
Maybe just other than one
concern and so I just, I just
don't feel like it goes far
enough to address crime in the
state.
Uh, Chairwoman Chandler.
Explain your vote. Ah, thank
you, I, I just wanna thank
everyone for working on this uh
with me and point out a few
things. The package includes
vice-partisan bills. This is not
just a democratic package, it's
not just me. There are other
members who have signed on, and
I'm very proud of the fact that
we've included um all anyone's
idea that we thought had merit,
and I appreciate all the work
that the committee's done to
even improve on those ideas. I
appreciate the um suggestion
that.
there needs to be a delinquency
piece and that may come in due
course.
Delinquency law as some of you
I'm sure gleaned from a very
brief um tutorial that we got a
week or so ago is very
complicated.
Really not much different than
the competency stuff that we
took 6 months.
to go through and come up with
what I thought was a very good
proposal, so.
To my way of thinking to rush.
Um, a delinquency statute that
hasn't been vetted by any
committee yet. It was, it was
touched on during CCJ, but it
was not well considered, is
doing the community and the
public a disservice, and we're
all here, I know, in good faith
and I'm not suggesting anyone,
um, what is wanting to do that,
but I think we need the time and
and the um deliberative um
process to to work on that bill
and I'm sorry people are
disappointed that we didn't rush
it through, but rush doesn't.
mean good
Rush often gets to the outcomes
that are not good. So I just
wanted to make that point, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's 10, did you, I apologize.
Thank you
And I also appreciate.
The work that everybody did
bipartisan on a lot of these
bills. I I do like the compy
bill, I obviously signed off on
that. I do appreciate that one
of my bills was included in it.
But I, I agree, um, Madam Vice
Chair, Madam Chair, with what
Representative Chavez said, I
don't think this package is
going to address.
Crime
As far as what I think it needs
to do. I, I do believe that we
have this humongous juvenile
crime problem here. And yes,
well, it is a difficult task,
um.
I've been able to get no headway
on even hardly getting a hearing
on it, um, with even talking
about it through the interim and
offering suggestions to where
we're just fixing one part of
the bill that will make a huge
impact on juvenile crime,
working with the DA in the 2nd,
working with DPS, working with
everybody on that, and it's just
been no, no, no, and if we're
really gonna address crime in
the state in Mexico, I believe
that is the one bill that will
address crime where we're at.
Now, these are all good bills,
but taken together, I don't
really think we're gonna address
a lot of crime in them, and I
think we're gonna be back here
in 2 years, next year, dealing
with the same crime problem that
we didn't address this time. So
I do hope that we can address
evil crime this session. I do
hope we can get it on a
committee, um, I think we've got
some, um,
I think we've got a bill that
everybody's in agreement on
right now, all the different
parties, um, that have come to
the table and worked on it, um,
we just, we're just not getting
far on on getting any hearings
on it, so.
That is why I don't like the
package because I don't think
we're addressing the main
problems. I do think that
competency is, this is a great
piece and I, I would love that
these could all go separately,
um, but when we do deal with
competency and it is something
we need to deal with when it
comes to crime, it really only
impacts 4% of the people. I
mean, incompetent people only
this says a lot of other stuff
and I'm 100% on board with it,
but to say this crime package is
gonna change crime.
In the state of New Mexico, in
my hometown where.
Juvenile homicide is up 150%.
I don't think it's gonna cut it.
And so I wanna.
Deliver a crime package to the
public that's going to make a
difference and
That's, that's why I voted no on
this, um, but I, I appreciate
all the work and effort
everybody did and um, you know,
we, we'll see where this all
goes, but that that's I'm sure
you have a do pass on how sheary
committee substitute for House
Bill 8.
Thank you.
Our next on House Bill 103.
Battery on a peace officer
penalty.
Yes, your floor's yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, you've
heard this bill before, uh, this
is, um, HB 103, um.
And
This bill came before the House.
Um, in the last 60 day session,
um, and it actually passed
unanimously on the floor, um,
and in every single committee it
got through, it just never got
over to the Senate side, and
what this bill does is it's
really just structurally a
problem with the way the
statute's written, um.
It, it seems like it might be a
higher penalty, um, prime,
which, which it is, Madam Chair,
but it's also fixing
structurally, what I believe is
is pretty, it's it's not common
structure with how we are
dealing with crimes against
peace officer. So for example,
if you have a regular assault on
a person, that's a a petty
misdemeanor, but if you have an
assault on a peace officer,
that's a full misdemeanor. You
have a battery that's a
misdemeanor, you have a battery
and a peace officer, that's a
4th degree felony. So this case
you have an
aggravated battery on a peace
officer with a deadly weapon or
causing great bodily harm, it's
a 3rd degree felony, but it's no
different as if I shoot.
Another person, it's the same
penalty. They don't get that
higher degree of penalty that
you would normally get, as you
see it in hands up. The bigger
problem is if you actually shoot
at a police officer and you miss
them, it's a 2nd degree felony,
so that penalty for missing a
cop is higher than the penalty
for actually hurting and
injuring a cop. So what this
actually does is try to put this
structure in line with um the
other statutes against peace
officers and um I do have.
Um, expert I have my, my
co-sponsor Nicole Chavez,
Representative Nicole Chavez
here with me, and I have a
couple experts, um, who have had
some firsthand experience with
dealing with being shot, and so
I'd like them to introduce
themselves first and and a
little bit about your
background.
Madam Chair committee members.
My name is Lisa McGahey, and I'm
a detective with the Farmington
Police Department.
And I've been employed with them
for over 18 years now, I
investigate violent crimes,
officer involved shootings and
other felony crimes.
18 years ago it was an uncommon
for many individuals to want to
become police officers. We
wanted to serve and protect our
communities.
We have seen a shortage of
police officers nationwide and
my department has also been
affected.
With my current knowledge and
experience of this job today.
I don't know that I would make
the same decision to become a
police officer.
I am thankful for the
opportunity I was given.
To help the citizens of my
community.
But people don't know or
understand about this job.
What we really experience, we
leave for work each day, not
knowing if we will come home to
our loved ones.
police officers see the worst of
society.
No one calls the police because
they're having a good day.
The trauma of what we witness
and experience leads to
sleepless nights, we constantly
judge ourselves and our
decisions, the calls we respond
to.
Causes long term trauma and will
affect many of us for the rest
of our lives.
Police officers are scrutinized
every day for the decisions they
make.
There is no way to prepare
future officers or individuals
who want to become police
officers for what they will
experience. We become entirely
different people.
We are battered
Sit on and called every name in
the book. We are expected to
tolerate this behavior and
continue to do our jobs.
In 2022, a farmington police
officer was shot by a convicted
felon. I was assigned due to the
current laws in place in the
state of New Mexico, the suspect
would have only been charged
with aggravated battery, a 3rd
degree felony, and was facing 3
years for shooting.
We were unable to charge that
defendant with attempted murder.
Because the elements of the
crime were not met and the jury
instructions did not fit.
This is a common issue when
police officers are shot and
battered.
We are left with no other charge
than the aggravated battery on a
police officer.
After the officer was shot, I
went to his house regularly to
check on him. I saw the fear in
his wife's eyes.
And her not knowing what the
outcome would be of his injuries
and the future of his career. He
was the sole provider for his
family.
It was difficult to tell the
officer and his wife that I
could only charge the defendant
with a 3rd degree felony.
At work
You slammed my door several
times. I watched him melt and
hurt.
He sat in my office and cried,
demanding for me to explain to
him why the defendant was not
being charged with a higher
offense. He wanted the suspect
to go to prison for what he did
to him.
He wanted justice for the
lifetime of suffering that he
would experience.
This story doesn't get better,
it gets worse.
How do you tell the officer that
the charges will be dismissed
against the defendant.
He would receive more jail time
for being charged by the feds
for being a felon in possession
of a firearm versus the
defendant being charged for
shooting a police officer.
The charge of aggravated batter
on a police officer was
ultimately dismissed, so we
could get some real jail time.
The officer has not received
justice for being shot and will
suffer from a lifelong injury.
The defendant has not had to
face the New Mexico legal
system, we are still waiting for
justice.
In May of 2023, my friend and
coworker was shot, responding to
an active shooter.
This case would forever change
her life.
Have the defendant lived in this
case, he would have been charged
with aggravated battery on a
peace officer for shooting her.
I watched my friend be drug into
the emergency room, my fellow
police officers.
The look I saw on her face that
day will never leave my mind.
Fear is real.
The thought of death is real,
and I saw that on her face.
She begged me to call her
husband and tell him that she
was OK.
I called him at the time. He was
also an officer.
And he said he was on the scene.
He couldn't respond and be there
for his wife because he was
doing his job.
I've watched her struggle
physically and emotionally over
the past couple of years. She
put her life on the line for the
community, and the pain she will
suffer is a lifetime.
I sat with my friend in her
vehicle while she cried because
she was denied workman's comp
benefits pending a hearing to be
approved for continued care.
As law enforcement officers, we
do not view ourselves as heroes,
we wear a costume every day, but
the truth is we are not
superheroes, we are just human
beings.
Though the public and the
community may view us as more,
we are sons, daughters, spouses,
parents.
Friends and coworkers.
We want to make our community
safe and a dedicated our lives,
expecting no recognition.
On behalf of the law enforcement
officers within the state of New
Mexico, I asked that you accept
the proposed changes to
aggravated battery on a police
officers that are in House Bill
103.
You are the individuals that can
show law enforcement officers,
you support them, care for them
and recognize the work that they
are doing.
Your actions in supporting this
bill proved that our selfless
actions are not unnoticed.
Thank you. My name is Sergeant
Rachel Deinza Smith, and I'm
with the Farmington Police
Department.
I stand before you today as a
mother, a daughter, a sister, a
wife, and a police officer.
On the morning of May 15, 2023,
I responded to an active shooter
call.
I immediately knew there was
active killing taking place as I
rushed to the scene, I mentally
prepared myself to face the
threat and the threat and for my
son to lose his mother the day
after Mother's Day.
Without hesitation, I am 4 other
officers ran towards the danger
to protect our community. We ran
past the ceased and injured
community members to face the
cause of this carnage.
I was shot twice by rounds which
had already fragmented because
they had struck a chain link
fence and the pavement before
they struck me.
I know this because I now have
hundreds of pieces of metal and
rocks permanently embedded in
both my thighs, my buttocks, and
my pelvis.
I initially fell when I was
struck as my officers continued
to advance forward, I also
attempted to rise and advance
forward.
But I fell onto the payment. I
had suffered a fracture in my
pelvis, and I could no longer
hold my own weight.
That day changed my life. I
suffered a fractured pubic bone,
a left knee sprain, a torn
rotator cuff, and I was covered
in shrapnel from my knees to my
pelvis. The carnage was so bad
the ER thought I had been struck
by a shotgun.
As a result of this incident, I
began a long frustrating battle
with workmen's comp to receive
needed medical care, and I now
live with lifelong gynecological
complications.
Severe nerve pain and nerve
damage.
PTSD
Anxiety, depression, hearing
loss, and tinnitus.
I was unable to walk unassisted
for months. The physical,
emotional, and financial toll
has been overwhelming. A life
sentence, I will serve
indefinitely.
Despite, despite these
challenges, I continue to serve
as a patrol sergeant.
This is not just my job, it is
my calling.
I am not alone in this
dedication across New Mexico,
approximately 3000 sworn
officers share this unwavering
commitment to protect and serve
our communities, regardless of
the personal risks involved.
Every officer who is seriously
injured in the line of duty
endures a life altering
sentence. It is only just that
those who commit such acts face
appropriate extended sentences
as well.
The individuals who harm
officers do not only affect us,
they impact our families and our
entire community.
I did not hesitate to face
danger and run towards that
gunfire for the safety of my
computer, my community. I ask
you now, please do not hesitate
to pass this bill. Stand with
those who stand before you and
protect those who protect you.
Passing HB 103 will demonstrate
that the sacrifices made by men
and women behind the badge are
recognized and valued. Thank
you.
Representative
Thank you. The only thing I
would add is this is not a
mandatory penalty. It is a
normal secondary felony, 0 to 9
years, the judge would still
have discretion, so there isn't
any mandatory time in this, um,
but with that we'll stand for
questions, madam chair. Thank
you. Let's go to the public,
those in the audience wishing to
speak in opposition to this
bill, please um, come up to the
microphone. It asks you keep
your remarks to about a minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Rickie Lee
Chavez on behalf of the Law
Office of the Public Defender,
these oppositional comments are
not provided in disregard or
disrespect for the important
role of law enforcement.
However, the department's
analysis points out that this
increased penalty is
unnecessary.
For example, charges for battery
on a peace officer most often
arises during arrest for other
crimes, so generally the
punishment for the entire
episode would already be more
than 3 years.
Also, there are numerous
sentencing options available to
address conduct that is more
egregious, including firearm
enhancements, habitual offender
enhancements and in certain
circumstances, these crimes can
be designated as a serious
violent offense, which limits
the ability to earn meritorious
deductions for their sentence.
Prosecutors and judges already
have ample tools in their
toolbox to ensure that more
violent batteries received the
greater penalties. Thank you for
your consideration of our
comments.
anyone else in the audience
wishing to speak in opposition.
No.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition.
Audience, anyone in the audience
wishing to speak in support.
Yes, Chief.
And um, yes, um, Miss Cole.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Terry Cole and
I'm the president CEO for the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. I stand today in
strong support of HB 103.
A common slogan of the police
department is to protect and
serve.
Indeed, this is exactly what our
law enforcement officers do day
in and day out. They often have
to face violence in the course
of their daily duties, as you
heard this afternoon, it's a
tough job.
They run towards danger in order
to protect us.
At least, the very least we can
do is provide them the maximum
support and protection under the
law.
We need to signal that
assaulting a police officer is a
serious offense, and offenders
will be punished accordingly.
Let's support our officers this
afternoon by passing HB 103.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good afternoon. I'm Dale Wagner
with the New Mexico State Police
Deputy Chief.
If
Yes.
Support these critical changes
to New Mexico's criminal code.
This bill is a vital step in
enhancing protections for police
officers who face significant
risks while serving.
Our communities
While increasing the penalty for
aggravated battery upon a peace
officer to a 2nd degree felony
in cases involving great bodily
harm, the use of a deadly
weapon, or actions likely to
cause death, we send a clear
message that such violent acts
will not be tolerated.
BPS believes that it is critical
for crimes against officers to
have an enhancement because
individuals who commit those
crimes are showing the highest
level of disregard for a lawful
society and often pose the most
significant threats of safety to
the public in general.
Thank you.
Thank you, Chief.
Anyone online wishing to speak
in.
Jeremy.
Good afternoon.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Jeremy
story, please you for Las Cruz's
Police Department. I won't echo
what's already been said. I
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this forward.
I think it's a common sense, uh,
change that kind of corrects the
structural issues we've had, but
the reality is, now, it's it's
been more difficult now than
ever to recruit and retain law
enforcement. And part of that,
is because of uh at the very
least of perception that there's
a lack of support of police
officers from
From the top all the way down to
the bottom.
And I think part of that is
true. Part of that is probably
unfair.
But the reality is these are
opportunities to send the
message that
The legislature supports our
officers. We recognize the
sacrifices they make.
We've seen an increase in
assaults and batteries on
officers just in general. And so
this is a problem that's
existed, um, but continues to
get worse.
So I asked that the committee
support this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Chief. Anyone else
wishing to speak in support of
the bill, please raise your
hand.
He raised back to the sponsors.
We stand for questions.
OK. Members are representative
Martinez.
chair
Representatives, um.
Active in sergeant.
Uh, first of all,
Thank you for
Um
Keeping a safe despite what
you've already lived through.
Um
I have a couple of questions.
You said earlier, Representative
Reeve, Madam Chair.
There is no um.
Mandatory sentencing in this
bill.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
no, this was just raising it.
What we felt was consistent with
the other crimes against law
enforcement up one degree, so
it's 0 to 9 years. The judge
still has full discretion on
this charge.
Madam Chair Representative.
What's, what's the difference in
time between 3rd and 2nd degree.
Madam Chair and Representative,
it's 3 years, 1st 9 years.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Um
So this, this brings it in line
with.
Other
statutes
Madam Chair, um, representative,
yes, every other statute
involving a crime against a
peace officer is raised up
another level, um, except for
some reason this one, and in
addition, as I stated before,
it's even more odd that someone
could shoot at one of these
officers and miss and face a
second degree.
Um, charge.
Uh, but if you hit them and and
receive the injuries as this
officer did, you're still only
punishable by 3 years, so it's
just very inconsistent language
in the statutes, it's more of a,
a fairness, um, I also would
bring up Madam Chair and um
representative. There's even
enhanced penalties for crimes
against healthcare workers, um,
and school personnel, so, and
those are felonies, so we, we
are structuring our statutes to
have a higher penalty.
Chair and representative towards
peace officers and people.
Thank you Madam chair uh
representative, I appreciate the
answers, appreciate the time,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, Speaker Martinez.
Have a motion for a due pass on
house Bill 103. Um, I did have
another person on the list.
Madam Gerald is coming. I'm an
absolute.
Favor of this
And this happens to be
My own agency or my son works.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you, um, Representative.
OK, what you call the roll.
Representative of Beta, yeah.
Representative Chavez.
Yes.
Representative Hall, yes.
Representative Hoffman B. Hill,
yes.
Representative Martinez, yes.
Speaker Martinez.
Representative McQueen, yes.
Representative Reeb
Yes.
Leader Sapansy, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair
Yes.
Madam Chair, with 11 yeses, you
have a due pass at HB 103.
Thank you. You have a due pass.
Thank you.
Representative Lundstrom.
Do
Is your mic on?
Thank you Madam Chair. Uh, if I
could please have my expert
introduce himself.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I am Peter Pacheco.
I'm the assistant.
Legislative director for the
state of New Mexico and um.
I'm here
To uh
To support this
Um, can I just have a prefatory
conversation with the rep it's
in line with our little message
that I sent you. So we know that
there is an amendment that
representative McQueen will
have, it does not meet the 24
hour rule.
We have two options. One is
you're welcome to present your
bill because you have your
expert and I would understand if
you'd want to do that, that's
totally appropriate. But we will
need to roll it to Friday so
that we bounce, but um, sorry
about that, but we do have those
little procedural requirements,
but happy to hear about your
bill and then we can move
forward and I'll put it first on
the agenda for Friday.
Uh, about the procedural piece
or yeah go ahead uh just
procedurally on the amendment,
is it substantive?
Yes, it's not one of these a few
words, it's substantive.
Yeah.
had been a few word thing I
would have obviously
accommodated that. All righty,
well, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you committee. We are here
to discuss, as I said, House
Bill 160 and basically and I and
I love the title. It's requiring
drivers to stop, look and listen
for other on-track equipment in
addition to trains, and you
should have a copies of uh
pictures of what that equipment
might look like. I'm not sure if
the.
staff has passed that out.
looks like this, Madam Chair.
There they go.
Get some picture, a picture that
looks like this and Madame
Cherry should also have a map
that looks like this.
pictures. So we're gonna have
to, we're gonna have to, there
are 2 pages, yeah.
picture of
So Madam Chair, basically what
the map is uh.
Indicative of it is all the
states that currently have
passed this law. Those are all
the red colored states and then
those that are considering uh
this law active or pending or
are in blue.
And I had to ask my expert what
BMWED stood for, and that's
brotherhood of maintenance of
way employees division of the
Teamsters, so it's got a long
title that uh that goes with
this map and the types of
equipment that will be talking
about our or this yellow yellow
tamper.
What the bill does is it
basically adds um.
The concept of railroad
crossing, uh, laws pertaining to
motorists and what their
responsibilities are at rail
crossings, uh, the issue is that
maintenance of way and on track
equipment are not included in
the statute that mandates a
motorists responsibility,
particularly to, OK, OK.
It was worked on a few days ago
to stop that. Oh, OK, well.
All right, approaching a
crossing, so um.
As we've, as we've worked
through this bill, uh, both rail
labor and the boat and the
railroads have expressed no
opposition.
Because it's basically a public
safety issue.
And the title says it all. It's
um amending a definition in the
motor vehicle code requiring
drivers to stop, look and listen
for other on-track equipment in
addition to trains, so it would
be something like the tapper.
That is my understanding is that
it moves about 1 mile per hour,
but we want to make sure that
the motorists know that they're
supposed to stop when they see
this kind of equipment.
Uh, I come from Gallup, which is
considered a railroad town by
the NSF we are considered a
heritage railroad town, which
means that we have all kinds of
crossings inside of our
community and throughout our
county.
It's a particular interest to me
because we've had a number of uh
rail.
Uh, related fatalities.
So with that, we'd stand for
questions.
Very good, thank you,
Representative. Let's go to the
audience, those wishing to speak
in opposition to this bill,
please.
approached the gentleman with
the microphone.
I don't see anyone.
Um, those wishing to speak in
opposition.
I please raise your hand. I
don't see anyone.
Um, those wishing to speak and
support, um, please approach the
gentleman with the microphone.
Approximately one minute,
please.
Hi, good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is JD Bullington. I'm the
registered New Mexico lobbyist
for Union Pacific Railroad, and
we want to thank the sponsor of
this legislation.
for bringing it forward and just
want to note that this is an
example of what model
collaborative efforts look like
when we agreed on legislation
among all the interested
parties. Thank you.
So
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Robert Romero,
registered lobbyist for BNSF
Railroad.
As was stated earlier, this bill
is passed in 39 states. It's
been supported by both labor and
management, and we ask for your
support.
Good afternoon. I'm Terry Cole,
the CEO of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
I'm here to support HB 160, you
know, you, many of you know we
have been working on public
safety for many, many years in
this bill, uh, helps to make us
safer. So how can we not be here
to encourage you to support it.
Uh, we commend the sponsor for,
um, carrying it, and we hope you
pass it today. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Julio Romero. I'm
a trial lawyer and also an avid
cyclist, um, and I think the
sponsor for for for bringing the
safety bill and also thank the
sponsor of the amendment.
Um, both whether it's in my
capacity is representing um
injured New Mexicans who have
been hurt in these types of
accidents or as someone who.
Uh
Um
Cycles all throughout New
Mexico, um.
I would, would ask that um there
would be consideration for the
um um amendment that would be
proposed.
At our next meeting, we're not
on that, so I guess you don't
want to come up on Friday, huh?
Perhaps that what this is all
about? OK.
Perhaps, Madam chair. All right,
thank you, thank you.
Anyone else
wishing to speak in support.
I don't see anyone, anyone
online wishing to speak in
support.
Please report of this bill.
OK.
Very good.
Um
I think since your expert is
here will question you and talk
about your piece of the bill and
then we'll roll it and then we
can have a second part of the
meeting where we talk about the
amendment. That's all right,
sounds great. OK, representative
McQueen.
Thank you, ma'am Chair, um.
So Ma'am, uh, I apologize to you
and the sponsor.
Uh, the amendment was brought to
me, uh, late this morning.
Uh, with the man, um,
Corresponding area of law to
include these definitions.
Um, and it will be distributed
of course for Friday, so.
Just apologize for the added
delay.
Thank you, man.
Yes Madam, just a point of.
Clarification here. So has
anyone seen the amendment? Have
you seen the amendment sponsor?
Quite candidly, Mister Speaker,
Madam Chair, I got it exactly 5
minutes ago.
So the alternative would be um
we can pass the bill on the
floor, which probably is not a
preferred approach.
Um, so I kind of went through
these various options.
So, um
Obviously amendments are
preferable, much in advance, but
I will say I did schedule this
bill rather quickly in terms of
getting people's act together in
terms of amendments, so there
wasn't that much. I don't
believe it's a friendly
amendment.
No, it's not a friendly.
It would
Rather than, I mean, obviously
you run the floor, Mr. Speaker,
but my thought was you probably
prefer it here.
No, I, I think, I think that's
fair. Thanks.
Um
Representative Lindstrom
anything else before, oh wait,
we just got to Mr. uh
Representative McQueen, do you
have anything else besides your
comment about the amendment.
Anyone else questions about
itself.
No, OK.
Well, it is an amusing title.
I was thinking about marriage,
you know, stop, look, listen.
Sort of a similar philosophy
maybe for those.
Um, so anyway, I appreciate your
patience, uh, representative,
well, I'll put you at top of the
list on Friday and we should be
able to deal with the amendment.
accordingly.
So we will roll this bill.
Thank you, um.
Very good, any other business?
Oh, I don't see any, I guess we
are adjourned. I can't believe
it.
