Representative ream.
Representatives sapansky here
medan vice chair.
Madam chair here.
We have a quarm cake just a few
things before we get to the bill
some housekeeping matters were
rolling house bill one forty
four office of gun violence of
their people here for that I
just want you to know that will
not be heard today
I think that's o and also dinner
will be brought in at some point
maybe in an hour or so
will cross her finger so
because we have a long agenda
and it's my intent to get
through it
so sorry leader chasey the floor
is now
they come out of term that we
were on work speed there
we have the committee sub and
each of you has probably more
information
let's give him a minute to get
everything handed out so
you'll recall we heard this bill
on monday we had some
suggestions about changes and so
on the sponsor went back and
reworked it so what I understand
is we have a committee sub that
shows some rework language and I
also believe there's what we're
calling a hand out where one of
the leaders staff persons rode
in where the changes were made
so if you want to follow there
is that assisted aid okay so
that's that's where we're at I
think everything's handed out so
uhm
you may now proceed so i'm true
i'll show you what we changed if
you go to page six.
Oh the two two number is nine
hundred point eight is that
right nine hundred point eight
right
thank you should have said that
I am line five we removed
clearly identifiable we removed
a lot of those address and
adverts that town such as
average beyond this
are the advertisement of the
media and then online seven we
added application.
To the
definition of distribution
platform
than one.
The next page is line excuse me
go to page seven.
At the bottom line twenty four
we removed upon viewing our
listening a reasonable view or
listener incorrectly believe
that depicted individual.
Engaged in the conductor speech
depicted in the media so instead
we have was published
disseminated distributed or
displayed to the public without
the consent of the particular
depected individual.
Okay
go to page ten.
And this are line seventeen that
was an suggestion by mister
kates whose republican analyst
in every language used in the
advertisement so that if it's
done in spanish in english then
the disclaimer comes in both
languages.
And then online twenty.
You removed.
One in footage which we had
talked about and write before
line twenty one before between
that and describes we removed
most accurately again we removed
those modifiers.
On page and eleven.
The.
The.
Line for
we removed the phrase by the
average bure.
And we did the same online seven
after easily readable.
The.
Online ten.
We reproved after the word
heard.
We removed by the average
listener.
Online thirteen after the
semicolon we had and and a new
subsection for for next media
there shall be a disclaimer in
the same forum as provided in
this section for each form of
media used.
This.
The.
Then i'm page twelve.
Line two.
We removed the word or before
television and added streaming
service online three.
I'm lying eight we again removed
that phrase by an average
listener or viewer.
Online thirteen.
I get sim same and.
Edit as in her paragraph wanted
subparagraph one which is
removed or after before
television and added or
streaming service operator and
then online fifteen at the end
streaming and then service I am
sixteen as added.
And online seventeen we removed
provided it's.
And we have.
Out of the world has disclaimer
requirements.
Online nineteen we removed to
each person or entity that
created produce published or
distributed.
And that call sentence and we
have put in and that it provided
those disclaimer requirements to
each person or entity that
purchase the broadcast or
streaming of the advertisement
so we limited the universe there
of an.
What did the.
Disclosure has has to include
right who had asked to go to i'm
items the idea of the disclosure
okay on page thirteen.
Line three we were moved.
It's the same changes that we
had in subparagraph into okay
but it's for a different entity
so that's just following the
same.
Pattern
and page fourteen.
We added on online eleven that
same change in every language
used in the media
and fourteen we removed after
with we removed one and put each
of the following terms and we
removed most accurately but just
so it's just that following
terms that describes media.
And online twenty three we
removed those by the average
viewer again online twenty five
we removed.
The.
And after the semicolon it ended
the page.
And
i'm lying three.
On page fifteen.
We removed again the average
listener.
I'm like
we had added and and then put in
the same clarification regarding
a mixed media that we did before
the doctor made yourself joined
us
manager.
Factor business i'm sorry
my goodness it's been a really
long day.
And then online thirteen earn
page fifteen.
We we clarify the penalties and
representative room we.
Did not use violation we put for
a first conviction of estimator
and a second conviction of
fourth degree felony so we left
we don't have to all the rest of
that out
and that was that sums up art
changes
one thing I I would like to let
her touch your most
clarify with you they
they use of our definition and
and just I think it'll give you
a sub sense of confidence or
confidence in and if she want to
speak to the definition of a I
so welcome doctor moses it's
nice to see you here live
it's great of you to drive all
the way up so appreciate it so
for yours thank you
madame chair and leader chase I
appreciate that you're allowing
me to jump in at this last
moment and I just wanted to see
a couple of things addressed at
this point but other first just
I am i'm really pleased to see
how much incredible just the
leadership in bringing this
forward and the care with which
this entire committee has as a
dressed the the definitions in
the the specifics of the bill so
I wanted to let you know that I
consulted with the group of
faculty at unm and a santa fe
institute um these are leaders
in computer science social
science law who are deeply
steeped in a I experts in new
mexico and around the country.
I brought to them the definition
of a I and they concurred with
me that this is a really a good
and appropriate definition for
the purposes of this bill and so
they all supported that that
this would be a a definition
that they didn't see any reason
to change I will note that
academics agreeing on a
definition is a rare event and
so
I think that you get some some
level of confidence
that we they also agree that in
the definition of materially
deceptive media that was in the
previous version of the bill I
understand that there's been a
change
and I just want to reiterate
that you know it's this point
that's really eliminated any
great area that that that anyone
might want to be concerned about
um I might even encourage other
committee to consider that
sometimes a little bit of grey
area might allow a little more
protection
and an engaging in that debate
about
what the appropriate the right
place to draw the line I think
is is a good thing today we
could discuss further if you
like.
Um I want to take one moment to
just encourage anyone who is
sort of on the fence about this
bill and not certain if it's
absolutely perfect
to consider the way that
legislation has in general
proceeded in technology if we
look back at cyber security and
we look at social media I think
the slowness to respond with any
sort of real guard rails has has
been a real detriment to society
and I think it's important and
really appropriate at this time
to take this but I think it's a
very careful well considered
step forward to put guard rails
in place for deep x in
advertisements around elections
this is really the time to do it
so I I strongly urge the the
committee to to do so thank you
I just want to acknowledge uh dr
more in the audience he's been a
huge help to all of us and
supported us in talking about
either come to meetings
and an accorse lindsey and of
course your staff so we could
try I we we just have a corner
so it would probably nice for us
other to ask questions if we
have them and move forward if we
can.
The questions happy to entertain
emotion
manager I would move there do
not pass on.
House bill one eighty two when
do you pass on the house
judiciary committee substitute
per house bill one eighty two
the point eight version
emotion for it
up yes a motion for a do not
pass on house bill one eighty
two made by whip sapansky
seconded by representative
ream uhm
in a due pass and house
judiciary committee substitute
for house bill one eighty two
would you call the role pleas.
Representative all con.
Representative chasing
representative henry.
Representative lane
speaker martinez.
Representative my queen
representative reap pass.
Representative read
yes bef and explain my boat
representatives the pansky yes.
Madam vice chair madam chair
isn't the correct or.
Yes that's okay so
representative read yes.
Madam chair yes
six to zero percent you have a
uh you have a due paris with six
affirmative zero negative thank
you leader
yeah i'm sorry madam chair
representative thank you for
cleaning it up the way it is I
kind of wonder do we need it you
know if you end up with
a mailer with a bunch of eye
that is
derogatory I mean the responding
mailer is going to be that the
opponent is very deceitful.
So but
you know I understand thanks
madame chair you're welcome
thank you very much
were now on we on canada's
regulation but vice chair romero
is presenting a bill and in
another committee so you got
lucky rep
so on canabas as prison
contraband in its own house bill
two thirty nine and there is a
committee sub I think there is
okay.
Thank you thank you members of
the committee.
And.
I might I hope I get the right
number here I have two to in
front of me one of them they're
both different numbers but I
believe the one where to be
looking at is to to eight one
ninety seven point one is that
correct better and that appears
to be correct at least that's
what our records are showing as
the sub that you were going to
present today and and
madame chair and members of the
committee are we ready to to go
ahead
yes you may proceed so.
Madam chair members of the
committee
house bill to thirty nine.
The.
Relating to corrections
including canabas in the
definition of contraband
prohibiting canabas in places of
imprisonment and providing uh.
Exceptions.
So madame chairman members of
the committee.
This bill
I brought forward.
In the last session.
Because we had a particular
individual in forget some new
smuggle canabas into the jail.
For her boyfriend.
And when it went to the day the
day didn't feel like he could
prosecute.
Because contraband cannot be was
not on the contraband list so
therefore.
And that was just something that
happened when when cannot be
scott legalized it they got
pulled off the counterband list
accidentally I would I would.
Say.
So
we came in and and drafted a
bill
and.
It went through committees went
through the house went through
one senate committee and just
flew through all the committees
in the house and everything and
we ran out of time so then it
wasn't it it just didn't happen
so this year we come back.
And.
We've been working with
representative a metal because
of the canabas
rules that are coming back up in
her bill.
And madam chair I believe you
had some something to do with
catching about the junior
juvenile part so that's why we
see their substitute coming
back.
Because the juvenile detention
was and in there so
today we have one that we think
is pretty clean.
And even though it mirrors
representative of the metal's
bill we would like this bill to
go forward in case hers has some
kind of problem and if if they
both go through.
We'd like either for the
governor to put in both together
or I can work with the
representative from that or
whatever and
I believe i'm safe to say that
the representative of a metal
supports this bill.
We've worked with her on on the
language and everything and
tried to make everything right
and.
I believe we stand for questions
with that matter
just a couple point so
clarification one is I just want
to acknowledge our staff who
actually caught the issue yes
yes madam chair
so i'm very proud that we look
at very carefully and we're very
appreciative of a.
Of the staff member that that
did catches kindle galler jalger
and appreciative of hern and her
working with this in and you
madam chair and and I think this
bill shows what happens when we
worked across party lines and
fixed things that are wrong yes
okay so let's go to the audience
first and then we'll have
questions from the committee
thanked thank you madam chair
those wishing to speak and
opposition to the bill in the
audience please raise your hand.
I don't see anyone those online
wishing to oppose the bill
speaking opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
I don't see anyone those in the
audience wishing to speak and
support the bill please raise
your hand.
Those on mine wishing to speak
and support of the bill please
raise your hand and I think I
see a hand raised okay a larry
santa.
Good evening madame chairman
members of the committee is
larry santa
fully support this bill and
appreciate the bill sponsor
bringing it forward as as he
mentioned there are things that
get past in a special session
that it's impossible to think
about all the united
consequences and as you know
there's a shortage of workers at
the
prisons and our
that situation it does not help
by contraband coming into the
their environment I encourage
you to fully support this bill
thank you
thank you larry anyone else
wishing to speak and support the
bill online please raise your
hand.
I don't see any other hands
raised okay any final remarks
will not final but any
additional before we go to the
committee representatives of
more madam character I believe
we're ready for questions okay
very good
committee members
madam chair actually did have in
a big discussion on a page for
section a
on the juvenile detention
facility verse juvenile
correctional facility madame
charita thinking the reason that
the penalties are different is
because if you bring into a
detention center it's a juvenile
detention there but you could
still be a juvenile bringing in
into a correctional facility if
you're in there isn't it kind of
an adult sentence or you know.
A useful offender type thing
and so i'm assuming that's where
the penalties are different I
mean that the sections
consistent with I think what the
real statute is and so so I do I
don't think we should change
that necessary with this
stupility I believe what's in
the is what we're gonna hear on
the other one twenty eight so
what you're referring to ex if I
manage his original language in
the law correct correct so we're
not changing the law we just
added from canada's as
contraband rate and and I think
the problem that represent every
was having is it there's a
juvenile correctional facility
which is a third degree and
there dumilitation facility
which is a four degree but I I
think there is a clear
difference probably in that of
why the parents are different
and a general could bring
something into a correctional
facility I think and so
depending what their sentences
so
I think that's what we were
discussing but I mean so I I
think a madam cherry represented
that you know i'm a coast
sponsor in the spill we did
cause consent to agree to the so
believe last time of a great
catch right the chair on the
juvenile staff and so this is
just something I think we need
to change and clean up and if
the big bill doesn't pass and at
least we have this part changed
so
i'll just make that comment and
then I do have a motion whenever
there's anyone else one else on
committee of a couple comments
but anyone else wished to speak
to this bill okay so I just
wanted to clarify it when I when
I became aware that.
A represent ramiros bill had a
contraband provision and of
course i'm aware of this bill
have been having a contract
cannot be contributed we
suggested to the two party the
two wraps that the mirror one
another they be the same so if
both bills pass we shouldn't
have any problem having that law
take effect and have only this
bill passed as the kind of
smaller narrower bill then it
passes but it was a intended so
that we wouldn't have a problem
with the conflicting language of
both bills pass really that was
what was going on there so
appreciate the cooperation
between the two sponsors arm so
without if you're ready to make
a motion that's great this
manager
when you find the other right I
know i'm looking for the other
one hold on the front of the
mobile
person
to thirty nine one second
chair I can make the motion for
all right representative reading
madame chairman
house bill two thirty nine and
they do pay so house you just
sell for house consumer in
public affairs committee
substitute for how spilled
all right right so there's been
a motion i'm a motion that's
been seconded for a do not pass
on house bill two thirty nine
and I do paris and house
judiciary committee substitute
for house commerce and public
affairs committee substantial
for house bill to consumer sorry
substitute for a house bill to
thirty nine would you call the
role please.
Representative i'll con.
Representative chassis.
Representative henry
representative lane
speaker martinez
representative mcqueen
representative rep yes
representative ream.
Representative sapansky yes.
Madam bice chair madam chair
yes.
We have a due pass with six and
the affirmative zero in the
negative thank you thank you
madame chairman members of the
committee and madame chair i'd
like to thank you again for
working with us on this bill and
making it happen thank you
madame chairman thank you
members of the committee have a
good afternoon.
I feel that way myself
so next up is house built two
forty two that's share woman gay
goes and senator ivy sodo and
then i'm going to take a little
bit out of order representative
martinez I will call you after
this bill okay I mean i'm i'm
not trying to keep you waiting
for too long cause they saw you
there but I know rep chair woman
is has a chairmanship that she
should be involved in
and I didn't want to keep her
too long so
she has her own committee going
on right now so after her own do
you want that's okay so
the floor is yours and I believe
there is a committee sub here as
well that's correct madame
chair.
Which like the the number yes
please a point two two eight one
zero four point two okay
shell can I get a motion for
discussion purposes so so moved
okay so we have emotion in a
second to move the substitute
for discussion.
The floor is yours your one
thank you.
So good afternoon manager and
committee
has judiciary committee
substitute for hb to forty two
is a comprehensive bill that
midernizes and as long overdue
housekeeping of the domestic
repair statute
there are many changes to this
bill so I will narrow it down to
to a few of what I feel is
significant hb to forty two
brings new mexico marriage and
divorce law into compliance with
better alarm it clarifies the
minimum age of eighteen for
marriage and new mexico and will
now be like most nations the
outlaw child merges by making
eighteen years old the minimum
age to obtain a marriage license
just bill clarifies and
simplifies the reason for
divorce by establishing the
mirror pleading of
incompatibility as proof of
incompatibility it period it
permits a deployed service
members to be to marry by remote
means so they're petroled
doesn't have to travel doesn't
have to travel
and be on a base with there's
soon to be spouse it increases
the marriage license to be from
twenty five to forty dollars
which will be up to each county
clerk to determine the amount
the amount is appropriate for
their jurisdiction a fee of
eighty dollars will be charged
to all non residents if neither
party is a resident of new
mexico
who chooses to marry in new
mexico this bill
has been worked on and has had
some changes and we we worked
specifically with the acl and
equality new mexico to make some
of these updated
changes and without manager i'll
stand for questions
great thank you before we go to
the committee I will go to the
audience.
Those in the audience wishing to
speak and opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
They don't see anyone those
online wishing to speak an
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
The.
I don't see anyone with their
hand raised in opposition those
in the audience wishing to speak
and support the bill please
raise your hand
okay we'll start over here with
a mandate and
if you could keep your remarks
about men and have that
you can just stand
it supposedly we have mikes in
the same
thing
I am in support of this bill
there's two specific provisions
that I think are really
important and long overdo the
initial one would be the under
age
provision I have personally seen
several instances in my own
office where I had a concerns
especially connected order area
internet and the increased
highlighting account trafficking
and are
a country.
As well as the
option to charge
a little bit more for those that
come out of state again being
adjacent to port less
the entire city of all sorts of
shut down itself we then we're
happy to do it but it really did
over run our office and I think
that it's appropriate to be able
to have the abilities.
Thank you I saw someone over
here thank you.
Yes my matter chair members of
the committee my name is friend
of green I am currently the
chair of the clarks affiliate
we have worked on this
legislation for several years
needing to increase our fees for
the services that we provide
this is one of the few sources
of income that we have in our
offices that give us the funding
to do preservation which is
something that we are test was
statutorily so that increases
very important to us from a
revenue standpoint the other
aspects in this bill we also
were strong in strong support of
and we asked that you give us a
good pass on this thank you.
Lensing.
I don't members of the committee
you all know me as linda and
with the secretary of state
office of prior to that well I
actually was a cheap w work and
and that's capacity and the
secretary of her former capacity
is a county official we wish to.
Thank you anyone else in the
arty and swishing to speak and
support yes.
The.
I'm shattered county clerk and
of course were in support of the
spill as well there are some
some changes that have been
needed for a while and including
the the fee changes we've had
numerous people over over many
years that come into our office
to get a marriage license mostly
from out of state because we are
in a in a tourist location and
many times they they walk in and
the first thing they say is it's
only twenty five dollars that's
amazing and
they don't mind paying more for
it and and we would appreciate
that the extra revenue in our
offices.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience wishing to speak and
support the bill.
I don't see anyone anyone online
wishing to speak in support of
the bill.
The.
Jim williams.
Jim you need to undue yourself
it looks like.
Okay
yes.
Spam chair members of the
committee when jim williams
vietnam better on the member of
the new external better than
military family caucus with
support shbt.
The proposed change is allowed
service members she wanted
for activated to a duty station
outside in mexico to be issued a
marriage license without
appearing personally in the
office of the county court.
Subject to the following
conditions
the other party to the marriage
is personally in the opposite
account for
one of the couples is a
permanent temporary resident the
county of the licenses.
The deployed member completes
the declaration provided by the
country.
A copy of the deployment or
activation orders is provided.
The declaration and orders are
filed with the county.
The civil contract had married
the solomise and the ceremony in
the mexico with the boy member
by remote communications
technology.
While the other party and
witnesses for physically at the
ceremony mexico
remote marriage is not proxy
marriage as both parties to the
marriage will be present.
One virtually the other physical
during the wedding certain
months.
Fired for spouse to qualify for
base thousand receipt benefits
use an alternative base for
soldiers included unchanged
duties station borders receive a
family separation allowance
thank you appreciate your input
anyone else online wishing to
speak and support of the bill.
I don't see anyone back to the
sponsors any other comments
before we go to the committee
questions members.
Okay was an old cone then
representative read a world
question madame care were you
looking at the
speeds five
and you're looking at the line
to
explain that to me any person
over the eighth of twenty one.
In other words you can go and
describe with somebody out in
highway and then they can
appreciate it
though I we're going curious
manager
they are so that so the modern
practice for a lot of couples
who get married is that they
like to ask somebody who is
significant to them to marry
them even if that person is not
either a religious officer or a
judicial officer.
And and so
what what a lot of people then
do is that they will go online
to get ordained in order to be
able to comply with the law we
believe we're not always sure
and so that the credit cards are
not in a position of having to a
police such matters we're simply
opening it up for the couple to
be able to choose if they want
to have somebody to still have
nice the ceremony they may do so
and and and
it is long as that's the person
closing by the couple then then
there's no police in that's
required.
Thank you madame chair.
And senator representative so it
the the under eighteen is just
to prevent
any issues with you can explain
that I heard some comments on
that matter
so thank you for the question
matter chair and and thank you
representative
so many times we see that maybe
a fifty year old person wants to
marry a fifteen year old person
and so we're really looking at
making sure that people that are
wanting to get married they
really do want to get married I
think sometimes either the
reinforce which were see so much
human trafficking specially
close to the border that's what
we're trying to address ok thank
you madame chair senator
representative and them part
with the military
and being able to is it work by
zoomer
something like that I like that
obviously because we have a can
therefore space their own
actually detecting my clerk
though and she said she'd only
had like one person ever request
that but this would night and
and cause i'm kind of skimming
through the bill but this would
not affect effort somebody in
carcerated
camp that's all that's the only
questions I had you sugar had
knows so thank you thank you
thank you manager.
Other
representatives of
thinking madam chair and
representative
and the domestic partnership
section that's being added in
this.
Substitute arm.
I just want to make sure that
that wouldn't impact.
Insurance eligibility because
currently.
You could.
Yes sort of certified to your
employers say that you had a
domestic partner.
That person could qualify for
health benefits for example.
Um.
By creating this well yes.
Does a.
Certification of a domestic
partnership currently exist
in the state
manager madam majority were the
so currently there is no state
certification of domestic
partnership a lot of employers
will allow people to declare
themselves to be best apart
this does not
necessarily replace that
however what it does do is for
those employers who may not
provide those that benefit it
would it would actually supplant
and and make that benefit
available
what it also would do is for
example the regard to hospital
rights it would it would allow
that i'll distinction those
visitation rights to take place
and they're a bright of other
benefits that that a lot of
people like to be able to have
particularly older couples where
they don't want to have to drain
out their savings but before
somebody can get certain
benefits of the other partner
can get certain benefits
in terms of medical care
and a particularly when it comes
to long term care that that they
can benefit from domestic
partnership that a marriage
actually creates a lot of
problems.
And so this provides an
alternative
that is interestingly.
Well while the domestic
partnership to.
Was a big debate prior to
marriage quality the benefits of
domestic partnership.
Extend well beyond the ltbt.
A community.
Thank you for that manager and I
I think.
So the domestic partner section
starts.
Twenty one.
And I think.
Madame chair and madame chaired
senator.
There it is we are establishing
um some protections in on page
twenty two page twenty three for
for those kinds of scenarios
which I really appreciate um
that I think that those are all
the questions I have think you.
Anyone else with questions.
Um.
I have some questions
so is this a clerk's bill.
Manager their aspects of this
that the categorics have been
pushing for sometime
particularly with regard to the
fees
the the bulk of this bill I
wrote myself last year actually
did not take it to the kind of
clocks filling it I ran it by
myself.
Are through the senate.
And and then frankly was asked
well how can we don't have any
old positions behind you.
So then when I brought the bill
back this year are working with
representative I then reached
out to the whole services that
the crooks fill yet
we we went to other
organizations in order.
To to to get some commuted
support for the bill it also
caused some some changes to the
bill which I think made the bill
a better builder.
Yet as I thought a lot of the
provisions seemed i'm sort of
outside the world of clerks and
that's not intended to sound
disrespectful but.
You know there is stuff one does
to manage your operations and so
on and many of the provisions go
well beyond that sort of thing
and so I just wanted to clarify
that yeah I get i'd want my fees
increase at that part
so the sponsors you and I spoke
about my concerns on the
eighteen year old issue and the
the concern is the following I
get.
That there are situations where
young people are maybe forced
into marriage or you know it's
very under unsavery things
happen to young people I I get
that.
But there were also young people
who uhm in our date let's know
on and the example I gave you
now there's a sixteen year old
dating and eighteen year old
high school probably not the
unusual and
the young woman gets pregnant
they're the family feels they
should get married or even the
sixteen year old feel she should
get married in the eighteen year
old wants to take responsibility
the the young man and this would
preclude them from being able to
marry and you know
I have an issue with our in we
had talked about some amendment
might that might address the
issue similar to what exists and
other
parts of the law for example
statutory rape there is an age
differential so you know if
you're a few years older than
the person who's a minor there
are some accommodation for that
where are we without
representing.
Uh chairman you manage your
we're open to that you know when
united spoke earlier I think I
gave the the example you know
the fifty year old person is the
twelve year old we don't want to
see that but you know if we're
talking that you know a four
year difference III think that's
within reason and and i'm very
open to that and I think that we
did look at the language on that
the chair has a has remembered
I didn't do I have an amendment
I mean I
well I personally don't did we
get it okay so sorry okay oh it
just arrived okay very good
okay.
So maybe we could hand it out
so that's helpful.
The.
Okay so also while the
amendments being handed out
maybe we can change the subjects
a little bit in this business
about anyone i'm following up on
representative all cons question
this business about anybody can
marry anybody
it sounds like if you're over
twenty one
if the official is over twenty
one
and so how do you establish the
that in the clerk's office you
just have that person signed
their name and say I perform the
ceremony how does that work
matter that is that is correct
and in effect right now what
happens is that the the
efficient
never goes into the corps office
for the most part signs and then
often there will sign their
title and often times they can't
really read the title but if
they give their title.
The clothes office just simply
accepts it and they have no way
to verify what the title is.
Okay okay so I have a true
confession to make I like to
read wedding announcements
I know you all would never think
that's one of my harvest but I
have very surprised yeah it's I
know it's kind of a key thing
but I do read wedding especially
in the new york times so often
it's often they say an our best
friend from college got it you
know got this special
certificate blah blah blah and
they they wedded up right you
know you see that in the have
these different things you can
get to get qualified.
Did you consider that what's
that all about and did you
consider it
when you were you were making
this you know kind of lay person
marriage official thing so what
what's your reaction that
senator represent a merger wheat
we did consider that the the
certificate of the get is an
effectively an online ordination
yeah right so this is this is
somebody who who.
Him in some cases they are
people who have a relation with
god or with church maybe some
training and they get an
ordination but an in other cases
they have absolutely no relation
with god whatsoever and they
simply go online to pay twenty
five dollars late they are as
ordained as I am a major in the
air national guard of new mexico
and
and and there must be some
official process because you
know they always mention it in
the ad like it's an official
thing is not like I don't know
okay it's it says it says it's
as petitious as it is official
madam chair and
and frankly it it allows people
to dispense with the pretence
okay.
And if they want their best
friend to marry them.
Let them choose their best
friend to marry them.
Fair enough we now have a an
amendment
so if someone would.
The two o two the two two eight
number and hours two two eight
two one five point one is this
at sound correct senator okay if
somebody would be willing to
move the amendment for
discussion purposes.
We have a motion from
representative chase he's second
to buy representatives of pansky
um to consider consider the
proposed amendment so maybe one
of you could explain.
Whomever wishes to explain.
Oh certainly manager of the so
the structure of the moment is
is is on the line deal with
voidable marriages
is that it it restores the
language in subsection a
regarding sixteen or seventeen
year olds with the promise of
their parents
it does not restore the language
and subsection be which is
someone under the age of
sixteen.
Upon order to the district court
if if I put it for party to the
to the marriages is pregnant.
It it however at the end of what
was subsection a which is no
longer subsection
it adds the language provided
that the other person to whom
the marriage license is issued
is within four years of the edge
of the sixteen or seventeen year
old who was authorized to be
issued a mayor's license
pursuant to the subsection so
that it keeps it with them
within that parameter that you
were saying.
And then and then there's simply
be the language then on page
sixteen in terms of the of the
application
of rental permission that is.
Some items sure we can call the
romeo and julia provision yeah
okay
I just said I
wedding announcement so it's
clear i'm interested in this
kind of thing okay so.
Any discussion of the amendment
members represented of chasing.
Mount what restrictions would
there be on child marriage if
you change this.
You're taking it all out.
No what we're permitting if I
believe I the way i'm
interpreting the amendment is.
There can no no one under
sixteen can marry in individual
sixteen and seventeen year olds
the gap between the two
parties to the marriage cannot
be greater than four years and I
think that I can ask so that's
in number seven yeah I I was
then it took any words today
thank you and with parental
period with parental commission
yes and that's what you're going
to add.
That is the amendment that I
spoke to the sponsors about
based on the scenario that I
provided them.
And and
manage her representative I
believe that that language is in
the existing that's where I
come.
Yeah.
A matter of charitable and
matter for leader it'll ill come
out clean.
And the in the committee sub and
what we can do.
Described.
We just did it tonight yeah.
No I was actually h.
Any representative chase are you
yes I I finally understand okay
other members on the committee
would questions about the
proposed amendment.
Because we could give each other
a few minutes just to look at it
carefully.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
Have people had a chance to take
a look at the amendment
looks like it many other
questions about the proposed
amendment.
I don't see any.
Happy to entertain emotion on
the amendment.
And i'm chair only of adoption
of their men meant but
you know it'll be a point three
version yes thank you
so we have emotion to include
the amendment within the serb.
It is there a second
and it was second in my
representative of re made by
representative ream second year
by representative reeb
any further discussion okay any
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
No opposition so we have an
amended sub that will be re
issued as a point three o k
alright so we're back on the
amended bill any further
discussion of the bill.
Representative chasing.
I'm terribly moving do not pass
on house build two forty two and
I do pass and how strategic many
substitute for a house build two
forty two a point three version
okay but I think
turkey goes should tell people
how long has been since some of
this language has been revised.
Shoot
she can do it yes
so madam chair in representative
initially this statute was from
the eighteen hundreds I know
that they did some slightly up
in the seventies but this is all
language that really needs to be
updated and for the sake eleven
and channel you run
so we have a most second let's
get a second before we go any
further okay that's get a second
do we have a second
okay so motion I went to explain
my request and that is one of
the committee members kept
seeing what what work and what
if we have to come back and fix
this with it with
representing guy goes said well
it hasn't been amended since
eighteen
so so getting us back on track
we have a do not
emotion to do not pass house
bill two forty two but a due
pass on house judiciary
committee substitute for house
bill to thirty two forty two a
point three version made by
representative chasing and
secondary by representative
ream.
Would you call the role.
Representative akone
representative of chasing.
Representative of henry.
Representative lane
speaker martinez representative
mcqueen
representative reap
yes
representative ream.
Representatives to pansky yes
madam fice chair.
Madame chair yes.
The.
We have a new power so with six
in the affirmative zero in the
negative graduations thank you
very much matter okay and I I
have a feeling
it's in room two oh seven
okay very good
so what i'd like to do on our
agenda is
here representative martinez is
ignition interlocked task force
you all were recall we we had
some suggestions and
representative martin has worked
with our members to.
You know do some editing and
things like that so in the
amendments came
yes and I thought maybe we'd get
through this relatively quickly
and then we'll get back to the
agenda
sure.
So we are on house memorial
thirty.
In the floor is yours
representative
thank you madame chair members
of the committee back are with
some immense to house memorial
thirty.
After meeting with
representative mcqueen
i.
Got the language for the open
meetings act.
And he reminded me that
representative ream had
suggested requiring or
requesting the task force to
report to
the courts and corrections
interim committee so we included
that language also.
Uhm and the amendment numbers
point two two eight one eight
nine point one
k and with that I understand
question alright
and we heard this this memory
already were not going to be
going back to the audiences
represent a brain madam chair
i'm just going to move for
adoption of the amendment okay
alright we have a motion to
adopt the amendment to house
memorial thirty that not the two
of the two two eight number is
two two eight one eight nine
point one is there any
discussion on the proposed
amendment.
Okay is there any opposition to
the proposed did you want to say
something represent I saw you
going for the all right so is
there any opposition to the
proposed amendment number okay
there's no opposition so we have
an amended memorial
thank you madame chair I now
move a do pass on house memorial
thirty as amend.
All right we have a
motion for a due pass on house
memorial thirty as amended made
by representative ream and i'll
give the second to represent.
All right it's easier and.
Will you call the role.
Representative alcohol.
Representative chasey
representative hemry
representative lane.
Speaker martinez.
Representative mcqueen.
Representative reap yes
representative ream
representative sapansky yes.
Madam vice chair madam chair yes
thank you represent them thank
you for your patience and i'm
terrible the committee I
appreciate it nice evening thank
you alright next
okay a good question so we have
food available in room two oh
seven my suggestion is people
leave as they feel you know as
they were what let's do this
let's take five minutes and get
our dinner and will come back
because that I always worry
about doing that because nobody
ever comes back when they're
close to I can't even get people
here on time so come on you
promise you'll come back and
five minutes
okay so bear with us audience
and then we'll get back to the
to the agenda.
Three o seven.
The.
Right
too bad yeah yeah.
So if people give us a few
minutes what we're going to do
is we will go to
car crash reporting that you
represent sanchez and then will
do the prison rate.
Memorial okay
and then will come back on an
election fall selectors and
public safety retirees okay all
right that's what
the rank in the member and I
discussed a minute.
The.
I know rep chasing will be back
in a minute
so who are we in representative
of sapansky
and we're going to do
representative sanchez is bill
house bill one eighty six okay
but give us a few minutes.
Yeah.
