It every.
Representative Townsend.
By chair covenant here.
Madam chair.
So we six
okay we need one more tour
operators to full committee but
I think we can go ahead Aston's
subcommittee right now and our
first item is Representative
Lewis do you have any experts
you would like to have.
Thank you madam chair I DO I
have Charles do selling.
And I believe Douglas miss John
as well.
Okay and we have Representative
I've heard here so we do have a
quorum welcome good morning
Representative.
And I'm gonna turn my video off.
For band went and I'm gonna turn
this over to you Representative
the lowest madam chair state
government.
Thank you madam chair and good
morning committee members it's
good to see everyone on this
Saturday.
house bill fifty is a private
right of action for a statutes
relating to the environment so
that is oil and gas air quality
control hazardous waste solid
waste and water quality and
madam chair we do have a
committee substitute I know it's
not going to change public
comment substantially but I
think it will change it slightly
so if we could move that for
discussion purposes.
That.
Great thank you madam chair and
So the proposed committee
substitute repeals section
seventy dash to dash twenty nine
and then it in it affects the
new sections to allow a private
right of action for you.
A civil suit by authorizing any
person on its own behalf who is
injured in fact.
Economically or otherwise or.
Immediately threatened with
injury economically or otherwise
so madam chair I do want to turn
it over to my experts to talk
about it a little more but just.
For everyone's just a little
history lesson here at least for
my career in the session this is
one of the first bills that I
brought as a freshman in twenty
thirteen and we're hoping to
bring it around full circle but
you know it's really important
so that we can have a recourse
when injury has occurred or is
there an to occur and with that
I will send it over to Charles
please if you like to add
anything.
I thank you Representative Lewis
good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
the opportunity to speak with
you this morning on house bill
fifty my name is Charles to
sailing and I am an attorney
with the New Mexico
environmental law center.
House bill fifty would allow a
private right of action
to be brought by private
individual or an organization in
state court against a company or
other entity that has been in
violation of our state
environmental laws.
The bill would allow private
action under five New Mexico
laws the air quality control act
the water quality act the
hazardous waste act the solid
waste act and the oil and gas
that.
Both the of the New Mexico
mining act in the New Mexico
surface mining reclamation act
already include private rights
of action provisions in addition
virtually all of the federal
environmental laws of the clean
air act the clean water act the
resource conservation and
recovery act those statutes all
include private rights of action
or citizens to provisions in
this bill is largely modeled on
those laws.
Under the bill the court could
award injunctive relief ordering
the violator to come into
compliance with the law.
Or could also assess civil
penalties for the for the
violations and and those civil
penalties would be paid to the
state treasury.
It importantly the court could
not award private damages.
additionally the court could
award litigation costs to the
substantially prevailing party.
A creating a legal mechanism for
private parties to bring an
action for violations of the law
is important for several
reasons.
First of all it helps to ensure
that the laws are enforced and
and that's the case even if the
regulatory agencies lack
adequate resources to devote to
throw Enforcement
and as I think you know for
several years now the state
agencies charged with protecting
our environment the environment
department and the Energy
minerals and natural resources
department have been seriously
underfunded and understaffed.
Of the bill would help to
preserve the deterrent effect
the civil penalty provisions
have
in that we're we're designed to
create.
The second reason that this this
bill is important that it gives
some legal recourse to
individuals and community
organizations were injured by a
polluters that violate the law.
For example people who live in
Albuquerque's south valley and
and Mountain View communities
have become victims of
concentrated industrial
development in their
neighborhoods and that's
resulted in pollution of their
land and their air and your
water.
A private right of action would
empower these people to sue
polluters that violate the law.
It's important to note the
government agencies would also
be authorized to bring legal
actions under these provisions
and I can give you an example of
that back in nineteen ninety
eight The New Mexico Attorney
General filed assistance to that
was under federal law
against a manufacturing company
that had created a large plume
of groundwater contamination in
the north valley of Albuquerque
both the City of Albuquerque and
Bernalillo county of filed
similar federal citizens to to
join the action
the actions were all
consolidated.
The third reason that this is
important is that although there
are of federal pollution laws
that include citizen suit
provisions any penalties
assessed under those laws must
go to the federal treasury the
federal treasury no wonder this
bill any penalties assessed
would go to the state treasury.
Madam chair we have made several
revisions to the bill that are
in the committee substitute and
these revisions are based on the
analysis in the FIR in your also
based on comments that were made
during the hearing before the
house energy environment and
natural resources committee.
So first of all we've clarified
it in action cannot be brought
against the state or local
agency that implements the law.
We've also more specifically and
narrowly written the section in
the bill that provides for the
court to grant reliefs so among
other things this change
clarifies the court may not
award damages in a private suit.
We've also added and expressed
time limitation for bringing in
action essentially a statute of
limitations.
And we've specified some actions
that the agency can take if it
uses to intervene in an action.
and we clarified that the bill
does not limit other legal
rights at a party may have under
other provisions of law.
So thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'd be
happy to to try to help any
questions to answer any
questions that you might have.
Thank you Mr Mikel John going to
speak.
Madam.
Good morning madam chair
committee met.
I'm Douglas Michael Chun I'm a
lawyer with the New Mexico
environmental law center and
I've been involved in efforts to
pass this bill in the past I
would just maybe add one thing
to what Mr disablement said and
that is concerns have been
expressed in the past that this
would lead to a flood of
litigation the empirical
evidence indicates that that is
not accurate that is not
happened at the federal level
with federal citizen suit
provisions it also has not
happened with the citizen suit
provisions of the New Mexico
mining act or the New Mexico
coal surface mining act so that
is not a concern to a legitimate
concern about enacting this bill
thank you I'd be glad to try to
answer any questions as well
thank you madam chair.
Are you ready for me to go to
the audience you madam chair we
are ready to stand for questions
and go to the audience so I I
think this for those of you who
favor house bill fifty to about
yes honor fifteen second all and
for those of you who oppose the
house bill fifty please vote no
we'll do that for fifteen
seconds and that'll take public
comment on if you wouldn't raise
your hand yet well let's do that
all first and then I'll announce
about raising hands but.
What.
Okay I'm in support we had
twenty three percent eleven
people opposition seventy seven
percent thirty six people I am
going to
If folks an opportunity to speak
I'll start with the opposition I
would appreciate it if you keep
your comments brief we are going
to have a one minute time limit
I if you don't need to speak
please don't we would like to
spend time with the committee
being able to examine the belt
and
If you.
Just don't repeat what others
have been saying.
And let's begin now with
Those in opposition.
Richard curry.
Go ahead.
Yes hello thank you I'm a
volunteer for Americans for
prosperity and it as stated
before in previous comments.
I'm I'm opposed to the state I
just want to see it ways that
our local government and.
Hopefully encourage more freedom
and liberty for.
Individuals instead of just this
ridiculous expansion of
government.
Next I have to be added to soci.
I'm here to speak in support
what that to you okay.
I'll come back to you on the
next round.
Regular Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
I'm here on behalf of Marathon
Oil we appreciate the Sanchez
dedication to our state in this
legislature but respectfully up
here in opposition of house bill
fifty the ability for any
private citizen to commence a
private right of action is
created by this bill would have
significant negative impacts of
the state its economy and its
industry partners Marathon Oil
prides itself on being a state
partner and industry leader the
company recognizes that there is
a state national and global goal
to address climate concerns
however addressing these
concerns requires change in
investment there's no certainty
for a company like Marathon Oil
should every private citizen
have the ability to engage the
company and any number of
lawsuits for any number of
reasons such an option signals
the state partners and any other
interested industry that
companies can abide by state
rules and laws only to be taken
to court by citizens thank you
for your time madam chair
members.
I'm sure on rob's.
Thank you madam chair committee
members join robs executive
director of the New Mexico Chile
Association and we respectfully
oppose this legislation.
House bill fifty grades huge
regulatory risk for farmers food
processors manufacturers this
bill would remove any regulation
stress that protects our food
businesses and farmers open them
up to lawsuits from anyone
wanting to file.
This is especially alarming for
agriculture food manufacturing
industry knowing that a large
portion of the population is not
understand agricultural best
practices this bill be damaging
to the state as we try to move
towards a diversified economy
encouraging value added
agriculture companies and state
security thank you and we
respectfully oppose house bill
fifty.
Read more.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Brent more I am a registered
lobbyist for the American
property and casualty insurance
association we respectfully
oppose house bill fifty we think
house bill fifty is the wrong
way to go if you look to the
statutes that the proposal
addresses both the energy
minerals and the environment
department have asked for
additional funds to run the
regulatory programs we think
that's a better way to go to
enforce these these is low
grants that protect the
environment to make sure the oil
and gas is responsibly extracted
in the state that this proposal
will simply result in more civil
actions in court instead of
addressing things that the
agency and ministry of
proceedings and if you look to
the FIR it is clear from the
agencies that they will need
more folks to follow along with
these lawsuits and actually
doing the regulatory work that
they need to do we respectfully
oppose this approach to
protecting our state.
Next a neighbor Ave.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Amy
Barrett B. and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico oil
and gas association amongst the
reasons demo this stands in
strong opposition to house bill
fifty today we asked the
committee to consider that this
legislation is duplicative of
laws already administered by the
oil conservation division and
the New Mexico environment
department there are no costs as
outlined in the at F. I. R. to
make this bill and tenable for
government and business planning
purposes the broad language in
the bill provides for the
claimant to file on behalf of
their own injuries or the
injuries of by standards causing
concern for an unmanageable
litigation frenzy burdening
government agencies and
businesses the legislature has
previously and properly enacted
laws that provide a pathway for
parties to file grievances with
agencies and the legislature has
empowered agencies to impose
penalties and work business to
correct actions this legislation
is a necessary and curtails the
potential for New Mexico's post
comment economic recovery.
Martinez.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Vince Martinez
with tri state generation and
transmission association.
By twenty twenty for over fifty
percent of the Energy tristate
delivers to its eleven New
Mexico cooperatives will be from
renewable sources six years
earlier than the ETA mandate
price they will let another one
thousand megawatts of wind and
solar by the end of the decade
bringing RRPS to over seventy
percent.
Today I respectfully stand in
strong opposition to house bill
fifty.
Although tristate enjoys an
impeccable reputation for
environmental compliance we
believe H. B. fifty will stifle
business expansion and internet
businesses from coming to New
Mexico thank you madam chair.
Merry Sonntag.
Thank you.
The committee Leri Sonntag with
the New Mexico business
coalition we respectfully oppose
this legislation because the
provisions outlined in H. B.
fifty but businesses and
industry in a precarious
situation that leaves them a
significantly higher risk
lawsuits by allowing for
basically unlimited private
action opportunities.
The bill makes it easy for
anyone at almost any time just
to without guidelines little.
That delineation of of what the
cost of action a reason is we
appreciate this committee
substitute that addresses a
statute of limitations which we
have previously raised as an
objection what has not been
addressed is the inclusion of or
otherwise as a cause of action
H. B. fifty with significant be
a significant deterrent the
business expansion and
diversification we urge you to
vote no on house bill fifty
thank.
When Chester.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jim Winchester on the
executive director of the
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico we do
stand respectfully oppose to HB
fifty a private right of to
allow citizens to really file
civil suits or any civil actions
for any pastor present
environmental violation
potentially empowers anyone
anywhere with the ability to act
as an environmental regulator
over any indiscretion and we
feel this is a broad standard
and offers the opportunity for
frivolous lawsuits and that's a
major roadblock for business
growth and requires expensive
legal resources on the part of
small operators
as we've already heard it would
also stretch government agencies
to accommodate the spike in new
cases in and finally we just
like to say this is a major anti
business piece of legislation
and for those reasons we do
stand opposed thank you.
M. F. L. B..
Please introduce yourself.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee salary work
that registered lobbyists for
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau thank you for the
opportunity stand in opposition
of HB fifty this morning I'm
this bill creates huge
regulatory risk for New Mexico
businesses including agriculture
agricultural processing and I
will agriculture manufacturing
the bill would circumvent our
existing state regulatory
protections and allow anyone to
file a lawsuit for claim past
harm what also up in the sense
any sense a regulatory structure
in New Mexico making it harder
to recruit and retain businesses
as we try to restart and
diversify our economy we're
currently looking to develop and
the value added sector in New
Mexico and this legislation
would inhibit those efforts for
these reasons we ask that you
vote no on H. B. fifty.
Next I have Ashley Wagner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director of public policy for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce and we strongly oppose
this bill because it creates
huge regulatory risk for New
Mexico businesses and industries
in twenty nineteen Forbes ranged
New Mexico number forty eight
for the best state to do
business which means we were
already at a competitive
disadvantage compared to other
states pre pandemic but now that
we're trying to recover economy
we can be set back that much
further in a twenty nineteen
loss to climate survey eighty
percent of surveyed businesses
said that is states litigation
varmint is likely to affect
important decisions such as
where to locate expand or
restrict business operations or
sales legislation such as H. B.
fifty would significantly
increase the litigation costs
for businesses operating in New
Mexico which will drive business
out of the state the result in
making new Mexico even less
economically competitive today
will result in decades of
economic stagnation please
oppose.
Thank you.
Patrick Killian yes thank you
madam chair can you hear me I
apologize.
Members of the committee madam
chair members of the committee
and Patrick Killen registered
lobbyists for chevron we
respectfully but strongly oppose
H. B. fifteen we are committed
to responsible energy
development in New Mexico
however we view this bill as an
attempt to hold her development
efforts in New Mexico on a
blanket basis since restraining
orders or injunctions filed in
state court under the provisions
of this bill maybe immediate
chevron's activities could
become subject interruptions and
downtime caused by individuals
making baseless and frivolous
claims this will create
significant regulatory and
operational uncertainty for
chevron's operations in New
Mexico those also duplicative to
existing statutes in the case of
the oil and gas act there is
already a private right of
action section allowing injured
persons to bring an action based
on a violation that's seventy
dash to dash two nine of state
statute for these reasons
chevron opposes H. B. fifty and
we thank you for your time.
Not to.
Madam chair members I met
Thompson registered lobbyist for
Apache corporation in opposition
to HB fifty as expert witnesses
alluded to existing federal laws
the current global warming cases
are based on the theory of
public nuisance where eventually
a jury will be asked to decide
whether the benefits of oil and
gas production outweigh the
alleged harms this bill does
away with that analysis entirely
and could conceivably set up a
strict liability regime for
potential future harms by anyone
in New Mexico.
Also the bill specifically
affords the court the right to
grant injunctive relief as such
arguably enjoining further oil
and gas or other industrial or
agricultural operations in short
this would enable anyone in the
world to bring causes of action
alleging any number of
environmental type claims thank
you for your time and we urge
your opposition to this anti
business legislation thank you.
Thanks.
Hello honorable chair and
members of the committee my name
is may banks I'm registered
lobbyist with concerned veterans
for America which part of
Americans for prosperity this
bill creates substantial
incentives for anti development
groups to file lawsuits in an
attempt to uphold.
Hold up all types of energy
infrastructure including
renewable and transmission
projects as well as permits for
new small food businesses
manufacturing facilities and
economic recovery projects
decades of experience with more
modest citizen suits and
enforcement action provisions
demonstrate that this bill will
usher in secret behind closed
door rulemaking and enforcement
actions leaving New Mexicans to
foot the bill the US chamber of
commerce found in a series were
of reports the citizen
enforcement actions under the
federal clean air act led to
backroom soon settle agreements
and develop costly and
burdensome regulations imposing
hundreds of billions of dollars
of costs on the American people
each year thank you for your
time.
We propose I'm sorry Alice's.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith I'm the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico groundwater Association
the groundwater association
believes that such legislation
could divert all monies that are
used for environmental projects
to address legal actions taken
by third parties they also feel
this bill would be
counterproductive to resolving
any existing issues and would be
a strong deterrent to any future
economic development in the
state for these reasons and
other stated previously we stand
respectfully in opposition to
this legislation thank you for
your time.
Thank you Carlos list zero.
Yes good morning madam chair
Chasey members of the committee
Carlos to start with the Public
Service Company New Mexico we
appreciate the sponsor will in
certain companies and industries
accountable when a person is
injured or strengthen injury.
In a subject to some of the
statutes and house bill fifty
such as air quality hazardous
waste air quality acts with
individual lawsuits that
potentially could be filed in
the future this could have
extremely high cost you any
litigation against multiple
individuals for alleged
violations of these
environmental acts currently
these acts are enforced by the
state and violations resulting
spoke finds not Emma
distributors which would be much
higher than funds as PNM most to
a cleaner sustainable energy
portfolio and one hundred
percent emissions for in the
next twenty years we expect to
see a low amount of future
violations of these actions for
by elections are currently
handled through the state we can
support House Bill Cosby but I
understand Sanchez intent for
this legislation thank you.
Michael Miller.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee Mike Miller
with the Permian basin petroleum
association we oppose this bill
and feel that this bill shift
the legislative and executive
authority away from those
branches of government to do
just to the judicial branch this
is creating an imbalance that
most in in the least a shirking
of responsibility by the
legislature and the executive
branch of government.
What will now be acting as
policing agents which is not
their constitutionally defined
role and with the diligently
prosecuting going undefined the
point will be left to not just
acts as a policing agent but I
chair of work for the executive
branch for these in the in
reasons already stated we
respectfully oppose this bill
thank you.
Related single.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Beverly
it's in go with Jerry producers
of New Mexico we respectfully
oppose house bill fifty their
attorneys all over the nation
but look for legislation like
this to initiate lawsuits this
is happened in the dairy
industry in New Mexico with
nuisance lawsuits that were
deemed frivolous later but not
after a couple of years and a
lot of heartache and pain that
our families and producers had
to go through for these reasons
and all the other ones stated we
have to ask you that
respectfully oppose house bill
fifty.
Is the career.
Good morning madam chair and
members my name is Missy Currier
and I'm a registered lobbyist
for strategies three sixty
speaking on behalf of our
clients Occidental petroleum and
plains all American pipeline we
respectfully ask you to oppose
house bill fifty we can Kerr
with the concerns that other
experts and fellow industry
leaders have expressed today
this legislation would not only
further hand would not only
further hinder current business
in New Mexico that it would make
economic development and
diversification even more
difficult when companies
consider New Mexico as a place
to expand and grow their
businesses they look toward many
factors including the business
and regulatory climates bad
actor should absolutely be held
responsible but we must create a
climate that makes New Mexico
attractive to additional
economic base career
opportunities without
unnecessary and over reaching
regulations thank you for the
opportunity to opportunity to
testify and please oppose this
bill.
Inspires and.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
stress person I am the deputy
executive director for New
Mexico counties many of the same
reasons that have been stated we
stand concern of this bill we
think it's incredibly duplicate
regulatory processes that are
already in place that
established many of the fees and
penalties that exist.
Process is bring together large
groups of stakeholders to truly
that these an often for more
than a year we feel that this
legislation would essentially
circumvent many of those public
engagement processes that exist
we also have concerns about the
reality that this may have on
some of the future economic
development as individual
companies maybe really concerned
about bringing long term
investments to New Mexico and
with that we stand respectful
opposition to this legislation.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce we believe the
stable and predictable
regulatory environment is key to
balancing business development
and growth with responsible
environmental protection.
String of lawsuits the chamber
anticipates that will come from
this legislation will create a
financial challenge both state
agencies and businesses in our
state.
Better Albuquerque chamber of
commerce believes we should
refocus our efforts on making
New Mexico more competitive for
jobs and new investment while
balancing environmental
protections that are already in
place.
Two weeks.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Jason Weaks
Representative Russia's largest
for targa X. two X. on
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce in the New Mexico
hospitality association all
these entities I propose this
legislation we understand and
appreciate the need to protect
our environment in people but
this is not the way to do it
this is basically an unfettered
and and unlimited private right
of action to sue pretty much
anybody for just about any
reason so long as you allege the
act occurred under one of the
relevant regulatory acts the
problem with this is it's just
completely brought there are no
guard rails on it at all the
injury can be brought for
economic or otherwise has a
court gonna limit otherwise it's
just an incredibly broad what
the regulators who are
professionals at regulating
regulate don't let put
individuals in a position of
actually enforcing these acts
quite frankly this will stifle
economic development Mexico and
economic injury is as real as
environmental please oppose this
legislation.
Wild.
Madam chair.
my name's Kevin Golan the CEO of
the New Mexico electric
cooperative association we have
members throughout the state and
we have a duty to provide
affordable and reliable
electricity to all we do this
through a series of almost forty
thousand miles of power lines
distribution lines and hundreds
of substations and to maintain
this infrastructure
in a responsible way we have to
go clear right away is three two
right waste of what this bill
will do could possibly put all
that infrastructure in jeopardy
without you all of those
lawsuits so therefore must stand
in opposition to this thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
associated general contractors
New Mexico as well as the
national federation of
independent business and both
organizations to stand in
opposition.
House bill fifty has the
potential to upend any sense of
regulatory structure in New
Mexico making it even harder to
recruit and retain businesses as
we try to restart it over spire
Kanemi the huge regulatory rests
for New Mexico businesses and
industries.
Like agriculture extractive
industries and then your
fracturing create a huge concern
as well as for small businesses
that the legislation chills
economic investment in New
Mexico it will for our entire
economy at a critical time you
need to focus on encouraging
economic recovery in investment
here in New Mexico instead we do
encourage the legislature to
continue working on additional
funding and supporting the
appropriate agency departments
doing their current jobs thank
you madam chair.
Alert.
Got a caller can you hear me
yes.
my name is a color and for all
the reasons previously with and
I A. strongly oppose the well.
Representative Trotman.
Good morning madam chair.
First I'm a volunteer with
Americans for prosperity into
the reason stated by our
organization previously I also
respectfully ask that you oppose
house bill fifty thank you for
your time.
How would choose.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee on power touch in
San chairman of the San
Francisco solemn water
conservation district.
R. I have a concern that merely
answering a suit.
What bankrupts mall districts
pursuing accepted conservation
practices from those who may
oppose an element of those
conservation practices I think
that there are sufficient
regulatory constraints on.
Pollution of groundwater
pollution of surface water.
And stand in concert with the
previous statements made in
opposition thank you madam
chair.
Christopher Hotmail.
Thank you madam chair and
committee as a system of New
Mexico I respectfully ask you
appropriates depicted we need to
be cautious of are the secondary
unintended consequences of this
bill I don't think it's a
question even say at this time
our state is in a very fragile
position as we move forward
after COVID and with this bill
potentially has another barrier
to Mexico's recovery by creating
a much more toxic when the
environment our state by raising
the difficulty to do business
there someone wants to see a
brighter future in our gorgeous
state and for the people we must
not pass this bill thank you.
It's almost.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Markovits Alice and and
registered lobbyists for pattern
energy pattern is developing
over four thousand megawatts of
wind and solar New Mexico which
represents about a seven billion
dollar investment we have to
respectfully oppose this bill I
want to committee and madam
chair and sponsor to know that
we did engage with the Sanchez
experts for about an hour.
Unfortunately we believe that
this bill will really not only
gender but to bring to a stop
renewable energy development and
New Mexico as previously stated
by the speakers and powers
basically anyone to bring a
lawsuit many people have
discussed various issues but I
would like to just highlight for
the committee that financing for
renewable energy projects is
very complicated and these
projects are developed over much
time and many have.
Well see I'm running out of time
here but financing makes it
difficult and we're gonna have
to propose a bill I'm sorry
madam chair.
Ricardo Gonzales.
You hear me madam chair yes we
can.
It's all us without Paso
electric but we are opposing
this bill for many other reasons
stated but what I want to bring
to light is that inside about
Paso electric's region we serve
both Los crucis and I'll pass so
and it is a very hyper
competitive.
Economic development corridor
and this type of legislation
would would very much hamper our
ability to have competitiveness
on both the New Mexico and Texas
sites of our region.
thank you very much madam chair
and committee members for today.
Thank you I want to invite those
in favor of the bill to raise
their hands now if they would
wish to testify.
I'm gonna start with the person
I told.
I would get to first of all the
added sesi.
Thank you madam chairman
honorable committee members my
name is B. R. LTA associate work
with two women United's
environmental health and justice
program I'm here to ask for your
support of HB fifty as a land
based table mother traditional
former C. keeper birth worker
and advocate for the protection
of ancestral homelands from
environmental violence I am very
aware of the barriers to
ensuring a clean safe
environment for future
generations and donor relations.
It is urgent that this bill
passes so that the people who
are this land who are this
please hold expertise in values
rooted in survival for all have
the ability to help enforce the
requirements of existing
environmental laws regulations
are permits.
We need this bill to hold hold
polluters more accountable to
help shift from a culture that
allows harm from polluters to
win that first encourages that
no harm is done so we can better
protect our most vulnerable
community members are shared
error living waters and I'm not
sure where Joel or grandmothers
thank you please stand strong in
support of our beloved homeland
and in support of each B. fifty
could go off.
No.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is listed on the legislative and
political organizer with the
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapter
representing thirty five
thousand members.
Across New Mexico we stand
across support of HB fifty there
have been many agency about this
bill have been sold so far this
bill is actually good for New
Mexicans and for business it is
not the tractors to our state
this legislation only allows for
lawsuits brought by private
citizens when you Mexico
businesses and industries are
violating that already existing
law persons to bring suits must
be injured or immediately
threatened with injury
economically or otherwise in
order to bring a lawsuit against
the industry that's not the case
that anyone and anywhere to
bring a suit thank you Mexico
business district for Harman
anytime there's no reason the
law abiding businesses should be
concerned about this bill I am
asking for your support today
for H. B. fifty thank you very
much for your time.
Thank you madam chairman has
been children in the political
and policy director for
conservation voters New Mexico
the expert witness is that once
again stole most of my best
talking points so I will I just
reiterate a couple of items
first you as to the regulatory
depleted Mrs you know we just we
have seen throughout this
legislative session particularly
the secretary environment stand
up and say that the budget
situation is so dire they are
struggling to apple core duties
V. fifty would be an excellent
under score to the environment
department's regulatory
authority in terms of making
sure that we are actually
enforcing all the laws we need
to be enforcing I am currently
or struggling to additionally
directly committee's attention
to some of the guard rails in
the statue The standing guard
rail in particular the
jurisprudence round injury in
fact requests that grandstanding
is extremely well developed so I
don't think there's much reason
concern that and the same goes
for the recovery finally madam
chair there's a lot of talk of
foolishness and some of the
committee for today I would
direct you know that your
counterpart on the Senate side
once told me we don't use the F.
word lightly here and I would
encourage the committee to keep
their eyes on the text of the
bill thank you very much.
Cause problems.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Joe
Zou pandemic second of director
of the Migos problems which is a
nonprofit watershed protection
organization we support house
bill fifty of private right of
action we think that's an
important backstop to our
regulatory agencies and Amigos
bravos we've engaged in private
right of action on a federal
level
we've seen private right of
action work across the country
it's not some scary dangerous
thing.
And I was kind of interested to
hear the comments in opposition
by all the paid lobbyist
organizations and I kind of
wonder how many of them
routinely engage in private
right of action lawsuits of
their own so.
Right of action for me but not
through the I guess is the model
that they're working with we
thank the citizens of New Mexico
have a private right of action
and then we support house bill
fifty we ask you to do so thank
you.
What she.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Bianca supposed developed I am
the co director of earth care
and environmental and social
justice member based
organization with over three
thousand five hundred members
and supporters in Santa Fe
County and I want to reiterate
what the experts said about
there not being any empirical
evidence of from the list
litigation under similar laws
and I want to point out that the
corporate industry interests we
heard about on the opposition
side have nothing to worry about
as long as they're not violating
the rights of New Mexicans so
for good actors there's nothing
to fear but meanwhile our
communities who are on the front
lines need to have tools to
defend their health when
industry acts irresponsibly and
endangers the human and
environmental well being of our
communities so and unfortunately
there are many instances of
industry abuse negligence and
misconduct that need to be
addressed and we work with the
environmental justice
communities to have their rights
violated by industry I know that
the supplies needed.
Mary Feldblum.
Chairman committee my name is
Mary Feldblum and I represent
the oil and gas accountability
project of earthworks and I I
would like to point out that
this is a deterrence effort how
do we determine that actors your
lots of tools and I I think it's
really important to remember to
keep secretary designate when US
designate can make queens
testimony before Senate rules in
two thousand seventeen we talked
about the importance of tool
boxes and at the time we were
talking about increases in
fights and he said having said
that I can tell you is coming
from the industry I can tell you
that the funds were available to
OCD I think we would see an
accelerated attempt to achieve
compliance by companies which
were not in compliance and
having lack of it enforcement
and OCD and having tools like
this is is just one tool that's
all it is to help it get jaded
compliance and what's important
I think is that there are no
there really is no.
This ensures.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is sue
Schurman and I'm speaking today
is in New Mexico resident in
support of each fifty private
right of action.
The concerns raised by the paid
lobbyists in opposition don't
pass muster each of their
arguments has been addressed
either by the experts or by
changes in the amended version
amended version HB fifty will
advance the cause of
environmental justice and
address environmental racism in
New Mexico I am powering people
to not have to depend on the
state to hold polluters
accountable.
I urged committee members to
vote to pass on H. B. fifty
thank you madam chair and
committee members.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Annika Johnson and I'm here
representing yucca or used in
economic crisis action to use
lead COVID justice organization
with members throughout northern
New Mexico and we stand in
support of house bill fifty it's
critical that our communities
have the power to hold
industries in our government
accountable when a public health
environment and teachers are
threatened in a government built
to protect us New Mexico we know
the environmental racism has led
to our indigenous in lowincome
communities of color bearing
disproportionate burdens when it
comes to pollution and
contamination caused by
extractive industries and dirty
energy some of our members have
been directly harmed by living
in areas where industry seems to
call the shots and regulators
lying to the real and present
danger posed by.
Because my glutes this action
will empower community members
to stand the alarms and demand
government action and is based
in these bills are firing
accidents alongside a public
health crisis exacerbated for
frontline communities this is an
important step to take to right
these wrongs increase
accountability and action to ask
you to please support house bill
fifty thank you for your time.
Right yes.
Good morning committee members
my name is Maria I'm just
fifteen generation new Mexican
firmly in support of HB fifty
and speaking as a private
citizen this bill removes some
of the robot log space
Christensen's run negatively
impacted.
The the burden of enforcement
also the on the state with
enforcement agencies typically
underfunded and overworked this
legislation only allows lawsuits
for existing law this bill does
not change the regulatory
framework
it just gives us another tool at
peoples ability that people are
able to use to right wrongs.
this bill also.
Would bring the air quality act
water quality hazardous waste
solid waste act oil and gas act
in line with the mining action
coal miner Commission act which
already allows private right of
action provisions thank you
please vote yes for eight.
It will.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak today my
name is Emily Wilson in the New
Mexico program coordinator for
the national parks conservation
association we work to protect
and enhance our parks in the
communities and landscapes
connected to them and we
strongly support H. B. fifty the
measure will give individuals an
important tool to ensure
compliance industry
accountability with
environmental requirements in
their communities protecting
public health and safety in our
parks public lands wildlife
water and air quality it's B.
fifty will codify the
prioritization of public health
of communities
disproportionately impacted by
energy development over
polluters and would be an
important step towards achieving
environmental justice unchecked
industrial development greatly
threatens community health and
landscapes connected to our
national parks home to water
resources unique geologic
features sacred cultural
properties wildlife habitat and
natural resources.
Ross the state communities and
individuals who are experiencing
health and environmental
degradation firsthand regularly
take action and H. B. fifty will
support these efforts thank you.
Stewart lost.
A good morning madam chair
committee members I'm sure
what's the long term resident of
New Mexico and I just want to
say that support house bill
fifty and agree with the past
speakers and I want to thank you
thank you very much.
Thank you and that is the last
of our public comment open got
one more Michael.
Eisen valves.
Yes chairwoman and committee
members my name is Mike
Tyson I I with in Farmington and
I work for the San Juan citizens
alliance and that we are in
support of H. B. fifty it's time
for Communities to be protected
when it comes to.
that imprint of.
Infrastructure is already here
and opportunity for citizens to
I have the opportunity to
be protected when
the complexity of issues is only
getting greater state thank you
very much for the opportunity
given coming.
Thank you now we will go back to
the sponsor and her experience.
You madam chair I think just in
consideration of time if we
could just be allowed to closing
that way we might encompass
everything at the end.
And perhaps some of the
questions will bring
opportunities for you to respond
as well yes thank you okay.
So do we not have questions from
committee members.
Representative night part two we
we do have questions I was going
through our.
Representative things up
madam chair I just want to say I
was shocked for just a minute of
city's going what we questions
Representative Nibert what also
fifty sorry.
Fees in relation is still a
fight.
My video were on you would know
I had a similar reaction.
We're waiting we're waiting I
was waiting for someone to make
a do pass and let Nibert remains
leaving the.
I was will remember.
Madam chair I was waiting for
for a the other madam chair to
to.
Include her remarks but I'll be
happy to jump right in
Madam chair.
Madam chair what my two chairs
I do have a number of questions
regarding this legislation and.
Let's just turn the page three.
Thank you to page three of them
page twelve page fifteen of them
page nineteen because they're
all.
Some work.
Situation but the wordings
different at one versus the
other three.
On page three this allows.
A private party to enter into a
consent decree maybe I should
just a question of Madam chair
madam chair to.
Does this legislation are
provides for a private party to
to settle a lawsuit and more
enter into a consent this decree
That we're.
Address whatever wrong except
they are I mean occurred.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Nibert I'm
gonna defer to Mr Desalegn
because I believe he has just.
That information there and
probably examples as well.
A yes thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert that is
correct.
Madam chair and you madam chair
of the if the party entered into
a consent decree it could
contain terms that would the
likely by
an agency of administration of
its.
Duties either statutory or
regulatory sector.
I'm Madam chair representative
Representative Snyder generally
speaking not the agency would
not be bound if it was not a
party to the consent decree the
legislation gives the the agency
the regulatory agency the clear
authority to intervene
as a matter of right in any such
action of but a consent decree
that does not involve the the
agency would be
binding on the parties to that
can sit consent decree.
Well madam chair and madam
chair.
When you have a consent decree
that would stipulate to search
and.
May be.
A certain way of interpreting
Maybe a law or regulation and
with that block replied some
notice to the agency that it
needs to maybe a few things of a
different light that may be what
it was formally joined them.
Hi madam chair
Representative Nighbor yes I
think that could happen but I
think it's important to point
out that under this bill the
agency would be given the
opportunity to comment on any
proposed consent decree so if
there was a an interpretation or
or an approach that was taken in
the consent decree that was.
A contrary to the agency's
interpretation or the agency's
policy the agency could bring
that matter to the court's
attention any could you so even
if it was not intervening in the
lawsuit.
Well Mister the so I'm madam
chair Mister decide on let's
look at the language that deals
with that because I find it a
little and years old but that
differs.
In one instance of between the
various agencies and and so on
all Begay on page three of the
bottom.
This is a provision that deals
with the.
Or Survation.
Division and oil conservation
commission.
And I.
Does.
This provision dealing with oil
and gas require agency approval
for the party to enter into a
consent decree.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I yeah that the wording
in this provision is somewhat
different and we certainly
endeavor to be consistent
throughout the
the bill in drafting it these
changes were made at the request
of the Energy minerals and
natural resources department
originally they all wrote were
written the same but the the
Department asked us to to make
provisions to the provision
that.
amends the oil and gas act.
Madam chair and Mr to seven if
they.
Evidence any reason why.
They would not want to require
agency review and approval of a
consent decree prior to its
entry by the court.
I'm Madam chair representative
Nibert the the their explanation
was that
it would take up agency
resources that they didn't want
to to
devoted to this matter.
Welcome chairman and Mister to
sail and I find that.
Somewhat the concern it because
this is the agency that's
charged we're.
Protecting.
Our oil and gas resources
preventing waste and and the
protected coral of rights.
And yet.
It's willing to allow a consent
decree to be entered into by a
private party that affects other
agency but they don't want a
provision that requires them to
at least be able to review it
and.
have an opportunity to weigh in
on it of and I find that the.
I'm frankly shocked that the the
agency wanted to have that.
Revisions changed in that
fashion because you know I'm
sure the other.
Three H. twelve line to page
fifteen line seventeen page
ninety one nine.
All of the other agencies.
Are required.
Required.
To receive a copy of the consent
decree to review it and can then
enter into.
And then the.
Tell the court whether or not
they agree with it or not
Once let me just read that one
and we're.
The.
On page twelve beginning of wind
to.
Let's talk about the consent
decree or stipulated judgment
and the department has had at
least forty five days after
receipt but prior to entry of
the decree or judgment to
prepare and submit arguments or
evidence or both on the proposed
to create and judgment to the
court and that's true for the
solid waste that it's true for
the the
issues
and it's true for the air
quality control that's true for
the of.
Sh water quality at but it's not
the session for the oil and gas
conservation commission the and
the version of New.
That is a real concern to me
because and assets this
provision provides that a
consent decree or stipulated
judgment to be entered into and
with respect to that agency.
I don't have they don't have to
We don't have to go through the
same process others.
That's what it's for.
It was brought up during public
comment the the.
The oil and gas sector already
contains.
Okay.
A statute that allows parties to
bring bring circuits
And I believe they cited section
seventy dash to dash twenty not.
Could you tell me why you're
former testimony was that there
was no action that could be
instituted by by private parties
if that the statute is already
on the books.
Madam chair and Mister to sail.
Seven.
And madam chair of.
Representative Nibert Hey if I
understand your question are are
you asking
why this bill is necessary if
there's already a provision in
place that allows a private
right of action.
one precisely my up my question
but well certainly accept your
answer to the question that that
you just so those that's fine
okay Madam chair representative
Nibert sure
I understand your your point
there and there's actually some
talk about taking that that
section twenty nine out of the
the
the the bill just completely
deleting it from the law
complete entirely but the two
provisions actually are a little
bit different section twenty
nine provides for a private
right of action for damages
the bill does not allow an
action for damages what the bill
does allow is an action
for civil penalties for the
violations and those penalties
as I mentioned get paid to the
state so the the two these two
provisions actually have a
different scope and allow for
different forms of relief so in
a sense they complement each
other.
Well and Madam chair of Mr to so
and they the.
Bill that you're.
The the expert witness for but
does a couple other things.
that the current statute doesn't
legislative and it it's my
suggestion that that gets to the
primary point.
and that is you mentioned one
damages the second one is
recovery of attorney's fees and
costs and and so
that.
That to me
You know we do have a statute on
the books that allows for
private individuals to
For states where and I don't
think the agency is is acted out
be a suit against the
compression version but they can
bring the action.
to
enforced rules regulations or
orders issued there under
And so it's it's somewhat of a
misnomer at least with respect
to the oil and gas that but
there's no bility of people to
to pursue
There are their concerns in that
regard.
Madam chair and and madam chair
Senator the agency's Romero five
hours made statements that.
If this bill is enacted.
They're going to need additional
funds to deal with litigation
issues that may arise thank I
think the environment department
it was approaching half a
billion dollars per year I would
be.
Funding to of.
Keep up with with service that
we heard testimony or at least
comments from the public that
it's overblown we don't need to
worry about this stuff because
there's not going to be of the.
Number lawsuits that may be the
people who testified against are
worried about so I'm.
I'm kind of wondering why do the
agencies themselves we open that
additional money is going to be
needed for their agency to
big gauge that this stuff if
there's as the people who were
favor of it we are your experts
testified to it there's not
going to be a high run up the
case.
Madam chair and representative I
believe that FIR was based on.
the previous bill and not the
committee seven I think that was
mentioned earlier that that
addresses some of that but I'll
defer to Charles to confirm.
Thank you for Representative
Lewis madam chair
Representative Nyberg yes that's
true I do not believe that the
environment department still
would agree with that FIR I've
had some conversations with with
staff at the Environment
Department
I also would say that just based
on my own experience I mean I
worked at the environment
department in the general
counsel's office for about
fourteen years and during the
time that I was there I know I I
I will oversaw or kept an eye on
maybe half a dozen citizen suits
in that entire time and you know
it's possible that I spent maybe
forty hours sort of overseeing
or monitoring citizen suits that
that had been brought under
federal law or under the mining
act in the the FIR that was
prepared and and and relied on
the environment department's
analysis indicated that this
bill would require for FTE per
year and I can do it I can say
categorically state that that is
just there's no way that this
legislation would require for
FTE of the environment
department and I you know I have
a lot of respect for for
secretary Kenny we've worked
together on a number of things I
have a very high regard for him
but that the that F. I. R. I. is
it's just it's it's not
reflective of reality.
Madam chair and.
Representative
the Attorney General has
expressed some concern in itself
by our the the bill
may work maybe would allow cases
to propose big brought against
the agencies themselves.
Representative I'm sorry what is
the question.
Representative Lewis madam chair
Representative Nibert I don't
know if I heard a question but I
could respond to that well the
question was do you have any of.
Anything to say about it at the
attorney general's expressed
concerns and if so why are the
cases could be brought against
the agency for cancer our
employees for I suppose their
failure to.
Properly engage in their
regulatory duties hi you madam
chair Representative Nighbor yes
actually that was an issue that
was expressly addressed in the
committee substitute us so we've
added a new clause that makes it
clear that in action can only be
brought
against a an entity that is a
regulated under the law so that
would exclude the agencies are
actually enforcing and
implementing the law.
Madam chair.
Mr December could you point me
to the language of the.
Committee substitute.
Certainly if you could hold on
just a minute here.
So I'm pages one and two.
it says it in action can be
brought
maybe make commences civil
action the person's own against
any other person who is subject
to or regulated by the oil and
gas act or rule permit work
order issued pursuant to that
act and there is a similar
language in each of the other
up.
I'm provisions of the bill.
There are Mr to Salem thank you
for pointing that out of.
If you.
You madam chair and and
Representative the
Under our current
System.
One of the issues in fact I
would say probably ninety five
percent of the issues that that
I'm aware of our.
Our handle the administrative
board within the agency they get
resolved and they don't go to
court of that right end up.
Getting resolved through the
administrative process of and
I'd just like to get your sense
that if this legislation enacted
is that going to hamper or maybe
curtail.
The administrative process.
As there may be.
Some are.
Desire for members of the public
to commence a court action.
Particularly when.
The HSD is not responding
through court action but trying
to get those things resolved the
better strictly it do you have
any concerns with that.
Sure.
Your phone.
Sh.
Everybody agrees.
Our.
Nibert I think folks are getting
speakers daughter's muted.
Turow's.
The last question sorry there
is.
Some background of.
Thank you Representative Lewis
madam chair then Representative
Nibert
I think the the bill and and
again this is in the committee
substitute
As I mentioned authorizes the
the agency to intervene and
actually to intervene as a
matter of right so it if the if
the agency wants to intervene it
gets to intervene
in any action and
in that are in as an intervenor
you can
seek to dismiss the action
because the.
The issue is already been
addressed it administrative
delay it can also seek a stay of
the proceedings because it's
already addressing it and in an
administrative actions so we
have in in the bill in in the
the committee substitute.
I tried to address this this
issue Representative night or
did you are racing.
Well that.
Madam chair and Mr decide on
that they can interfere in they
don't have to.
And I guess the concern I'm
expressing is.
With this bill if this becomes
law with this.
May be.
This rocked.
And possibly preempt.
The administrative process that
we have employees at the
existing top.
Madam chair representative
Nibert no I don't think so and I
and I can and I can give you
some some some evidence for that
and that is that the the federal
environmental statutes have.
Excuse me citizens who
provisions that are very similar
to this
the federal EPA likewise does
most of its enforcement through
through administrative actions
and there hasn't been disruption
of those administrative actions
are of that in ministered
Authority as a result of
citizen suit actions that are
brought under the the citizens
to provisions of federal law so
respect relays Representative
Nyberg
Madam chair I don't think this
would be a problem.
Well.
Madam chair and Mr to Salem I
might.
Have some disagreement with you
to a certain extent on that
point because.
I have seen are particularly if
bar metal groups that have
brought suit.
To.
Get into the position of
entering into a stipulated
settlement agreement with the
agency.
To what same's problems from my
perspective but to to forward.
And action that.
The agency may not want to go
through the administrative role
process for did go through the
administrative role process and
thank Dr back and then all the
sudden there's a there's a
lawsuit filed and then you have
a stipulated judgment entered
into which them.
Impacts of the very people who
were were speaking.
Against this type of legislation
so you know I as as an oil and
gas attorney have have seen some
of that at the federal level
where it it just appears that
there are actions filed to get
to a stipulated settlement that
amendment controls of.
Further decisions down the line
and totally of avoids the normal
administrative process and I'm
concerned about that the coming
to the state level under this
legislation.
Madam chairman Mr Desai one does
the private individual bringing
this action have to prove
damages to get the relief.
I'm Madam chair representative
Nibert no the the plaintiff in
such a suit cannot even seek
damages however the plaintiff
would need to show that he or
she has standing to sue in other
words has a real interest in
what a in the in the in the
violation as it has a real
interest in
alleviating or ending the
violation so we we the plaintiff
would have to show
the that it is subject to or
likely to suffer some kind of
harm.
Isn't that damages.
Sure Mr decide on Madam chair
representative Nighbor not
really because that the damages
implies that the court would
award make a monetary award to
the plaintiffs and that is not
authorized under this statute so
it's just showing that you are
going to be harm to the
plaintiff is going to be harmed
as a consequence of the
violations there's there there
isn't any quantification there
isn't any any monetary value
placed on it and there's no
monetary award.
Madam chair Mister to sail and I
think we're saying the same
things I I'm use of the term
damages not in the term that the
it has a monetary value but
thank they have to prove that
they were impacted by the event
that they're complaining about.
Some listening there.
They just can't simply bring the
suit because I think that agency
has.
Are not made a proper decision.
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes that is correct okay.
This bill says that the
the party can.
Bring an action for past
violations M. so my question is
how far back.
With this bill authorizes a
private individual to say to
redress provided hereunder
for actions that occurred prior
to the
effective date of this
legislation how far back.
I'm.
Madam chair representative
Nibert one is the changes that
we've made to the dell as a
result of comments that we
received in the the previous
hearing is that there is an
express statute of limitations
it's actually a reference cross
reference to the statute of
limitation the currently
existing law and that would
limit the the time period to
three years.
And so if I understand the
ninety day provision with what
you just stated madam chair
investors so I would.
Ninety days after this bill
would be an act that they would
have to provide notice of things
that could have reached three
years back is that how it would
work.
Madam chair representative night
period yes if you or if there
are for example there are
violations going on right now
and then after this bill is
passed
if the violations were less than
three years old in action could
be brought for the for those
violations.
Is there any instance where the
the ninety day notice provision
are gets extended for our.
Would not be.
Would not be the applicables
provision for bringing the
action.
Madam chair representative
Nibert no the
the ninety day period is
required
and that cannot be extended
never the less I it often
happens that after notice letter
is sent there's no lawsuit filed
on day ninety what often happens
is the parties engage in
negotiations and no lawsuit is
necessary and I've I've seen
that happen on a number of
occasions.
Madam chair and Mr to say one.
I don't know whether it was you
or someone else talked about the
maybe some some pollution damage
in some areas.
Is that ninety days.
From the date the.
Pollution record or is that
ninety days from the date the
individual.
Recognizes.
There are.
R. or potential harm.
Madam chair representative
Nibert to ninety days refers to
the period of time between the
issuance of the notice letter
okay so the plaintiff has to
send a letter to the alleged
violator and to the this the
state agency and the Attorney
General saying that that these
violations are occurring
and we may bring a lawsuit under
the under
under the private right of
action provision of the law
and then from the date that that
letter is issued there's a
ninety day waiting period before
the plaintiffs can bring a
lawsuit.
and that the federal citizen
suit provisions in federal laws
contain very similar provisions
are mining act contains a
similar provision as well.
So so madam chair Mister to sail
and I'm just Representative days
so it basically you said it's a
three year statute of
limitations have the ninety day
does starts the the hi where
where I have to notify and then
follow up on that additional
water if I understood your
testimony right.
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes that's correct okay
thank you for clarifying that
for me
Madam chair of.
I'm sure that I will have.
A number of other questions
about this is as if this moves
forward
but I I tried to digest the
sector after last bite I do your
the your baby as far as I'd like
that's all the questions that I
have.
Madam chair Mister to silence
thank you for answering my
questions thank you
Representative and I'll turn it
over to somebody else.
The queen.
Let us hear you Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
This bill House Energy I don't
have any questions I I do have a
couple comments I want to make
the.
We had.
We had quite the the rogues
gallery of corporate lobbyists
in opposition to this bill.
In.
I found some of their comments
striking
There was a comment made that we
need to preserve freedom and
liberty and.
Then Terrazas Luis I I you know
I wonder if we should have the
freedom and liberty to.
Live in a healthy environment
and have live around
corporations that aren't
violating the law.
madam chair it was repeatedly
stated.
That this law was inconsistent
with.
Economic recovery economic
expansion I could economic
diversification.
You know what this law is
enforcement mechanism of
existing laws.
It every time I hear that all we
can have a strong economy if you
pass this law what I hear is we
can have a strong economy if we
the corporations comply with
existing law that's all this is
is enforcement mechanism.
Madam chair senseless I
repeatedly heard this would lead
to frivolous lawsuits.
And.
So people are gonna hire lawyers
to sue polluters when they have
no chance of recovery.
What's the incentive for the
frivolous lawsuit if the the
full the plaintiffs when they
might get their attorney's fees
back.
It's just.
It's absurd
Then.
Chair who is coming the slot
amounted to strict liability for
corporations.
Hi I don't know how you get
there.
It was said it was full this law
was both a ridiculous expansion
of government and completely
duplicate of the existing
regulatory process.
So it's fault something we've
never seen before and something
we already have.
Madam chair I you know I
appreciate as usual the
Thorough questioning of
representative Nibert.
About the mechanics of the law
You know I think I think she she
asks good questions and madam
chair I appreciated Mr
disciplines answers to those
questions.
Madam chair I I guess.
I mean I think this is good law
I think this not enforcing
existing laws it's not even
expansion of existing laws just
a way to enforce.
Madam chair and for the
corporate lobbyists who might
still be listening.
When the sky is always falling
and when you make statements
that are not true it really
undermines your position.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Roybal
movie do not pass on house bill
fifty and a do pass on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
R. S. bill fifty.
A second.
We have a second Representative
Lewis I don't have anymore hands
right so the quick to please
call the roll.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Representative Eli.
Yes I'm trying to get my camera
works yes Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative nightmare.
yes Representative Cook is back.
Representative Cook yes all.
Representative Townsend not.
Representative Rehm.
All now.
Thank.
Thank the vice chair is excused.
Madam chair madam chair before
you folks could.
I was worried about cook and I
think I said yes the state I'm I
was going to ask you
Representative Nibert you're
actually.
Your vote no I agree to the no I
did I did not I was was saying
that state and when you have.
Got me off my day but I did the.
Madam chair can reconsider to
nine or not my vote.
Madam chair I knew neighbors
vote was incorrect but I know
cooks though is correct.
This kids.
Is nine for no.
Madam chair I I object to
changing is both.
Come on.
Yes.
It I I just got your views with
us and what is okay.
Now.
Representative Cook nuts now.
My part yes he votes now okay.
T..
Are you ready and is it my turn
to vote yes I will yes.
So what is there about.
Seven to four.
We do pass committees up okay
thank you very much thank you
madam chair thank you committee
members thank you all you did a
great job next we have
Representative Maestas.
Thank you madam chairman of the
members of the thanks for having
me this is a house bill two
hundred eighty six two hundred
eighty six and I'm just give a
quick
Premise and then we'll we'll
point to the bill.
I want to thank the analyst for
working all day yesterday a
point to version got to the
committee.
Up over twenty four hours ago
but when we arrived last night
naked explained that and then
you guys can decide but anyway
managers after twenty nine is
our New Mexico lost regarding
long for.
chapter twenty nine oh two
section to the state the section
seven is law enforcement
training.
Section thirteen as the law
enforcement protection fund.
but then you have section
fourteen which is the which is
employer employee H. R. stuff in
state statute and then you go
over the top line section
nineteen and you have the look
of.
The law enforcement advisory
committee.
What we have in New Mexico
literature is a law enforcement
academy which is charged with
training of all the officers
that don't go to the others.
One person to get the meaning of
the schools they give
certifications are also the
peace officers can become peace
officers.
But there's also a mechanism to
suspend or revoke certifications
upon allegations of misconduct
this is what is dysfunctional
needs to change it is not fair
to the officers for their these
allegations to hang over their
head for months and years is not
for the public who demanded in
every city and town and and in
this country police
accountability and revising the
the legal structure with which
police are held accountable for
absolved through us the
streamlined investigatory
process.
There is a hundred thirty
complaints anymore at the law
enforcement academy that are
uneducated they're just sitting
there it twenty general estate
Mexico described this process in
a Kael be report as a quote
train wreck the train wreck is
not the fault of the line
officers not the fault of the
men and women out there serving
our community every single day I
want to make that clear it is
our fault as lawmakers it is our
fault to not get the statute
right in the and the the
incentives right and the
structure right and so this
attempt to do that there's gonna
be opposition to the to this
bill at primarily for one
provision at the very end but I
want to thank all the officers
of met with visit with and you
have email me back and forth
thing we still don't support
your bill because their comments
are very very helpful in shaping
this piece of legislation
particularly the lawyers from
the AG's office that came the
analysis last night what this
does madam chair essentially is
make the Law Enforcement Academy
ape your academy changes the law
enforcement academy board to
include all the directors of the
various law enforcement academy
statewide but still chaired by
the Attorney General and the law
enforcement academy trains and
certifies a police officers at
the initial stage but we also do
is we created independent
independent board so that
there's no up conflict of
interest between the law
enforcement academy which which
train officers and and and is
all about officers and we create
a law enforcement certification
board which which deals with
allegations of misconduct of the
original bill had other
misconduct cases going to R. L.
D. E. I thought I was a fabulous
idea fell over like a lead
balloon this bill this up
proposed a committee substitute
has the law enforcement
certification board
administratively attached to the
department of public safety was
administratively attached but
not under the department of
public safety but is purely
independent and it.
Has
It has a border make up they can
hire and executive director and
they deal with these but
misconduct cases similar to the
way the bar does with lawyers
UNM law school trained you you
graduate you get your diploma
that's the law enforcement
academy law enforcement
certification board is the bar
that deals with
bar complaints and deals with
whether of the the lawyer keeps
license or not or get suspended
or whatever this keeps and all
of the appeals process is for
state police and up and so once
again streamlines the process I
would be remiss madam chair I.
so here's the difference between
the point two on the point
three.
The point to actually has had a
so if I can if you look at the
point three madam chair on line
up the last page line twenty six
of page twenty six rather a line
seven it removes a section of
law twenty nine point seven.
Twenty nine dash seven dash five
point one it was the law
enforcement County Board can
fire the law enforcement academy
director the the the bill in its
original form had the department
of public safety secretary over
the director of the law
enforcement academy so that
section of law where the board
hires and fires the director was
removed and then also there was
a
There was a I'm more of a typing
error in
In the section to.
In which on page eight we we
deleted of paragraphs a and B.
we want to keep that end so that
the law enforcement academy
give that initial certification
upon completion of the academy
so I know that's a lot madam
chair but lastly I'd be remiss
if I did mention this one
portion of the bill this
streamlines the process there is
a statute twenty nine dash
fourteen dash one entitled the
law of the peace officer
employer employee relations act
that with all due respect has no
business in state statute.
No business it is it deals with
the do's and don'ts of
misconduct investigations.
That is codified in collective
bargaining agreements it's it's
outlined in the people statute
that we passed last year there's
adequate protections for
officers as workers but this
provision is not consistent with
the with streamlining the
process of the bill and this is
what we're trying to solve chair
this is the current process for
up investigating misconduct
cases under current law.
And this bill will just make it
streamlined all allegations go
to the law law enforcement
certification board and get
educated quickly of so that
officers don't have the stress
of these allegations and that
the people get accountability
for of that misconduct that
crosses the line.
Thank you madam chair.
I didn't ask you if you have any
witnesses expert witnesses.
Thank you madam chair no no not
today but I I appreciate the up
the director Law Enforcement
Academy the lawyers from the AG
the lawyer from DPS they've all
been.
You know email me back and forth
all week long getting the
language as best as we can thank
you madam chair.
Thank you I'm going to go to
public comment at this time but
we have a floor session that's
supposed to begin in just over
an hour and we're just starting
our second bill I would like to
limited to ten minutes from each
side if we are impossible to do
that so I will I want to be sure
that.
On.
Folks who are the primary
spokesperson are first in line
and John before we do the
I'm going to ask for a whole a
very fifteen second pull for
those present in favor or
against.
Close bill two eighty six so
let's get that pulled up.
So this is fifty fifty three in
favor three in opposition.
Eight.
Let's go first to the opposition
Sean will agree.
Hello madam chair can you hear
me correctly we can go ahead
thank you so much for the
opportunity hope you're having a
good Saturday I would like to
propose this bill I'd like the
work and I respect the
representative was done the work
with someone force the
professionals to address the
last bill which I did not like
this is going down the direction
of of a positive bill the
officers bill of rights
everybody has one the
firefighters have a bill of
rights I find it alarming that
we're not taking these bill of
rights for everybody to
correctional officers have have
the bill of rights right now in
Santa Fe were arguing to get a
student body bill of rights into
law all this law does all the
bill of rights does is establish
pre existing federal law under
wine garden and watermill and it
allows officers who deserve due
process I'm in a room full of
attorneys were arguing that that
that appeal rights and due
process is not something
valuable for police officers
they can use the bathroom they
don't yell that they don't get a
cost it's it's really simple I
would encourage you to read it
and please propose and vote.
Thank you Chris Baldonado.
The morning madam checkers balls
on a registered lobbyist
Albuquerque police officers
association we appreciate the
efforts we are partially
opposing this piece of
legislation madam chair members
the committee for the following
reasons if you go to page five
line fifteen to twenty in the
first one has to do with the two
seasons at large members we
would like to request a response
to consider have a background
check on those two seasons at
large members make sure that I
have no felonies make sure that
they have no association with
any anti police officer
organization the second change
madam chair it has to do with
the behavioral health health
care provider to make sure that
behavioral health provider has
one of them has the police
psychology background and
experience those are the two
reasons we stand impartial
position we hope they as this
bills moves the committee we can
continue to work with the
sponsor we I think we are
getting there to be able to
support forty thank you very
much.
Thank you let's go to those in
favor of the bill.
You raise your hand please.
Barron Jones.
We're not hearing you.
Okay yes so good morning madam
chair members of the committee
on my name's Barron Jones senior
public policy strategist ACLU of
New Mexico we stand and support
for H. B. one eighty six we
believe reassigning was
responsible for misconduct
investigations every program The
New Mexico
peace officers employer employee
relations act on the has been
known to frustrate misconduct
investigations will Ottoman the
increased accountability
transparency and trust among the
public the law enforcement
community in New Mexico and
across the nation has had a long
history of being unwilling to
police themselves and this bill
is a good step toward a radic
hating that culture and current
you also recommended to past and
bring New Mexico closer to the
state of Maryland who recently
build their states bell overall
for some bill of rights we thank
the sponsors for bring this long
overdue courageous legislators
thank you.
Thank you I don't appear to have
any other people with hands
raised so let's go back to the
committee
Representative Maestas anything
to say.
We'll just ask that you all if
you're comfortable with the
point three it has those two
corrections point who was
provided to the analyst and I
appreciate the work they've done
but we to address that the
committee to consider the point
three version.
And I will move that point three
version of house bill two eighty
six for discussion purposes.
Members.
Representative Rehm.
All thank you madam chair and
and thank you.
Representative I I do agree that
it's moving more into in a
proper direction which was begin
by who is the current head of
the law enforcement academy
board that disciplines officers.
Thank you madam chair
representative Rehm let me
glance at my phone I don't want
to mispronounce her last name
but they had one person now to
me is.
Director I Kelly on the Honda.
Madam chair and representative
sorry maybe I didn't make it
clear the law enforcement
academy board okay thank you
thank you madam chair or
Representative Rehm
the who the sitting Attorney
General.
It would be the head of your per
port proposed board under this.
Thank you madam chair of the
that would not be ahead of the
Board necessarily
but the board will be chaired by
a retired judge appointed by the
governor.
What's talk about what is the
failure to as you called it a
train wrecked who can call the
board to review officers
currently.
Thank you madam chair
representative ream
The gentleman that referred to
it as a train wreck.
The.
Attorney General correct.
Madam chair representative bring
yes okay so perhaps the failure
of disciplining officers needs
to lay at his feet is my comment
we have the ability to go ahead
and call the board to review
these and a you know while we're
moving in a different direction
if the chair of the of the board
doesn't call a meeting then
there's not going to be the
action or review.
Sure sure go ahead
thank you madam chair
representative know that.
I'm not that's an issue but for
the bigger issue is the
reporting aspect of it that I
think there was a report about a
year ago your app go that was
the session failure to report
these misconduct cases and
there's some that we may have to
address in in that in this bill
and subsequent statutes but
under current law.
I make a mess I make up a
complaint against an officer in
my home town that they deal with
that as an agency the chief
then of boards that complaint to
law enforcement academy those
and the law enforcement academy
deals with that
and they have staff the Attorney
General merely chairs of the
board itself but there's plenty
of staff to frankly there's not
plenty step but they're supposed
to be staff to get that done
it's underfunded and
understaffed but my point is is
that apparently the the chief of
police and the sheriff's
statewide are not submitting
that stuff to the law
enforcement kind of a that's
another element of the
dysfunction that we hope to
solve.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of.
I agree that I think this
staffing is that the issue is
one of the failures of the
current board.
And I think that if we are
placed a
some resources there that would
help at that position so I I
agree with that statement.
However are if they're not
reporting how do we have a
hundred and thirty cases
pending.
Thank you madam chair
representative prematurely those
other hundred thirty of the
cases that have been reported
and have not been adjudicated.
Yep thank you madam chair and
representative R. if an agency
had does not report are an
errant officer can the academy
or take action against him.
Or or thank you madam chair
representative Rehm what is the
if you don't know you don't
know.
But I don't know if it has the
power to.
Yes to start a misconduct
investigation that's not brought
to them that are out there like
a like a judge consumers fun day
do a motion I do not know that.
Madam chair and representative
of it you know malfeasance
misfeasance all of that can can
cause a disciplinary action.
Our.
Madam chair and Representative
when we go to page five which
unfortunately I've got a point
two version but I think it's
going to be real close.
Okay so you're making all this
these new members on the board
and I see one of them but you
left off that your door leading
at the very bottom of page five
one twenty five you're deleting
the share of.
You're replacing the board
members and you're only putting
on a
You're only putting on a chief
of police why are we not
including the chair of.
Chair representative Rehm I
believe the chief of police's
street struck as well this
language was adopted from.
From a Senate bill three hundred
seventy five which is supported
by law enforcement of the
restructuring of the law
enforcement academy board and
what it does is it it includes
the.
All satellite Law Enforcement
Academy so the directors of the
academy's essentially replace
the municipal police chief the
share of the state police
officer
Things like that.
I'm.
Mr wrote madam chairman and
Representative let's go to page
five line twelve and there's one
certified police chief of an
Indian nation.
One of the points that I think
is been problematic with the
Board is if we look at you madam
chair and representative if we
look at law enforcement agencies
you look at the big three there
Albuquerque police department
New Mexico state police and
Bernalillo county sheriff's
department and you kind of find
those individuals on the board
you know in the past and
currently.
Then you end up with smaller
agencies all across the state so
I think that what needs to be
represented on that board is a
small medium large law
enforcement agencies are there
currently directing the our
training at the academy and the
needs of all officers when you
have a department of six and you
have a Department of six hundred
your needs are different.
Anyway that's a a comment that I
think needs to at some point be
examined.
We're working at the.
So taking out our our madam
and Representative take it out
R. LD I think is a good idea
they can even take care of the
the current stuff they have so.
Madam chair and representative
when we look over on page eight
we're talking about the
certificates going to be issued
by another group when I.
When I attended college and I
graduate it's a calling go
ahead.
You madam chair thank you
Representative being fantastic
catch great catch we're looking
at page eight of the point two
version.
The we caught that last night
and so that those lines on line
page eight lines third for page
eight.
Line thirteen through twenty
two.
We construct those lines be
versions about fantastic catch
the law enforcement academy
trains the officer and give them
their initial certification.
And then any subsequent up you
know suspensions or revocations
or renewals is dealt with by the
certification board thank you
Representative remember.
Representative right let me just
point out the point three is in
the Here file yeah.
We.
So quick to venture your the
conversation with Representative
Rehm thank you at that chair and
representative of it okay their
backend but let's on page eight
line twenty.
R. who are the tele
communicators because you're
you're well on them and your act
here.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Rehm the
That is actually up current law
but the tele communicators of
the nine one one operators and
and and folks like that a key
component to law enforcement
that have their own training
regiment and certification.
And madam chair and
Representative why do we want to
roll them over to this stuff is
Madam chair representative brain
that they were not included in
the initial introduction of the
bill.
But I believe it was the GPS
analysis or the AG analysis that
suggested
That since they're similarly
situated they should be
incorporated into this act.
Madam chair being trained
certified I don't think they
deal with suspension the
revocations and stuff but in
terms of their training
certification and the fact that
they remember the law
enforcement team I think that
was the reason.
Okay Madam chair representative
but they're not certified
officers they can't make
arrests.
Thanks is that you.
So madam chair and
Representative when we go to
page nine and you have some
stricken language in there.
Of why do we not want the cat to
me board our our the Khattar me
through and the training
officers in the academy to
review the curriculum.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Rehm.
And up and for the folks at home
the.
The director of the law
enforcement academy is appointed
by the governor but can be fired
by the board thank you does not
have a boss
and up.
So this bill puts it on under
the chain of command of the
department of public safety and
the secretary would still be a
that will position by the
governor so some of that
language as a result of that the
the section you're talking about
at I believe it's covered.
Just below it just below it so
what we're striking is annually
evaluate the courses of
instruction being offered by the
academy and make necessary
modifications and adjustments to
the program.
Instead we took the language
from three oh five which are
Senate bill three oh five which
is.
Once again supported by many law
enforcement members implement
the training standards and
requirements developed and
adopted by the board I just I
just modeled the the language
from the Senate bill three
seventy five which in which we
may see.
we go after next.
This is the same I but we can
take a look at another look at
that.
I'm not a particularly
Representative I thank you for
the academy
when I when I propose a training
class subject they review the
curriculum they approve the
curriculum and give it a
certification number likewise
they look at the current
evolution in policing and they
are change are different
training subjects to fit that.
We'll see.
Madam chair and and
Representative going back to.
Some of the public comments on
page five about the board the
citizens at large I have I think
we ought to have some.
You know definition of who they
are who they can't be you know I
think that I think they they
raise part about a point about
not being a convicted felon I
don't know whether the Senate
would approve a person of that
or not but clearly you don't
want to end up having anti
police people on here who have a
another agenda.
A great manager there should be
a estimates limited dot
guidelines
As to who can serve on the board
that they have to keep an open
mind from from all perspectives.
And madam chair and
representative of well I was in
the sheriff's department
administration and we were
looking for behavioral health
providers one of the things that
officer must do is
are complete a
Mental health evaluation before
it becomes an officer and so
it's difficult to find.
a
mental health provider who
understands.
Police officers and so you need
to you need to have that with
some police backgrounders some
education in that area.
No that's an excellent point
madam chair representative ream
folks who make these decisions
have to have.
Up.
Not just a clue but education on
what the officer is going
through and and in the history
of a the law as it relates to
law enforcement the the safety
concerns that officers have
that.
That average folks don't.
That you gotta you gotta see it
through the through the eyes of
the.
The beholder.
Madam chair
representative one of the things
that I saw.
It let's see make sure I've got
the right.
Okay so if we go to page.
It starts at the bottom of three
it goes to for.
So we are removing the
administrative appeal for a
state police officer is that
correct.
Thank you madam chair of
centering no no not exactly and
and we caught that the original
draft
Was written that way and this is
something we may have to revisit
but there's a statute for state
police officers right now
section to.
There should be a statute for
all officers
but there is a statute for state
police officers and kind of its
own administrative.
laws for
And disciplinary proceedings
fort St cops that doesn't apply
to other law enforcement
agencies so what we did
Madam chair representative bring
currently at you know that the
state police chief disciplines
an officer that officer can then
appeal to the law enforcement
I'm sorry that they can appeal
to the.
Public safety advisory
commission I believe now all
week they can appeal it straight
to the law enforcement
certification board so if a
state cop is sanctioned they can
either just accept the sanction
or yield that sanction to the
law enforcement certification
board and that's on page four.
Lines five and six or obviously
they can go to District Court
which is their right as well but
in this situation they go to the
law enforcement certification
board and if they don't like
that then they can go to
District Court so those yield
due process rights that state
cops currently have would
remain.
Madam chair and representative
one fortunate certification
board is that the same one that
would have the hearing to revoke
his of certification or
disappointing thank thank you
madam chair representative
Representative Rehm yes that is
the new independent entity that.
That that has the authority to
suspend revoke renew.
allegations based on allegations
of misconduct that is the new
board and the responsibilities
that we've removed from the law
enforcement.
Academy board and made it up
administratively attached to DPS
so that is the new board work
creating
And the the makeup of the board.
Is section seven subsection
seven is the new material law
enforcement certification board.
And it's up.
And its membership is on the
bottom of page ten.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
Do you see kind of what I'm
pointing to if you take any
other law enforcement agency and
the officers dips disciplined
and that agency is gonna have an
appeal to whatever government
agency a power processes before
he goes.
Probably to the law enforcement
academy these are two different
avenues one is does the
government entity approve of the
discipline that's being
generated.
Up by his superior.
The other is the process by the
board are you can are
disappointed him as well or
remove is certificate.
So you have two different
processes for everyone else
except for the state police
because a state police.
Are your.
Legislation goes straight to the
our board.
Up for review the law
enforcement certification board.
Interesting that some yeah it's
weird the way the state police
has its own statute and other
officers don't at that just
struck me as odd.
Well they're all with regards to
the state police.
Madam chair and representative I
I think that your true by this
you're treating them differently
you understand that.
Chair representative reams
current state law treat them
differently current state law
treats state police differently
than other officers so my bill
doesn't change that it just it
just deals with that reality in
a fair way to those state
police.
Okay.
Madam chair and representative
was go to the page twenty six
section sixteen you're gonna
repeal
Basically the officers bill of
rights is that correct.
Thank you madam chair up thank
you Representative reading this
is a conversation that needs to
be had.
It is a it is referred to as the
bill of rights.
By the law enforcement
community.
That is.
Incredibly peculiar to me.
but but let me just let me talk
about the security but let me
talk about the yes we want to
repeal that because it has no
business in this process it is
a.
Very detailed
H. R..
Rulemaking in state law as it
relates to peace officers
and so it's very restrictive on
the do's and don'ts of what an
officer superior can and cannot
do as it relates to
investigating misconduct.
I mean it is really detailed
when you go to section yeah and
and it's it's chapter twenty
nine section fourteen
paragraphs one through eleven.
I mean it puts in state law that
you can only interrogate them
not shall not to excel not
exceed two hours.
you know unless the parties
mutually consented that only one
officer can ask questions at
that time I mean it's.
It is it is a a very
protectionist to the state
worker and I respect state
workers state workers are
protected and the people build
up public employee.
Of.
Act that we passed last year.
Let me just say to refer to it
as the bill of rights.
there's there's seventeen states
that put in this provision from
nineteen seventy three to the
early nineties we're one of the
last ones we put it in in
nineteen ninety one has been
talked sense.
The bill of rights.
Was put in by the founding
fathers to protect citizens
against government officials.
Second amendment right to bear
arms Fourth Amendment right
against illegal searches and
seizures fifth amendment right
to remain silent sixth amendment
right to counsel upon criminal
allegations that the bill of
right to to flip to flip the
book that the concept of the
bill of rights and give and
suggest that the government
officials that the bill of
rights protects us from are
entitled somehow to their own
bill of rights protecting them
from being accountable to the
people to me it's just a.
Happening contradiction and has
no business in state law that
that's my position.
But but but from a practical
standpoint it doesn't belong in
this act because it's not
consistent with the streamlining
of these of this process that
the.
All this is is is codified and
collective bargaining agreements
it's part of the police culture
it doesn't really change the day
to day aspects of of of police
misconduct investigations it
just should not be codified in
state statute of based on.
Special interest groups ability
to influence legislation.
and Representative out can the
agency under under the act that
you're repealing require an
officer to take a polygraph
test.
Madam chair of reservation not
if it's not it's not if it's not
in the collective bargaining
agreement which this act has
been cut and paste it into all
the collective bargaining
agreement statewide.
Well okay let's let's take that
point for a moment thank you
madam chair and representative
is the state police a bargaining
unit or do they are they are
they represented by a bargaining
unit thank you madam chair
Representative Rehm the state
police officers are not they're
not an official bargaining unit.
that as collective bargaining
rights and that's an interesting
development and that may be the
reason that they have their own
kind of statutory scheme but
you're correct state police are
not an official bargaining unit
similar to.
Similar to the unions that work
with the public sector unions
that we're familiar with.
Not thank you madam chair and
representative many agencies in
the state don't have any
bargaining unit
are just some of the largest
ones but not including the state
police Madam chair
representative was go back to
Twenty nine dash fourteen dash
I.
Which is the one your repealing
are requires an officer to take
a polygraph test is ordered by
the department so are.
You know I think that there are
some provisions that are in
here.
That job
that it you know it's it's also
protecting the public it's part
of the investigative process.
Madam chair and representative
of why did this come to be could
it be from of Supreme Court
decisions no thank you madam
chair representative bream and
when we should.
This is about this it's
fascinating how this that came
to be the very first state to do
it was Merioles in nineteen
seventy three subsequent states
have done it up to seventeen
states I think the last eight
Google says that it recently but
fifteen states from nineteen
seventy three R. as in nineteen
ninety one put it in.
And it's just amazing the the
development of
Of policing of of all of the
power of police and and
In the political process the
riots that occurred in the late
eighties particularly in
Baltimore and and the rise that
occurred in Detroit and and then
those officers were able to get
such significant raise
significant bargaining
abilities after that and it's
just evolved over fifty years
into
Into the riots of this past
summer.
and once again through no fault
of the officers it's the
lawmakers it's the policy makers
that that created this.
legal institution of qualified
immunity and and the so called
police bill of rights.
In which every single officer I
talked to says you know Google
we we agree we've got to get rid
about officers.
But there's no mechanism to do
it.
and so we I believe it house
bill two eighty six.
What creates a streamlined
mechanism to do it so that
officers and the committee can
regain that mutual trust
that is necessary to increase
public safety but the but it's
just an interesting development
as to how it went from state to
state and I could see it because
I could see this bill passing
one committee and then it gets
to the next committee gets to
the floor and how can you vote
no.
to what is referred to as a
peace officer's bill of rights
everybody wants to vote to help
peace officers but it it it just
contradicts.
State employees should not have
protections in state statute.
Other than the public employee
bargaining Act which encompasses
all state employees but a
special a special group of state
employees should not be
protected from.
From the people.
Madam chair representative.
Under this act that you're
repealing art can and officer be
compelled by the agency to give
a statement in regards to
administrative hearings.
Thank you madam chair
representative Rehm up that that
that the answer is it depends
once again those collective
bargaining units have this
language codified in their
collective bargaining agreements
and the the culture of of
policing embodies this this
statutes so I don't know the
answer to question I it all I
know is that.
That the as a profession the
lawmakers and policymakers have
excluded this profession from.
Accountability that the people
demand we rectify.
Current Representative
I suggest you see twenty nine
dash fourteen dash for our that
requires an officer to provide a
statement so if we take this off
the books.
You and I both understand this
term but what's keep an officer
from if you will Lorino up I'll
just come all invoke my rights.
Thank you madam chair of
Representative Rehm well the the
anyone aware of any given time
But the right to remain silent
only refers to a criminal
investigation these are all
civil investigations when your
boss because you in your office
and starts asking questions.
You answer those questions
that's what people do that's
what employees do.
This prohibits that it gives
officers twenty four hours to
get their stories straight it
prohibits.
The the interrogation of
officers over one hour periods
it it prohibits to investigators
asking questions at the same
time it's right frankly written
as if officers of.
It's written like a like a
criminal defendant's dream but
it's but it's but it's a state
actor a state agent that has
these protections of.
That lead to an accountability.
Madam chair and representative
so are keen to lawyers in a
court of law ask a witness
questions at the same time.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Rehm no no only
one lawyer can question a
particular witness
Correct.
Yeah madam chair and
representative I think that's
you know.
You're not trying to confuse a
person and you're trying to get
a direct answer all what that
point not to police officers at.
This legislation questions at
the same time.
Madam chair and representative
yes they can although that's not
what I expected that's what I
know that.
Madam chair and representative
of.
Where are
our police officers who were
arson investigators what actor
they covered under.
Thank you madam chair
representative bringing up.
I don't think they're
distinguished of once again the
statutes are all over the map so
of the law enforcement training
is section seven the state
police is section two so I don't
know where they fall I don't
know if they're distinguished
G..
Madam chair and
Representative do they have
their own if you will bill of
rights.
Thank you madam chair
representative Rehm I do not
know.
Okay madam chair and
representative of.
You need to look at ten dash
seven F. dash one.
Thank you act that is a mere to
this one where arson
investigators are.
So are you feel familiar with a
lot of mail or the Garrity
ruling.
Thank you madam chair of the
room I if you refresh my memory
the big these court cases of
great names I
UP I read Baumgardner the other
day for guy with the with the
bad knee.
Well madam chair and
representative I they're the
emphasis of this act you know
and so.
I I think that the while there's
protections in there for the
officers there's protections in
there for the public officers
are compelled to cooperate in
investigations and that even
means they may have to submit to
a polygraph test
I think we're getting there you
know I agree that the economy
board needs to be revisited I
think that we ought to have a
long probably with courts and
corrections over the summer
figure out how to do that.
I think that there needs to be
better representation from small
agencies to large agents is on
that board as well.
But R. unfortunately I can't
support this is the way that
it's currently written are but I
do agree that you have been
approved bill thank you madam
chair.
Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair
My question is I'm looking at
now is not you have repeal
certain sexual all.
So if the member.
Police department is a member of
the of the you can he be
represented by a union
representative according to your
legislation.
Thank you Mr madam chairman
resemble gone what this
legislation doesn't.
but the answer to your question
is yes this.
Yes.
I understand you madam chair
representative the was at
basically you have eliminated
the the you from
By participation according to
the analysis no madam chair for
Representative Alcon zero know
that now I I don't have the
analysis I want to criticize the
analysis but the answer's no
collective bargaining agreements
are.
Are contracts between.
These workers and the thing
counties this doesn't affect
that at all zero was affected at
all.
Madam chair.
Used by region in those last
part of it the decision making
changes the role of the police.
Can have a positive impact on
reducing previous in less
conduct thank you madam chair
Representative Rehm that's an
opinion Irene.
A forgive me madam chair
representative Oakland.
That's about opinion that that
is very persuasive but this
we're not dealing with that
today but but there's up
opinions that that police unions
are distinct from other public
sector unions
and that the power of police
unions in large cities has
contributed to
the lack of accountability of
their members that that's like a
conversation for another day I
school.
And madam chair and
representative I can agree you
with that basically after
looking at the.
Your cities.
One thing is excess mother
conversation for of the day
that's just one money one
consumer Garza I'm looking at
how labor Leo B. O. R..
Limits for these investigations
unit this is eliminate the that
part of the range of a police
officer.
Thank you.
Representative Alcon thank you
for the question.
No.
Constitutional rights are in the
constitution
it was I was argued that that
this essentially puts in statute
those constitutional rights and
by taking it this out of statute
you somehow take away those
constitutional rights.
Lawmakers don't have the ability
to take away anybody's
constitutional rights
the constitutional protections
by those famous cases that were
mentioned.
We can't change even if we
wanted to.
But the law enforcement employer
employee relations act which was
put in back in nineteen ninety
one is
provides protections for police
workers during misconduct
investigations and I should be
determined by the police
themselves by the investigators
themselves by the the city's and
county's themselves not by a
state statute
Got through a citizen
legislature thirty years ago.
Thank you thank you thank you
madam chair.
Representative Eli.
I'm sorry madam chair was
Representative dot com done.
All right then I'll make a
motion to pass.
I do not has been a do pass so
I'm sorry I do not pass the pass
to make and that's the point
three version the one that
correct the errors.
Yes do you pass on the point
you.
So the the motion before us is a
do not pass on house bill.
At this rate I've got to.
Two eighty six and two passed on
the Canadian stock which is the
point three version house bill
two eighty six I don't see any
other hand so I would like the
clerk to call the roll please.
Representative Alcon no.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
Yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Representative night Burt hello.
Representative Rehm now.
Representative Townsend no.
Madam chair.
The vice chair is excused and I
thought yes and then I grab my
microphone I needed I would like
to vote yes.
The speaker yes okay by a vote
of seven to four we have a do
not pass on house bill two two
eighty six committee set up and
a do pass on the point three
version of Committee sub for two
eighty six thank you very much
of the past Representative years
thank you madam chair members
will keep working.
Representative Eli thank you
madam chair members the
committee so we're on house
joint resolution twelve this of
course would import proofed by
majority of both chambers would
go directly to the voters it
would set up a public salary
commission on the membership is
composed job I won't go through
it paragraph the of the house
are resolution it would set
salaries stand for a number of
public officers including
the governor lieutenant governor
Attorney General secretary state
treasurer auditor commissioner
justices judges legislators
public real regulation
commission and other public
officers is provided by the
legislature I do have a chief
Michael be held with me as an
expert on and I wanted to tell
you the members the committee
just to warn you that we're
gonna be talking through but not
today a couple of potential
amendments but not in committee
that would be on the floor
because I just got a call last
night one would be to include
the magistrate judge's at the
request of a see some kind of
talk through that between now is
suing this gets out of this
committee and the other would be
that the commission could not
operate to reduce salaries and
that is something that I want to
talk to both sides about four
percent on the floor the ideas
you want you don't want this to
be a retaliatory Commission but
I do think this is something
that the committee has seen
before it is something I think
the voters should be deciding
and with that that manager I'd
like to turn it over to chief E.
Vigil to see if he has any
comments.
Mister Chief Justice we would
love to hear from you thank you
madam.
Members of the committee it's my
honor before you.
Part of this.
legislation and support of house
joint resolution twelve my name
is Michael hill not to justice
of the New Mexico Supreme Court
you know there's some history to
this so.
Open ocean and I'd like to go
over that a little bit
fair and adequate compensation
for judges has proven itself to
be a very very difficult issue
and I'm very a moving target and
I think this legislation goes a
long way toward solving the
problems I'm going back to two
thousand five the legislature
creek the legislature created
the Jews will compensate the
shin as an independent six
member commission charged with
recommending a compensation and
benefits plan for New Mexico
your judges this is Cisco
legislative finance committee
and to the department of finance
and administration and ever
since then they've been putting
out reports the commission was
formed.
Point I'd like to just go over a
couple of those reports for your
benefit in the two thousand six
report the commission reported.
Since the judicial commission
judicial compensation commission
findings are that judicial
salaries in New Mexico are among
the very lowest in the nation
this year New Mexico judicial
salaries are for appellate and
District Court judges the very
lowest.
To attract high quality judges
to the bench in New Mexico and
to encourage them to remain on
the bench the compensation
commission has consistently
asset these disparities be
addressed.
And not withstanding that in
prior increase was recommended
and approved by the legislature
as of January one two thousand
sixteen the salary for the New
Mexico Supreme Court justices
right fifty out of fifty one in
the state.
And apart from forty eight
salary of New Mexico court of
appeals judges by former court
was forty out of forty the very
bottom of the barrel district
judges in New Mexico with the
bottom of the barrel rank you
fifty one hundred fifty one.
The commission noted at that
time that the very low salaries
paid to New Mexico judges
relative to every other states
are having an impact on the
diversity of candidates who seek
judicial office secondarily the
judicial compensation commission
finds that experienced judges
are retiring due in part to work
tractors salaries in the private
sector.
They did a study of people
applied for judicial of
positions and
The average partner well eighty
five percent of all applicants.
The twenty two thousand two
thousand ten to two thousand
fifteen at experience in
government service and almost
forty four point seven percent
of ten or more years of
government service.
Lawyers with experience in the
private sector as well as law
firms in the.
As offered reported that you
additional salaries were
preventing them from applying to
be judges.
The data show that these lawyers
were not seeking office.
Our review of three hundred and
nine judicial candidates from
two thousand ten to two thousand
fifteen reveal that seventeen
percent almost one fear raged
thirty nine or younger.
Although a District Court judge
must be thirty five years old to
be qualified under the
constitution.
In two thousand seventeen the
report reflected that not
withstanding a small salary
increase that was given the
salary of New Mexico judges
ranks last in the United States.
The fact that judges are paid
less than comparable lawyers as
well as local and state
employees has significantly
reduced the judiciary's ability
to attract and retain judges was
brought experience in criminal
and civil law.
This was the finding of you're
you're all judicial compensation
commission your own independent
judicial compensation
commission.
In the two thousand eighteen
report.
the compensation commission
reported that at the start of
two thousand eighteen to co pay
judges the lowest salaries in
the nation.
there had been a a six point
five increase effective July of
two thousand eighteen which
would help but that left you to
District Court judges for
example with the salary ranks
forty nine out of fifty one and
judges of the court of appeals
again forty out of forty.
The
Judicial compensation commission
at that time for the first time
recommended amending the
judicial compensation statute to
make judicial compensation
commission salary
recommendations effective unless
rejected by a majority of the
legislature this was a rare
recommendation made to the.
Legislature at that time for the
first time which is very similar
to the bill that's here before
you at that time the
compensation commission read
that the average partner in a
law firm is paid fifty one
percent more than a justice of
the Supreme Court based upon the
then current salary of the of
the justice.
And the partner salaries that
were then reported the average
sole practitioner in two
thousand eighteen was paid
thirty two percent more than a
Supreme Court justice the
average pay of all five hundred
and sixty nine lawyers and that
survey for partners of law firms
legal aid and government
attorneys was a hundred and
forty two thousand dollars what
is the salary but you of a
justice on the Supreme Court to
percent below the average pay of
an attorney in any field of law
practice if you in in New
Mexico.
Chair madam chair I've always
wanted to do this so I get to do
this today because I don't want
to run out of time because we're
going to the floor I get to
interrupt Chief Justice we stand
for questions thank you madam
chair members the committee.
I'm it is present for for rob.
Sorry chief I don't I don't have
an oral argument in front of you
soon.
We.
The big two points one we
support this to to additions are
made what include please the
magistrates there's a of sixty
seven magistrates judges and
forty six courts all across the
United States we all question
Mexico yes that they be included
we also ask that you included
provision that's currently at
the New Mexico constitution for
magistrate judges but applicable
to all judges that there would
be not be a reduction in salary
through the term with those
changes you would have the full
support of the entire judiciary
the Supreme Court the District
Court judges federal court
judges and met and magistrate
judges.
We wanted to say hello how do
you Chief Justice so he came out
with
I'm gonna go.
Thank you hello.
I'm gonna go to the audience now
let's to fifteen second all the
state those in favor and those
in opposition resolution twelve.
That was interesting we had a
hundred percent favor but was
only two people so let's.
to that to those folks and see
if anybody wants to comments.
I'm in favor of the bill I don't
see any hands up.
In opposition.
All right let me go to the
panelists first I have
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair all make
this quick.
Yes on page two.
We.
I just like to ask that they may
be aware.
geographic representation
required
I'm not sure I'm real happy with
the with the budget but I
certainly would would encourage
you to look at some geographic
representation page three winds
ten of eleven members of the
public regulation commission.
Would that be true even though
they're moving toward a pointed
body instead of and elected body
that's just the the comments of.
And then
in light of some recent
headlines a sure we put cabinet
secretaries as another list of
people that the commission
should consider setting the
salaries of.
Online page three line twenty
three we see the word allowance.
And my question would be does
that mean that the commission.
Establish shows the.
Allowance that we would provide
to judges and others for their
staff.
Or does that mean something else
So if if this commission is
going to set up a budget for
each judge of.
That may be getting a little
further than what I would be
comfortable with our and so just
maybe look at that word if
that's the appropriate worker or
at fifty eight further
explanation.
You know each member Congress
Congress gets allowance the
staff their office and the.
I don't want there to be an
administered to patients that
if you want to answer
representative for just because
you live okay.
Madam chair madam chair what I
if I cannot be real quick the
geographic diversity in section
B. makes perfect sense to me and
consistent with what we've done
it's a good catch frankly on the
public right and should be in
there you guys are appointed as
I should be happening and the
allowance we're just gonna have
to sit down and visit about it
because I want to talk
Legislative Council that she why
they include that because I
think that's also good point we
are going to be doing a floor
amendment so when we go floor
amendment I will commit to
working with Representative
Nibert on those issues as well.
And madam chair those what my
quick points thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
Did you get through all of them
I did you after all your points.
In record time.
Thanks.
We have a motion for it to pass
from Representative I'll call.
Thirty seconds.
Second second for representative
Armstrong.
There are no more has raised
let's have the court call the
roll please.
Representative Alcon yes
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative Ely yes an oddly
out like to make a comment at
the end of this.
Representative Lewis yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
Representative night we're.
Yes.
Representative green yes.
Representative Townsend no.
No.
No.
Madam chair.
It is yes.
What the intended one we have a
due pass.
Thank you very much and
Representative Eli or comments
yes madam chair I would just
like to say that the Chief
Justice that he's the best Chief
Justice we've ever started all.
Well not too much trouble thank
you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
I let me just to confirm Chief
Justice that Representative Eli
was following our backs them up
let's not talk a bill that well
today.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much.
Thank you and if you could
please so Mister Norvell all our
former Attorney General that I
said hello back to it
thank you know the time thank
you.
Thank you all very much we what
we
thanks to in house Judiciary at
a level I think it's a eleven
thirty eleven or eleven thirty
on Monday following that the
first round of committees eight
to eleven man we're eleven
thirty to two thirty so see you
then everybody thank you very
much
but I.
I beg your pardon Representative
local.
We on the floor.
We on the floor now here's well
he's still here.
It's either two thirty or three
okay we're.
Thank you everyone especially
the adults and the staff I
really appreciate you.
