Non
new non.
The floor is yours and we don't
have any amendments or anything
this is just the bill okay
that's correct
okay you're ready yes
managed her hospital note to is
addresses the current lack of
clarity in our law to create the
crime and falsely acting as a
presidential elector and the
crime of disrupting election
results the bill is intended to
protect the valid results of a
democratically conducted
election the votes of new mexico
voters and nothing less than
democracy itself my experts are
jane's gracer
check deputy attorney general
and shan sullivan assistant
attorney general both with the
new mexico partner department of
justice learns about indirector
of legislative not security of a
fares for the new mexical
secretary of state am I
my eminent co sponsor
representative general on your
normal is my next door neighbour
in
distractist yes.
Yeah.
We stand for a well
but i'm annoyed let them I want
the attorneys general to be able
to speak to you a little okay
mr
madame chair members of the
committee
the department of justice
strongly supports this bill and
we think leader chase for
sponsoring the bill and
representative on in our new as
well and we believe this bill
makes important changes to the
election code after a
comprehensive investigation into
the fake elector scheme in two
thousand twenty
nine message a department of
justice concluded that there
were gaps in the election code
that prevented prosecution of
the electors and in that
situation and that the
changes brought forward by the
sponsors of this bill would
close those gaps and make sure
that.
Elections in new mexico
are are protected and the.
The process of electing
presidential electors
is is.
It protected in new mexico thank
you madame chairman members of
the committee
thank you mr grayson any one
else representative chassis.
I will let me spark men add to
this
okay
good evening madame chairman
members of the committee will
microphone
my name is lindsey bach men and
the director of legislative
executive affairs as as the
representative indicated and
while I was not
a member of the secretary's
office and twenty twenty I would
like to share kind of the
timeline of how things occurred
in twenty twenty in regards to
the summition of a false
electoral votes so on november
third as you all are well aware
joe bite in and in commonly
harris were elected by the
voters
new mexico to be the vice
president and president of the
united states and because of
that in pursuant to state status
ute the democratic parties
nominees became the elected
presidential electors poor new
mexico so that was november
third then pursuing to see its
statute the state canvassing
word which is supposed to meet
on the third tuesday after an
election met on november twenty
fourth twenty twenty and
certified the results of that
election.
On december fourteenth so we're
now in december
the process by which those
electors cast their ballots
in in regards to the electoral
college took place the
secretary's role is to kind of
perform clerical duties at that
meeting the the official process
took place what also happened
was that a group of electors who
were not
a group of nominees who were not
elected to be the electors of
the state on the sale a lot of
elected electors in in this
testimony so if you have
additional questions i'm happy
to answer but nominees met i'm
here at the state capital the
secretary of state's office i'm
directed security because of
covered protocols not to allow
additional members of the public
in in at that time i'm in those
documents that resulted from the
meeting of the nominees not the
official process
did not come through our office
so what I hope to communicate to
you all and this evening is that
the statutory process in twenty
twenty was followed by the
secretary of state's office the
official slate of electors will
submit it through appropriate
channels
as i've result of that process
and what a crewed outside
occurred outside of that process
so I just want to share the
public that everything was
followed in the official way.
Questions let's go to the
audience first those wishing to
speak an opposition to house
bill nineteen please raise your
hand.
In the audience.
Those on line wishing to speak
an opposition.
Don't see anyone those in the
audience wishing to speak and
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
The.
Those online wishing to speak in
support of the bill please raise
your hand
chick mason.
The.
Unmute yourself dick.
Okay share members of committee
my name is tick may send i'm a
board member in a registered
lobbyist with a legal man bars
and mexico the league standards
from support of HB nineteen.
We support protection of every
citizen drive to vote procedures
to guarantee the integrity of
voting in new mexico the
elections that I did conduct it
accurately family in a vision.
He nineteen addresses the issue
a facal electors there's a
threat to the integrity of
elections so the lake of owned
boldest tens of strong support
of each being nineteen energy to
give it a do pass and send it to
the house for thank you
thank you anyone else wishing to
support speaking support online.
I don't see any other hands
raised and will go to the
committee anyone have any
questions
represent a welcome.
Second okay we have emotion for
a dupass on house bill nineteen
maybe representative of
consecondaries by representative
of ramaro sir any discuss.
See any discussion where you
call the role please
representative alcohol
representative chassis
representative hemri
representative lane
speaker martinez yes.
Representative mcqueen yes.
Representative reap
representative
ream representatives sapansky
yes
manage chair yes madam chair yes
and you have a do pounds with a
by a vote of seven in favor zero
thank you for your patience we
got through it so very much
appreciate all your hard work I
would suggest that we roll
representative
romerose bill.
Why it's my part is.
We've made all the fixes my
sense is that the committee
would prefer to r.
It will put it on first put it
on first does the committee.
Okay all right well i'm happy to
do it
will do it excited agreement
I was I was getting some sense
of impatience
patient.
It is
um
on twenty eight yes so just to
refresh everybody's recollection
as to where we are on this bill
house bill one twenty eight and
there is a sub floating around
sub handed out
we had a good discussion of the
bill.
Two days ago on monday
we had some suggestions in terms
of how to improve the bill the
sponsor went back and prepared a
sub and that's where we're out
we're not hearing any additional
testimony or public comments
since we did all of that earlier
so the floor is now yours
representative think your
manager so we have come to
agreement on all of the feedback
I believe that he's given i'm
including some fixes and i'll
just reiterate the folks here
about what we had agreed to and
what we fixed
including one additional arm is
uhm.
Firstly there is no micro plan
increase the industry and uh the
microproducers as well as the
agency got together and agreed
they work through the interim so
now it's fully under the pervie
of the agency as to what this
bill does arm which is
reinstating a cap on licensing
fees which was a suggestion from
uh representative hembry that we
were so we've taken that entire
section out where we were trying
to.
To
strike that language so it's
gone
we worked barred by partisanly
to improve the contraband
provision that juveniles were
left out of that so that's also
why it was a little bit late
because we're working on that
language.
And.
I work at the foundation of open
government to correct that it
broke question on case law so
that's clear now in the in the
cs and then finally we
fix some language that was
loosely guiding pending
investigations versus regular
investigations
on how a license could be
revoked or removed as per the
sir drug policy alliances
comments we worked to tighten up
that language and make sure that
we understand what what's a
clear violation versus those
that might be pending so with
that madam chair the two two
eight numbers two two eight one
seven zero point two is that
it's in front of you all.
Great so each of those changes
have been made we agree and
again this was a bipartisan
effort so we.
So moved.
Second manager.
Just real quick manager
uh said it is I just want to go
through here make sure I got
everything that you included in
the bill and then what is not
included in the bill.
So your bill fixes the issue
background checks that came up
over the interim that correct.
Uh yes mountain representative
that's still in the bill and
you're the bill also deals with
the issue of owning both a can
of his license and a license
under the linker control act
absolutely manager
but it's still prohibits call
location of canada's in the
correctivities which was the
intent to original
matter chair mister speaker yes.
Okay.
Based on the feedback receiver
representative reeb last year I
believe she had a bill doing
this but this substitute deals
with packaging requirements as
well as contraband in jails as
you mentioned earlier madame
chair representative correct and
chair speaker your bill
knowledge
your bill no longer has the
plant country for insurance that
we had explore a couple meetings
ago for micro licenses that's
cracked out of chair mister
speaker reluctantly but we have
a deal and as I understand him
to represent it part of that
deal is working through the
interim with r d industry to
make sure that we have
a
your solid grounding more solid
grounding for micro
entrepreneurs to be able to
thrive in this industry and I
believe that that's part of the
deal madam chair representative.
That's correct
that's all they have member
very good speaker anyone else
wishing to else questions or
comment on the bill.
I don't see anyone i'm happy to
entertain a motion.
Well yeah.
But a do pass on how's your
district we substitute for house
bill one twenty eight point two
version current okay so we have
a motion made by a speaker
martinez second and by
representative cone for a do not
pass and house bill one twenty
eight but a due pass on house
judiciary committee substitute
for house bill one twenty eight
the point two version would you
call the role please.
Representative i'll con
representative chassis
representative hemry
representative lane.
Speaker martinez yes
representative mcqueen yes
representative reap
representative ream.
Representative sapansky
madame chair yes madame chair
yes.
It's okay
seventy five vote of seven in
the affirmative zero and the
negative you have a do pass
madame vice chair
okay are you bowing or is that
occurred sea okay thank you
