Mr speaker.
Your.
I'm here.
Representative.
Representative.
Representative McQueen.
Representative McQueen is in
commerce so his bill is going to
be second set of first.
Representative.
Representative.
Here.
How many do we have.
Six.
Okay so we're a sub committee at
this time.
I want to go ahead.
Let the participants know that
house bill eighty eight will not
be heard tonight.
Over at all in the session the
sponsor chairman Lente eight
said that he has decided working
with the number of people that
this is something they would
like to study in the interim and
spend more time with so we're
eighty eight is off the agenda
for to night and it won't be on
a subsequent agenda of House
Judiciary.
We are going to begin as I
mentioned.
No with Representative with we
in.
It was house bill one fifty
three I'm.
He would have to agree but right
now he's in
he's in another committee fixing
of Bill.
So we will begin with house bill
twenty.
With our Representative Chandler
and Rubio and I think you said
Representative.
Roybal Caballero issue with us.
You might have left a personal.
It could be.
One more thank you madam chair I
just have to say this because we
are interpreting we're supposed
to be interpreting
simultaneously to the people who
only understand Spanish and then
when they speak we're going to.
I interpreted into English but I
don't know why this is not
working so because we want to
the people who only understand
Spanish to know what's going on
in the committee.
Right right Peter could tell I
think you're on the line.
We're having trouble because
we're hearing the Spanish
interpretation.
Now I don't see teachers.
Well I've got I've got your
screen.
Calls hello listens.
That's what I think yeah.
But I'm not hearing Peter speak
yet.
So whoever doesn't want to hear
the spending can you put it in
the English.
Circle of the.
The reason.
If you're if you're translating
unable to hear.
Late we're gonna hear you
speaking the English.
And not you not supposed to if
you put it in English you're not
going to hear it I'm gonna
interpret the right click to the
Spanish speaking people and when
they speak I interpret in
English do you I change okay.
Okay just members madam chair
chair of Representative Ely says
he's waiting to be let in.
Waiting to be let in yeah he
does.
This is.
He wants.
I'm sorry this is sorry not.
Yeah Daymon yes.
It is not Representative thank
you madam chair who.
What.
The license we have a quorum.
Sorry madam chair I think my car
not exactly tactically probe.
I don't think I'll be right here
about.
I think.
Very good very good.
We have two expert witnesses who
are in the I think participants
list one is change units in the
US the other is Stephanie Welch.
K. Mr uses on and.
You know with from.
Stephanie Welch is with us yet.
And while we're waiting for is
Welsh here she is great what
we're waiting from as well so I
just wanted to verify some
logistical matters with you
madam chair if I may in some
earlier exchanges with you and I
and Representative Rubio I
believe you requested that we
identify about for people who
would speak on in favor of the
bill to assist kind of
facilitating the meetings
progress is that still your
preference and we we are able to
do that madam chair if that is
your preference.
Yes I did speak with
Representative Rubio as well I I
when I I told the Sanchez we
have a huge agenda and very
complex built and I asked if
they could try to limit their
public comment because this is
their second hearing on this
matter so those are the people
we're going to raise their hands
so I'm gonna let you talk about
the bill and then I'll go to the
public for the general view of
people who are tend.
and I'm going
to try.
I'm interrupting your time to
see if you have your
interpretation modeled on.
Madam.
Join just building up.
Have the interpretation for us
they shouldn't have the
interpretation on you should
have to switch something on on
your end I asked Peter to call
you to.
To that.
Thank you can maybe stay muted
as Intel at get specs.
In Spanish George when you said
you've asked Peter to call you
you're talking about the other
and.
Okay.
And what about us what are we.
Staff.
The automatic on here and if you
go down to the bottom you can
switch it to Spanish but if you
don't switch it to Spanish it
would just.
The New England.
For anyone attendees are
panelists okay.
Thank you.
Are you ready to proceed
Representative.
Yes madam chair I just want to
verify who amongst my team was
on the call is Representative
Roybal Caballero with us.
I don't see her in is
Representative Rubio I did
receive a text from her
indicating that she might be in
another committee at this moment
so I'm happy to proceed madam
chair
I will be brief and my comments
so that we can have a great
discussion of bill amongst the
members this bill is called the
healthy workplaces Act and it is
a bill that affords what I
consider to be really a an
essential and basic benefits for
all employees in the state and
that is mandatory earned sick
leave or mandatory sick sick
leave to be paid to all and
employees of private employers
that is the sum total of the
bill it requires an employer to
offer one hour of sick leave per
thirty hours worked and and it
can and an employee is allowed
to use up to sixty four hours I
think in a twelve month period
and
That's about eight days which I
think is you know a modest
amount of sick leave after all
that we've been through in this
past year madam chair and
members I think we realize it's
very important to have that as a
safety net for all workers in
the state to ensure that they
are not going to work sick that
they are not going to work sick
and infecting other employees
that work that they are not
going to work sick and a
potentially infecting members of
the public and we feel that this
is really kind of a basic right
and I would point out to you
madam chair now there are over I
think close to two hundred
countries a hundred forty five
countries provide paid sick
leave in some form.
those kind many of those country
our our industrial on additional
countries such as ourselves and
yet we who I think like to
thanks think of ourselves as a
caring and compassionate country
have failed in all of these
years to implement a paid family
of a paid sick leave program for
workers and I think that being
the case I think it's time for
the New Mexico now to join the
ranks of about a dozen other
states who have taken up the
cause for their employees to
ensure they have the ability to
stay home when they are actually
sick and and that's really the
whole the underlying reason and
that's a a brief outline of what
the bill does and with that
madam chair I am happy to
entertain questions.
Chandler I think you're
proposing an amendment are you
need hi I'm thinking that before
we go to for public comment you
might want to explain the
amendment and we were adopting
it so that is that might affect
public absolutely madam chair
and thank you for reminding me
of of that fact yes we are
proposing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
labor veterans and military
affairs committee substitute for
house bill twenty and the two oh
two number is point two two zero
one zero six point two and
It it it it it does a few things
it changes a few things from the
labors labor committee some
substitute madam chair would you
like me just to give us a quick
some nail sketch of what what
the substitute does.
Hold on just one second because
I'm gonna share file and I want
to open the right.
The right one it is state and
the analysts we have to tell me
I've got a proposed amendment
and then I've got.
I don't know which elected is
the committee substitute.
In the current.
House Bill twenty CS.
That's the analysis right.
No it says committee substitute.
Thank you.
I keep opening the right one
that's more Canadian.
You may substitute without a two
one nine four seven nine point
two.
There's that's must not be the
latest.
The professional looking if any
that point two is the latest.
Representative Chandler do you
have a point to yes I I do madam
chair point to the Lincoln yes.
But it's not a one line number
it was to to to those eight
numbers that right yes so let me
see what you have in your file
and compare it to what I have
madam chair there are many
drafts in around that we have
the correct one in the Here
file.
Is there so Senator that look
like big they beat that within
the share file it's two zero one
zero six two anything on and All
I.
It's the one that says one oh
three K. beyond the bottom of it
the committee.
The share my Lisa tell us what
it's titled in the Here file.
It is can be and that is in the
house bill twenty four
committee's substitute and then
right below it says windows
three K. B. for the size of the
file.
So does it say committee
substitute madam chair H. L. B.
M. C. after House committee the
right one.
The hard copy one oh three Cabey
and that's the one that says one
of three KP.
Which file is it.
Madam chair I think I found it
and it is.
Eight GB twenty committee
substitute HLV MC on.
Actually that's what I thought
was right Representative
Armstrong but it's not the right
number what.
According to what I've been
told.
One city.
It is it is the Judiciary
Committee substitute so what it
does say that it's just House
Judiciary Committee has to do
bill for House labor Veterans
Affairs.
The C..
Yes the correct one and then two
oh two number again.
It's two two zero one zero six
point two yeah that's it that's
the right one yes okay.
And madam chair.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is in the waiting waiting to get
like a flat and we have no
matter what I do on
interpretation I hear the
Spanish whether it turn it off
or whether internet English.
Yes and on the committee
distracting.
I'm hearing the Spanish as well.
What why why don't you turn on
your interpretation Malik I
don't think you have it.
I've done it both ways I've
turned it on to English and I've
turned it off all together and
it doesn't make any difference.
I don't know I don't know what
so I I think
Sure.
I just wanted to work.
On the translation so I'm going
to teach English if you this
there's four things you can
select off English Spanish.
Many Spanish she says mute
original audio click that and
then if you're on English you
will not hear the trance the
Spanish translation okay
everybody is the very bottom bar
click new original idea thank
you Mr speaker thank you and
we know that works when we start
having Spanish testimony whether
we're hearing in English.
This is get rid of duplication.
I'm a full service
representative madam chair tech
support.
You know legislation whatever
you need.
They do work on the services we
need to work on.
Thank you very much.
All right we you explain the
committee substitute now that we
all know what it is
Representative Chandler.
And then we'll go to public
health.
Thank you so much madam chair
and thank you for your patience
and I'm glad I have the correct
substitute I was a little
nervous there for a minute or
two
this substitute changes a few
things in the and the labor
committee substitute the two
main changes are it removes
public employees from the scope
of the act and it also changes
the complaints and enforcement
provisions to essentially adopt
what is in the minimum wage law
that we passed a couple of years
ago are
so that's the essence of the
chief of the significant changes
in the bill.
Okay.
Representative coming out all
did you want to say anything
about the bill before we go to
public comment.
Madam chair and no for the sake
of time and allowing the
multitude of public comment that
I'm sure is on line I will wait
for later or questions as they
apply thank you for recognizing
me and and and what I did let
the the committee no is that
the Sanchez Representative
Chandler and Rubio have asked
their.
Multitudes to.
Reduced themselves to it as
long.
Yes okay but I'd like to.
The Iranians now and ask for
those who would be in favor of
the bill to state yes and those
who would be opposing the bill
to vote now.
Then we will take public comment
at one minute fifteen.
This will be the call will be up
for fifteen seconds.
Okay we have in support we have
seventy two people in support
twenty in opposition seventy
eight twenty two percent I'm
going to begin with taking the
the comments in opposition
first.
So if you are in favor of the
bill we you put your hand down.
Lower your hand if you're in
favor of the bill.
If you are
in opposition to the bill.
Please raise your hands I will
come to those in favor later
okay.
You will have we will have a one
minute timer.
The first person I'm gonna call
on is Ramona the body.
Present yourself.
She's gone Camilla car come LA
Hastings.
Hi.
Can you hear me.
Yes go ahead.
Is part Now Hastings.
Okay.
The.
I just wanted to say New Mexico
is one of the lowest paying
states in the US we barely can
meet our everyday needs with the
pay that we received.
I think sick leave would be.
In order.
To help all working New
Mexicans.
You know if small businesses
have funds to open up a business
they sure have funds to take
care of their employees big
businesses like I work for you
know miss Putin Drug.
They're a big corporation and
they should have the funding to
pay as the sick leave.
You know I took home COVID
nineteen to my whole family.
And I had to use my vacation
time in order to get a full
week's pay.
So that's why I'm for the sick
leave okay.
To help all New Mexicans you
know we work hard for everything
that we can.
Right your time is up and I'm
trying to get trying to divide
it up so that those who are
opposed to the bill are speaking
first.
So
Right now the top of the list I
have Ruth or tap.
Go ahead.
Madam chair good morning action
with us then and then members of
the committee I am is one of the
school minority to one man and
that I have seen five B. at
least I know that that putting
up on any small businesses where
we all in that I don't know all
what do you what this last
usually to find to do but these
yes.
Making our you know I have the
the name to to all and to to run
my business create more jobs we
already provided a lot of the
nineties would provide you know
that the to the state I mopped
would provide for a one K.
health insured and I paid Holly
the.
and I don't know what else I can
do I just all those bills thank
you for.
Right the pricing to me and that
your site or.
I'm not sure if I want to
continue to you know creating
more business more impressed.
Find more jobs for the New
Mexico I'm just hi.
Thank you.
Mark Fiedler.
Madam chair and members of the
committee up I took the time to
read through and analyze.
The last two we were revisions
to the bill and probably eight
of twenty problem areas were.
We is resolved or at least
improved but some maybe Mr items
were not touched including the
fact that under this bill in
order could not raise the rent
at all
for an indefinite period of time
this it's it's a wording problem
and that was not fixed in that
that can be a big problem also
with the national association of
real property managers did reach
out to the bill's sponsors and
all for their assistance and
received no response whatsoever
again we offer to help but it
hasn't been fixed yet thank you.
Thank you let me say that I
think you were speaking about
house bill one eleven which is
on our agenda tonight that
that's not what's before us
right this moment
Sherman record.
Thank you very much my name
Sherman McCorkle I'm with the
sandy ascension technology park
today I'm representing the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce.
The substitute bill before you
today is onerous.
For employers private sector
employers particularly small
employers in New Mexico the
small private employers simply
do not have the resources.
Private sector or government or
public stock Corporation
employers.
A less onerous onerous bill a
fair and reasonable bill would
delay and stagger implementation
it would exempt very small
businesses and consider tax
credits.
And it would recognize
generous leave policies that
companies have.
And so what's on the line is
keeping the jobs we have thank
you very much.
Thank you Tiffany Rivera.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
comment this afternoon my name
is Tiffany Rivera and I'm the
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico for the last drive out
this afternoon I speak to you on
behalf of my twenty thousand
member families which I
represent statewide to
respectfully oppose house bill
twenty this bill will place
extreme financial burden our
state's agricultural producers
and businesses many of whom are
operating at extremely narrow
margins are agricultural
producers and businesses handle
extremely perishable food
products that require immediate
attention to brit preserve
freshness and quality and that
requires a presence workforce we
support policies that are
beneficial to the business
environment in New Mexico and H.
B. twenty is not that further we
have concerns with the increases
in fines and penalties mentioned
in the bill as well as the
massive increase in workload at
the department of workforce
solutions we respectfully
request that you oppose house
bill twenty and I appreciate the
opportunity to come in this
afternoon.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm actually
Wagner director of public policy
for the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we stand in opposition
to this bill recognizing the
current public health crisis
there should be a path forward
towards a mandatory paid time
off program that could work for
both employers and employees
unfortunately this bill is not
that passed this bill is poorly
drafted with many unintended
consequences and would create
perverse incentives for
businesses with existing PTO
plans to reduce their budget as
well as create huge liabilities
and risk for families across the
state a couple of the challenges
include over the book overly
broad employer definition
employers are not limited to
individuals or companies that
need to file with the secretary
of state county or city but
include anyone who hire someone
for domestic services in a
private home additionally were
concerned with overly broad
employee definitions no
recognition of existing more
generous PTO programs and the
public health emergency leave
thank you.
Senator.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Christy
Jeter and the executive director
of western heights learning
center as a child care provider
I've been open since the onset
of the pandemic and I want to
take the opportunity to first
thank my staff for their
dedication and hard work
and resilience during the most
challenging here I think we've
all faced recognizing the
current public health crisis
there should be a path forward
towards mandatory paid time off
program that could work for both
employers and employees
unfortunately HB twenty is not
that path my business resides in
Bernalillo county Bernalillo
county passed an ordinance in
two thousand nineteen this
ordinance takes both the
employee and employers needs
into consideration a couple of
examples include an exemption to
those companies to offer an
equal or greater paid time off
program and the flexibility for
employees to use paid time off
for any purpose I strongly
recommend the committee take a
closer look at Bernalillo county
ordinance
HB twenty and currently harms
both employees and employers
thank you.
The market is.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Charlie
mark is a registered lobbyist.
The association of
developmental disabilities
community providers.
We are concerned about the
Medicaid implication to this.
With our rates are coming from
Medicaid there is no
A provision allowing for a rate
increase to accommodate for the
changes in this legislation.
We however do look forward to a
conversation with the sponsor
in in hopes of making some
changes that may affect this and
other provisions within the
legislation thank you very much
for the opportunity to address
the committee.
And now Carla.
Good evening.
Yeah okay I'm not sure who we
have.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee this is Leri Sonntag
here on behalf of New Mexico
business coalition we provided
written comments with detail as
to why we oppose house bill
twenty so all the previous
evening.
New Mexico business coalition
opposes blanket mandates like
those proposed in house bill
twenty because they are
unnecessary and a growing burden
on small business owners these
mandates and up hurting not
helping New Mexico families
wages and benefits should be
negotiated between the employer
and the employee.
Expected unique situations
constraints for every business.
Government attempts to micro
manage this process leads to
serious problems and reduce the
opportunities for growth and
employment businesses and
employers alike.
For these reasons and others
with the particulate in writing
we oppose also point thank you.
Yeah.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Angela
Garcia I'm the president of the
New Mexico childcare and
educational station and I also
on the way back early learning
center in Los crucis I want to
be clear and I'm not speaking
before you today in opposition
of paid sick leave but I am in
opposition of H. B. twenty
ask for and I think sick leave
is critical for all New Mexicans
especially those in the
childcare industry as we have
been serving the needs of
families since the onset of the
pandemic I current PTO package
at both locations or on my staff
under this plan many of my
employees will lose as they have
to now I can now to afford to
pay for the sick leave and will
no longer be able to offer the
PTO package the PTO package
allows them to take time as they
as they need it for any reason
not.
I want to thank the committee
for allowing me to speak today
and I hope that you I'm opposed
and hostile twenty thank you.
I'm venting.
Madam chairman my name is Brian
fennel I would Albuquerque
publishing company we provide
sick leave and other.
Time off for employees but what
did one of the amendments to the
bill is the addition of
supplemental sick leave so while
the sponsor says the bill would
provide sixty four hours here.
If this bill is signed before
the pandemic or that a public
health emergency is lifted we
would be required to provide
another eighty hours of sickly
and it just seems to pyramid on
top of what the bill proposes as
the base sixty four hours and
we're really penalize employers
that have worked with employees
for the last year or so to
accommodate their needs during
the pandemic thank you.
Remotely body.
You need under your cell.
Okay.
Hi my name's Ramona you look
very and I am for the bills on
house bill twenty and I filled
large is would be.
Are not an advantage but a good
way of being able to if you are
sick to stay home take care of
yourself not be pressure to have
to come in with the a doctor's
note after two three days I I am
there is a concern after so many
days but at this moment I do
feel like it's safer just way
because I do work with the food
industry cannot and I always
want to be safe I want to have
everything that for my customers
and I know that you know with a
local unions without them we
wouldn't because far as we have
and I want to thank them to and
it's I just think it's a good
way of being able to go to work
after being gone for so many
days and not being pressured
because not always everybody can
afford the duck deductible and
even one or two days of missed
and works.
The next person is Wendy.
We're still on opposition.
When.
Please.
All.
K..
Randy Velarde.
Jason Espinoza.
Madam chair this is ready by
Verde.
All right.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Randy bell
Verde and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of realtors which
has both large and small
employers and throughout the
state although we're not against
the concept of paid sick leave
we cannot support this bill
without more consideration for
small businesses and for many of
the reasons already outlined
thank you for your time.
Thank you all right Jason
Espinoza.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business and we do stand in
opposition to house bill twenty
since early March and FY B. as
conducted a COVID nineteen Sir
be assessing the public health
crisis is impact on small
business operations and economic
conditions are the most
significant and concerning
finding is that one in four
small business owners say that
they will have to permanently
close their doors and current
economic conditions do not
improve over the next six months
additionally track the recovery
dot org as of February tenth I
know that small business revenue
was still down thirty three
point one percent compared to
January twenty twenty
additional costs created by this
bill will have a significant
well significantly hamper our
ability to recover from the
crisis in fact Congress passed
the FSC are after C. R. A. at
the onset of the pandemic last
year they recognize the impact
so that they created a tax
credit to offset the harm to
small businesses that they
the city created a refundable
tax credit we hope that you may
consider similar.
You are.
Please go ahead.
And.
Okay.
Wendy.
I'm yourself please Wendy.
Hello go ahead.
Yes I worked for Safeway for
twenty one years.
And
I just.
I don't have any sick pay
because I'm not full Senator and
about ten years ago I had
learned that is and I have taken
time off because I couldn't
speak and I was able to do my
job and.
The.
And take the time off each
person and it hurt he said.
And so I think thank you it
should be offered to all
employees yes it may and we are
you and it runs through more.
Thank you.
Don't.
Just turn yourself please.
For Donna I did okay good
afternoon I have worked in the
grocery industry for over thirty
years most employees must work
sick or employees are frowned
upon if they call in sick
employees are not allowed to
make up for lost hours employees
sacrifice their vacation hours
to help compensate for lost pay
if you have children you save
your vacation hours for when
your children are sick or your
sick this is happening to most
of your services here in New
Mexico sh because your citizens.
Are living paycheck to paycheck.
that that is why they have to do
those things my husband had
COVID in a bit he was sick for
about a month he had no stick
pay he also was not given COVID
pay this happens for many of
your citizens here in New Mexico
even though you have mandate
that are out there
R. E. ours our state needs to
get.
It Jason Weaks.
I want to remind everybody we're
supposed to be taking all I'd
like to take opposition if any
of you have your hands up that
are in line please put them down
if you're in favor of this bill
and you will get your turn.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name she's makes a
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce New Mexico hospitality
association Exxon or XTO Exxon
Mobil one targa well we
appreciate the efforts of
Representative challenge to
Representative Chandler to
address the issue of paid leave
each one of my clients opposes
this bill is drafted.
They leave is obviously
something that has the potential
to improve our overall
employment situation in Mexico
however the rate the proposal
outlined in this bill is not
something that any of my clients
can presently support my
previous clients propose this
bill for very different reasons
with respect to the small plants
Representative by the Spanish
chamber and hospitality
association they're fighting to
keep their doors open and this
is a very prescriptive they'll
that quite honestly may end up
causing them to not be open the
doors at all with respect to
larger clients there just needs
to be an opt out provision
allows and opt out when they're
paid benefit plans are actually
more rich in beneficial in
larger than the prescription
within this bill does cause
significant impact to them we
stand opposition.
And yourself please you need.
And introduce yourself.
I think we have taken all of the
comments in on this discussion.
I would like for the there were
certain spokespeople chosen for
the those in favor and if there
are any that any others who
would like to speak that will be
fine I'm.
So in favor of the bill Rosedale
carpio.
All right that is disputing
thank members the committee so
you're also think that yield
modest with data that I have a
lot of with the end of the
semester is that the best you
raise.
In miss would be so much that
that Representative almost a
must be being on that'll see the
state estimated at that
hostilities I will soon as it
that how that is this and this
and this bill yes yes least
that's what this morning if
someone we also that are going
to do we must assist that'll
student eleven do you need the
serving as as you can back that
up Jake in the sport doesn't
just mean we address the coming
the York one meters in New
Mexico and was not that
difficult for New England people
that do that but assisting then
you'll see dean Sanders provided
a good teaching access all of
your files put into me that
usually posi Peabody COVID
nineteen people have is that
Miss albeit at that a
hypothetical nipple need and let
me just seven no no look it must
be me at the market is located
at one thing that I'm equally in
mainly on those niggles
assistant to see in the mood
just for my schedule that you
guys imported that that'll for a
homeless homeless inject this
almost yes I got one of the need
at the.
What do you see yes.
Does
it.
I think this
you it will be is it is.
Is that the land is yes but does
admit that that.
He said this is because of that
are that the homeless is.
In the nation Mexico is in the
state Senate.
The that it is.
This is.
A simple.
For me it is implicated Mr
Forbes and I just said it goes
down in the ceiling in the.
Thank.
Thank you.
You.
Madam chair members to add
Judiciary Committee committee my
name is go ahead Richard.
Yeah I am.
Yeah
yes madam chair members of the
judiciary committee my name is
Dick Mason I'm chair the action
committee of the league of women
voters in New Mexico and I'm
here to speak in support of H.
B. twenty and twenty seventeen
of late joins was three hundred
and forty organizations
representing a range of
demographic groups for more than
forty states to support an
inclusive family and medical
leave policy and to reject
alternatives that leave people
behind.
Signatories included advocacy
groups direct services
organizations and private sector
businesses so without the league
stands in strong support of HB
twenty thank you.
Thank you Catherine Preciosa.
Just introduce yourself and
introduce yourself.
Thank you madam chair Catherine
crier shot I'm a registered
lobbyist with eighteen T. I'd
like to state that we remain
neutral on house bill twenty
however we would like to think
Representative Chandler for
working with us and taking the
time to consider our amendments
to this legislation we are
really important great changes
and we want to thank her for
that thank you very much.
John missions.
And thank you Madam chairwoman
members of the committee John
Lipschutz with that New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO we
represent tens of thousands of
workers around the state many of
which have the ability to
collectively bargain and bargain
in their contracts the ability
for paid sick leave and we very
much appreciate that
unfortunately there are many
other workers that do not have
that ability and we've you paid
sick leave not as a privilege
but as a right it is a right for
people to not have to decide
whether or not to take care of
themselves or earn money or take
care of a sick child or earn
money for that reason and for
many others that have been the
spoken about earlier in this
committee we strongly urge the
committee to support this bill
thank you very much.
You know.
Good afternoon can you hear me.
Yes.
Already my name is there because
you will I am a twenty eight
year employee was miss food and
drug I am also a twenty eight
year number of local fifteen
sixty four UFCW.
I am in favor of any sick leave
whether it's on bill H. B..
Twenty or any other that is
better for all New Mexicans to
have sick leave if vacation
leave is earned we should be
able to use it for vacation is
sick leave is earned then we
should be able to take it just
thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you Honorio doll.
Good afternoon as a survivor of
domestic violence I can say that
simply leading ones of users not
the end of the road it is only
the beginning in a very long
during the healing as an
individual who needs ongoing
physical treatments for my neck
and back injuries sustained by
my ex husband I can honestly say
that I have to skip countless
treatments as a result of having
no paid sick leave protections
not being allowed by my
employers to obtain such
treatment as a result I am in
pain daily and have been since
my ex husband strangled me
unconscious over ten years ago
as a single parent such as
myself are often faced with a
choice of going to work or not
being paid to stay home to care
for our sick children there's
been times in the past in which
I've gotten rid not that work
because I chose to put my son
first to remain home with him
when he was sick as a past
employer of mine refused to even
allow unpaid days off essential
workers who face repeated
exposure to COVID nineteen have
a very high chance of
contracting the illness as we
see around the world should they
have an auto immune disease like
I do they're having to weigh
their life death options before
every single shift accordingly
many of us myself included have
had to leave careers it with
benefits and pensions to find
something that is better suited
for us comment.
Thank you.
There are no such as.
Representative Ezzell.
But I student they members of
the day or let me know what is
your lan that already yes so you
member of this almost service
and work on this almost as soon.
Don't think what it is you know
a Banyuls you bring to the
seller.
Thank you for being in the memos
from Yankee it was totaled
twelve instead of me asking me.
You also not just yet maybe one
of the more I learned about.
That we is he going back.
No thank you and may not but I
lost all know your award going
away estimate but a program is
yes see Dumbleton walk us on if
we'll sign.
Your story.
Lonely guy and is also on the
kind of associate goes down and
when you put a six story thank
keep it up in the list of this
get by Senator stop request is
several was then also you are
the apple simply I'll list
bellow article but I've mostly I
get impairments seen is that is
economical motion grant this.
It yourself.
Chair and of the committee my
name is land sana from
Albuquerque many know me as a
city councilor who has
championed sick leave at the
city level others know me as a
health care advocate
of the sexual abuse survivor and
others million cancer survivor
which is the company that I am
hearing today I have been
battling stage four Hodgkin's
lymphoma a type of blood cancer
for the past ten years and even
treatment where I go through
chemotherapy every four weeks
for the last four years black I
think we have that issue for
patients to access streaming I
thank you all payments and
limited families to care for
their loved ones going through
the treatment even children
going through surgeries and
chemo without their mother or
father no one should have to go
through their files alone in the
house bill twenty will have more
family the by the slide in loved
ones well not worrying about
their next paycheck or if they
can afford their prescriptions
or dinner I urge you asked how
many thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jane hammer
I'm a volunteer advocate with a
a RP New Mexico paid sick leave
is a priority for eight eight R.
P. the New Mexico this year many
workers in New Mexico do not
have paid sick leave this causes
them to choose between working
CENIC or losing wages because
they choose to care for
themselves or their family
members.
Warning to an a a RP study
twenty sixteen the average care
givers and eight thousand six
hundred sixteen dollars of
income on care giving losing
wages compounds their hardship
we've reviewed.
By H. B. twenty and strongly
supported and thank the sponsors
for bringing it we ask you to
join us in supporting New
Mexico's working family
caregivers with a day pass but
thank you.
Representative I'm Lopez.
Hi can you hear me yes go ahead.
Okay great my name is crystal
and I was cafe exponents of the
New Mexico I've been in the
service industry for seventeen
years are working from and
everything with copy paste
bartender my current position
which is part of the management
team here in Los crucis as at
hacienda in this year we often
in this industry have to choose
to work over getting health care
an example would be I watched a
viral viral Banville inspection
with papers of a hundred and two
and body aches spread among most
of our staff who could not miss
work or pay for care you're
talking about kitchen staff who
work paycheck to paycheck or
servers who are using their
track to cover their cash tip
taxes
all of this reinforces the
culture working while you're
sick and ultimately spreading
sickness and I just I think
after working through this
pandemic and meeting the needs
of our employers and being told
that were essential it would be
amazing to be treated as such
and have our health taking care
of thank you.
The Santo.
Hello madam chairman and members
of the community I'm sorry.
I am in support of H. B. twenty
as I am an essential worker for
Smith's food and drug.
And I am being compromised and.
I have been going to work ever
since the pandemic started.
And most likely I worked you can
track the stillness I would
possibly die and without proper
treatment and that is something
that concerns me.
And I know that there are many
others like me who workforce Mr
any other large companies who
refuse to pay their employees
sick leave.
And I find it
to be absolutely disgusting that
they do these things.
And so that is why am in support
of our H. B. twenty thank you.
Thank you.
Stephanie.
Thank you for sending to me my
name is that and I'm
representing Mr redirection New
Mexico I have twenty years of
service and yes that is straight
out of high school twenty years
Mr and who would have ever
thought that we'd be doing but I
do
I heard somebody earlier stated
that they believe that of this
work has on.
So far distressful imagine.
Exencial.
What are the dealing with
customers the family
emergencies.
The loss of the shortage of ours
consumers.
Distress all it'll be better yes
word House Bill twenty twenty
it'll motivate to work harder.
And it'll have your workers need
more prideful and financial.
Your.
I'm I have one that says user.
Allow ME number this system.
One is that this president I
members of the committee the
number is money and that the
agency you so members so most at
CM B. Google federal may he go
that often to stone and the.
People that yet is the proposed
amendment.
For some this.
What the status was that person
is going to hit the COVID
nineteen but but soon as get
done meant that some include
confession meet that awful
moment buddy in the US than
feminine that I listed in what
and then yes so sorry I'm going
to call me for me to get that
thing called that issue because
it then won't trust us discuss
it just died late I tip it
banked it knows that he at thank
you that.
The K. C. will follow.
Yes in this government.
Hello eleven ms eleven ms from
media at the height infidels.
Need our throws a study
according to him yes yes is bill
is billable temple to bit bang.
Okay.
Yes good afternoon good evening
members of the distinguished
house Judiciary Committee my
name is mark Haley and I am an
LMS W. school social worker here
in Rio Rancho New Mexico I'm
here today with Ole and I stand
in strong support of house bill
twenty I am a contracted
employee so house bill twenty
for people like me and countless
other New Mexicans would mean
that we would finally have
access to paid sick leave as you
probably know more than fifty
percent of New Mexicans don't
have access to paid sick leave
this bill is a step in the right
direction it's vitally important
and in the midst of a pandemic
it is unconscionable that we do
not have some kind of paid sick
leave for Everhart every hard
working New Mexican I hope you
go ahead and pass this bill and
thank you so much for your time
tonight.
Christopher Martin.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Christopher
Martin R..
The teamsters local four nine
two I am unemployed you yes the
number of all right.
We live in America in New Mexico
what we're supposed to be
treated equally what is workers
are not treated equally some of
us get rid of those of us that
if we don't like having not
having paid sick leave.
Another doctor we're but it's
not so easy to pick a different
career for different jobs so
of the college legislators I
think you should understand
that.
I.
This.
Legislative.
Everyone.
It.
Every single worker every
disabled workers.
L. G. B. T. Q. of what that is
why I'm not only asking you to
vote yes on SB twenty urged the
governor to get this bill passed
as soon as possible thank you.
You.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Tracy make Daniel and I am
here to speak in support of HB
twenty on behalf of the
southwest women's Law Center but
we advocate for policies that
ensure economic security for
women and their families paid
sick leave is critical to
ensuring that individuals can
balance work care giving
responsibilities and health
needs women and particularly
women of color are most likely
to be responsible for care
giving for both children and
elders women of color are also
over represented in jobs that
typically do not offer paid sick
leave including those on the
front lines during the pandemic.
During the COVID women have been
forced out of the workforce in
unprecedented numbers due to the
conflict between care giving and
works as we come together to
build a stronger more resilient
and more equitable economy we
ask you that you so do passed on
H. B. twenty thank you.
Could you hear me.
Hello.
Hello.
Well you need to it yourself.
Are you there.
Yes hello.
Yes.
My name is here okay thank you
good afternoon madam chairman
chairman and members of the
committee my name is our
accounts with I've been working
in the grocery business forty
three years.
Please quit putting this off the
grocery workers and any other
were to show up to work six
because we cannot pay bills if
we are not working and if we are
showing up to work should we
affect other co workers that's
includes miss Safeway and
Albertsons stores this house
bill twenty this is not three
six request report and earning
at this make everyone healthier
with troop sick pay please.
Support House Bill twenty
workers will appreciate it thank
you very much.
One.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes okay.
I work for Smith's food and drug
and I am for the H. B. twenty
bill I have caught COVID.
I am get ready to go back to
work next week
unfortunately in my has been
converted to and he is that
disabled veteran and doing very
poorly I just got out of the
hospital in and is on oxygen I
support this bill and I would
love for it to pass I have never
had a sick day I would go to
work sick just like when I COVID
I didn't know and I was going to
work until they actually did
some testing and were able to
you know confirm that I had it.
But it is very necessary that we
have this H. B. twenty bill
passed so thank you and I hope
it gets passed soon thank you.
Thank you Roseanne Vascones.
Madam chair and going to have to
promote Representative panelist
in the current.
All right let's try that we come
across any war we're not going
to have time to go through that
procedure.
Hi.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Roseanne
Bosque is and I'm a native of
Los crucis and with thanks to
you on I'm asking that you vote
to give person the workers The
essential lifeline they need
through this pandemic and vote
yes for earns paid sick leave
over the past year I've worked
with hundreds of key
stakeholders in behavioral
health we have seen a
significant increase in
behavioral and mental health
needs and both children and
adults during this pandemic to
the point where people are
suffering from debilitating
anxiety and panic attacks which
also requires one to see care
and be treated I know this
because I was one of them no one
should have to make the choice
between their healthcare and
having to work to feed their
families so I'm asking you today
to please vote yes for paid sick
leave for our essential workers
and throw them an essential
lifeline.
S. H. B. twenty thank you.
Right now I'm gonna.
Twenty five were people with
their hands up and I had
suggested the Sanchez but it
wasn't to be helpful if we
couldn't get to the committee
pretty fast because that's going
to take us awhile so I'm gonna
ask those of you with your hands
that still.
Do not repeat anything anyone
else is that and.
If you can just agree with
what's been said so far please
take your hands down so that we
can try to act on this bill
tonight.
Right this Sarinana.
It is.
The Senate yourself.
Okay go ahead.
I thank the members of the
committee so I might do that
again are you so you're not
gonna have a sense of that Act
we don't have electricity that
is seventy thousand basically
then building centrally what are
H. of.
One three we must on political
amended bodies affect this thing
I'm about to go to start a hello
this is incentives that the
manning at commercial not the
name most access so I just
thought I was putting vitamins
that give bookings values in I
will go to thank you don't think
they need access on
also is that I well there's so
thin and often I'm just going to
have those those my skin and
then it access so that they're
not funding at Baskin dental we
almost access economy from media
anyone can we just and a lot of
them Mexico I'm also revised and
then the whole state than it
component and vehicle.
Okay maybe just a stamp okay
table thank
I think they have with us yes.
Thank you very disloyal.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much my
name is merry but I speak they
haven't heard anyone else was
educators to get I'm I'm a
teacher near Rancho I've worked
that
my grand by interactions I've
thrown up on my desk
if you don't get paid sick
leave.
Michael workers being co workers
you need more undergoing
chemotherapy and radiation and
over teach water mom with dying
because she needed to be able to
take the time off to take care
of her sick father we don't get
enough we've and yet we're
interested with this wonderful
face future
When my daughter was born in
August I didn't make a single
day I did not taking one day off
after having my daughter because
I needed to be able to see my
gaze going to the year old is
you say that I'm.
I just I know I'm not the only
one thank you.
Thanks for your.
Hello madam chairwoman.
Hi I think you are Madam one
members of the committee thank
you.
First of all for your service
and and during what we help the
temporary video world
thank you for your time your
heart your commitment I'm
honored to be the president of
forty five hundred grocery
workers in New Mexico with CYFD
W. these workers primarily work
it's miss Albertsons Safeway
John Brooks and some other small
bargaining units sick pay is
long overdue in New Mexico and
we cannot wait another year the
business coalition is not caught
off guard they've had years to
prepare for this and put
together sick pay policy I want
to emphasize that paid time off
is not the same as six.
Nor will it yield to help your
workforce New Mexico meets
recent polling shows that
seventy four percent of New
Mexicans believe the employers
provide six pack why well
grocery workers who are not
feeling well as well as other
Senator workers have a choice to
make their decisions that they.
Hi can you hear me yes.
Madam chair members of the
community my name is COVID dean
of.
I currently have six Hey are
sick leave at my job are there
was a time when I didn't.
One thing that hasn't been
discussed yet is how.
Paid sick leave is a central
business infrastructure no
different than electricity or
running water and this is
evident by how out of control
the pandemic was because
ascential workers had to come to
work sick
if we want to prepare for the
next pandemic and prevent the
spread of illnesses we need the
infrastructure of paid sick
leave thank you very much.
Lopez.
Present yourself.
I'm gonna skip to the next
person now.
To.
Who is it.
It's best Lopez okay please
again okay I'm just wanted to
say that I'm gonna cut it short
because I know you're busy and I
am in support of the H. B.
twenty I think it needs to be
passed because well over due and
I do respite Representative a
lot of the employees.
That could make it and I've
discussed it with them they
think that it's the best thing
for everybody and since that
some managers and employers have
it already in place and they
feel like they deserve it I we
feel like we should deserve it
also because we work just as
hard thank you.
Thank you.
Tino Martinez.
Please I need your cell.
Tino Martinez.
This get to the next person is a
belt not at a.
Please I'm it yourself.
Yes.
Hello go ahead okay.
The number you started it.
Representative the state can you
get in the second half of this
was going to discover the
connection then yet again in my
nose that test and gathers.
The Austin doesn't offer those
in need of this it often you do
just that they are in it was
just begin used in Santa Fe do I
need to ask about conflict and
if I divide it into personal
consequences from yes the
importance of the economic if
you just come across a how do it
is going to see that report that
they thank you specific
disorders yes and for me that
that's.
When the agency both we go from
most affect that as quickly
because you you Mr gather notice
distribute the Hondas you
mistress would look easy by that
if you focus to be most
important thing when the
nautical but almost monitor this
one is to provide.
Nobody to get by the bill and
vocals really humid I just check
it is to look for that is
because we do Costa but at the
list is the most of a handle
yeah for the most I think one of
the activists imported and
initiatives implemented yeah yes
indispensable the bottles are
hobbled what is to the Spiegel
capital here in the second by
the lake activity but I could.
Local groups and sixty four
response and support age one and
say that it's time to take care
of New Mexico workers so.
Thank you just be honest.
Please.
It yourself you.
Yes are you working just missed
progression I agree with HB
twenty to make sure that
everybody does have sick leave
so that we can take care of our
families take care of you guys
and the to stay healthy and help
this comment spread slow down
but you all have a good one and
stay safe.
Thank you.
The L. G. K. thirty.
Please introduce yourself.
Go ahead.
The number is Senator science.
So remember when this a state
president and member of the
committee number SNES signs so
in Madison that adequately yeah
what are those need best.
The center of a develop however
and all that I think we already
have not been we aspects of the
is the pyro supporting but then
that for much of it is going to
what if we have a hot impediment
I'm gonna miss some federal
thank god supplement the net
access live it it just all
models we also know when we come
out so they don't get the new
look at the matter this issue on
the PC less a little bit so
sequence of the middle class
will be reviewed.
Someone will miss
that's a sort of yes but also
for that matter this was yet
again is that what is your best
for me yes.
Yes but element when we are both
saying that
one in five Americans down last
several we kind of the other
that I will have a laugh so on
the best.
Thank you.
Stephanie.
Please yourself.
Yes please bow H. B. twenty
twenty this is your chance to
turn from being negative or
central workers to February
thirteenth of twenty twenty and
turn it into something positive
something that has been.
Devoting their whole lives and
time to stop being so negative
this whole year yes Stephanie
Goldendale from Smith for
thirteen the vote yes HB twenty
twenty.
Many workers veterans including
the better time.
I'll turn.
Please send me your.
All.
This you know misty inside New
Morales almost as the test that
I think we're going to see our
we will hope for this to this
and the most implies that they
have a felony animal thank but I
and many more when the men
federal I want to see what.
We're gonna follow and then
tested for people open the new
plan no Campos okay then yes
that is that one of this
consenus another what is we are
going to look it up with that
you think the and we committee
that the National Trust with the
what is up with the dentist of
the other coming up on of.
Conditions are less important
thank you Mrs Donald he can.
Socorro so how must be up with
the most on the membership
committee that Mr Starr levels
look must be the most important
that someone has been serviced
and Michelin lettuce on the know
what animals the second one or
not so soon at the end of the
someone established a second
assailant that put up with it so
if you need a cleaning coming
inside and for and put them back
in the so many when he sees the
co op bank CFO then I should
have a the internet is quite the
same thing members the committee
proposed to me that they are
going to stay with us.
We now and the policy number not
the committee domestic violence
survivor center here in New
Mexico as well the executive
director for women's the
agriculture network the need for
eighty twenty at the gym and
long overdue you are aware of
the pandemic the actual we're
waiting longer for COVID
nineteen arrived one of the New
Mexicans with some of the pilot
and one of four will provide
actual up.
That already high the right date
thank you for that and twenty
twenty additionally what's going
on here the guarantee of paid
sick leave taking time off work
even thank hi my up in the
expectation that the hi can you
make an open trouble but the cat
but I knew how they do come up
reporter services renewal your
children in school and in a
technical hearing what the Donna
victims on time and on that one
dollar.
We have two percent conviction
rate of domestic violence find
your actual users and.
Make the decision whether or not
to go to court and against you
know quite for the charges being
brought against their abusers in
their alters or have to not
being able to bring a paycheck
home in.
Further compound the injustice
and the trauma that they've
already experienced thank you.
Yes.
To go to work sick and infect
others and also.
The customers.
All for it and thank you for
hearing me.
Thank you Marianna Toyota.
Good evening madam chair and
committee my name is Merriam
Montoya and supportive HB twenty
I am fully advocate for missing
options grocery workers H. B.
twenty is something Mexico
workers need we've waited long
enough for this it's time sick
pay is made available to
workers.
Sec employees at work create an
unhealthy workplace not healthy
workplace I respectfully urge
you to vote yes on H. B. twenty
thank you so much for your time.
The last person to speak is
Janet you settle.
Madam chair and spoke.
Okay very good thank you very
much we'll go back to the
committee and
I'd like to get the Sanchez and
their experts a moment if they
would like to respond before we
go to committee questions and I
I do have a list so I will be
checking with you all.
So far I have on my list
representative Armstrong
Representative Townsend
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair were up we're happy
we will go the Sanchez first
madam chair I can't speak for
Representative Roybal Caballero
but I'm I'm happy.
Madam chair the only thing I
want to say is that the voices
of all of those speaking in
support of paid sick leave have
courageously said at all thank
you.
Thank you very much.
Right.
So the last Representative
Cadena stranded chair for a few
minutes and and
We'll begin with Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you sponsors and to all S.
special thank you to all in the
audience who spoke I'm a strong
proponent of paid sick sick
leave and have for a lot of
reasons besides the obvious this
year of public health issues but
for also for care giving for our
family members.
that is a
an issue that I have
brought forth legislation in
order for for number of years.
But I do have one question for
the Sanchez and that is how does
this compare with what was past
in Albuquerque and if this is
substantially different or
different than Albuquerque what
what takes precedent there I'm
I'd just that's that's the issue
that I would like to clear up if
we can
you madam chair and
representative of I could just
showing you and or Stephanie
Welch to answer that both of
them are attorneys practicing in
the area in Albuquerque and I
believe madam chair and
Representative we have a pretty
good handle on the the
Bernalillo ordinance.
Your Chasey Representative I'm
Armstrong Representative
Chandler at the short answer is
that the city ordinance.
Is is effectively a paid time
off four and ten doesn't provide
all of the protections and
benefits of sick leave and a
dedicated sick leave statute
which sets one of the minimum
wage in the workplace in New
Mexico four percent we eight it
is that it's sort of a different
animal this bill is devoted to
the notion of six weeks so that
employees may take time if if
they're sick.
Thank you
I appreciate that because there
is a difference but it that
brings a follow up question
madam chair and representative
just so that I'm clear this is
for sick leave for yourself or a
family member.
Number.
Madam chair representative
that's correct okay.
All right thank you and I I look
forward to supporting it down
the list of the rest questions
thank you.
Members might we have the motion
to move the committee separate
discussion at some of thank you
Representative Armstrong.
Next on the list we have.
Representative go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
In the Representative
A few questions
there was a motive to remote
public employees
from the covered
Employees can you speak to that
a little bit why what for.
Those issues.
Madam chair and leader Townsend
yes after discussions with
various stakeholders and
including workforce solutions
and so on we agreed that it
wasn't necessary to keep public
employees in the in the bill.
Can you explain to me why.
Yes Matt madam chair and leader
Townsend it's because after
reviewing the sort of the
landscape of public employee
benefits we felt that they were
more than adequate and include
very
are generally include sick leave
provisions.
On that point madam chair.
Representative Armstrong thank
you
thank you and I just wanted to
when to madam chair to
Representative Townsend a bill
that I carried a few years ago
expanded sick leave for public
employees to cover household
members not just himself.
Thank you.
Thank you for that.
Madam chair and.
Representative
I heard comments from.
Some major companies opposing
the bill.
Exxon XTO.
You know and others that I know
of that I.
No have.
Wonderful benefits.
Including.
Eight more.
If you look at those and will
they be well is there a way that
you exams in four years to have.
HR policies.
substantial HR policies would be
exempt from this.
Madam chair leader Townsend I
had a number of conversations of
those representatives from some
of those companies and and very
good conversations most of their
programs are not sick leave
programs they're paid time off
program GPS yeah yes madam chair
and leader Townsend and as we
said the foundation of this bill
and the philosophical foundation
is that employees should have
dedicated sickly and those
companies madam chair and then
Representative town have the
ability to adjust their policies
to accommodate this legislation.
So your bank and that they would
just change their PPO plans the
PPO slacks sick leave and that
would.
What they needed to do.
based thank.
Madam chair and leader towns and
I'm not sure I understood the
question I.
They they have the ability to
get once reading this
legislation to adjust within
their programs okay.
Have you.
You madam chair and
representative has been in just
estimate of the cost.
To employers then we quantified
how many employees are out there
that don't have the coverage and
what we believe the cost would
be to impose the coverage.
You madam chair and leader
Townsend not that I know of and
I'm not sure I know what you
mean by cost what is the cost of
a sick employees coming into
work should we quantify that as
well madam chair leader
Townsend.
Well currently
Representative madam chair we
haven't taken on dynamic.
F. I ours although I am a big
proponent up in this particular
instance this legislation
requires in for your The New
Mexico.
To encourage cost and I'm just
trying to figure out do we know
what that the.
Mr.
Chair woman and leader Townsend
I do not have a number for you
but I know that studies have
shown that actually there are
many benefits that employers who
offer these sorts of programs in
court include greater employee
loyalty greater productivity and
less employee turnover so I
guess if one we're going to do a
study madam chair and leader
Townsend all of those components
will have to be factored in as
well.
But I guess the answer to my
question was do we know what the
costs are and the answer is no
we don't.
Madam chair leader Townsend I do
not have a numeric number for
you.
Thank you ma'am
A couple of.
You know.
Questions that I think.
She might want to be.
more defined
There's some language in here
I'm looking I'm not looking at.
The latest version I'm looking
at two one nine four seven nine
point two.
Noting that the changes.
Thank you said were
Significant in the revisions I I
think I'm.
Pretty good with what I have
It talks about.
and there.
Hey John looking isn't
definitions on page three
hundred domestic partner and it
does throughout it's not only
there but it says.
An individual maintains.
Or and another term is mutually
committed.
Do is there a way to do it is
there a way that that can be
defined so that it's not.
Of.
This.
Will not be such an issue I
thinks to employers and
employees down the road.
Madam chair leader Townsend I
understand on where you're
coming from to a point however
these
I have work for employers who
had some very similar kinds of
definitions recognizing that we
often do not our society no
longer has traditional leave it
to beaver type relationships and
in truth of it they are they
adjust and and it's has not from
I have not found that to be a
problem madam chair and leader
Townsend.
I think it probably just needs
to clean up their
under ET for example there's the
employee definition says in
employees then bid to employed
by an employer including an
individual employed on a part
time seasonal or temporary
basis.
Does.
And I heard someone in the
audience it in in the public
comment thought that all
contract workers work orders.
So just is that true are
contract workers covered by yes
Madam chair and leader Townsend
no they are not and I do
remember that Madam and I had a
conversation with that
individual prior to this meeting
and explained that to him madam
chair okay all right yes
That's good mark that off the
list several questions that.
Another definition that I
thought was the.
I think it will be problematic
at some point somebody under
I need.
To.
Yes under G. S. seven.
It says and then it individual
whose close association with an
employer employee spouse or
domestic partner is the
equivalent.
Have a family relationship
makes that equivalent
determination.
Madam chair and leader Townsend
I think the individual does and
employers would recognize this
again it goes back to an earlier
question we have we do not have
a traditional relationships and
people recognize and then as us
as relations of value and long
term commitment for which this
sort of policy Mr chair madam
chair and attends the leader
Townsend the policy should apply
to.
So we're basically saying and.
That.
One way.
Who has.
I brothers and sisters and
another employee that has.
Brothers and sisters.
There it seems like it's a it's
there's a quality issue about
equivalent to I mean I I think
that needs some work of.
I think it will I think it will
be problematic
The other thing as I was reading
trade yes
Yeah if there is an acquisition
from one company to the other.
This legislation requires that
the stateLee that had been
accumulated by one employee lows
of.
So are we going to.
In the united world are we going
to.
Mergers and acquisitions are are
we going to them because people
the safety and now there's value
here and not just in the all of
these employees straight across
we're going to go through an
employee process of retiree so
we don't have to do yes.
I mean I'm I'm afraid that we
may be causing more harm than
good if are not repairable.
Yes.
Cross your mind.
Madam chair and leader Townsend
I can't say that it has and I
truthfully and I understand you
are very immersed in some
corporate world but I would be
shocked if madam chair if sixty
four hours of sick leave
that an employee or some smaller
version of that might of the
crew is going to determine how
eight an acquisition is
structured madam chair and
representative.
I thank you yes surprised if
there were five hundred
employees it starts at the.
It's.
You also have a closet here that
I think is the and that is that
your stabber from the company in
a seasonal lay off for example
and rehired within twelve
months.
you pick up what you left off
that that's not I mean that's
pretty common in the workplace I
think that that.
I think they're just.
This is the legislation is going
to cost.
Unfortunately.
I think this piece of
legislation will cost will cause
some people who lose their jobs.
And I think it will cause some
people to be reclassified.
Into a class of employee.
That will take them out of some
benefits that they might have as
they go to contract.
And.
I can't support that I.
It's I don't think it's good for
New Mexicans I I think paid sick
leave is good for some reasons
that you mention.
This is too broad this is more
than just a sickly and so I I
look for to listen to the rest
of the debate
Madam chair in Representative
but I.
Thank this is problematic thank
you very much.
Thank you next we have
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
representative
from just a couple of questions
if if we're going to exempt
public employees what we exempt
companies that currently have
budget or unions that have
negotiated benefits why don't we
and exclude them.
Madam chair and representative
we're not talking about budget
we're talking about earned sick
leave.
Okay.
Madam chair representative do
companies offer sick leave
either by their company policy
or by a union contract.
there are some companies that
offer sick leave and by and
through you contract.
Thank chair and representative
sorry.
Madam chair and representative
why do we not exclude them.
madam chair and representative
Representative I I don't think
there is a need to if if they
offered sick leave that's in
accordance with their with this
law there is no need to and
madam chair and representative
individual companies have all
kinds of a raise of sick leave
and our proposal madam chair and
representative provides what we
think is in the best interest of
the state of New Mexico and the
citizens of the state of New
Mexico for example the scope
what it can be used for of
family members it etcetera so on
and how we define them I don't
know that every sick leave
policy at for every private
employer includes the kinds of
considerations madam chair and
representative that we have and
we have included in the bill and
it would be virtually impossible
to determine that across the
board.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
So the the group that you
excluded of the public
employees.
Do they currently offer the
package that's in this bill
everyone about
madam chair and representative I
can't answer that question.
Okay thank you madam chair and
representative I noticed that
workforce solutions it will have
a one million dollar.
hit from this legislation how
are we going to pay for that
this is going to appropriations
or.
All.
Madam chair representative could
you remind me of the date of
that FIR as this bill has been
amended most recently.
Madam chair in Representative
all have to dig through my
paperwork.
The wind at because I a
I.
I made some notes so I'll try to
find that let me move on to the
next one that and madam chair
representative please walk me
through how an employee decides
to take this leave and if there
is a verification process or
not.
madam chair and representative
an employee and I just my
experts to jump in if I get
anything wrong with my
explanation an employee would do
what most of us do when we are
sick on a day we call in and
notify the employer that we are
sick
the employee if we it asks that
if the employee may get my bills
mixed up so please someone the
would just me if I have to kind
of similar bills madam chair.
if the employee has some
reasonable basically done know
that they may be absent then you
know that it's requested that
they provide some advance notice
of possible and all of those
kinds of provisions are very
typical in sick leave policies
that you called in sick if
you're sick if you're not sick
you don't call in sick and if
you think you might have a
doctor's appointment a week from
now you let your employer know
as soon as you can madam chair
and representative that you got
to go to a doctor's appointment
or take your child to a
doctor's.
pretty straightforward madam
chair wrapped.
Current Representative one arms
if you haven't course I can go
we hadn't paid sick leave for a
family member that I need to
care for the.
I'm sorry Representative your
question was madam chair that if
you do you get to take sick
leave to care for a family
member yes.
And madam chair Representative
is there a verification process
for that.
Yes the employee board.
madam chair and of my experts
please correct me if I'm wrong
but my recollection is if
there's three up to three
consecutive days the employer
may ask for written
verification.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
that did try to keep it simple
we we go back on Representative
Townsend our question he was
asking about what it would cost
and so which was soon that the
employees making ten dollars an
hour because that would be
easier to figure out and what's
the maximum number of days that
employee could be set let's say
in a calendar year.
Madam chair and representative
we do it on a consecutive twelve
month basis and
so.
I guess I don't know how to
answer that question I guess it
would be a consecutive twelve
months so I guess you could say
that's a year so ten times sixty
four hours is what it are you
asked me to multiply ten time
sixty four Madam chair
representative.
Four and six hundred forty.
And
that yes madam chair I was
scared for a second.
We're going to pick it back up
of.
Sixty four hours in a calendar
year is that what you're saying
it's challenging okay my my
experts right over how whatever
you want to figure here yes yes
madam chair and representative
okay.
The
would act February eleventh
after the house labor committee
subs it is where I came up with
the of one million dollars to
work for solutions what
settlement where you went.
Eleven well madam chair since
that time we have amended the
bill and I believe madam chair
and representative the the
portion that might have caused
some additional cost to
workforce solutions was and that
was a different sort of
enforcement mechanism which
required a level of
investigation and litigation
that has now not is no longer in
the bill so I don't believe that
is now an accurate assessment of
what it would cost workforce
solutions madam chair and
representative.
Well okay thank you madam chair
and representative
Our high school
A government classes asked me to
come and speak to them in the
past of one of the questions
that comes up is why not have a
minimum wage of fifteen dollars
an hour.
And one of the things that I
point out to the class is that
if you go to the grocery store
you go to Lowes or home depot
places like that what you're
seeing now or more of is the
chaos for you to go ahead and do
your own self checkout.
There's one employee now working
over six or right cash registers
if you will and there's only a
couple of them open so as we
make employment more expensive.
Our businesses are having to cut
their corners to go ahead and
keep their profit to be open.
And I'm afraid that this is
going to
Slow down business growth and in
fact I think some of businesses
would look at do we really need
this employees you know
and and I think that's going to
hurt the intent of this bill I
would and I think I said this in
our last committee I would
rather see us.
go to a point of we would give
you a tax return business
company if you had some type of
package like you.
Anyway that's my comments and
and why can't support it but
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and welcome back
to the committee.
You know we have Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Well I have a lot of concerns
but so.
I I guess I'm not understanding.
The reason why.
Personal time off.
Programs are are.
The debate.
Some water want to to what
you're you're doing here and why
if you have a you have to do
that have
more generous personal time off
programs why you're with them.
Want legislation that would
encourage them to do away with
those programs to simply put
into place a paid sick leave
program.
All madam chair and
representative
I guess I don't agree with the
promise that they would do away
with their other programs
What we are want to underscore
it let me step back a little bit
there was a trend I don't know
when this trend started where
companies started to say we're
just going to give you PTO and I
don't know when that occurred
madam chair and representative
but maybe it was about twenty
years ago and frankly I think we
it's it's it's under cut madam
chair and representative what we
are trying to get at which is
people need to be thinking in
terms of staying at home when
they're sick and that's what
sick leave is for and that's
what we are encouraging the use
for if you have when one house a
PTO policy especially if it is
not a terribly generous one
there is a temptation on the
part of the employee to.
Protect the small amount of PTO
they may get because remember
we're talking about some low
wage workers they may get a day
or two of PTO they're not going
to want to use it for sick leave
and you can appreciate why they
want to be able to take their
kids to the zoo were to the park
or maybe take a driving trip for
a couple of days if they can
attach it to a weekend so we
want to ensure that employers
are setting up programs that
encourage
employees to stay at home when
they're sick and and that's the
foundation of this bill it's
called the healthy workplaces
Act madam chair and
representative.
Sure that we're on that point.
Yes Sir the reason the reason
many.
corporates.
The PTO was for the flexibility
and it was something to allow
employees to do all of those
things so I I hate it it wasn't
in an effort to take away from
enrollment was to allow more
benefits.
Madam chair representative that
so I can't speak for our.
Bigger businesses I can only
speak to.
My business and the discussions
we have and I think you're
testament of twenty years ago is
is spot on
I know that
and in my law firm we have these
discussions and.
Instead of.
Having the old system of.
Worried about whether they
actually went to the doctor or
actually we're set for
you know that their spouse or or
or children were ill we we we
both completely to a
of paid time off program where
basically they that creating so
many hours
pay period and and and we don't
second guess applied they take
time off as as I see fit
I would suspect I don't know
businesses of law yet but I
suspect that if this gets.
In the.
The discussion will be taking
plates.
As to what do we do with respect
to complied with the new
stature.
With respect to our existing
policy and am I would I would be
willing to bet.
That the the policy will be one
that that brings us back twenty
years where we're going to be
more concerned about.
The very things that are in this
bill did you actually go to the
doctor did you actually have a
sort of one at home did you
actually do those things and so
you know that that's my question
if you have a more generous.
Paid time off program.
Why are you one of those
employers to maybe move back
twenty years and go to what I
would consider a more draconian
system that the.
Is going to have a lot of the
backstop Center and there this
very legislation of the of the
employers are going to do you
know that.
inquired and the expect to
receive some of our response
that yes it was actual health
related time off not just going
to the park is use a.
Be with your with your
children.
So it.
I'm concerned about
the the alternative facts and
frankly I think the I think so a
lot of employees who have have
the benefits of a of a personal
time off program a generous one.
They're not gonna want to go
back
but so that's maybe where we're
headed.
You also madam chair and and
Representative you said that
this applies the lower wage
workers actually when I read the
definitions this applies to the
all employees regardless of our
the size of a paycheck or
anything else does it not
madam chair and representative
I'm sorry if I misspoke I did
not intend to imply that it only
applied to low wage workers and
I hope I didn't say only applied
to low wage workers but many and
low wage workers grocery workers
for many of whom appear tonight
spend a great deal of time in
this committee hearing sharing
their stories are those
individuals who will benefit the
most from this this program Mr
chair and then.
Representative.
Well Representative such a
brought up the Madam chair
representative of.
Where.
Where those workers and the
grocery stores that were or
maybe yes find what would those
be you always certain on your
orders you madam chair and
representative I have no idea
and I don't know why that would
make any difference.
Well I think it would make a
difference in my questioning
did did you know whether stress
frustrating scores is a you
shopper or whether those are non
union employees that stress I
kept her here in the the words
Mr brought up I assume that's a
growth on Madam chair
representative in my experts can
correct me but I think some you
there are some Smith stores at
are you eyes and there are some
Smith stores that are not
unionized if I'm wrong about
that I would ask my experts to
correct me right.
Madam chair representative
Nibert all of this agency
grocery store workers in New
Mexico are organized are you
members of the U. of C. W..
The madam chair representative
well it seems to me that if this
is an issue that is of critical
importance to those employees
that they have the opportunities
for collective bargaining to get
to this very point.
And they don't have to.
In that state law to accomplish
that if if that's the if that's
an important point four for the
year yeah
so in our I'm a I'm a bit
concerned with with that
Here's here's a gap serves of
some of the problems the breadth
of who are employees.
If what what.
Yes.
If I hire and really it's more
widespread hires but if we hire
someone to come in our house to
watch our dog because they're
spoiled rotten.
And they work but they're there
for for more but maybe a couple
weeks of.
Do we have to keep track of that
and then keep track of their
paid sick leave and and there
are eligible for those benefits.
madam chair and Representative I
would say now.
But if I'm wrong please correct
me expert.
Experts.
While also you're wrong and I'll
show you what Madam chair
representative.
The definition of employee.
On page three winds eighteen
through twenty one.
Employee means an individual
employed by an employer included
an individual void on it part
time seasonal or temporary basis
or an individual performing
domestic service at a private
home for regeneration.
Employer.
Individual employing one or more
employees of a one time so my
hypothetical.
We're really in a hypothetical
answer it's a fact on occasion
We employed someone to come into
our home to watch dog.
I think that meet the definition
of employees do they not know
thank you madam chair and
representative I would disagree
with you they meet the
definition of an independent
contractor.
madam chair I am in these
exciting position as you are
Representative Nibert I have two
dogs to my spoiled rotten and
who might you.
Hire babysitters for on a
regular basis those are
independent contractors that is
not in the monthly.
Madam chair and representative
where is dependent contractor to
provide in this bill
independent contractor is a
common law principle that is
well established in New Mexico
law madam chair and
representative.
Let's not only our common law
of their this and statutory law.
Contractor yes my memory serves
me number one it's not defined
in this bill is that correct.
madam chair and representative
there is no definition for
independent contractor in the
bill is well established
principle in the law.
That that that principle has
undergone great change over the
last ten years the pandemic
contractor are used to be a a
way out from under a lot of
things including minimum wage
loss but those are the ability
to classify one as an
independent contractor is been
very are constrained the last
number of years your great.
Madam chair representative if
this is it there are probably
definitions within specific laws
but this law does not have a
specific definition madam chair
and representative and therefore
common law will prevail we will
not be grabbing definitions from
some on statute across the
state.
Well if I recall by definition
or the definitions that I've
seen in case law of the years of
the pandemic contractors someone
who who also about the to.
Reform certain services by
supply their own tools and the.
Supplies what have you
in my example.
That person not support anything
I supply the dog food I supply
the house I support the dog
that they're supplying labor
that's all their supply and I
would disagree with you that
under this bill.
That person that's coming to my
house to watch the dogs is an
employee and I would say that
bad employee definition is you
within the scope of your
specific definition because it
says an individual performing
domestic service and a private
all.
That's exactly what that
person's doing.
I don't think you can escape
that definition.
And I think the site will be
true for a babysitter.
The same will be true for of a
person who comes into your home
to potentially claim or do
governing or mow the lawn or you
go down the list and I think
they fall within that definition
of employee and what this bill
requires is that when that
person comes to my home I'm
going to have to keep track of.
But only what I'd pay them I'm
gonna have to keep track of of
there are sick leave and if
you're.
If there are there are for
whatever for them I guess I can
call me on vacations either
second not gonna watch dog for I
don't know what the what the
that would be but
We have a problem here that is
because of the Brett.
Your cast a wide net in your
captured everybody.
At and I am really concerned
with with the breath because I
will agree when you when you
call the.
Electricians or the plumber and
they come with their with their
our band full of tools and and
supplies their independent
contractor no doubt.
But this definition of employee
gets a lot of folks that I think
I would.
I would like to argue that
you're correct but that person's
an independent contractor.
First of all the law the person
coming in.
Every other week to clean the
house or or wash windows are
cleaned out the gutters or trim
the trees or or whatever it may
be.
But your definition.
Winds eighteen through twenty
one on page three.
Is is so broad that I don't
think you can hi independent
contractor on a lot of those
folks that the people may think
are independent contractors and
it's going to put a lot of folks
in New Mexico in a very of.
Unusual prison prevent our
position yes of.
If things get taken to the
straight because then all the
sudden.
Back in the back of our read
this right there's penalty
provisions for not adhering to
this the statute.
Once.
You know one thing that's the.
Concern me.
On several bills is that.
The current public health
emergency that we find ourselves
and.
Is.
Not only are.
Showing some so maybe.
Justified things that we need to
address but I'm concerned that
that may be.
We are reacting to hopefully
once in a century of that.
That won't ever right
for the remainder of my life
anyway.
But I'm not sure that we Dr
public policy based on hopefully
a one time time of that.
And there's there's words and
care the.
That are of concern to me
regarding this.
Public health emergency and if
you'll turn to may overpaid
This page our page and.
Following pages deal with the
public health emergency my
question is.
This refers back to a number of
bills that have come through
some other committees.
What if the governor.
And the secretary of health.
Impose a public health emergency
that is very limited in scope I
think in other committees I'd be
of use the example what happens
if that public health emergency
only affects the town of Clayton
New Mexico.
And does not.
Affect any any place outside of
Burke Burke municipal limits of
of quite.
Do the provisions in this bill.
Apply statewide development.
Representative Chandler you yes.
Sorry.
Sorry madam chair and the if we
could ask one of the attorneys
to help prepare this provision I
I would like to defer them to
them if I may madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I think that the short
answer questions yes but I don't
know if the governor is
authorized to create a public
health emergency just applicable
to one at all is so eight I
don't think that that problem
worker.
Well I would beg to differ with
you are Madam chair of and Mr
here it's
The public health emergency and
in fact all of the merchants the
acts
In fact most of the emergency is
declared in the state are very
limited in scope.
Most emergencies that we stay in
the state are because due to
floods
maybe a tornado.
Forest fire.
Flooding are which which affects
our.
Generally small areas you do
have larger merchants Senator
declared for droughts that may
affect larger portions of of the
state
but public health emergencies to
be declared for
a very small area.
Could be declared for a
municipality could be declared
in the county could be declared
in a region or or even like this
one we the entire state so.
I think.
You know my my suggestion would
be that you need to look at
that.
And determine whether churches
to apply those benefits
statewide if you have a public
health emergency that is
required but is limited in scope
maybe that.
Maybe this provision on a white
wives be limited in scope to the
area impacted by that emergency
One
Overall page nine one two.
We see a word to Sir David
commented on a couple times and
Judiciary already this year and
the word good faith appears and
I think another legislation
we've requested that that the
word good states be
change to reasonable I just
leave it up to our maybe some of
my colleagues
to maybe work with you all that
but that's something we've done
all on other bills.
Page thirty two.
Why is.
Fourteen through sixteen.
It says a basic way the sick
waves in addition to and they
paid time off provided.
By the employer that might be
used for purposes other than
those specified in the act and
I'm wondering.
The employee claimed both
personal time off for they have
a personal time off policy have
the sick we policy
for the same time all.
Madam chair representative I
apologize I'm not sure I
understand if a person is sick
in they have sick leave
available they can musically can
I use PTO I don't know what the
policy of the company would be I
and I apologize if I don't
understand your question madam
chair I guess that's a stacking
question can I get paid for for
both the sick leave them and the
personal time off for the same
time that they're out of the
office.
Madam chair representative if a
person sick they're gonna take
sick leave
I'm not sure I know why they
would take PTO on top of it they
would be losing PTO time
for time that they're already
being compensated so I don't
quite understand the question I
apologize madam chair and and
Representative well my my my
questions probably driving at
something that that is just in
my head and nobody else's but.
I was.
Was think about that you get
paid twice for the same time off
but I don't think that's a real
issue but the effect is that if
I read this right the true
intent is to.
If there's a personal time off
policy and say it get some.
Another sixty four days a year.
And you have this policy that
gives them up to sixty four days
a year I can take off a hundred
and what is at a hundred twenty
eight days under both policies
and or under both budget and and
that would be appropriate under
the terms of the staff.
Madam chair Representative.
I think so but I see my experts
poised to way and so I'm happy
to have him do that manager if
you are thank you.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I think I understand
questions do employers PTO
policy would be able to at
prohibit it essentially what
you're saying is some sort of
double dipping
all the statute is addressed
towards is the sick leave and if
an employer wants to limit the
use of PTO that they have the
ability to do that nothing in
the statute prevents that so I
don't think that would be a
problem.
Madam chair and Mr you I think
you're right I think the impact
of this will be.
Every employer in the state's
going to be looking up there
policies and we will be.
Amending or deleting those
personal time off policies to
accommodate.
This this.
Our which is where we started.
Earlier on our the question was
asked about the the Bernalillo
county a personal time off for
dense verses.
House Bill one AM and
Not that that I necessarily be
looking at Bernalillo county for
leadership but it so.
It certainly.
There's many aspects of this
bill but are much more generous
than them the Bernalillo county
policy.
Which I understand was.
maybe highly negotiated between
major employers and Bernalillo
county are possibly the unions
and possibly of members of
parliament Count staff and and
so.
Yeah in light of of some of the
things that they built
Bernalillo county.
Our.
Did anyone.
Working out of this bill.
Maybe consider some of the.
Role of time and the amount of
time that the they found to be
reasonable Bernalillo county but
seems to be more generous here
did you look at at any of those
issues when when you draft of
this legislation all.
Madam chair and representative
I'd ask one of my experts either
Shane units or Stephanie Welch
dancer that I know they are both
pretty familiar with that
ordinance.
Madam chair representative
Nibert the answer your question
is yes I hate the party a county
ordinance was reviewed as well
as in fairness statutes from
around the country Oregon
Washington California Arizona
Connecticut and I think what
happened is that a cross section
of those statutes or state in in
in as to to create a bill that
we thought would make that work
best for New Mexico I would also
defer to ms Welch on that
question.
Thank you madam chair and
representative yeah we we look
at statutes and ordinances from
around the country and of the
bill serve New Mexican workers
we think in the best way
possible.
Thank you for for those answers
Madam chair representative
experts
A couple remaining questions I
have of.
Or so we're involved lawsuits
If I read this bill correctly
there's no requirement.
To try to resolve things before
filing a lawsuit under this
there's no requirement to have
an administrative remedy process
or anything a person can go
straight to filing a lawsuit
against employers Act grant.
You madam chair and
Representative
I think it's highly unlikely
that there would not be a
discussion between an employee
and employer before a lawsuit is
filed we're talking about up to
sixty four days of sick leave
and yes I recognize there are
some penalties but the penalties
are not so great that there
would be some grand inducement
to file a suit before trying to
work out the situation with an
employer madam chair and
representative.
But but there's no requirement
to to go through administrative
process or to come to a state
agency for resolution as we see
in some other.
These employment type things for
you to file suit it if I read it
correctly.
The the other issue.
If it seems that this
legislation also covers of.
Part time employees and and that
they would what are creating the
same benefits as full time
employees and the have those
benefits and I I guess the
question is.
If you have our.
You know.
People working out.
Some white boy scout said that
work after school fast food
restaurant for a couple hours or
few hours a week they would
accrue sick time as well that
are not under this legislation.
Madam chair representative yes
they and and every employee part
time and all other a cruise up
to one hour per thirty hours
worked so if you're working on
five hours a week your accrual
rates gonna you're gonna be
accruing sick leave at a very
slow rate madam chair and
representative.
And I probably should have paid
more attention when I read it
this issue did not jump out at
me when I read it if the
employee of.
Is there any provision in here
for the employee to receive
compensation for their land use
sick time.
Madam chair representative not.
So that they all a right course
as they take their sick time the
rules roll over up to the the
maximum number of hours when
they leave the employment
If there are we hired within so
much time they can bring that
sick leave back but there's no
remuneration provision on Madam
chair representative correct you
can't cash out your sick leave I
think that's what kind of the
question around front and
gentleman.
But but if you do leave the
employment I think I think I
recall a provision Madam chair
representative that allows you
to still on the benefit of that
are accrued sick leave if you're
hired within a certain time
period after you leave that one
Madam chair representative
correct.
So on seasonal workers.
If I hire seasonal workers for
for.
And.
There working maybe.
A few weeks out of each year
them.
I higher back up potentially if
if there's not the duration
issue but they keep coming back
then they can keep growing the
second wave up to up to the
maximum Wilder in the statute
that correct Madam chair
representative I think that's
correct but keep in mind that
sixty four hours eight days
right up to eight days.
What we're which which in my
case meant by the maybe half of
the time that I need to.
Madam chair representative
This one of those bills that
that the.
Hi.
You know I'm I'm not opposed to.
sick leave I think this is a
little bit on the generous side
but.
I really think that it's going
to have some.
Some are adverse impacts in the
state of New Mexico particularly
in a year that our businesses
and employees as we as we heard
the testimony are are are
suffering.
Certainly the the bigger
companies serve have.
A lot of big companies have been
able to thrive in the.
In this
Shut down environment.
A lot of the smaller businesses.
Are barely hanging on.
Many of them aren't hanging on
at all and have given up for a
given up further business and
there's some that are remaining
that are questioning whether
they can survive and.
I'm not sure that.
Right now is the time to be of.
Engaged in in this particular
discussion I I understand the
reason why it's brought up now I
just the from the business
standpoint I'm I'm really
concerned about the piling what
in essence is more cost on to
our small businesses and.
And the impact that's going to
be I also think that what you're
going to see an outcome that's
not.
Considered in this legislation
as you have.
A number of employees.
Who are benefiting from personal
time off policies that are are
very generous and I think the
impact of this legislation is
going to be to either restrict
those policies or to eliminate
those policies to come in line
with this legislation and and I
think that's probably a future
here we're gonna we're gonna
hear how
how employees may not like the
outcomes of some of those
decisions
with that so I will.
I will be quiet and
See how this comes out thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative thank you next up
we have Representative I have
gone.
You madam chair from I will not
keep us here for another thirty
minutes on the state of the
bill.
One question in the comment okay
and representative madam chair
and then we gonna vote then we
can was this will need.
Madam chair representative
my gosh yes I mean if I mean to
say Representative Alcon thank
you for that question in.
As I mentioned in my opening
remarks there are hundreds of
countries who have programs like
this in it
in states in this country in
this country that have programs
like this and we need it because
we need to encourage people to
stay home to take care of
themselves to take care of their
families and keep the public and
their co workers safe so thank
you for that question madam
chair and representative thank
you thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative and
that's something that I'm you
know because over and over here
because of the pandemic now
we're doing this and we
shouldn't do this because of the
pandemic.
Honestly I believe that we
should have a had a sick leave
policy at least fifteen years
ago and every so often I hear
the COVID one we didn't drive
business.
We need business partners
businesses being around for the
last three hundred years and
they haven't done anything to do
about legislators can do
something that business will not
do and that is stake here the
people that work for business.
So.
One of the other things that I
heard a lot last night in the
run up my mind is if somebody
hasn't sick leave policy not our
PTO policy or whatever it is
that they call it is there any
reason why they get a lot of
improvement with this bill and
the policy that they have now.
Madam chair representative.
There's no reason why they
can't.
Thank you and that's that's one
of the things that I could not
understand the question it seems
to me thank you thousand
employer and I had a good plan
in place and is we okay we're I
would find a way to incorporate
this will lessen the brands that
I could keep my good employees
with me and it would we have to
stay here with me is going
somewhere else when they would
be treated better with this kind
of plan so that's the only
comment I have madam chair I
just wanted to say that just the
other night.
That is just a few nights after
return this bill and labour I
was miss and some of the
employees over there that'd be
on the back because they're
really hoping we get this done.
So with that madam chair thank
you.
Thank you next we have
Representative chair madam
cheesy.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for this
bill.
And
I'm I'm just just
a little bit of the question but
I do have a couple of COVID if
you've already answered it I
don't need an answer I can get
it later but one of the
One of the suggestions I've
heard from the critics is that
there should be some variation
for smaller employers did you
consider that to where are we
with that
Madam chair representative thank
you for that question and now I
think you're the first person
who asked that question and our
I think our rationale is the the
same reason is that exist for
small employers as small as
larger employers employees need
not come to work when they're
ill they need to protect their
employer they need to protect
their co workers so in our view
madam chair and representative
and madam chair.
such a distinction is is not
well founded.
And one of the things that
I
believe I.
I I thought might be good to
point out is that the part time
employee accrues the same number
of sick days or however it works
but it's all proportional
because if they're only working
four hours a day.
And they miss a day because
they're sick.
They're only getting paid for
four hours it's not like you're
getting it and our.
Credit right madam chair and and
madam chair precisely.
Yes.
One of the things that and I
think that she might be able to
answer this question madam
chair.
I I think one of the reasons we
heard from a lot of Smith's
employees because I've got will
a lot of emails is that those
who worked full time don't have
the sickly that's what I'm
gathering so they've bargained
but they're only bargaining with
the full time workers is that
correct.
She.
Madam chair eight I it and then
that this is a PPO policy but
the thing about Smith's PTO
policy is that there's a bidding
process you have to give two
weeks notice sometimes the size
of the black that may be taken
office limited and it greatly
affects the ability of both full
time and part time employees
just to take a regular sick we
day and.
You there are there are
guarantees in the proposed
statute which are not in this
agency sick leave or paid time
off policy on it.
I I have a feeling there was
something there aren't you can't
plant two weeks in advance to
get the stomach.
And you definitely do not want
to be going to work all.
Circumstances.
So.
I guess I was I I wondered if
you needed the public health
emergency section and I I really
the.
Their staff.
That.
This pandemic is not just a one
time event this is the case it
Tostrup.
We lost more than five hundred
thousand people in this country
I have found myself thinking.
The inequities that the pandemic
exposed in our society that
health disparities.
I just wanted.
So.
Now.
It's a good idea it I have
thought to myself it we don't
just want to back to normal we
want a better normal.
We want to help their society
and I actually I had
I listen to.
I talked to some people and.
There was a food service worker
who was required to go to war.
With COVID.
And that person was preparing
food for you would be to pick
up.
That was not a good public
health decision.
And
so.
You know sometimes things are
seem onerous and difficult I.
There there if you don't correct
and it's bad policy.
This is one of these.
These areas.
So.
I still got the impression from
some of the folks that they
would like to continue to try to
like it better and I know that's
kind of your approach
Representative Chandler
Representative Rubio represented
by Bakari out okay I'm sure
there are some creative
solutions.
You will look about along the
way.
I have no further questions
madam chair thank you thank you
Representative chair Chasey back
to Representative Townsend for
the second time if you might
have your hand up.
Ideas I just want to make sure
under the something is is.
And I I just would like this
madam chair and representative
is our expert with us also.
the bargaining unit manager for
the employees the smiths.
Madam chair representative I
don't believe so but I will ask
either of my experts you know
state whether they're the
bargaining unit manager for
Smith's.
Madam chair Representative
Townsend I'm not familiar with
that term I'm not a lawyer in
private practice here in New
Mexico I I represent a lot of
you needs here in the state of
New Mexico that are the.
Are you employed by the you see
you Representative thank you and
that is also the negotiator with
Smith's I mean are you involved
in that negotiation and all are
have very I'm.
Madam chair representative
counting yes.
Representatives I do want to
keep today's lengthy debate to
the scope of the legislation in
front of us.
So I appreciate it and if I
appreciate that it's it's also
very important maybe that we
know we're dealing with thank
you.
Next we have Representative
McQueen.
Madam chair the if you're ready
I'm ready to make motion.
Seeing no further discussion I
have a motion
Representative McQueen I believe
that's a do pass on Madam yes
I passed on the house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute and they do
pass on the house Judiciary
Committee substitute.
For house bill twenty thank you
Representative I couldn't
remember what committee heard
this before us on the spot we
have a second Representative
Michael and.
Any further discussion on this
HJC Committee substitute.
I see none let's please call the
roll.
yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
No.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative McQueen yes.
No.
No ma'am.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
All yes.
Seven.
One.
Passed house bill twenty
committee substitute.
If I heard that correctly I
believe it was you have a due
process on the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for H. B.
twenty with that in the in the
affirmative and for both in the
negative.
Was a little bit hard to hear.
Congradulations and before it
returned to madam chair to see
if you just want to offer a
quick comment I so much
appreciate the intention of this
legislation I am proud to
support this I appreciated some
of the previous commenters
naming what this means to hold
moral values for workers and for
our families and for our
communities and we certainly are
feeling that
at home these days as we all
work to survive the COVID
nineteen pandemic I just want to
offer as you continue
deliberations that potentially
had to the floor I do have a bit
of a disagreement and and get
stuck in this philosophy about
what workers need and I imagine
it's probably a combination of
sick time and PTO I think of
those Mamas who deserve to
chaperoning kids field trip I I
think of those workers that
deserve some time to figure out
how they provide their own of
the place in peace and purpose
in the world so I appreciate
that that this is aligned and
focused on on sick leave but I
certainly hear the concerns of
employers and workers across New
Mexico and hope that we might
continue to find a way to
potentially provide flexibility
that would require some some
sick time and then potentially
the same a cruel the hours in
other we've but no response
needed I'm grateful to support
this legislation night and madam
chair Chasey if you would like
to go on the next bill.
You.
Thank you.
You all very much what was think
about I give you a chance to get
off.
Committee members the audience I
wanted to let you know we're
going to do Representative
McQueen spell it should be
really simple one minute just to
more simple ones before perfect.
The next big one.
So go slightly out of order but
we're gonna go with
Representative members I had
Representative.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair members of the committee
house bill one fifty three will
provide the public with more
relevant and timely information
about how we fund our campaigns
it does that in three ways first
in a lines are reporting periods
with our actual election cycle
us to lose two or more closely
connected second it simplifies
the supplemental reporting so.
If you get a Larson make
donation close to the election
date and you have to file a
supplemental report I sat in
third it creates a new report
page full page I called session
supplemental so if you receive
an unsolicited contributions
during the prohibited period
at the end of the session of the
seventies after the end of the
session you would file a report
on that and with that I'd be
happy to answer any questions.
Just the audience is there
anyone here in support
also one fifty three we'll do a
little quick little called say
yes if you are in favor and no
you're not.
Fifteen seconds.
Time's up we have twelve people
in favor to it opposition.
Is there anyone on either side
who wishes to speak.
Kerry process from the secretary
of state.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Kerry for us kids
that legislative affairs
director for the secretary of
state's office and our office
supports any effort in promoting
increased disclosure and we also
think that bill has the
opportunity to simplify some of
the administrative effort by
standardizing the dollar
threshold for the supplemental
reports that candidates are
required to file thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Sydney yes and I am the
associate director with common
cause New Mexico we would like
to thank the sponsor for
bringing for this important
piece of legislation and for
working to ensure that this does
not create an undue burden on
any candidates running for
office while reducing the
influence of special interests
in our elections is of utmost
importance to ensuring inclusive
democracy working to expand
disclosure for who is financing
our elections crucial to
restoring the public trust in
our government in a recent
survey that common cause
conducted eighty three percent
of voters believe strengthening
campaign finance laws to provide
more transparency would be an
effective way to improving
transparency in our government
we would must work to ensure
that we restore the public's
trust in our government and
elections and the public access
through increased disclosure
requirements and for all these
reasons we hope you support
also won fifty three thank you.
Thank you let's go to the
committee now.
Representative Nibert.
Your question thank you madam
chair
Madam chair representative we
talked a little bit about this
the couple weeks ago and.
You know more Irish the more I
read it the more I I really
think we need that three words
to it.
And my suggestion would be good
for line nineteen.
After the word received.
I think we need to add the the
words.
And not return.
To address the question of what
happens if you receive one and
you return it back to the person
because you don't want to accept
any donations during the the
blackout period just to avoid
any appearance I think if you
return it you should not have to
report it yep the language as
Representative.
Would require you to report it
even if you return it so I.
If you're agreeable I would make
the motion to to have those
three words are.
Thank you madam chair
representative Nibert if I may
yes Sir then managers and I
would I posed this to miss first
because and we can well I'll
just leave it at that let me
read her response to me which
email me that's it for your
second scenario which was the
scenario you describe.
If you send the check directly
back without depositing it
holding it or otherwise using it
first you don't need to reported
as quote received.
Madam chair representative white
point I have never even
considered that reporting
anything like that and I
returned Senator checks this
time never crossed my mind.
And I don't think it would with
the language the amendment.
Never miss a member at our
correct me if I'm wrong madam
chair representative.
Is to make it clear what happens
during that probation period it
was to tighten up the current
language.
And.
This language says if you
receive the monetary
contributions during the
prohibited areas you shall
reported.
And to me it makes it clear
madam chair that you would be
obligated to report it even
though you return it because
received and common parlance
means it's you that you have
possession of it allow you to
return it you still received it
at and so I would like to
clarify it to to all thank you
our report contributions that
are restated.
And.
The positive or.
Not those that you received and
return.
And I'm glad to hear that the
madam chair I'm glad to hear
that Sir processes would not
that maybe
our crack our knuckles for that
one but the.
You know we have another bill
basically giving the ethics
commission
some of forty over this stuff
and I I just don't want to go
down that road you know of a Hey
are retarded yeah but you
received the.
That's that's all I'm trying to
do is clarify.
Madam chair on that point.
Go ahead.
I also don't like to play the
hypothetical game but something
I am considering is potentially
what if the other party the
contributor did report it like
where might that leave us if
potentially the check was
returned it had it been received
yet or it you know it has to go
up and down their accounting
department so just another
dynamic that might play into the
situation I wouldn't want to
look as if I'd failed to
disclose something in that
scenario.
And.
Madam chair I might.
Yes go ahead your bills
Representative going.
So.
Madam chair representative
Cadena.
People who make routine local
contributions don't need to
report them people who need to
report them aren't allowed to
make them during
So so there's some protection
built in there.
Madam chair representative
Nibert to your point I don't
think it's necessary I really
don't I checked with the
secretary of state's office they
confirmed my understanding that
if you if the check arrives in
the mail and you send it back
it's not receive does the way
they interpret.
So I see your point is if it's
that important I'm going to
accept that amendment.
I do think the amendment would
be need to be made into places
in that same paragraph since we
used to work receive twice.
Madam chair representative in
that regard I.
I did all my it's a paper here I
did rather than a two points but
but I struck it out of the first
one because.
Online seventeen it says
received during the the the
prohibited period of and that
says a reporting individual cell
file a report of all monetary
contributions receive and then I
think you can just say and not
return
during the.
Program of the period because
the first one
You don't have any control over
I you know it's it's just if you
received the.
The second part of that sentence
that requires some action on
your part.
Then divert if that's what it
takes to get your bills are
going to accept that.
Are you by voted to rewards.
Except that is a friendly
amendment I believe
Representative Cook second that
seconded the motion or at least
try to.
A
second again.
So it's a friendly amendment
then Representative yes mentor.
And we have a I'm so we're
Representative night partners
demanded Representative ****
second the amendment.
Other questions on the
amendment.
Which discuss no discussion with
any objection to.
J..
Representative Fritz precise
amendment.
Keep us all out of trouble okay
seeing that is adopted.
I don't see any other hands
raised madam chair all movements
do pass on house bill one fifty
three as a matter that.
Madam seconds that
Representative Townsend is hand
is not now yeah.
You
chair representative claim IT
just to make sure on that
receive four four
For some of us that.
Don't go home.
And you know every night and and
the and we may have things in
the mail box for two three four
weeks before we know it.
Is that problematic.
Madam chair representative on
that's the other question I
posed to mistrust because inter
answer that that was my first
scenario her answer was since
the check in the post box.
Maybe this can since the check
is in the post box we would
considered it receives so you
take possession of the check
which would be after the session
so this is actually creates an
interesting situation where the
check might arrive during the
session but under the language
of this bill you would not
receive it so you won't have to
file supplemental report and you
can still keep it once you got
home and actually took
possession of it and I actually
had for some sort of trouble by
that but I do you know if you
don't know about it and it's in
your post office box this
includes table the legislation
anyway.
So you're not no problem.
Okay thank you Sir thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
Is there any objection to the do
passed.
Motion for hospital one fifty
three as amended.
See non should pre show all
members present voting in the
affirmative you have to pass
Representative McQueen thank
you.
Okay Representative Lewis would
you be ready with your bill
house bill two thirty one.
Representative Lewis.
Right let's just go to
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
She's
Start house bill ninety one
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
I told her I would text just a
moment.
Okay great.
Should.
So we're.
Okay Representative sure here
we're gonna do house bill ninety
one.
Welcome to House Judiciary.
Thank you all for.
Letting me present this evening
I know it's tough your tire I
have a vote expert witness who
is also waiting to be let in his
name is Mr Padilla.
I don't know if he's still on.
Let's see.
Mr Padilla.
Robert W. yeah.
He was ready he is working.
Madam chair members of the
committee I am on the call.
Yes he's here.
Go ahead I'm thank you very much
actually what I'm bringing years
house bill ninety one is assumed
the a an opportunity for the
mental court to
increased its mediation
cost from it's a ten dollar
increase and it doesn't have a
an impact on the general fund
but I move the for two of my
expert witness because he knows
absolutely everything there is
to know about this he represents
metro court.
Do you mind if he speaks.
We'll go right ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Robert
W. on the CEO of the
metropolitan court the card is
proposing a change to and M. S.
A. one nine seven eight section
thirty five dash six dash one
increasing the mediation fee
from five dollars to fifteen
dollars per person filing fee
the total civil filing fee will
increase from seventy seven
dollars to eighty seven dollars.
And with that I'll tell you a
little bit about the program
these in years past we reviewed
over eight hundred and twenty
seven cases annually this year
with the pandemic we're looking
at increasing that.
Of this program has gotten
national recognition we also
serve as a mentor court for all
the other courts in the state we
coordinate with over fifty
volunteers.
and we also have a process in
place for those individuals who
can't afford to finally be to
get the to get it for free.
And with that I'll go ahead and
stand for questions.
Madam chair we're ready for
questions.
Is there anyone here in the
audience who is in favor of
those still remaining.
If so please
Yes on the call that would be up
for fifteen seconds up here in
opposition please vote now and
madam chair it always seems like
there's a choir of angels
singing behind you when you
speak I don't know if it's a
neck or what.
It is my text message
Sorry.
But.
Okay we had.
Fifty eight percent favor forty
two percent in opposition.
Is there anyone in the audience
who wishes to speak on this
bill.
One minute.
Okay let's see do we have here.
Sen.
But Czecho.
Madam chair members of the
committee setting up chocolate
the administrative office of the
support of administrative office
of the courts I'm here to
support house bill ninety one
which is part of the Courts
unified budget thank you.
Thank you very much I don't see
any other hands to let's go to
the committee members now.
Madam chair I move too fast.
Mexico moves that you asked we
have a second for Representative
Lewis is that our discussion.
Seeing none are quick to call
the roll.
The local yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative cooks available
Representative Cook yes.
I was gonna vote no for you
Representative Cook.
Eleven yeah.
Okay.
Thank you madam thank you very
much Representative.
In the choir of angels.
That's what it was.
Okay members of thank you all.
Yeah that.
Representative Lewis is with us
so we'll do hospital to thirty
one right now.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members and stuff
that way when you called on me
earlier but I am ready to
present house bill two thirty
one and this is something that
we actually address during the
special session when we were
trying to ensure that native
American and had access to
polling places on tribal lands
generally
Polling places must be open to
the public but during the
pandemic we saying that.
I have a close their borders to
ensure that they can try to
maintain the health and safety
of our tribal members during the
interim time and what this bill
does is it seeks to accomplish
ensuring that that station for
and that tried well have to work
with the county clerk if if
things are going to change.
It and such events as a public
health emergency and I believe
that.
Kerry factor is on the line as
an expert or madam secretary of
state but if anyone on that
appreciate if you're ranger hand
otherwise.
Okay
maybe not.
But madam chair I am I am I
stand for questions.
Would you like to elevate Mandy
Vigil to the paddle so that we
can have her with us for
questions.
Thank you.
Thank you did you want to add
anything to the representatives
Introduction.
Sure after I'm sorry good
even chair members of the
committee my name's Mandy Vigil
I am the state election director
and here on behalf of the
secretary of state's office I
think that the the sponsored an
excellent job of highlighting
the provision in this important
legislation but I would like to
say that we are supportive
because it into hello it
provides for protection for
native American voters.
Sure that we can encourage a
voter participation in those
tribal areas and from an
administrative perspective an
important change that I want to
make sure the committee has an
awareness is that it does change
a deadline a for tribal
governments actually request an
early voting site I'm prior to
the existing language actually
requires that they actually make
our current request a year in
advance of a general election
and we've seen it during this
past cycle that just wasn't a
reasonable timeline so this
would actually change that so
that they had up until a hundred
days he for a statewide election
to actually request at the site
on one of those tribal land so
with that I'm happy to stand for
any additional questions.
Thank you very much let's go to
the audience and see if we have
folks here who want to weigh in
on either side we'll have a call
for fifteen seconds.
And if you're in favor of house
bill two thirty one please vote
yes and if you are an opposition
place but now.
We're getting there we go.
Here we go hospital to thirty
one.
We had a strong majority in
favor.
Ninety six percent ninety two
percent to eight percent.
Let me go to the.
to the audience and see if
anyone would like to speak on
the bill whichever.
In favor or oppose first amber
cardio.
Go ahead.
Register yourself and introduce
yourself.
Pardon me madam chair thank you
so much for that up madam chair
members of the committee my name
is amber Committee amber Karia I
am from the public of the gonna
and I'm speaking on behalf of
common cause New Mexico I am one
of the members of the early
foundations of the native
American voters Alliance and now
the new New Mexico native vote
and native American voter
education project I rise in
strong support of age between
two thirty one this legislation
guarantees voters residing on
sovereign land a polling it
guarantees them the chance to
vote in person at a polling
place during times such as this
which we never know when an
emergency is going to happen of
one of the things we did at
common cause after the primary
is we conducted a study of how
many of the people were impacted
in our tribal nations and in
some places up to thirty nine
percent of voters the the amount
of voting of voters dropped in
areas by close to forty not
forty percent and so I just you
know I think this is the bill is
really important for a couple of
reasons it it gives the tribe's
more authority over there voting
power.
Thank you very much Richard
Mason.
Richard Mason go hand.
Just under your spell.
I'm madam chair members a
Judiciary Committee committee my
name miss Mason I'm sure the
action committee of the league
of women voters of New Mexico
and I'm here to speak in support
of H. B. two thirty one the
league supports programs of the
delegated voting by all people
and H. B. two thirty one does
just that that was proven during
the twenty twenty election in
addition it recognizes the
sovereignty of our tribes and
pueblos in their right to
control access to their land for
all those reasons we we are to
committee to pass given to
passed H. B. two thirty one
thank you.
Thank you.
Chavez.
Just tell me your order please.
Yes I go yeah I think what's the
help madam chair members of the
committee I am also Chavis
demand born for Kewa Pueblo here
is the executive director for
animated vote and they've
education project during the
pandemic we worked hard to
advocate to keep the polls open
for people election co during
the primary made this very
difficult and oftentimes unsafe
but the temporary protections
granted by the special session
Senate bill for help to address
these issues we know first hand
that these changes work to help
prevent further voter
disenfranchisement during the
general election and thanks to
these changes may many of our
communities like could you do
that come on to how delay were
able to create solutions that
work for their communities this
bill is not first prescriptive
is does not force the tribes to
do anything if they don't have
the infrastructure to support it
is simply allows them the
opportunity to problem solve for
themselves please vote to pass
HB two thirty one.
Thank you undress her on a.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Andrea Serrano and the executive
director of a lady for all the
reasons stated we stand in
support of house bill two thirty
one and we think the Sanchez for
bringing this bill forward I
also think the community groups
who are leading the way in
protecting voting rights on
tribal lands thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair I just spoke thank
you
okay I'm.
The we scare them.
Good evening madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is risk at all the legislative
and political organizer with the
Sierra Club you're gonna chapter
representing thirty five
thousand members offer at New
Mexico and we strongly support
this bill for other reasons I
have to mention the same last
year I was able to partake in a
project to do a study of the
affected native communities and
during the election.
So this kind of those really
important and you know just give
access to people to be able to
get to the polls in a safe way
so I just ask you to please go
yes thank you very much.
Thank you Carl Crawford.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Carla
creating Hafer with the center
for civic policy in one sentence
part of this legislation we
believe that this piece helps
make democracy and elections
more accessible to voters and
therefore have always as
Representative as we others have
already noted this bill has
already worked in and has helped
increase voter turnout with that
we are just a minute so the
committee to pass this bill
thank you very much.
Judy Matthews.
Hi madam chair members of the
committee Judy Matthews with New
Mexico working families party we
stand with our allies that
animated votes and others
community advocates who have
spoken tonight in support of H.
B. two thirty one we urge a do
pass thank you all for your time
tonight.
Thank you.
Martinez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Marshall Martinez
executive director of equality
New Mexico the statewide LGBTQ
civil rights organization.
LGBTQ people of that on a long
journey toward liberation and
many of those steps have
included actions taken at the
ballot box we believe LGBTQ New
Mexicans and all New Mexicans
will reach our liberation
because of greater access to
democracy that includes and is
especially true for our
indigenous siblings and for that
reason we're proud to support
this bill.
Thank you we're ready to go back
to the committee now.
And let me see who I've got on
my list.
First on.
Representative Nibert and
representative Ely that
represent about calls.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative or Madam
chair madam chair of thank you
for for making the one amendment
that we talked about it state
government but the other issue
that I hope that we work with
addresses further down in the
amendments in context it's so.
The which is inserted language
toward the end of that
paragraph.
Of.
Basically it talks about that
there will be one polling
location within the boundaries
of innovation tribe or pueblo of
and then there's language well
but above that says regardless
of whether voters residing
outside the boundaries of the
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
are able to access such polling
location.
But my question that my question
now is how do we how do we.
Resolves the.
Need for and the the statutory
requirements that you have.
Workers from the county clerk's
office that are are at the
location you have whole watchers
potentially all challengers and
other people there are
that may or may not be tribal
members yeah and I'm just wanted
to know how that the in
practical terms would work if if
we see ourselves in in another
situation like this maybe maybe
the
Representative maybe mandate and
FY and all that Madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Nibert I can
actually speak to this has as a
result of having gone through
it.
With one of the tribes that I
work with and so during that
time.
There are security access points
that allow visitors which also
includes employee to come into
the Pueblo or the tried and so
at that point for example with
employees we have employee
badges.
If if the visitor such as a poll
worker or fat Act or let's say a
construction worker that's
coming in to do construction
work they will have fell out
visitor's permit in advance with
the governor's office and so now
have a permit issued to them
upon entrance into the Pueblo it
and in my case and my employer
did and the police.
Law enforcement would be
checking for those individuals
to ensure that they are
committed on during that time of
closure.
So madam chair representative
that will be one of the things
that would be an item of
discussion between the the.
I want to do and the county
clerk's here and bringing forth
that the election and that would
be covered so there's there's no
there's no desire to the surface
there be a different procedure
that would would be of all.
The dress that.
Madam chair and representative
fast track okay that that that
resolved so one remaining
question that that that I had to
and I guess if I understood that
last time I would have voted for
it so thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Representative Eli thank you
madam chair madam chair I just
really have one question in
Kurdish the do we need an
emergency clause for this the
upcoming election.
Madam chair and representative
You know that's a really good
question I hadn't thought about
I'm kind of at the point where
I'm seeing the light at the end
of the tunnel but that's not
fair and and I think it would be
great to add an emergency
emergency calls at this point
just because we don't know
what's going to happen.
Madam chair on I thank you madam
chair to now madam chair
judiciary
I'm happy to continue to move
the bill forward something.
For your whatever the chair for
for.
You know I think you could do an
emergency clause on the floor.
It goes to the floor right.
Madam chair that seems more
efficient but are keeping up and
put in the margins to cost on a
voting on Friday.
Okay.
All right that's all I have
thank you madam chair.
Representative Michael.
Thank you
madam chair.
News.
Question is.
First of all let me just say
that I really like what you
hear.
My question is and what I found
out in a primary.
Was he was embarassing county
of money using my counties an
example.
One of the following places in
my district which is our native
American land.
Was shut down completely.
As.
The people that normally go
there and be able to motive
there for ever and ever and ever
the only place they found the
speaker of the lord and said
you'll less go sixty miles away
too low.
That's far away he the county
seat is on the next polling
location for them Boller
accounting what's.
So how do we notified this the
ball.
Only place is going to be shut
down because that was not done
yes my god there and I think
some of those people that we're
going to go low there wasn't too
low that morning.
They had no idea this was
happening and they were not
prepared to travel sixty miles
to go.
So how are we going to notify
them when we do something like
this.
Madam chair and representative
I'm gonna differs to Vigil.
Madam chair representative I'm
quite a appreciate the question
I know that you have brought
this to our attention and it is
an important issue I believe
what I heard you speak to what
an experience during the primary
election and and this type of
legislation and what we had in
place through the emergency
provisions of SB four I'm here
to help to mitigate that issue
it provides us with the tools
and resources that we need to
work together with the tribal
government accounting clerk and
our office to make sure that we
are not and put in a position
where we can't handle some of
those unexpected challenges of
what we saw during the pandemic
so this would find that there is
a requirement for those tribal
locations to remain open the
only way that something would be
closed down its act request of
the government if they deem that
necessary to ensure the safety
of their voters and it would
also provide you know we also
have provisions that provide for
voting convenience centers
across the state so that a voter
can vote at any location during
any statewide election at this
point in time.
Notification Sarah I want to
transfer your exact question we
work with stakeholders we have
very close communication with
the tribal government and I
think that improved from the
primary to the general election
so that we have an awareness and
we could utilize any little we
had available yes the online
portal for voters social media
disincentive communication to
ensure that the clerk also
provided that information so as
soon as we have that we use
those means of communication to
try to get that messaging out
and and I think I would also say
that going forward there may be
some opportunity to consider
something along the lines of
text messaging or something to
that effect going forward.
Thank you madam chair and
corrections here.
I mean this one for you seeing
that I'm that I'm talking about
I believe it's I think we voting
questions there and then of
being around around thirty
percent which I thought was
really sad because that is a
really strong precinct good
making difference in an account.
Not so that is my question of
course is you're you're talking
about dismissing.
A lot of money the rules of the
road in this area I mean they
don't even have phone service
for cell phone service or.
You really do you the text
messages you might thinking this
is something like this is going
to happen we have by the way
that these people can be
notified so that they're not
surprised then that's what
happened that last election so.
I leave it in your hands and I
just hope it doesn't happen
again.
Thank you madam chair.
Pleasure of the committee.
Madam chair moving to pass.
Two passed from representative
Ely a second from representative
Armstrong.
Is there further discussion.
I don't know for sure it who is
here I want to just go with that
call the roll please.
Welcome yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Mr speaker.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Lewis.
We.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
You have
to pass a bill to thirty.
Very good.
Now we're going to go back to
our agenda we're going to do.
So what do you love in that
house bill one eighty three and
then house bill two twenty six
we can get if we can survive
tonight.
So let's go to one eleven.
This was a rollover.
So I want the Sanchez to explain
we're not going back for public
comment on this so the sponsors
need to explain the
To the committee.
Okay we should have.
There should be on.
We've got a.
To secretary a committee
analysis.
Updated based on all right on
the changes and and this is the
committee sub or is that
Madam chair it is a committee
says this committee so okay so
let's make sure we're we've got
the right one.
Its share file and it is the two
oh two number.
To
nine.
Nine five nine point four.
Yes that's correct Madam chair
okay so members that's what
we're on.
Okay.
Go ahead Representative.
Thank you madam chair and I've
if I may
promote our experts we have
absolutely.
Thank you madam chair Karen
Myers is in the audience and I
don't know if she was still able
to join us but Maria Griego is
also there and Rachel Biggs.
Very good.
Thank you madam chair would you
like me to go over the changes
to the committees of.
Yes please.
Thank you madam chair so
Many of you have seen some of
this Alice's so I don't want to
The labor anything that you've
already been exposed to we did
take many of your comments
suggestions
at its to hard Madam chair
representative thank you for
the.
Very great conversation
Previously so of first and
foremost madam chair we've
declared the emergency properly
in this committee some when it
came when it comes to what's
what a renters are still being
affected by regarding the
pandemic and the renewal of
their leases
then we that we can go through
it Intel chair I don't I guess I
can go line by line I'm sure but
the big picture madam chair is
that we can talk about some of
the changes that were made and
all all actually let
Maria Griego or Karen bags talk
about some of the bigger picture
changes that it referred to some
of the questions that we had so
I'm not just going picking
between the words that we
changed madam chair
representative.
Point out to the members that
are could cost we did it.
It.
What else table.
I believe that you were gonna
take us to the analysis
available and share.
So members might we confirm that
we can find the right many of an
analysis and share.
It's the committee analysis not
majority or minority and it's
got everything.
That's correct I'm sure that's
why I could I could read to you
Madam chair representative but
being cognizant of everyone's
time I think the questions that
we had we'd love to answer but
we don't want to get into
anything we don't have to but we
did resolve a lot of the issues
that were brought up in
particular I think that some of
you remember many folks worried
about presenting a receipt that
was signed for any payment we've
limit that to cash payments
madam chair representatives when
we talk about the twenty first
century and many of us paying
Representative with our with our
apps and whatnot that sufficient
to change that we've clarified
some of the question about when
to complain to to and to whom
regarding utility companies we
clarified have complete
mechanism would work and so it's
not just about you know I have a
leaky fridge and now I've made a
complaint and now it's made
landlords what we clarified that
Madam chair representative so
that if a complaint was made and
the landlord did not respond to
it
as far as the line of
communication goes then we can
then we clarified
How that works madam chair
representatives
so some of the bigger picture
questions that were asked rather
than be anecdotal madam chair
representative I think we can
to questions on the changes and
we are ready to respond to
anything that committee has.
So first on my list.
Is Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Romero I appreciate the work
you've done this bill and I I
appreciate the.
The direction this bill is going
up but I still have concerns and
it's a bill that
Things changing is that it tries
to do so much it's hard to focus
on
the like get each of the various
parts just right because there's
there are so many of them so I
just want to get through
relatively quickly at the Google
question a couple quick
comments.
Each team
The.
K. A. on the side of.
This is
I don't see landlord tenant work
it says that they're not require
the tents are required to
exhaust administrative remedies
prior to asserting a defense I
just that sounded weird to me
like why.
If you're getting sued.
We do have to exhaust the mills
the mystery remedy if that's if
you're starting a defense other
donors and.
Madam chair representative I'll
defer to my experts on that.
And I think just for
clarification madam chair I
think Representative I miss
Myers still can't and you know
she can and you're not.
Madam chair I don't see
Myers and we're.
Madam chair representative so I
I'm happy to feel this question
is the other expert on the call.
It will.
Thank you at Madam chair
representative from the claim.
So.
Parents that we mustn't.
It
needs to be promoted she doesn't
need to answer this question but
she does need to be more.
Raise your hand in the last.
Go ahead though miscreants are
you can work will work through
that while you're getting your.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and I apologize
that my toddler is crying in the
background.
Please forgive me
the representative madam chair
of the reason for that at
provision
That the at at ten it would not
have to exhaust administrative
remedies is because we have the
provision
About the at income a source of
income discrimination violating
Human Rights Act so under normal
circumstances and violation of
the Human Rights Act would be.
Plate would be made with at the
department of workforce
solutions Madam chair
representative and and that
could be a long process I think
Mr speaker that mentioned the
last hearing that could take
about eighteen months so the
reason for that language is
simply that if a landlord
brought an addiction case
against a tenant Madam Madam
chair representative the tenant
and the tenant alleged that the
reason for the eviction was a
retaliation because of the
source of income so for example
a tenant had been a private care
before and now would be getting
as
a voucher and the landlord tried
to evict for that reason the
tenant could raise that as a
defense in the eviction hearing
as opposed to having to exhaust
all administrative remedies
through the department of
workforce solutions.
Madam chair representative
Romero in the street I I I
appreciate that I don't have a
problem with that I just have
never heard of having to exhaust
administrative remedies to raise
a defense to the action so I
was.
He caught my attention.
Madam chair representative
Romero thank you for addressing
the on page twenty either H. the
of the receipt language I still
think it's quite right I don't
think it has to be a hand
written receipt.
I think it needs to be physical
receipt so could be pre printed
it could you know.
We're not we're not actually
asking people to hand write
things I just think that's a
wording issue.
Madam is ever more on page
twenty two.
Winds ten through thirteen.
nothing in this language has
been stricken nothing in this
section separate claim the owner
for retaining portions of the
deposit for non payment of rent
or utilities repair work for
other legitimate damages.
I mean isn't that the purpose of
the deposit.
Is that is that language
coverage elsewhere.
Madam chair representative
that's correct it is covered
elsewhere and I'll defer to our
experts to point that out Madam.
Madam chair representative I
don't know if mismatches able to
get on if not if Tom pretty men
is on the panel this would be a
question for him I think.
Madam chair he's under Thomas
P..
He has.
Okay let's get Thomas the here.
I know I've called in before.
When I have a client with that.
Member tenant issues.
Can you hear me yes we can.
Hi this is Tom pretty soon
and is gonna turn you Mexico
legally it's Albuquerque office
and the provision here is much
clarified in owner which in a
positive merely need to send an
itemized statement of the
deductions for the deposit
within thirty days of the latter
of the tenants moving out of the
termination of the lease
And there's some ambiguity in
the language and by striking
that language which seems to
back off from requiring the
thirty day notice
we clarified the law.
Okay.
Madam chair representative roar
Romero actually you're right
it's up above on the same page
the language has been
essentially reinserted and eight
to three and four so that is
covered so I appreciate that
Madam chair
Representative Romero on page
twenty three we've changed up.
I don't know if this is changing
the committee server not in
order to in bad faith retains to
knowingly retains.
We do not knowingly retained the
deposit.
Madam chair representative I
difference my expert on that.
Thank you.
Chair and and Representative
That language change was really
to address at the committees
concerned before about the bad
faith language.
Representative madam chair I
believe it was Representative
Nibert that raised that is an
issue and so we just wanted to
take out the bad faith language
add to be responsive to that and
just say that if the landlord
knowingly retained it question
of the deposit in violation of
the loss would be in violation
of
the above provisions that we
changes so.
Why not you know for complying
with the with the notice
requirements for the deposit.
Thank you for that.
Representative Romero I received
change language regarding the
appliances but.
I still think there's a
disconnect between.
you complain to New Mexico on
sequences.
I mean I still think if you have
a broken refrigerator you tell
you don't call PNM for the gas
company or whatever it is and
that would be eighty owner
supplied.
Client so I still think that
that provision needs work
because I just don't see the to
the two portions of it being
connected.
I just want to sort of take
these off it that's okay.
Madam chair representative
Romero claim hold on one sec
just because I.
To let you I want to let you
want sponsors to be others now
that we get this virus now on
the panel in case there was
something else they wanted her
to address along the lines of
your question.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair of Representative
between do you want me to
address the a utility issue sure
what this is involving is a
situation where for example an
owner provides additional so
it's an owner provided you to
appliance and that their the
leak is in the studio.
And not in the hook up for
example and so they contact the
gas company to come out to
identify whether or not there's
a gas leak they've been read
have the stove and since it is
an owner supplied so this would
provide protection so that the
landlord could not then say will
you complain there from going to
affect you so we've narrowed it
considerably obviously it is not
a problem that is appropriate
for a service call from gas you
to a gas electric or water and
then we're not trying to address
it in this provision if it's
specific to those types of
utilities.
I hope that answers the question
Representative Romero and miss
Myers
Me within one to complaint be
about complain to a gas electric
or water utility about the gas
electric or water service we
tell you to appliances.
Madam chair representative
McQueen because the plants would
be in that in that scenario that
I gave you the stove itself so
there the service spoke up would
be covered but the gas leak
there are situations where the
gas leak is in the stove system
itself so it is the owner
provided appliance that causes
the problem it's not properly it
the the the problem is in the
appliance itself if the owners
providing the are still.
Then that would need to be fixed
a similar thing is if the owner
was providing a dryer a gas
dryer it's already covered for
the but if there's actually a
leak in the pipeline that fell
this would cover that situation.
Thank you misfires
madam chair Representative
Romero on page thirty one.
Be it.
Read this year requiring the
owners to prove that they acted
lawfully.
Is usually the other way around.
Madam chair representative thank
you I we talked about this quite
a bit as it is a group and have
been getting that question so I
will defer to and there Thomas
are occurring on that question.
I think we we need to promote
Tom Freeman who could address it
also but let me just put it in a
framework if I might.
Madam chair and representative
is that okay.
in in this situation the way the
the the the procedures work is
that the landlord is the one
bringing the eviction case
they have the burden of proof
initially to show that they have
a basis to affect the tenant so
they have that obligation.
if the tenant then responds and
says wait a second the landlord
is retaliating against me
because I called code
enforcement then the question
becomes they have now put
forward a prime if what they
call upon the fishy case that
there is a potential risk
retaliation involved and if
that's the case they should be
protected the issue here is then
who's going to prove that there
is a lawfully permitted
basically for the conviction
because retaliation is not
lawfully permitted so that means
that the landlord continues to
have the burden to prove that
the reason is a lawful permitted
reason
and it's it's a question of
You know making sure that the
person RT has access to be
evident this is the one who is
required to bring it forward and
in this context a photo order
serving it's lawfully permitted
they should they have the
obligation to provide that
evidence to the court.
And I don't know if Tom's been
Tom pretty men from legally it's
been promoted but he could also
explain the basis service so
small with a small but important
over cases our clients face
eviction because they ask for
repairs it called code
enforcement or they lawfully
withheld the ramp or they're
asking whether they should take
this kind of action in New
Mexico legally we uniformly
advises clients that the
retaliation for retaliation
provisions of the current law
are weak and if they do this
they're going to face eviction
and they might not be protected
because the current law requires
attendance to prove a negative
if you did not have a lawful
reason for raising the ran are
for restricting the services or
for evicting them or serving
them with the notice of no cost
termination and these weak
retaliation protections have a
chilling effect on tenants
rights the lead to poor housing
conditions they lead to more
addictions on the basis for
eviction is within the can of
the owner and if the resident
engages in this protected
conduct whether it's withholding
rent after properly giving
notice of repair or calling code
enforcement or what have you in
the wants to affect owner knows
why they're doing this in the
owner has the info to prove it
so the burden should lie with
the owner to prove why they're
there and if they have a lawful
reason that's great they know
whether they're and they have
the evidence and hospital one
eleven creates clear and and
frankly easy safe harbors a
layover can rely on to meet this
burden they have to show that
the tenant didn't pay rent we
have to prove to ten committed a
violation or they have to come
prove that the repairs requests
are gonna require is the
vacating the premises it's a
modest but it's a crucial change
and and it's what the landlord
has to prove it anyway to to be
entitled to restitution.
So clarifying that no law and
enhancing the protections we
think is really important it's
not going to affect a lot of
cases but it's going to affect a
significant number it's going to
enhance tenants abilities to
assert their rights.
Madam chair Senator Maryland
experts I.
If complain about something but
also then pay the rent and the
landlord we to the act and the
tenant said you just make to me
because I complained in the
landlord said nominating you
because you didn't pay the rent.
What's the result who is that.
If I may your Representative the
landlord wins because they've
come within the safe harbor if
they can prove by preponderance
of evidence that the tenant
failed to pay rent after proper
notice.
I'm here because you didn't pay
that are at.
Madam chair what what's the
proof there any what.
With proof is.
The proof is that they didn't
pay the rent fund if the person
is that's the reason they're
evicting.
Where's the documentation for
that.
Madam chair representative in
that context obviously of the
landlord would testify at court
the additional language around
documentation is if there is
documentation available
obviously if there's not then
the court is going to take
testimony from both parties and
make a determination in your
example for example if the
tenant came in then and again
receipt shows that they have
received from the landlord then
that would become evidence that
the lower court would consider
but if it's yes if the landlord
has testified in the court's
going to take you know take
notice of that.
But.
Madam chair.
For it is the label improve the
case the rent you don't have to
go through this back and forth
the case fails.
So so you don't need to put the
burden on the landlord to prove
their state of mind in acting.
Madam chair representative I I
don't believe that this clause
requires them to prove their
state of mind what it required
Mr proof that the believe that
be objective reason for you are
terminating and seeking a
fiction comes within the law and
that could be any number of
reasons but it means that they
need to provide that evidence as
the law requires to affix
someone from their home and
their tenants and to and to the
tendency.
So.
That's that's what we're trying
to achieve here.
Representative Romero on teach
the.
Forty two.
I think this is just the.
The commission.
He has.
I would just note that one of
their duties reviewing the film
of the policies that the council
shall examine child include
reviewing developing and
revising laws and policies.
I don't think that's the wording
you're looking for I think they
would likely propose revisions.
in my my final comment which is
sort of
So one of the things I struggle
about what this bill is that it
does two things are I think
should be done.
And I think I think we're facing
a crisis I think we're facing
we're looking at in addition
cliff.
and something needs to be done
about that.
But I don't see this bill
passing with the.
Urgency clause intact.
And I just I worry that.
We were not addressing that
clips.
You know and I know you're
trying and.
This I don't think this bill is
going to get us there because
that.
I think.
I don't think the emergency
clause survives based on the
required the.
So I just think that's something
we need to keep in mind that if
if we're going to address this
addiction cliff we're gonna have
to find another way to do it.
Because I don't consider certain
this bill will be in effect in
time.
And I'm probably missing my
issues but.
mentors are more
I I I know
This this is important bill and
and there's a lot of important
things
I I'm not really happy with the
way instruction.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you madam chair there are
only two general comment and
then a few specific points I'm.
My general comment madam chair
and Representative Romero and I
I do appreciate the conversation
we had earlier this evening and
I.
I I want to be really clear that
I think you have done
Representative Rubio done.
Some good work to try to address
the issues that came up in the
last meeting and I believe that
both of you are.
Motivated by one of the cheese a
good result for tenants
throughout the state in.
So I want to say that before I I
need to come is one stance that
I many very much believe the
war.
Well motivated and and doing
everything in the best of faith
try to make this bill.
We're.
In I am approaching this.
Not with a view toward.
March.
Landowners that.
Operate.
You know many multi unit
complexes.
I am I try to look at this from
that perspective
many of my constituents here
Santa Fe who
you have one or two small houses
that they might wrenching
retirement as their source of
income.
That you know people all of the
state you know I'm most familiar
with that you know these we are
many many families that I
represent on the side of Santa
Fe.
Who have.
Large properties an acre or two
and two or three small houses in
the Representative two of the
three.
Our income for the family.
And thank you it makes me worry
for them some of the provisions
of this bill.
I feel like you've got a
sledgehammer of the bill
To really go after and
scrupulous.
Major landlords business legend
remain in doubt.
Really hitting and hurting.
Folks that did you rent one or
two small houses is there
sources in.
And.
And I I feel like if we're going
to proceed with something like
this.
NEC clear that these provisions
only apply to large.
When
Lawyers in New Mexico for folks
to represent them in court and
to understand what the changes
are to the law and how to use
that these processes procedures.
If they have.
Who is your problems.
Your.
You're modifying two separate
statutes in creating the council
and I in.
She also back in and revisit the
two.
Areas that I focused on
last current.
B. is one one area that I
discussed with regard to
exhaustion of administrative
remedies it appears to me to be
unchanged from the last time we
heard the bill this is on page
eighteen lines twelve seventeen
this is in addition to the New
Mexico Human Rights Act section
of.
Is a grievance procedure.
The stories page fourteen line
seven to think about it
according person claiming to be
greed final unlawful
discriminatory practice.
You know brings it claims to the
bureau of labor relations of the
workforce solutions to our.
Yeah we have all the interior
sections the.
Through.
J. that remain unchanged.
And.
It then.
Set out again and I I I'm
extremely troubled by this.
it says it tenant shall not be
This Is section K. on page
eighteen.
It says the tenant.
Who is brought an action for.
For possession.
who's in action for the
procession and and I guess is
confusing to me to action for
possession that means landlords
to evict tenants.
Attention not be required to
exhausted administrative
remedies prior to starting in
defense of the actuals brown
violation
of the prohibition on source of
income this discrimination
provided section twenty eight
one seventy first twenty one
next on.
So exactly clear.
If there is an action for
possession.
It raises.
It's.
That the landlord.
Is.
Acting unlawfully.
You don't have a the tenant is a
defendant.
There is no action under the
Human Rights Act.
So like this scenario that is
here in section K..
On page eighteen.
The only time in you know in my.
Sixteen years of practicing law
the only time I ever.
Heard of the concept of
exhaustion of administrative
remedies.
It applies to plaintiff.
Mexico clean under the Human
Rights Act it is required to
exhaust administrative remedies
before the plaintiff.
Can bring a claim against the
responded.
To the claim of discrimination.
Here in section K. is the
opposite we're talking about a
claim by landlord against
attendance.
Just think that this is not
required to exhaust state
administrative remedies.
I guess what what state
administered remedies are
talking that is if this is your
Rights Act that doesn't apply
because this doesn't tell me
that the tenant easy to file the
claim the Rights Act.
So what does this mean and your
manager miss Myers
this Griego.
This is very confusing to me.
So maybe you could help me
understand why this is an issue
Rights Act and and how it
replied an actual case.
Chair if I may you allow as
mayors to respond okay Madam
chair representative Mr speaker
this change was directly
revised after the discussion at
the last hearing
the distinction we have sought
to make is the following that if
somebody applies for housing as
an applicant they're not in the
tendency
and they are denied and they
believe it's because a source of
income.
That that person is not a tenant
would be required to go through
the Human Rights procedure the
administrative procedure that
you actually outlined when you
ask the questions at the last
hearing
so they would in that posture be
required to exhaust all
administrative remedies.
This is a narrowly drawn
distinction in the situation
where somebody is attendant they
have met and are continuing to
meet all the requirements of
their tendency they when they
applied they had enough income
to be at B. accepted by the
landlord but during the tendency
during the term maybe they lose
a job and they apply for a
voucher or they get some other
kind of source of income change
the the tenant
then if the landlord seeks to
evict them solely because of
that because now they have a
different income source
then that would be raised
because the only place they
could raise it and timely manner
is when the landlord seeks to
affect them so in that context
that very narrow situation what
we're trying to find is that the
tenant could raise that that the
only reason they're trying to
evict me I haven't violated the
lease I'm paying my rent but
part of my rent is now being
paid by the city of Santa Fe on
a voucher program and that's the
only thing that's changed in
that context we want the the
proceeding for eviction to be
able to take that fact into
consideration.
So the only miss Myers I get
that you should be in here
Rights Act.
You should be an affirmative
defense to eviction.
I'm uniformed reservations Act
did you do it it just doesn't
make any sense to have this in
your Rights Act because the only
time we talk about madam chair.
Ms Myers
the the concept of exhaustion of
administrative remedies it is
when there is a.
Share or plaintive who is
earning a violation of rights
under the Human Rights Act
before they can sue the
responded to District Court they
have to go through the
administrative process outlined
in the Human Rights Act.
If you're in a situation then
chairman Marci described we are
under an action for possession
under the uniformed reservations
Act.
If the defendant is saying the
only thing that has changed in
my situation is the source of my
income for rent.
The Human Rights Act is not
invoked.
There's no there's no reason our
or used there's no scenario
under which we talking about
administrative remedies what we
talking about is the tenant
would be giving would be given
in the statutory fermented
Defense.
Proved to the satisfaction the
judge could walk eviction.
So I think that I guess I
understand the scenario I just
don't think it.
It.
In less I missing something I
just think it should not be in
the Human Rights Act madam chair
at.
Mr speaker we we agree I think
that was probably just a
drafting agency
just a drafting error and duly
noted we definitely want to get
that in the right place.
Madam chair Mr speaker.
And yet the other thing madam
chair as far as I I said I'd be
concise just to go back to
page thirty one.
This.
It looks to me like it is.
A rebuttable presumption.
Without calling it a rebuttable
presumption right so.
Madam chair as minors you
described
A case where there's.
And action for possession.
And.
The.
Makes a claim that it is because
of retaliation.
You said madam chair is virus
that at that point it would be a
prima facie case.
Retaliation and it is up to the
landlord to establish is that
point.
There was a.
A lawful reason.
For the eviction.
And the simple madam chair is
Mars you again is that the
tenant fail to pay the rent.
Okay so it's a scenario the
the.
The the landlord would.
Testify.
The negative right we're proving
that the tenant didn't pay rent
so we have to have the landlord
testified that there was no
Representative received.
And get additional checks is no
evidence that the landmark is
just as a payment okay so.
The judge believes the landlord
that there wasn't many rate.
and.
Then the landlord is is in that
instance showed that.
Is properly to be evicted.
You know there's a few issues
there you know one if the
landlord was insisting that the
payment in cash there's no
receipts
you know years there could be
that the and it really didn't
pay I think you that evidentiary
challenges that there's evidence
your challenges.
What's the cost for eviction is
that the tenant is disturbing
neighbors quiet use and
enjoyment of their apartment.
By playing music too loud or by
causing some other disturbance
in the landlord is going to have
to bring it to court.
This the neighbors to say used
by music to our or there was you
know the owner of the use of
controlled substances or barking
dogs or whatever the complaint
is in less than landlord can
convince the tenant labor to
come and testify against the
tenant the landlord is not gonna
be able to establish that the
tenant was disturbing the quiet
use and enjoyment of the
neighbors and I can imagine the
neighbors who are being bothered
into the apartment building by a
couple tenants might not feel
comfortable or state reinvested
I that that's the position is
going to be in a.
Your issues I guess these folks
getting to go into yes
Representative Strickler.
I think that's real tricky and.
I can imagine a lot of
situations where.
Scrupulous tenants.
Is going to make a claim that
the eviction is retaliation and
landlords never very hard time.
Establishing that a reason for
the objection is valid.
And so I think we should proceed
with tremendous caution before
going to.
Create.
What does it say rebuttable
presumption and it it this
section on page thirty one point
seven to twelve still operates
as.
And
I I would I would be far less
madam chair this buyers
Representative I would be far
less concerned user nations.
If.
All of this new process.
Only apply to.
What I imagine are the
problematic landlords which are
people that run run large
apartment buildings in multi
unit complexes there causing
problems I just would hate to
you know two years from now hear
from you know a bunch of my
constituents the David tried to
you know here to get some non
paying tenants evicted from
the backyard we can't do it
because there you're claiming
you know retaliation so I think.
Yeah I I certainly feel much
much much more comfortable.
If there is a limit to that
we're really targeting all of
this expanded process and
procedure.
To the areas where I think is
most of the problem which you're
guessing multi unit complexes.
And
You know you targets of this
process.
They can.
Your responses so those are my
comments madam chair I.
It is with insurance in the
direction of cleaning I very
much appreciate what we're
trying to do and I completely.
Eight knowledge in that there
are serious series uses by
landlords I just don't want to
see.
Small.
Words to be taken advantage of
over to the.
Harm's way.
Yeah I processes procedures I
think most appropriately
targeted.
Are at large.
Large operators.
Your.
Madam chair thank you Mr speaker
madam chair I would love to do
at this point because we're
getting such great feedback if
the if if there's any
consistency in the problems that
the committee want to discuss
madam chair I don't I don't know
if you would be willing to help
us make those changes in the
sense that we would be willing
to do that to bring it back to
tighten up what we're hearing
right now having being being
able to make that attempt
already madam chair and and then
of course wanting to get this
right and I do see
representative Ely of course we
want any input on tightening up
that language at this point so
that we have a a settled
situation that we are bringing
back but this is been invaluable
to us madam chair.
So.
I wanted to let Representative
Ely he thinks he has an idea so
home.
Thank you representative madam.
Thank you madam chair chair
here's what I would suggest
wrap their and there doesn't
appear to be a desire on the
part of the committee do
something
but it's clear that there are
problems still and my suggestion
would be in fact representative
Nygren are doing this on another
bill on following exemptions
were literally just as we're
going along we're getting a
better bill out of the process
the my suggestion would be let
me get comments from
representatives from the queen
from the speaker from
representative Nibert
so that we don't you know spend
more time on this tonight let me
see if I can incorporate does
get together with Sanchez with
our experts
I if I probably you know
depending on the schedule
tomorrow I probably of time most
today tomorrow I'm hoping if not
I can certainly work on it
tomorrow night and we can bring
something back to the committee
I hope either Friday or Saturday
and and then have a discussion
that addresses the concerns I
see Representative I pretend up
and what I would suggest is is
that he get me his comments and
that way I can try to work with
the sponsors to a corporate
everybody's comments and then
we'll have a more focused
discussion that would be my
suggestion and I'm happy to help
the Sanchez to do that.
I I think probably what we'd be
looking at a Saturday we didn't
have a lot of Saturday bills but
I think it might be good to let
Representative Nibert
It.
Things he wants to point out
before anybody goes anywhere
let him do that now
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair aren't I
was really just going to comment
that you know I appreciate the
new drought but the I spent a
long time a couple weeks ago
going through a lot of things
and
I didn't see the movie that I
was really hoping to say I I
still Senator say there's
tremendous our our practical
problems and our I'm still of
the believe that the.
People that.
We're trying to help are
actually going to be negatively
impacted if this bill our work
to be implemented at the wall M.
you know I can I can just speak
for for my own actions I I know
that the
A bill like this would require
me to.
Again considering are renting
creases across the board to
address the additional risks
that I would be at current.
so
you know that's that's my
overall COVID without having to
repeat R. O. probably an hour
hour and a half point comments
made the other day so thank you
madam chair.
Thank you so I'm I just
appreciate all of the
the the brains that have gone
into the funding this of really
talented people here who've
been.
Working with our representatives
to been working extremely hard
this is a heavy left I mean I I
can't believe how much.
You're trying to fix.
It.
It needs fixing.
I have no doubt and it's like
the last bill that the pandemic
brings these things into focus
for us.
Because we're creating crises
without any safety net so
thank you all very much we'll
say good evening to those appear
here on house bill one eleven.
Now and.
I like how the text at the
bottom when I say house bill it
comes out as houseboat.
so appreciate your and your
committees leading us to work
with us this is been a case that
invaluable to our process and I
think for the the renters and
the landlords of New Mexico
thank you.
Okay thank you all very much
we're going to go on to
Representative Lente where's
bill use it as quite a and even
with us house bill one eighty
three.
Madam chair and members of this
committee thank you so much
first of all for your diligence
your insurance I've been
listening for hours and I've
learned so much the important
work that you're doing I am just
in awe.
I.
Introducing house bill one
eighty three.
As a proud new Representative
but district for the the region
that I care for is.
Is more the county regency
Colfax in some we get.
For the last thirty years I've
been a fierce advocate for
supporting the lives of young
people and their families
throughout northern New Mexico.
I've done that to public
education.
The development of after care
programs supporting the first
ever homeless shelter and
recovery programs for those
really struggling.
I've used art as medicine to
move children from trauma to
trust.
House bill one eighty three is a
natural extension of I my
commitment to protect young
people.
Although New Mexico sits at the
bottom of the rankings in
childhood well being The New
Mexico children's code leads the
way in supporting children and
families in so many ways.
Developed in unanimously
supported by the New Mexico
sentencing commission house bill
one eighty three is another way
for New Mexico lawmakers to
really make a difference in
eliminating the destructive
fines and fees from our
children's code.
I've created a video that tells
the story insurers the voices of
those impacted I'm wondering if
that can be queued up will be
bring April land Allison pock
ingestion irons to be promoted
as presenters.
Hi hope so I think you've made
arrangements with the assistance
and with we welcome professor
land and the others that you
mentioned.
Wonderful I'm wondering if if is
Gabby still awake.
And I see April M. A. C. listen.
Talk ingestion irons no waiting
on deck.
We can either there is
excellent.
Yes please.
We've got into the legal system
as a juvenile because I had
substance use of.
Issues I was fourteen years old
when I first own dog caught up
into the legal system one of the
biggest challenges is that many
of the the use who appear in
delinquency cases are not even
old enough to legally have a job
twenty six percent of children
in New Mexico live in poverty
what we're talking about
juveniles were talking about
young people under the age of
eighteen who have been referred
to the criminal justice system.
And those young people typically
go to children's court the
children's court is designed and
focuses on the best interest of
the child which is different
than adult court building.
We eighteen coming out of the
closet to conservative parents
it wasn't the.
It wasn't the easiest thing in
that I that really pushed me to
my drug use instead of being
penalized for my drug use I
should have had more how when
you impose a fine or a fee in
the young person or the family
can't pay for it.
What happens then it becomes a
violation and then then that
triggers a whole series of the
young person having to go back
into court.
And then they never get out of
the court system many of the use
are being raised or.
Cared for by their grandparents
or other relatives who have no
legal obligation to pay any any
of the the fees incurred by the
young person it's expensive for
a family it's not easy I think
by taking away fines and fees
we're gonna take a lot of stress
on families right now when a
child is made to pay a fine and
fees they are not able to work
so their families paying that
means that siblings and parents
also are paying this be if we're
able to eliminate it I think
that families will be able to
allocate more resources towards
their children children's corner
this was to do everything we can
to provide them with support
like either through community
service school.
Some kind of technical training.
And if they're having to pay for
fines and fees and they can't
afford to pay for these other
things the juvenile justice
system as stated in our code
this code the ultimate purpose
is to rehabilitate and to
remember that these are children
they're still in the process of
working right from wrong instead
of being penalized instead of
making my family goes to do all
these court costs I should have
had help is dead and maybe
things could have turned out a
little bit if using fines and
fees we miss a teachable moment
when we take away these fines
and fees are not punishing them
for the trauma that they've
suffered instead we're offering
them a different sort of
rehabilitation we're offering
them you know a chance to
recognize the wrong they've done
but to move forward instead of
to become trapped into a system
the sentencing commission is
supporting it and the sentencing
commission is comprised of
everyone involved in the
criminal justice system passing
this legislation would be the
first right step in the in the
right direction and not
criminalizing you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I would love to
present my first expert witness
April Lente.
Professor.
Good morning members of the
chair and members of the
committee could it could be
afternoon are working so late
feels like morning.
Here's not.
Being patient and and hearing
our bill this evening I've had
the privilege of teaching at the
UNM law school for twenty three
years now and in the course of
that I've had the privilege of
also representing hundreds of
children who were alleged to
have committed delinquent acts
mostly disabled children Pete
children living in poverty and
children as young as the ages of
eleven and twelve and I I know
it's late and I also would not
try to articulate any more
eloquently than judge Romero and
former district attorney Angela
the Czecho did on that video
about the damage that finds can
do fines and fees can do to
families so I would just like to
emphasize that this is a
consensus bill we work very hard
as at the New Mexico sensing
Commission level we have the
support of the district
attorney's office the Attorney
General was in the small working
group that actually initially
wrote those of the victims
advocates and all of even the
law office of the public
defender that's probably taking
the biggest hit by weaving its
of application fee for legal
services has fully supported
this bill and I with that I
would like to turn it over and
the proud tradition of the New
Mexico University of New Mexico
School of Law clinical programs
to the next generation of
lawyers represented here by
justice irons.
The madam chair my name's just
signs like professor lance said
I'm a third year law student at
the university of New Mexico and
I'm currently in the clinical
law program.
Some testifying in support house
bill one eighty three because
juvenile fines and fees are
contract to the well being of
children can have a long lasting
effects on the children and
their families in my role to law
clinic I think given the
opportunity to represent a child
in a delinquency matter wants to
know expert juvenile justice
it's clear that provide the fees
are not in the best interest of
children.
First of all.
Posing finds on you aside from
being contracted the purpose of
the New Mexico children's coat
has a disparate impact on low
income families for this reason
it can be argued that find that
these are useful for promoting
accountability.
Instead find the fees
disproportionately harm certain
children solely because of their
family's economic status.
It's issues very relevant New
Mexico we're roughly one in four
children live in poverty.
Sadly this statistic is only set
to worsen as fifty one percent
of households with children have
lost employment since March
twenty twenty.
On top of all this find the fees
can have long lasting negative
effects on children and families
for example find the fees have
been down to increase recidivism
and expose families very real
consequences such collection
actions negative credit scores
license suspension prevention of
reconciliation and criminal
liability.
Limiting fines and fees is a
necessary step to protect the
future of are you and that is
why I urge you to support house
bill one eight three I thank you
so much for letting me speak
tonight so late.
Thank you.
One of the witnesses going to
speak yes Allison.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Allison
pocket I'm an attorney at the
law offices of the public
defender for the past fourteen
years I've represented hundreds
of children in their cases in
children's court Albuquerque
today I'm addressing the process
and impacts of imposing public
defender fees in juvenile cases.
Under the children's code every
child must have an attorney so
public defender contract
attorneys automatically assigned
then the parent or legal
guardian of the child must apply
for a public defender by paying
a ten dollar fee per case and
providing proof of income or
support such as Medicaid the
vast majority of these children
qualify but the application
process is burdensome it is not
just a ten dollar fee some
families don't apply because a
lack of transportation other
struggle getting the required
paperwork and finally there
those were being raised by care
givers like grandparents you
don't have access to legal
documents to apply.
When these families fail to
apply they are in turn mailed
notices and finally sent to
collections for one thousand
dollars per new case and seven
hundred fifty dollars per
probation violation.
These financial burdens
ultimately cause harm to the
same fragile children and
families who we're supposed to
be protecting and helping thank
you.
Thank you.
Else.
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair that is it from our
expert I'm sorry my.
My Microsoft.
I need to turn my phone off.
Never mind I dropped it.
I just want to say on the co
sponsor of this bill and I'm
kind of humiliated that the last
time I had a bill.
Or with the bills I was
presenting Representative
Armstrong was with Patty
Jennings and I we're working on
getting the school age lowered
for children with disabilities
so I'm really impressed that I'm
actually my name is on the bill
and we have this kind of a
presentation I really appreciate
it.
So I'm.
With that are you ready for us
to go to the attendees.
Madam chair yes we are okay
let's put up a little call for
fifteen seconds Representative
you're in favor of on the health
bill.
Where we're to the number out
one eighty three we say yes here
in opposition the state now.
Okay we're through with that if
we had eighty nine percent in
favor eleven percent in
opposition.
Let's some.
Let's see let's take comments if
anybody wants to make a comment
it's late probably not too
necessary let's see if that
there are a couple of people in
opposition is there anyone in
opposition you wish to speak.
I'm not getting any hands up so
let me state who would like to
speak in favor of the bill.
Arbor.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Douglas
carver deputy director of the
New Mexico sentencing
commission.
And as you've heard this was
unanimously supported by the
commission to remind the
committee the commission close
representatives from the dust
the public defender's CYFD
corrections victims advocate
department of public safety the
AOC and this members appointed
by both parties from both
chambers and the governor's
that's a quite a broad cross
section and this bill was
unanimously supported by all
those parties thank you madam
chair.
Thank you our.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Bennett
are in the chief public defender
I'm here to test provide strong
support of this bill thank you
Miss Pollock and everyone else
for for the presentation and I
think it's important that you
know that this bill doesn't do
away with consequences for
rehabilitation for juveniles
but just the fines and fees
which really make no sense to
impose and as an agency which
would lose some money from this
I think it's important for us to
step forward is kind of the unit
HSD whose ox would be gored by
this we will find alternative
sources of funding I think it's
our responsibility and we would
ask you to pass the bill thank
you.
Thank you Bennett Monica all.
Good evening madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is money calls and I am the New
Mexico state director of the
fines of these justice center
and a former public defender my
family is from rural New Mexico
but I grew up here in Santa Fe
I'm here today both as a
concerned community member and
also as an advocate for the
rights and well being of youth
and families here in New Mexico
I ask that the committee vote
yes on house bill one eighty
three for all of the reasons
stated but also just to keep in
mind that so many children are
living in poverty here in our
state so many parents don't have
steady employment especially now
after dealing with the COVID
nineteen pandemic and it's
imperative that we removes these
economic barriers in order to
move forward so I ask that the
committee please support this
bill thank you.
Trujillo.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's fed non
those three here are and I will
policy associate with gold
futures for the young woman
United and we stand in strong
support legislation that will
not just make life easier for
families of.
Bye bye but of the people of
color but also to stop the
criminalization of the poor and
black and indigenous and I and
excuse many kids are being
raised by their grandparents and
extended to relatives who have
limited income coming into the
household in thirty five percent
of New Mexico parents are not
economically stable it if it
says fines and fees can quickly
calculate up to hundreds or even
thousands of dollars meaning
that in time the pandemic such
as this families can be forced
to choose between paying these
fines and fees or paying for
their necessities of life such
as food T. gas to get around or
rent to the for them not to be
on the streets when youth are
introduced into the criminal
legal system it becomes harder
and harder to get out of the
wall the noise of the system
increasing the chances of for
their involvement with the
criminal legal system going into
adulthood use of color are you
ready we we are presented in New
Mexico's too and I'll system
which disproportionately affects
you through our black indigenous
or lie in acts and their
families in fact bound black in
black communities I are already
over represented.
Margarita.
Your the last part of your.
The cut off so I'm not going to
even try to.
State half of your sorry.
Thank you madam chair good
evening I'll make this quick I'm
with the ACLU of New Mexico we
strongly support this piece of
legislation because we know how
this affects families and I'll
also want to speak on behalf of
being born and raised in Roswell
New Mexico I wish this wasn't a
law about thirteen or twelve
years ago because this would
have helped out a lot of my
friends and would have ended the
school to prison pipeline and I
urge the committee to vote yes
to pass on this have a great
night thank you so much.
Raul.
Madam chair members of the
committee it is definitely past
my bed time so I'll keep my
comments short name is have you
had a real phone number research
and policy analyst with New
Mexico voices for children one
of my areas of expertise is tax
and budget policy committee
purely fiscal perspective when
it comes to fines and fees the
juice isn't worth the squeeze
for example according to a study
from the Brennan center project
says every dollar from every
dollar Bernalillo county
collection plans of fees it
losing dollar and seventeen
funding fees are also known
reliable source of government
revenue as a significant portion
of the revenue generated by
fines and fees goes on collected
and collected fines if you in
fees have grown exponentially in
New Mexico from about two
million in two thousand twelve
to nearly twenty million in two
thousand sixteen overall fifty
percent of funding fees go
uncollected and even though the
juice isn't worth the squeeze
from the government's
perspective certain communities
in New Mexico are definitely
definitely feeling the squeeze
the rate of uncollected debt in
counties throughout New Mexico
correlates with poverty rate
within each county.
This lesson this relationship
underscores how fees and fines
tend to be a serious problem for
communities that can least
afford them in conclusion fines
and fees aren't only a
precarious irrational mechanism
to fund a government but they
also function as a regressive
tax when economically
disadvantaged communities in New
Mexico and because of these
reasons are urging members of
this committee to support this
bill thank you.
What the hell.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I am reserve the hell
and I'm representing and can and
here as a former foster youth I
just to please support house
bill one eighty three as many
young people we work with many
young people I know that I also
grew up in the system.
Well into the cycle of systems
and cross over and I feel like
this bill.
Really is a way to end those
cycles for our families and also
young people thank you very
much.
Thank you and brain development.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Brenda but when
a registered lobbyist for
Americans for prosperity New
Mexico we stand in support of
house bill one eighty three for
many of the reasons already
mentioned and we hope that you
will recommended to pass thank
you.
Thank you let's go to the
committee now and
First I have Representative
right the question.
I appreciate the gravity needs
cancer Lujan whites and and
helping them straight out is
that idea I have a suggestion
for the L. Sanchez so
madam chair and representative
we go to the four winds one.
After community service I think
what you should add is and if
appropriate at two and a drug or
other counseling program.
And that's a suggestion
For your Representative Rehm I
thought you told me it was for.
It's page four line one I'm
sorry I know I know but I
thought you told me it was not.
And attend a drug treatment
program drug counseling program
but for.
If appropriate.
Yeah and the either any language
I think getting counseling or
drug court in there is a I drug
counseling or other counseling
would be good however he would
like to.
So I I'm Representative Richard
this with me via text message
and I thought it would be
something to ask the next
You have a lot of experts with
you Representative Montoya and
see what the reaction is for
that idea absolutely madam chair
and representative remember like
to defer to my experts to answer
that question on the the change
but I am very in in inspired by
your your tweak okay so I will
turn it over either to April's
land or Allison.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee all take a first FY I
and then I will I'll turn it
over to public defender Alison
Parker but if
In most places in the structure
of the children's code allows
for the screen to get help that
they need and allows the state
and the judges and the system to
exercise its discretion to
provide to to tailor their
remedy that's appropriate
because even though it's a
little bit this are confusing
the way the bill is laid out
because of the part that you're
looking at is actually an
amendment to the criminal code
and the criminal code applies to
children through the delinquency
code the children's coat so what
you're seeing in terms of the
marijuana penalties you'll see
the thousand chapter thirty
which is just generally where
are crimes are listed and then
they apply to children through
the children's code on which
allows judges a great deal of
discretion and how these matters
will be handled so even though
it has specific language that
addresses miners.
In in it any case most judges it
because it's a petty misdemeanor
this will be in larger counties
in the state dealt with through
children's court and and once
your children's court this will
be considered a delinquent act
and the judges will have the
whole range of ability to impose
probation impose community
service
allow for deferral
They could even impose more
harsh penalties than are
included in this part of the
criminal code so for that reason
I think it's important for
members they can also impose
restitution I think that there's
two things John judges will have
discretion to impose the penalty
that's appropriate for the
child.
Thanks for our age the.
It will still be there that
it'll be handled that way.
Thank you that's all my
questions.
Okay.
Right Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair and the
Representative on that you've
got to reveal here.
Madam chair and thank you she
then sees he's got a great goal
sponsor I just want to go into a
little story about long long
time ago imagine municipal
judge.
New and municipal judge you're
not under the authority of the
AOC so you can pretty much do
whatever you want.
The meeting that I raise three
sons that were really hard to
raise I knew how tough life will
us to a young man or young woman
would go to a court room in
municipal judge and they were
under the age of twenty four in
the middle of the citation I
would think the citations and I
would put it away you know but
anyway with this promise is a
promise that they had to make to
me number one I was going to
hold a citation for six months.
Number two one of their parents
had to notify me that the new
site.
Years estable judge I only had
one return.
One young man that came back
with the citation within that
six months so that was pretty
good I think we're good I think
this is something that will
really work because I did not
see myself charging a teen ager
sixty nine dollars seventy nine
dollars in fines and fees
because they didn't have it.
So I think this is a weight
right away to work the state
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you judge L. Kong madam
vice chair.
Madam chair I'm speaking up may
have had his hand up first I was
just going to make a motion when
you're ready thank you madam
chair.
The motion now and we can have
discussions so go ahead.
I hope I get it right I move a
do pass on H. B. one eighty
three.
A second okay we have a motion
and the second item for
discussion I have the speaker.
I was going to make the motion
also madam chair so I will use
this opportunity simply say hi
professor is great to see you.
Thank you Mr speaker and.
In also I was to go by chairman
I'll call the story when I was.
Away were young man in Santa Fe
with too many speeding tickets I
would have to go to municipal
court and there's a judge Thomas
ma'am menciona existe and if you
have a speeding ticket between
September and the the first week
of January you would have to pay
your fine in terms to be.
Yes some of the city that to you
have to give charities them down
to.
To the food bank or to the
shelter so that folks can have a
thanksgiving dinner
as the cost of your speeding
ticket repair.
So I don't think that's
necessary either you know I
certainly assume are doing this
times change and that with this
bill thank you for the better so
madam chair Representative
Montoya thank you for bringing
it all and.
Professor land I think there's a
reason oil painting if you get
some addicts of where this agent
is you look exactly the way.
We're still six.
There are a lot of your former
students here on this.
All right.
Okay.
So let's.
Let's go to call the roll
please.
Chair woman and members out here
are ideal when out for just a
second I wasn't sure what you
were saying.
But okay we're ready to call the
roll so we can take about we've
got a motion and a second.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Yes the power restoration.
I will yes chair.
Yes.
Representative.
Her.
Representative.
Representative McQueen.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Yes.
You have
to do pass on house bill one
eighty three.
Thank you very much thank you
very much graduations
Representative Montoya.
Madam chair and members if I can
say just a few words as a
freshman.
This is been such a deep and
profound honor to be mentored by
members of the sentencing
commission.
The lawyer team at U. N. M.
awesome people I have learned so
much and I just feel really
indebted thank you so much for
helping me land this new role
there's so much to learn and
having this kind of mentorship
is just made it all that much
easier so which are just as good
nice to everyone and thank you
again for your still a work good
night good.
Representative bash you've been
with us a long time.
We're about to close in on this.
Agenda here.
Representative bash I did need
to direct you where to go of the
okay go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
I'm here to present house bill
two twenty six grand jury
targets dates and evidence and I
have with me
An expert witness
Michael stout.
And your your music.
Hello.
Yes.
Do we have Michael on this.
Yes I'm here for okay there you
are okay there you go.
Okay.
Yes Representative realize that
all.
Representative bash do you have
anyone else Representative.
Representative Ely yes
Representative Eli.
Share.
And he has here is here in.
And you have to be here anyway
and you are also a co sponsor.
Okay
Thank you madam chair and I'm a
little intimidated by all the
lawyers.
I have to say that as a non law
here I've learned a lot about
grand juries and what I have
learned is that
once someone has been arrested
and charged with the crime there
are one of two ways the that the
case can go either.
It goes to a preliminary hearing
or it goes to a grand jury and
there are differences between
the preliminary hearing and the
grand jury as I have learned
madam chair there are witnesses
at a preliminary hearing and
evidence can be presented and
there is the accused has a right
to counsel.
and the the hearing is public
In a grand jury the procedure is
private
There are no witnesses
and the target is not allowed to
present evidence and there is
Council available only if the
the target is testifying.
And it doesn't seem fair to me.
That defendants are treated
differently depending on whether
they get a preliminary hearing
or a grand jury hearing.
And
And.
This bill is sort of a redo of
eight two thousand three bill
that have the same requirements
for
For competent the testimony.
And
But that bill did not have any
enforcement mechanism which this
bill does this bill fix is that
it also protects children by
exempting them from testifying
in the grand jury hearing.
And
And with that I would like to
turn it over to my co sponsor
Representative Eli.
I'm thank you madam chair thank
you Representative bash so
Michael Staten Island had some
interesting and seated
discussions about how to present
this and course always like talk
about due process and rights and
all that and I'm not minimizing
that but this is really about
some surprising different this
about swift and certain justice
because what this requires the
district attorneys to do is do
their work up front.
And if they do it up front it
means that a grand jury they've
got to present evidence
consistent with the rules of
evidence and that it is stand
aren't subject to review by the
court and if they do that
they're gonna move this process
right to the front and things
are going to go a lot quicker
and if you want proof of that
take a look at the house
committee analysis which I was
reading tonight at why I said
this to she back I mean these
almost exact words and I did
talk to the animals and writing
the impact it says in fact there
may be some increase to
attorney's fees for pre trial
litigation District Court
however by front loading the
process the quality of cases to
proceed to trial will be higher
this bill encourages criminal
defendants to enter plea and
earlier stage the proceedings
because they will have notice on
the front end about the strength
of the state's case ultimately
house bill two twenty two twenty
six as amended should say the
court the DA the office the
public defender's resources by
resolving cases at the earliest
possible stage criminal
proceedings as this committee
knows because I've heard time
and time again you want
effective deterrent to crime
your swift and certain justice
so yes we have had long
discussions with the dust
although she track was
invaluable in terms of working
out some exceptions working with
the Santa Fe DA and I get that
sometimes the dust rested gases
can be difficult to do but it
will be so essential to getting
this process from Laurie
everybody's got to be moved to
the judges the public defender's
to dust get in there quickly get
your case together listen I have
to do that my civil cases and I
can tell you that it's much more
effective when a client comes in
the door to know what's the
evidence was quality Adams
what's the law if you do that on
the front can you're gonna have
a real deterrent to crime and
all we're saying to the DHS do
this right.
Do this right at the beginning
the defendants will then now
what evidence is really just the
quality of evidence against them
it won't be indicting a ham
sandwich anymore they don't get
the advantage of that but the
fact is is that everybody's
gonna know on the front and
really what's going on just to
do a have a good or not and if
they do House committee analysis
could be better is exactly on
point is exactly what I've been
saying but I know Michael will
want to talk about the process
flow through yeah so Michael
that's all right Representative
bash madam chair.
Yes go ahead.
Your cell.
I'm sorry.
I wasn't one of those who did
that but I guess I am.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee at and
Representative Ely with him I've
had these alleged heated
discussions
I can answer questions about
the.
The process in the bill but I'm
gonna save a lot of that the
committee for now I'm just going
to give a brief overview try to
be great especially here late at
night and I know that we have a
lot of
smart lawyers who have questions
they might want to have answered
and so I'll.
Hold most of that.
Simply put.
The bill H. B. two twenty six
simply requires proper evidence
to be presented at the grand
jury.
more accurately the hello the
the H. B. two twenty six just
in forces wanted was already in
law in two thousand three
because the law presently
requires the presentation of
lawful competent and relevant
evidence but it doesn't have any
enforcement mechanism and this
bill provides that and the
reason we know it didn't happen
in North mechanism which we
thought it did in two thousand
three but the Supreme Court in
New Mexico in two thousand
eighteen in the state in a case
that we don't need to get into
the weights necessarily the
state versus Isaac Martinez said
that and less you have that
statutory authority we can't
review this there's nothing we
can do about having at all the
indictment or bad evidence and
that kind of thing so this bill
actually makes that fix it does
a couple of other things as
Representative Representative
Ely said and he really hit he
and I really have not disagree
that much
They we did in fact I've talked
with district attorneys I've
talked with the.
The.
District attorney from Santa Fe
misc karmic all of us she was
very cooperative and we that the
amendment that we've made to the
bill.
Is actually the language the
exact language AC and I agreed
on which is two eight two
exempt.
Children from the bill and to
exempt informants from the bill
so it doesn't affect the
presentation of children and
adults in fact the presentation
of informants and of course we
we want competent evidence but
of course we don't want to we're
not trying to hurt children in
any way so that think that was a
big that was a big agreement
that that we made the result of
this is that we help.
the the system by having the
week basis.
Vetted and the strong cases and
betting going going forward and
we have resolutions earlier in
the process hi in the long run
it saves energy stress
resources it helps to
disadvantaged can help those
people who don't have the chance
of having a lawyer in the first
days of the of the process and I
think it is a a very reasonable
step forward I would make one
one noted that is that the
public defender commission.
Has also unanimously endorsed
this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you the audience and and
we'll take a quick all fifteen
seconds favor the bell please
vote yes to you are in
opposition please follow.
get that up.
Okay it's up now.
Okay it's close to fifty five in
support forty five percent.
In opposition.
So we go to the
We're not going to do.
In more than
Ten minutes on each side if
there's even if that so let me
begin with the opposition.
To see.
Mr is well.
Go ahead.
Good evening everyone thank you
chair members of the committee
my name is works for a judicial
district attorney representing
task affecting you counties I'm
also here by president of the
New Mexico District Attorney
Association to get to it there's
a lot of time
and regarding to some of the
comments made by the presenters
it does protect some children
all the children and response
representative Ely students are
in action nothing moves to the
front swiftly and confidently
rendering diamonds or people
information bind overs those
take a year to three years to
get to justice or trial there's
a small fraction of my cases
that go to grand jury I had
three no true bills of twenty
twenty and I want to graduate
presentations I had zero pre
trials not get bound over Mr
bosses are comment about of
course the mechanisms as
inadequate
it's the we cases I get better
but those are the cases that go
to trial no DA wants is to go to
trial strong cases once again
what there's a practical
deficiency Intergraph a
regarding the relevance here
state except in the state
admissibility of evidence rules
of evidence those are.
Natalie Campbell.
Thank you madam chair
my name is Natalie Campbell my
perspective comes from working
nine years criminal defense
before I moved to prosecution.
And things that I see the
proposed change to subsection C.
three.
Wiring ten days notice would
basically do away with taking
complex in custody cases to
grand jury and they would end up
going to have preliminary
hearings likely in District
Court and that means using an
example of a case that I have
presenting thirty witnesses in
my person fire department
personnel family trauma
survivors of murder victims law
enforcement and expert witnesses
to District Court you're looking
at a seven day preliminary
hearing which is basically
doubling the court's docket on
the same page.
Also I'd say who's gonna be the
arbiter of the rules of evidence
in a grand jury there isn't a
judge to make those decisions
and so you're going to see lots
of appeals of grand juries on
gray areas like an excited
utterance.
Hearsay exception there's no one
there to make that just.
Jessica patterns.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Jessica Perez I'm assistant
district attorney and I am
standing in opposition of this
bill with this bill on its face
what this bill is face may seem
like a good idea it will cause a
detriment to our community
randori is essential for cases
involving child victims who may
be over thirteen but still
children victims victims of
sexual offenses and for cases
where victims cannot testify
because their otherwise able
grand jury allows the district
attorney's office to present
these cases without the need for
the victim to testify because
the rules of evidence do not
apply if this bill moves for the
practical effect would be the
victim cases will simply die
before they begin and that is
not what the state needs for
those reasons I stand in
opposition of this bill.
Terry Cole.
Tear you need on your.
That is here can you hear me.
Yes.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is for what
levels one studio.
And the farmers you know I've
worked with Representative Ely
successfully on some of the
issues what we.
Representative community
separate from one on despite a
longstanding partnership before
the more.
This is one of the following
welcome in our community this
legislation will work in process
more efficient.
Which is why we work on all the
involvement one.
And it is not important.
Officer.
Our officers more obstacles
worth
one back walking location the
Asian Albuquerque.
Block grants from all for all
those lonely.
This.
Over here.
Yes thank you Mr.
Andrea right.
Hi members of the committee my
name is Andrea reed on the night
judicial district attorney the
district attorney's association
does not support this bill
I can tell the committee that
I've been doing a grand jury for
twenty five years as a
prosecutor I think this would
really affect prosecution again
I agree with the fact is he's
going to decide whether
something is admissible in the
rules of evidence the nice thing
about grand jury is that you can
actually produce a lot of cases
at one time and get a lot of
cases moving and I think we
forget about the investigatory
role that we use in the attorney
general's office is used to get
subpoenas and investigatory
things of that nature and we
would have to provide foundation
witnesses for that and I believe
that it would it would be
excessively time consuming and
we would not be able to get
cases through I just believe
this bill is is a bill that does
not need to be supported our
past.
Thank you see those in favor who
would like to.
Thank.
Thank you.
Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf for the New Mexico
caramel defense lawyers
association we appreciate the
work of the sponsor and his and
his and her advocates we
encourage you to support this
important measure thank you so
much for your time this evening
and all of the important work
that you're doing.
Okay our.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is been a
power in the chief public
defender I was also an assistant
district attorney for five years
at some point I've done grand
juries and I've done a lot of
criminal defense grand juries
are supposed to be at least an
initial screening process for
cases to test the evidence and I
can tell you that the way that
they operate now that simply is
not the case they really are as
the district attorney mentioned
earlier a way to move the ball
you month basis through and get
them into District Court I can
tell you that they don't work
because I in one of the
districts just since February
first when they restarted COVID
trials we've had to directed
verdicts those of you who are
attorneys noted that means that
there was not even enough
evidence that the judge still to
go to a jury that shows that the
system of screening was not
working I ask you to support
this bill so we can front load
are working from lewd Justice
thank you.
Thank you
I don't see that so let's go to
the committee and I'm going to
allow the
Representative bash and
Representative you like to say
something you know make comments
after the testimony if they
would like.
And then I have a list of.
that are raised.
Representative bash.
Representative Ely.
I I don't have anything to say
right at the moment okay
chair.
Okay first questions
Representative reading.
Your and I think we need to
begin with what is the purpose
of a grand jury and the purpose
is really to go ahead and see if
there's probable cause and bind
a target on over to trial it's
not to convict them and so I
think we need to keep that in in
perspective and I'm not going to
ask a lot of questions one to
get it general statements
because of slate we can get into
the questions later.
When individuals arrested
basically up to ten days to get
to the grand jury.
And the problem with that is
getting all the evidence getting
all the witness statements
getting the experts and all for
within that ten days because
this in essence takes a grand
jury and turns it into a
pulmonary hearing.
And when I saw preliminary
hearings used when I was a
police officer.
They use those for weaker cases
where they can take it to court
let's see if there's really
staff here let's hear both sides
and move it that way.
madam chair and representative
this is a question on that so
the Supreme Court makes the
rules.
Why are we going to the Supreme
Court and saying Hey how to
change the rules.
I think Representative Eli wants
to answer that.
Going into one of the sponsors
Michael no I just I just
couldn't see Representative Eli
all there is I see.
He he's muted at whatever I
think.
Yes.
Because of the fact all.
Madam I I'm just going to say
well like to do is turn over Mr
stout and then I I do want to
relay some thing after Mr stout
talks to the committee about
telling the court what to do I
thought that might be what you.
Yeah.
Can address the separation okay
sure okay Representative Michael
stout.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Rehm thank you
right I'm not exactly sure but I
think you might have been here
at the time the grand jury law
was passed originally the.
The present law requires lawful
competent and relevant evidence.
and.
To answer the question about who
determines what whether that's
what kind of evidence that is
that's the prosecutor determines
that.
But the New Mexico Supreme Court
just recently in two thousand
and two thousand eighteen.
Determined that well we can't
review that unless the
legislature tells us so and
that's the reason that's that
was the genesis of this bill to
say.
in fact they cut out they have
in their rule the Supreme Court
I'm reading from the rural
districts for rural and says
that the the weight of the
evidence should not be subject
to review but the grand jury
proceedings the indictment and
the lawfulness competency and
relevance of the evidence shall
be review by the District Court
they wrote that rule after the
two day after the two thousand
three law but then they said
whoops two thousand eighteen
they didn't give us that
authority so they take that
language out so this statute is
to make that six.
So it is perfectly legal another
works thanks to David basically
invited the court are invited
the legislature to do.
Yeah and madam chair and
representative I just wanna
response something you said that
and I want to I want I want to
make clear to the committee hi I
had exactly one experience as a
lawyer in a criminal proceeding
and while both a grand jury in a
preliminary hearing and without
going into the details of it the
woman was taken for granted I'm
not I want to sit there as your
lawyer I'm not allowed to say
anything I'm not allowed to
cross examine any witnesses I'm
not allowed to do anything
there's no pushback the DA was
trying to get an indictment in
that case interestingly enough
to do a didn't get the entire
and then went to a preliminary
hearing and here is the
interesting thing is when the DA
got done presenting the
preliminary hearing this time I
had a real lawyer with the to do
a cross examination and the
judge listen to everything he
was able to save the D. eight in
effect are you kidding around
and then apologized to my client
for the DA having trying to take
advantage of the entire process
so there is a huge difference
between a grand jury process
we're really isn't any other
side going on and a preliminary
hearing with the DA gets to see
what's really going on and all
we're saying with the grand jury
is it's not going to suddenly be
subject to cross examination but
present real evidence present
evidence is consistent with the
rules of that that's what this
bill is about.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Right those beyond that by
allowing the defense attorney
and there to present evidence
and cross examine so it just it
makes everything at pulmonary
here.
Madam chair representative
there's no cross examination in
this bill it's not happening
it's not having the grand jury
met Mr stature to correct me
that's not happening my wrong
I'm sure Mr staff.
Then it madam chair
representative.
Get this just says what kind of
evidence the prosecutor Act
present there's no challenging
of the evidence there's no cross
examination of the evidence and
there's no presentation by the
target and the target cannot be
present during this it's just it
has to be competent evidence as
defined by the rules of the
there's no cross examination
whatsoever.
Then quicker Representative I
think we need to use more at the
grand jury said so.
slow down the process
practically in early County and
that's why the.
Here's taking a lot of the cases
to federal court.
That thank you madam chair
that's all my questions.
Thank you next I have
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam chair.
Sure Representative is.
As as you probably know I am a
lawyer.
The transactional work
do litigation little criminal
work
And so
said she learned a lot about
grand juries and at this point
I'm confident she knows more
than I do
I have questions my first
question just to clarify things
Madam chair Senators Mr stout
reference an amendment to this
bill.
In the moment I saw the scene
pretty technical.
It in.
Was there a formal amendment
that the dress the concerns of
the Santa Fe district attorney
what are you speaking to start
the process of drafting the bill
no Madam chair representative we
we get actually do and that we
get and I'm looking at it we did
an amendment in C. pack to
address the district the
the Santa Fe district attorney's
concerns about children
witnesses under the age of
thirteen and informants.
So okay that there may have been
others madam chair and Mr staff
because he was involved directly
in those discussions I want to
make sure covered.
Madam chair representative and
the Representative McQueen yes
it is important I'm glad you
pointed that out because there
was a comment made during the
public comment about the ten
days there's a ten day
requirement for talking those
that was amended that's not
that's no longer in there in
order to take care of that
problem I talked to district
attorney Diana loose from the
fifth district about.
Possible language and so forth
and that was one of the issues
as well but the and this Santa
Fe district attorney and I
agree with that seven day
amendment so it should say seven
days not ten and then it has the
amendment concerning the
children and the informants okay
and then chair representative
and Mr chair that you know.
You know the seven districts
of the district attorney's
current position on the screen.
I Madam chair representative I
do not she.
We had a very good discussion
she'll have to open that she
might take any position I'm not
committing her to a position
except that she and I agreed
specifically on that amendment
language.
Chairman representative in no
way are we suggesting that she
is
a supporter of this bill is just
Mr stout work with her directly
and I want to make sure that you
know to the extent that we can
agree changes we would
Madam chair representative so
the reason I and I will.
Excuse me just a moment I can't
find an amendment.
If you go to
the website I went directly to
the website yeah I didn't do the
website I.
Contacts so you'll see it right
away.
Madam there's also that in the
committee report in the
committee reports are showing up
in our Citrix files so if you
master you are the context you
have to go find it.
this Madam is the reason I ask
is the Santa Fe district
attorney give me a call in the
she left a message expressing
concerns I don't know if that
was before after the amendment
and I was unable to actually
reach for so I adjusters so let
me if I could just move on.
Concisely explain to me.
Why some cases where they have a
pulmonary hearing in some cases
we go to a grand jury I mean
what's what's the purpose of
having the two different prices.
Would you like me to think that.
I think if you could do it
briefly I'd I really thought
Representative Eli did a good
job of that already go ahead Mr
stout okay I'll try to.
Well basically it's it's it's
quite arbitrary they're aging
there are grand juries in
certain parts of the state.
Generated on the Rio Grande
quarter I call it but there are
others as well as is in the
north is what's necessary.
And but most.
The bridge Authority of
districts in the state have
preliminary hearings but and
there are some districts that
have both.
So it it subject to could try to
use it just to save time try to
get a case through the pipeline
as quickly as possible and
others I think I want to see the
the strength of their case and
that's what's happened in the
fifth district for many many
years.
I'm not sure that answers your
question but I.
The.
Let me also say that
Representative McQueen I mean I
do that because the LESC did a
study and what they showed in
the LFC report lists a couple
years old it was substantially.
It was a substantial savings and
higher conviction rates and
settling cases by using the
preliminary hearing.
So madam chair Mister so what
I'm hearing is.
There are two different
processes and it's not super
clear why.
What it is and it's somewhat
arbitrary that's a concern is
that it's arbitrary.
Madam chair representative I
think it's a concern that is
there's a stark difference
between the two procedures as
Representative bash it noted in
one proceeding you have right to
counsel X. public you have cross
examination so forth and so on
and the other you don't have
either it's secret proceedings
and one this Mr I'm sorry I
can't take you off because it's
late I I want this thousand
question okay I'm sorry I did
not included to one procedure as
opposed to the other one and and
answer I'm hearing is that it's
our.
And I think it's for time
reasons as much as anything and
and most of the time.
The there is consideration for
Children witnesses which has
been taken care of in the bill
The yes that is also one of the
one of the reasons.
Services with these changes.
Perhaps it was something.
I I think I heard percent ring
saying.
It seems like to two different
processes are getting closer
together.
Prosecutors in the United States
yeah I don't I think they are
they aren't I mean what all
we're seeing now is the grand
jury is still not a cross
examination process so so that
makes a difference because
unless the defense lawyer has
the ability to cross examine you
can't use that evidence at trial
as a prosecutor so the
preliminary hearing is a totally
different process because is
cross examination allow the
lawyers the defense lawyers
allowed to participate but in
terms of the quality of evidence
yeah I mean Michael can speak to
this but I think it's the same
I'm all we're saying is is if
you're going to present evidence
to a body heather slide with
rules of evidence that just
doesn't seem like a big deal
does that move the process is
closer together yeah I guess so
but in terms of actual visual
visual areas grand juries are
behind closed doors there's just
the DA and maybe the water
sitting there is a potted plant
the defense lawyer and that's at
worst a pleasure hearing is like
a little mini trial I'm sure the
defense lawyers for all cringe
when I say that but it's
somewhat like that where you
have actual cross examination of
the judges a referee and all
that stuff and if I said that
wrong I'm sure Mr stout will
jump in
I'm not jumping in thanks.
Act.
Chairman representative.
Terms of the light so if that's
the case one of the questions
from the public and I think it
was one of the dust or something
so she with the dust of the
question of okay who's gonna be
the arbiter the rules of
evidence and I would think the
benefit of the complementary
hearing where the judge is
present is the judge can make
rulings Inc incorrect any
defects in real time where is
now is if a grand jury you do
have to comply with rules of
evidence you're gonna get all
sorts of appeals based on the
defects and those that that
evidence in your gut you're
you're going to litigate the
evidentiary rulings that.
That level rather than in real
time.
Is that.
You
chair representative that's an
excellent point except for one
thing lawyers can't just file
appeals to file appeals they
have to have some basis for so
it really requires is the dust
got a present evidence is
consistent with the rules that
if if it were to fence largest
starts filing motions every time
an appeals that lawyers gonna
get in trouble you can't be
doing that just to do it so this
notion everything's gonna get
appealed everything there's a
basis for so the DA is following
the rules of evidence then we're
fine and if they're not D. A.
should know that right that
because that means the quality
of evidence is there to continue
to prosecute a person who
they're putting behind bars and
they're subjecting to the
criminal process we we talked
about the rights of people I'm
leaving that out of this
discussion the fact is is that
the dust should be presenting
quality evidence evidence
consistent with the rules of
average right away and yes I get
this notion of the sky's falling
because you know whatever's
going to file an appeal but
every lawyer you wouldn't be
included in the criminal defense
lawyers are also due to rule
that you can't just start filing
appeals just because you can't
you can't do it.
So mentors and you let.
When I was in law school I of
course took evidence I bust my
**** in that class I got my only
see.
not my strong point
The question is.
Random immediate appeals but a
grounds for appeal is if there
is evidence presented in the.
Grand jury and there's a defect
in the evidence and and from my
perspective the the C. evidence
to that it was all over the bay
I'm clear you know what the what
the rules were is that then the
grounds for appeal at some
point.
For once the grand jury acts.
Grounds for appeal because it
says that in the bill that the
District Court can read to
review the the grand jury.
So so don't you end up arguing
that and District Court at a
later date after it's already
been present if if you have
Madam chair representative if
you have a basis for but you
can't be doing that without
basis and remember this is where
I turn into a lawyer again Madam
chair representative we are
talking about people's rights so
you know should there be the
ability early on in the process
to go to a judge and state if
they didn't do this right you
that I I stand by that I had no
problems the Senate to you madam
chair Representative Eli my last
question as someone will
remember the public race issue
about.
The victims requiring victims
testified in I think of the
cation was in again.
This is my last more energy with
this location was you can get a
grand jury indictment without
having the victim testified.
It can could you just explain
that to me is.
Your take on that concern on
madam chair and Representative
that when I want to turn over
Michael stout since she would
have experience with that and I
would not.
Well Madam chair representative
thank you for the question the.
I mean it.
The call I should say is such a
cliche I hate to use most but I
will anyway and that is the tip
of the cliche of indicting a ham
sandwich at any any prosecutor
worth the salt N. dot M.
sandwich the reason is because a
prosecutor put controls a
process and has no penalty as
nobody grading his or her
papers.
and so there there are many
indictments where they don't
hear testimony from from the
alleged victim of whether it's a
robbery or burglary or theft are
aren't any kind of crime.
Of students to answer your
question about who makes the
decision it's the same as it's
always been for years the
prosecutor makes the decision
whether the evidence is comp a
local rep relevant they do that
now.
They're the ones who make that
decision and we trust them to
make that decision it's just
that there is a reason is a
review of that because frankly
the whether willfully or.
And maliciously or not or just
inadvertently they have not.
Presented competent evidence
many many times that can be
abusive.
So madam chair and sat under
this bill.
A grand jury proceeding in
victim would be required to
testify unless.
They fell under one of these
exceptions the informant or the.
Someone under the age of
thirteen.
Right.
The.
Madam chair representative I
can't say of course for every
case but there are some cases
require you to have direct
evidence of what happened and
yet you have to have somebody
who has some kind of personal
knowledge about what happened.
If you simply have reviewed
simply bring all the police
officers in to read reports
about something they heard and
then you move down the process
you've wasted a lot of grand
jurors time lot of system I love
the energy with and say okay
fine that's what you heard so
will indict but you haven't
heard competent evidence on it.
Thank you so it does it does
require that the personal
knowledge at some point.
Representative Nyerere.
Thank you madam chair and a two
going to follow my my
transactional from the
Representative from Santa Fe and
and try to Wade into some some
issues that I don't see in
practice and and Mr stout
certainly knows that my
knowledge of this subject is a
limited at best but madam chair
and representative
I always thought that grand
juries and I may be wrong but I
always order the grand juries
we're just to ensure that there
was probable cause to bind
somebody over for trial it is it
will M. I. operating under a
misconception of what the grand
jury was for.
Mr stout.
Madam chair representative not
worked the legal standard is it
a grand jury.
The standard of evidence is the
same at a grand juries that is
of primary hearing that is
probable cause that a crime was
committed and probable cause
that the defendant is the one
who committed so that is the
standard.
It's just depending on what
tools you use to get to that to
to evaluate that standard.
Okay M..
Madam chair and Mr stout under
the proposed changes that are
presented in this bill.
It looks like.
We're changing.
Some of that to make sure that
we have.
That we follow the rules of
evidence which why.
Thirty seven years ago last
dealing with those required
foundations to be laid up at
everything else so are the rule
changes going to require the
district attorney to bring them
a lot of witnesses to lay
foundations and to.
substantiate all the evidence
for that you're wanting to be
presented in this bill.
Madam chair representative no
the the reason that the rules of
evidence or even right referred
to is because that is the most
common.
At best.
A definition are best reference
to what competent evidence is
competent evidence again has
been required for decades he
just hasn't been enforced and so
there there's no there's no
court is gonna say well you
didn't you didn't you let the
witness our our did the
technical thing is going to say
well that indictment it doesn't
stand if there is evidence I'm
gonna evidence to show that the
crime the probable cause for the
crime that's going to stand.
Yeah.
And Mr Chairman looks why on
page two.
What the the.
For more months.
Contacts
and so that that page or wind
numbers but that so.
The language near where the
state track.
Amendments for those lawful
competent and relevant evidence
is evidence would be admissible
under the New Mexico rules of
evidence and that has the
exception for the the people
under thirteen years of age
That that tells me that you're
wanting evidence that would be
admissible under the the Mexico
rules of evidence which I think
requires foundation in many
instances and back.
May.
Or it seems to me that that
puts a higher burden and may
require a lot more people to to
show up to these grand jury
For students
what was normally contemplated
and just trying to prove
probable costs and more really
about language for all.
Madam chair representative no I
don't I don't think you really
know language wrong but I think
that it's a misimpression to.
First of all understand that
there are many exceptions for.
For for technical things that do
not require personal evidence
not require witnesses there are
thanks for lab reports and so
forth and also it's it's a there
are lots of exceptions to
hearsay and so for instance hi I
don't think that foundations
would be a problem if you have
for example a robbery a state of
a robbery victim who says that
yes this person robbed me I'm
not sure what foundation would
be missing that.
That would be a problem.
I I just don't.
I don't see it as a problem it's
certainly not the intent of the
legislation to cause such a
problem got you madam chair and
representative I mean it's not
the high standard on that
requires personal knowledge that
somebody sent an affidavit on
remember that's going to come up
on the house floor with the our
herbal law that were amending
right that's one we're all we're
doing is taking guns out of the
house that are an imminent
threat to someone themselves or
others and we're saying we've
got to have a personal affidavit
of probable cause remains over
saying here is it's got to
comply with the rules that and
this is by the way much more
serious than anything we're
doing in our.
And I mean we're indicting some
right the state is putting a
marker on someone that this is a
potentially bad person and yet
we're saying Gee the DA can't
even comply with the rules of
evidence that doesn't seem very
fair and all we're saying is
comply with the rules.
Well I'm not sure I agree with
that statement the madam chair
and representative it it seems
to me that the Enquirer areas
those probable cause exists the
buying those person over for
trial and to our.
Charge them with this particular
crime at and that's so maybe
just a different view all all
what's going on but.
I don't want drag this out too
long with I I I do want to and
madam chair Mr stout the forgive
me for this problem but it seems
to me that this bill kind of
allows Monday morning
quarterbacking and for those of
you that don't know Mr stout was
an all state quarterback of our
teacher I school so far that
we've got.
Really local.
You were there you were in every
everybody chair in
anyway
the the courts it looks like the
district courts get get an
opportunity to to review this
stuff yeah and it seems a.
Of.
Every defense attorneys going to
request a review is that how you
would see this as a practically
works out of if the DA does
through the spread during for
the this grand jury procedure
and.
Get state grand jury to bind
them over do you not see that in
every instance the defense
attorney is going to raise the
issue with the district court
that the procedure was not
substantiated properly and
requests the District Court to
now engage in a lot of time and
effort reviewing the grand jury
proceeding to see if there were
any missteps on the part of the
district attorney yeah and
moving through this grand jury
process madam chair and
representative I can check
question they have that right
now.
To do that today with no changes
will.
Then my wrong about that chair
Mister step.
Western.
Okay.
Madam chair representative I
would answer it the that you're
correct but the burden is to
show bad faith on the part of
the district attorney under
existing law and that languages
stricken right above the
language that I read a second
ago
it's taken out of the the act so
so the standard is is
substantially changed and so Mr
Snell I'm sorry for for
interrupting you go at correct
yes a lot of all.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
You said so much that I I do
just a few things but on the
other.
We'll forget the whole thing but
the.
But in terms of the the thank
you madam last actually that bad
faith that you are incorrect
because if you look at the rule
that out the state Supreme Court
to rule on the that that they
have read they say the weight
and I'm quoting the weight of
the evidence upon which an
indictment is returned shall not
be subject to review review
absent a showing of bad faith on
the part of the prosecuting
attorney assisting the grand
jury that language is part is
the law now so it's not needed
in that particular statutory
section which is it we can I
wouldn't mind it being there but
it's it's in the Supreme Court
law as we speak.
Of.
So that so that is already there
in terms of the cost of
litigation will there be what
litigation it opens up for the
possibility of communication I
mean no one would deny that but
I don't want to waste my time on
a useless Act if you know lacked
if the district attorney is
presented something reasonably
at the at the grand jury I see a
record of it it's not gonna do
me any good to the state all
they didn't you know that's it
to go challenge that we're not I
do I challenge things if I think
the challenge will no question
but.
I think it's overstated to say
that that that that's a problem
I think it's a good thing that
we get these things right in the
first place and even if you went
if you find a sale on that
challenge all it does is they go
back and do it right.
And so it doesn't it doesn't in
the case you don't the case is
not dismissed except without
prejudice.
Turn to section the which is on
the last two pages of the bill.
And that's where that story
District Court review of the
proceedings and
I'm told that the spring court
may review this on a case and
and review their own rule five
dash three oh two eight which
had similar language to that
which was soon of the subsection
the order that it be removed
because it was a source of
confusion and needless
litigation.
Madam chair and and
representative maybe Mr stout is
there any
It does the same reasoning of
the court used
maybe apply to this section.
Madam chair representative.
This is the reason for the bill
this is the essence of the bill
is it paragraph do that language
I'm not sure if that we could
track it word for word but is
meant to be exactly the same as
the Supreme Court referred to
and it's prior rule in rural
than if the language because
that is that the grand jury
proceedings and that while our
competency and relevancy shall
be revealed all of the District
Court that's the language that
was cut out because by the
Supreme Court their reasoning
being justice Daniels wrote in
the opinion.
saying that well we didn't the
legislature can give that
authority so we don't have the
right it'll be confusing our
rule would be confusing to make
it seem that we have the right
to review and we don't the
legislature has to give us that
right and that's why we're here
with this bill.
Madam chair and.
Representative Mr staff.
Thank you for your answers are.
I'm a bit the.
Computers because.
I've talked to the the district
attorney of the judicial
district and grand juries are
not something that the I guess
are utilized very often in the
judicial district apparently
because of budgetary constraints
and and maybe other reasons of
order I'm not quite
understanding what the what the
real problem is that they're not
used about fairness but maybe
maybe some other judicial
districts do things a little
differently about that how we do
it at and.
In my part of the state thank
you for that comment on that Mr
Representative served as chair
representative if fifty
additional district and you know
As You disclosed earlier I cut
my teeth in the fifth district
and it was at that time it was
known as the fighting fifth you
know and they put more cases
through then that district but
more cases through than the
second district in Albuquerque
and they did about preliminary
hearing and the experience.
A district attorney's there many
of time using New Mexico
Representative.
Realized that it wasn't a
budgetary issue it was a matter
of they got better results by
having resolution of cases early
by having preliminary hearings
and they had very very few grand
juries those of prosecutors were
good prosecutors and they learn
how to try cases and I learned
you read a lot more cases and
resolved a lot more cases but
preliminary hearings that you
did by putting up a Moffit here
by putting them in the pipeline
to the grand jury.
Madam chair and Mr Saleh
currently that still the case as
well it isn't that strict.
I thank you for your time thank
you madam chair.
Thank you and I had I handled
one felony case ever it was a
grand jury and I got.
I got I rooted for Jones letter
in the judge that they had to
call another witness and I don't
think they ever indicted my
clients.
So.
What.
There's got to be a better way
Representative I don't know but
then last year.
Madam chair and wanted to pass
on HB two twenty six as amended
at I will second that motion.
Click to call the roll.
The CBS.
Sh Representative Alcon yes.
Representative Cook.
Madam chair with in my
friendship with the legendary
footballer Michael stout I don't
know.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
it was stabbing my long history
with the expert.
Hi good.
When.
Representative in.
No ma'am.
No ma'am and I am the only
bulldog here.
Withstanding my short
relationship with my
constituents the expert Michael
out will you.
Yes.
Yes or no in a compact from
house bill two to six.
So we have eight in favor and
for now right.
Okay.
Thank you all I've got a hearing
in the morning.
Thank you all very much for a
let's not let's not do this
again is to log.
Not everybody staff thank you
madam chair thank you thank you
all the panelists thank you
everybody thank thank you madam
chair.
It is a part.
