Um, the shooting threat bill was
in the package that was signed
by the governor today. Um, so
this just deals with swatting,
uh, it doesn't deal with
anything else, um, I've worked
really closely with Senator
Cervantes and his staff, um, to
get it in the right section in
the right way, um, so,
We've put it under uh the false
reporting section in the law.
Mr. Chair, I think we need a
motion just I move a do not pass
on Senate Bill 18 and a2
passport discussion on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 18.
And uh so starting on the 2nd
page is where the subsequent
part of uh the swatting bill
picks up and it's um the the
same language that we've been
working on, um, and makes the,
the.
Crime of swatting a 4th degree
felony, as I think you remember
swatting is when.
Uh, you know, they call law
enforcement or 911 and say that
they heard gunshots in someone's
home or something like that to
get a response from a SWAT team
that's why it's been labeled
swatting all over the country.
I don't know, just one second,
I've lost Emily someplace. Give
me just a second. Do you know,
do, do you know, Senator, was
there anyone who had signed up
to support or oppose your bill
to your knowledge. All right.
Does anyone here who feels they
did, in fact, sign up.
In support of opposition, I'm
not seeing any hands, so we'll
go to members of the committee
questions.
Not they didn't sign up, so.
I don't have anybody signed up,
so, um.
Thanks, Emily. Do we have
anybody who signed up?
opposition on 18? No. All right,
committee members, questions.
Sorry.
Mover do pass
of the Kusa.
OK, motion. Any other
discussions that are true?
Thank you Mr. Chairman. So,
Um
Just, just reading this, so a
is a misdemeanor.
But Tempe is a 4th degree
felony. What's the difference
false police report you say you
saw someone committing a crime
that they didn't commit, um, and
you're proven that you filed
false police reports, so that's
a misdemeanor.
Um, and then B is where you're
trying to get a response from
the police, um.
Or fire department or any of
those that uh uses possible use
of SWAT teams, so, you know,
you're calling it the police
department or 911 again, saying
you heard, you know, gunshots or
something and, and someone's
house you don't like.
Trying to get the law
enforcement to respond to that.
So is the is the new part which
is fixing a with.
Yeah, they just, there was just
some antiquated wording and in a
that.
When we open up these statues,
we kind of fix the language a
little bit where.
OK, thank you. Thank you Senator
Stewart. Anyone else?
We're on a do pass motion for
the committee's substitute. Is
there any objection to the
DuPass motion?
and you have a do pass. I
appreciate you working as hard
as you have. You've been at this
for a long time. It took us a
few tries, but congratulations
today.
I don't have Maest here in the
room, we'll go to the next
Senator do extendate Bill 54.
OK.
OK
Which.
I
OK.
While you're taking your seats,
Senator, we've heard the Senate
Bill 54 before we did all of the
public comment, uh, pretty
extensive dive into this bill,
and there were a number of
suggestions and proposed changes
made along with the
recommendation that we do this
the committee substitute, so
that's what you have in front of
you. So, Senator Wirth, you want
to make the motion?
So Mr. Chair, I do not pass on
Senate Bill 54 and a new pass on
the committee substitute and it
bill 54 for discussion purposes
just discuss the changes that
were made after our last hearing
alert us to those and then we
should be ready to take a vote.
Senator, do it.
And you know, Mr. Chair, I think
I misunderstood your request
because this is a, a 0.2 of the
committee sub. There were a
couple of changes that were made
since.
So everything we talked about
last session or last week when
we heard this, is in here since
then.
A couple other changes were made
and I thought that's what you
wanted me to describe.
So 4.2 version. Yes, yes, yes,
that's the right version, uh,
apart from what we already
discussed when we heard this
last time, there were just a
couple of small changes made.
OK, just alert us to those
24.
Uh, there was a, a date taken
out page 24.
The 20, there had been a date
there that, that did not need to
be there, the, uh, I had a a lot
of discussion with Grace
Phillips from Association
County. She said, we're already
doing this. You don't need to
put a delayed implementation
date on us developing
implementing and publishing
policies, uh, about medication
to assist a treatment.
In that same subsection that sub
3 which is page 24 lines 22 to
24. We changed this language a
little bit to make clear that
there is a requirement for
county facilities to provide
medication for opioid use
disorder or withdrawal
management,
age 24 at line 22.
We want to make sure that the
folks who are going into
withdrawal in our county
facilities get the appropriate,
uh, management for that. So.
Ms. Phillips, uh, had suggested
putting that that language in
there to make that very clear.
What I had said previously was
provide withdrawal management
that ensures each program
participant receives the
medication identified to be most
effective at treating the
individual's needs. Uh, she, she
had said that she thought there
needed to be a specific
reference to to opioid use, to
medication or opioid use, uh,
disorder, which uh the draw for
which can be very dangerous.
You look on the next page, on
page 25.
The next change is in that
subsection, subsection 5,
starting at line 4.
And
There's a, there's a lot of
concern on the part of the
counties, uh, about unfunded
mandates. They, the request had
been.
To make this entire section, uh,
dealing about what, what they
have to do, contingent only on
them getting, getting funding
from the state to do so. I, I
did not think that that was
reasonable, especially for
things they are already doing,
but for starting.
Um
Starting medication, uh,
assisted treatment in a county
facility. I understand that they
would need me funding to, to
start that new program of, of
initiating it in their
facilities. So this now says
contingent on the provision of
state, local, or federal funds
by the end of fiscal year 2027
offer medication-assisted
treatment to all people who are
incarcerated in county detention
facilities and in need of.
Uh, medication assistance
treatment.
Um, whereas before it had.
had talked about the
availability of those funds.
This is actually this is the,
yeah, once you actually get the,
so we don't quibble about what
available.
Otherwise, the only other change
that was made in the Saab other
than what we had spoken about
before, was removing a section
that right right now, uh, if you
have a DUI, you cannot get a
conditional discharge. There and
we had added a section in that
said if it's been 5 years, you
can.
The last time we talked about
this bill, Mr. Chair, you said,
I can't believe the DA's
association isn't here and
apparently they were listening
because the next day they said,
Well, can we meet, um, because
we, we really, we really have a
problem with that section,
specifically, so I agreed to
remove that section at their
request. That's where again you
won't see it in here because
it's been taken out.
Otherwise, that those are the
only changes other than what we
had discussed at the prior on
this bill.
I understand, right, that the
district attorneys were
listening to that hearing. They
were paying attention. OK.
Good to know.
All right, I appreciate the
changes. We went through this
pretty extensively before. I
know that we've got somebody
signed up, uh, Denali Wilson
with the ACLU and New Mexico.
We've already gone to this
before unless do you or are you
here Dena? I'm looking for you
in the room there way back
there. OK, yeah, are, are your
comments specific to the changes
that have been made.
They are or not? OK, I'm gonna
ask you to just stand on your
comments earlier, but ACLU
supports the bill, right?
you as well.
Thank you very much, Ms. Wilson.
All right.
Committee members with questions
that
again.
Um, our list of people that have
already heard this bill pretty
extensively. I appreciate the
summary of the changes,
questions on the changes or on
the motion that's before us,
anyone at all.
And Mr. Chair, I just wanted to
say at the last meeting you had
said you wanted to make sure
that there wasn't any conflict
between this one and HB 8, there
is not.
Understood. All right. Anyone,
questions?
If not, we've got a pending
motion. Well, it's for really
for discussion purposes, but, so
we'll take a, a formal motion.
There's no question,
Cerysus.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I
move but do not pass on 54, uh,
I do pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senegal
54.2 version.
That's the motion, there being
no other questions or any
discussion. Is there any
objection to the DuPass motion?
No, thank you, a lot of work
here. Appreciate that. Was that,
was that an objection? 2
objections over there? OK. All
right, Senator Paul, Senator
Thornton, Senator.
Brentley.
is that it? All all those and
support. Thank you.
So I just, um, we skipped over
you to get to the next one, let
me.
Because you've got a number of
people here, let me, because I
want to keep you here on yours
anyway, so let's go to Senate
Bill 73, bicycle stops.
We have Cio Lopez, we don't.
Yeah.
OK. Um, we'll go to Senator Ma
to Senate Bill 50.
Themesis?
You're on. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Honorable members, I'm joined by
Sean Dolan from Legislative
council Service who will
introduce himself in a moment.
But what we have before the
committee is a point, point one
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 50 or affectionately known
as committee, uh, Senate Bill
50, and it deals with police
training,
so we have in front of us, we
have a 0.3. No, I know, I'm
gonna explain that just now,
just just now.
So
Mr. Chairman
I move it do not pass on Senate
Bill 50 and for purposes of
discussion, I do pass on Senate
Judiciary Committee's substitute
for Senate Bill 50.3.
Thank you, and make sure, are we
on the right version of the
committee said it's 39.3 is the
footer.
They're correct. OK. All right.
We, we just got confused. You
said 0.1, and I know maybe he
didn't mean that literally, so.
I took you literally, but we're
on the 39.3
but center. Thank you.
So after reviewing the commit
the original committee
substitute, uh, there was a few
errors and, and changes that
needed to be made.
Uh, so the, for the folks
listening at home, uh, on page
9, we uh we removed or private
business.
Uh, from, from, uh, safety
agency, we remove the words or
volunteer.
From tele telecommunicators.
Senator, let me interrupt you
for a second. So you're, you're
getting very specific into the
bill about uh lines and pages
and wording. How about you tell
us a little bit about the bill
first of all and kind of orient
us before we start getting into
the surgery and then again, uh,
uh, we're gonna recognize you
for 15 minutes for your
presentation, but tell me what
the bill is about what you're
trying, what you're trying to
do, and then we'll worry about
the specific changes that you
made. Thank you so much if I
may, the, the, the change we
made was.
We put back in Senate
confirmation. But thank you, Mr.
Chairman, honorable members,
Senate Bill 50 deals with police
training, and it does several
things with regards to the
police training requirements,
but before I start with that, it
adds, I'll just go kind of
forward to backwards. It adds
telecommunicators to the
retention fund. There's a bill,
uh, Senate Bill 173, which adds
telecommunicators to the para
retirement.
Uh, it doesn't look like that.
Well, Hazard's tremendous
support, but we have to do
something to retain
telecommunicators in their jobs.
It's an incredibly high stress.
highly uh traumatizing job to
answer these calls day after
day. So this adds
telecommunicators to the
retention fund, but doesn't
threaten uh retention fund
monies from current law
enforcement officials if the
fund were to ever dry up,
telecommunicators would be
removed from the front.
Um, as you recall, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senate Bill 375, uh,
was the, the brain, the
brainchild of the municipal
League a couple years back, that
that language was then
incorporated into the House Bill
68.
We then passed a couple years
later, Senate Bill 19. This is a
continuation of that work and
the main premise of the bill is
to revamp and modernize police
training and curriculum in the
various in the various uh
Uh, police academies and
satellite academies. So
throughout the years, Mr.
Chairman, what we've done as a
legislature, we we've required
training on this training on
that. I remember there was a
high speed chase that ended up
in a horrific crash. We came
back to Santa Fe and put a
mandatory requirements on
policies with regards to height,
speed, uh, chases. What's
happened over time, Mr.
Chairman, is that police
officers need 40 hours of
training every 2 years.
40 hours of training,
approximately 30 to 32 of those
hours is our statutory
requirements which repeat
themselves every 2 years. And so
even though it's tough to take
these requirements out of state
statute. I think the way we're
doing it, uh, is, is going to
allow the academies to continue
to modernize their training,
hopefully get the resources they
deserve and continue police
officer training ongoingly as
the modern society progresses,
the things that we mandated in
state statute are not going.
away.
Those are deeply embedded in
police training curriculums and
are absolutely necessary to be a
successful uh.
A police officer in the state of
New Mexico, for example, the
first bill I ever did in my
legislative career was one of
these statutory requirements
that were, that we're now
proposing to take out uh this
bill, Mr. Chairman, does not
deal with um the certification
board as it relates to DPS where
this isn't a changing any power
dynamics, it's not dealing with
uh the legalities of an
administratively attached
agency. However, the
certification board is
In this bill in section 4,
because we need to, we need to
do some cleanup under current
law, a retired and we're looking
on page 16 line 18 under current
law of retired district court
judge.
Shall share the the
certification board, but we're
having a difficult time finding
a retired district court judge,
so we're merely changing the the
words to read an attorney with
judicial experience, so
theoretically a former justice,
as a former court of appeals
judge, a former Metro
magistrate, and that, and that
the certification board, uh,
chooses its own chair and vice
chair. That's the only reason
the certification board is even
in this bill is because of those
uh two changes. And so, uh,
there's a lot of folks.
want to speak in favor, and
there's definitely some concerns
from law enforcement.
That this was not a result of a
task force, um, in a perfect
world, the, uh, training, uh,
the, the uh training council
comes with recommendations every
couple of years to the
legislature to further tweak the
statutes to modernize police
training, uh, this was done ad
hoc based on all the suggestions
I've received through the years
and most recently in the last
month on what to do with regards
to police training in the
curriculum, in particular, this,
this, you know, constant,
constant.
Almost like the movie Groundhog
Day where the training does
nothing to advance the careers
of the of the officers in the
field and does not necessarily
make us more safe.
Uh, or doesn't, you know, really
move the profession forward. So,
so anyway, I will uh.
Uh, I'll maybe ask Mr. Dolan to
make a few comments with regards
to some of the changes, um, we
do deal with the uh with the um
training council in terms of
changing, uh, you know, making
the sheriff a liaison to the
sheriff's association, making
the municipal police chief, uh,
liaison to the Chiefs
Association, uh, for example, in
current law, we have 2 members
who have experience and
specialize in providing adult
education. The bill changes
those words to two faculties.
members from a public or private
postsecondary educational
institutions, criminal justice
programs. So we just tighten up
the language, hopefully get a
strong, strong leadership in
these positions and move the
profession forward, it is
imperative that every law
enforcement officer get trained
in modern national techniques,
adult learning, uh, this is
education. It's not in service
training. This is adult learning
and adult education throughout
an officer's career so that they
can be better in the
feel better at gathering
information, better at providing
evidence to the DA's veterate
testifying in court and, and,
and moving forward with uh with
public trust between our
community and our law
enforcement officers who
sacrifice every day them and
their families. So with that,
I'll turn over to Mr. Dolan for
maybe some other changes and uh,
and then we'll go to the
audience uh in support.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, as a reminder,
I'm uh here for uh representing
legislative council service, not
in support or opposition to any
bill, but just here to provide
technical assistance. Um, I
believe Senator Maestas went
over uh the, the vast majority
of changes that are between 1
and the 0.3 version, um.
The only other thing is there
were some um some math cleanup
on the uh number.
of the board members that was
due to um my very poor math
skills in adding together all
the individual members of the
board. I think that was the only
other, um, actual.
Change.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just
To specify on that currently.
Um, all the directors of the
accredited regional law
enforcement training facilities
are on the board. We bumped it
to 3 directors, so 3 directors,
and in doing so, uh, we dropped
some of the other uh persons on
the board.
Um, so that the board is smaller
and more precise also that the
uh.
The Director of the police
academy remains on the board,
uh, as, as an ex-official
member.
Um, and that, uh,
And then instead of, uh, for
example, on the top top of page
13.
Right now, the current law is an
attorney employed by the Public
Defendant department. We then, I
think, made the statute better
by reading by the public
defender department or an
attorney who practices criminal
defense, opening that slot up to
a private attorneys, things of
that nature. Thank you, Mr. um.
We could make them part of the
presentation.
Uh, Rachel Feldman, followed by
Nicole Brown on Zoom. Chris,
Michaelis on Zoom.
Her Bundy here and Valerie
Morris those are the people that
I have registered in advance. So
we'll start with Ms. Feldman.
Miss Felman, you're recognized
for up to a minute, ma'am.
I had prepared a longer
statement, which I thought would
be incorporated.
You're only recognizing me for a
minute. Yes. OK. Uh, my name is
Rachel Feldman. I represent
Indivisible SOS Santa Fe, and
organization of women who work
to improve our communities, our
state, and our nation, about 4
years ago, we adopted improving
professional education for law
enforcement as a strategy to
improve public safety. I'm also
a citizen at large appointed
member of the law enforcement
Standards and Training Council,
though I am not reporting that
body, um, not representing that
body.
Um, uh, there's several
important points I want to make.
Everything in this bill, um,
what has been included because
the needs have been expressed by
law enforcement leadership in a
number of venues we have
interviewed, had um made major
meetings with over 100 law
enforcement leaders in New
Mexico.
Discuss these issues and
standards and training council
meetings, had focus groups and
interacted with a lot of people
across the spectrum of law
enforcement and the things that
have been asked for in this bill
have all been requested multiple
times by those people. So, uh,
there have been requests for
modernizing the curriculum for
improving the in-service
training and turning it into
more credentialed credentialing,
uh, similar to other.
Professions, there's uh people
want to get degrees and have
access to better training so
they can improve themselves,
there'll be a telecommunicator
who will speak.
OK
One of the issues is the, there
was a study done in 2024 that
showed that our training in our
curriculum in New Mexico is a
dangerously out of date 25 years
out of date, substandard does
not meet any national standards,
so we have an undertrained
workforce which creates great
liabilities for the state and
for local governments and part
of the purpose of this bill is
to upgrade in a five-year plan,
all of the
training, create a professional
set of career paths and
curriculum for all law
enforcement in New Mexico.
I cut you off because we've got
others, and again, that's part
of why we have our rules to
allow you to have a longer
statement, but it's got to be
done in conjunction with the
sponsor so that he reserves
enough time for a speaker. So
Nicole Brown, are you on Zoom?
Right, Ms. Brown, you're
recognized for up to a minute,
ma'am.
Thank you. I um would like to
speak in favor of adding
telecommunicators to the law
enforcement retention fund. I
know that, um,
If, you know, we would be
excluded if the funds can't, um,
or ever.
Too much on the fund, which I
support, um, I'm also in support
of repealing the annual uh
training requirements that are
in currently in statute and
replacing them with um something
that the council can report back
to the the legislator with, I
think that that's really
important, um, to keep our our
training modern.
And up to date and future
forward. And so I think that
we'll still continue to train on
the things the legislator found
important in the past, such as D
and Safe Pursuits, and, you
know, dealing with people with
mental impairments, they're
still important. We're still
going to continue to do that,
but it gives us some flexibility
to still address issues that um
we, you know, trends we can see
like active shooter and things
like that in our country and and
still address them. As a council
member of the law enforcement.
gender training council, I, um,
I'm a little bit worried about
messing with the the makeup of
the council. Um, I, I have some
suggestions that I've submitted
that have have been taken by um
Senator Maestas and the, the
drafting of the bill, uh, I
think that it's important to
remember that we're still, it's
still for a law enforcement
training, and we want to be
cognizant that law enforcement
has a good makeup of who is on
that council and has a good say
in that, and um yeah.
All I have to say.
Thank you, Ms. Brown.
Uh, Chris, um, Michaelis.
On Zoom
or senator, I'm sorry, I'm
showing you on Zoom.
Chairman Cervantes.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, Chairman Cervantes, members
of the Senate Judiciary
Committee. My name is Chris
Micelli and I am indeed
representing and speaking for
both the state.
Organization of the NAACP and
our Santa Fe branch.
The NAACP has for 116 years in
the voice of people of color,
the marginalized and
disenfranchised, the people who
for many years, not only didn't
have a voice, but were treated
as less than human.
As we know, people of color are
disproportionately singled out
as potentially dangerous and as
suspicious. The legacy that has
continued in many areas of our
society today.
can and must change.
The NAACP respectfully request
your support.
Of Senate Bill 50 with its
amendments, so that our law
enforcement personnel across the
state and have the needed
upgraded training, which draws
the boundaries between
addressing suspicious behavior
and over policing.
We wouldn't expect surgeons to
use 20 year old procedures in
the operating room when new
techniques have been discovered.
And more effectively used to
heal the sick.
Similarly, it is unfair to law
enforcement.
To be expected to know best
practices in keeping our
citizens safe without updated
training and education.
The vast majority of those in
public safety positions want to
serve honorably, and we support
them.
But to ask them to put their
life on the line without
adequate and updating training
is inhumane to their well-being,
as well as those under their
radar. Thank you. Thank you,
ma'am.
Mr. Bundy.
I'm recognizing you for up to a
minute, Mr. Bundy.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy with
asks me, you have my written
comments, so I won't go along,
but, uh, this does have an
important component where the
law enforcement retention fund,
which you funded over the years
and we fought for it for years
before that to get into place.
This is something that can be
used to recruit and retain 911
telecommunicators. They are the
front line of our public safety
world. They help our police and
sheriffs. We also represent some
of them. They help our
firefighters. They help our
EMTs, so we need to be fully
staffed at.
certainly helps improve our
response times, we want to thank
the sponsor for bringing this
and hopefully you'll support it.
Thank you. Thank you.
Valerie Morris.
No.
All right, in opposition, we
have
now, it looks like.
It's like all law enforcement
with the secretary as well too.
We have 7 individuals. Did you,
are you all coordinated behind
the common spokesperson?
No? All right, so we'll
recognize each one of you in
turn then, uh, Chief Wheasler.
The chief heavy chief Nevis.
Chief Roberts, Chief Joy.
Chief Williams and Secretary
Bowie, I have you all in that
order, so.
Chief.
There you are, front row, uh,
given the number of y'all and
the fact that there's not a
coordinated spokesperson, I'm
gonna recognize everybody up to
2 minutes, all right?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the Committee. Troy Weler chief,
New Mexico State Police, um, we
appreciate the attempts the
sponsor has made.
Reach out to law enforcement
recently, a possible amendments
to this bill. However, to my
knowledge, those recent attempts
were the first and only
attempts.
That have been made to get any
input from state police, and
unfortunately, I believe that
will be echoed by by other law
enforcement colleagues here
today. I find this concerning.
A couple things that I would
like to highlight about the
bill.
Now state police does appreciate
the effort by the sponsor to
assist with the retention of
dispatchers, um, however,
without other efforts to fix the
solvency issues of the law
enforcement retention funds. We
believe this change would not be
helpful and very likely have a
negative impact on the fun and
adversely affect.
Public safety retention
statewide.
Uh, we're also opposed to the
addition of safety agency to any
type of er funding. Uh, it's,
it's unclear what exactly a
safety agency is and at least in
the original versions that could
include private entities. This
bill also will be quite
burdensome for the smaller
agencies in the state.
With the smaller academies in
particular, by adding new
administrative requirements
while simultaneously reducing
the representation on the
training council.
More expectations but less
representation.
Um, I also just want to quickly
correct. I know it was all this
talk about 25 year old training,
uh,
We have some of the best
training, best equipped, do
large parts of the efforts of
this legislature and their
funding in the last several
years. Uh, we have some of the
best training in the country.
Uh, and so I just want to
correct any, uh, assumption that
we might have had from some of
the previous speakers on that.
Uh, but we believe the sponsor
has good intentions with this
bill, but state police cannot
support it. Thank you.
Thank you, sir. Chief, I'm
everybody for up to 2 minutes,
all right? Thank you.
I'm Chief Steve Hebby. I'm the
chief of police in Farmington
and the president of the New
Mexico Chiefs of Police
Association.
Um, we stand opposed to the bill
in its current form.
Um, I like several of the things
that we've, we've heard.
About the bill, I think there is
potential, but there's several
things that we have deep
concerns about. I, I would not
like to see a reduction of law
enforcement presence on a board
that deals with law enforcement
training.
Uh, that, that to me is a
non-starter.
Um, I would like to see more
discussion on the dispatcher
angle. I, I think I share some
of the.
Concerns that the state police
have already echoed to you on
the funding and and how that's
gonna work, but we also
recognize that funding and and
getting in dispatches is
important to public safety.
Um, so there, there are things
that we have some potential on,
um, what
What we have on the standard and
training board is a sergeant who
from my department who is the
vice chair.
And the sergeant rarely um.
Rarely had a chance to have
input into this until very late
in the Gulf.
What I would have liked to have
seen was before we were going to
do something structural to the
board is a greater involvement
of the entire board earlier on
in the process so that we could
have got to something that we
could all kind of live with. I
think there are things and, and
I support the senator in his
efforts. I think there are
things that we like, uh, about
the potential of where this
could go, but in its present
form, there wasn't enough
involvement of law enforcement
early on and some of the things
are just nonstarters for us.
Thank you. Thank you.
Well, Senator Cervantes and uh
fellow members senators, uh, I'm
Chief Al Nieves from Clayton of
New Mexico. I just wanted to
echo what she said, um, Chief
Hebby, um.
You know, it's, it's difficult
enough for smaller agencies,
small community, northeastern
corner of the state.
We've never been contacted and
asked about Senate Bill 50 and
um.
Respectfully, just on
Don't supported at the time.
I had to say. Thank you, Chief
Chief Kirk Roberts, Chief Paul
Joy, Chief Christopher Williams
in that order, please. I'm still
recognizing all of you for up to
2 minutes.
Chief Roberts
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, I
believe my um support and
concerns have been addressed by
Chief Hebe and I'll uh give you
back my chief joy.
Nope, don't see him here.
Uh, Chief Christopher Williams,
and then Secretary Bowie.
I.
All right.
And we, so we got Secretary
Bowie, your last up, Secretary,
I'll recognize you for two
minutes.
Mr Chair members of the
committee, Jason Bowie,
secretary for the Department of
Public Safety. Had a good
conversation with the sponsor
today downstairs and was able to
express my concerns, uh, to
Senator Maas prior to, to
addressing here before the
board, really the concern for us
was, is that the legislation has
proposed in the bill was not uh
We did not have an opportunity
for input.
And so, um, we, we had a great
conversation downstairs today,
and I think we had a mutual
understanding, at least what
those concerns were, but we, we
preferred to have worked in the
interim, uh, on some of this
legislation and we didn't really
have that opportunity and really
saw the bill in this form just a
couple of days ago and there's a
lot of pages to work through. I
think what also concerns me in
general is that the uh the
boards which this represents I
know we've we've heard from
certain board members this is
not the position of the board as
a whole.
Um, I, I would have appreciated
probably in the board probably
would appreciate it, have an
input on this. And so having
individual members speaking
either online or here in person
who are just board members and
not speaking for their entire
board, I think it's concerning.
We have a great cross section of
people who serve on these
boards, diverse amount of
experience and have an
opportunity to weigh in on
things and they're not asking
for this legislative change,
it's a board member that's
asking for the legislation
change, working with the
sponsor.
And so that's just very
concerning to us. Law
enforcement as a whole could
have reached out to the Chiefs
Association, the municipal
Police Association, also the
sheriff's Association.
Uh, I would also say that in in
early testimony that over 100
law enforcement officers were
consulted on this. Yeah, 3 years
ago, we had some discussions
about the things that were
needed.
We can't go off with a 3 year
old discussion, including what's
what's necessary for the bill.
So, um, the sponsor knows my, my
position on this, and, and for
that, you know, reason
regretfully, obviously we can't
support at this particular time,
but we look forward to having a
continued discussion in the
future about what might be
necessary for, for training.
Mr. Chair, thank you. Thank you.
But is there anyone who believes
they registered in opposition
who I've not recognized.
Right. Seeing no members of the
committee with questions.
Senator Dewey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
So you still have some spots in
here where you, where you are
taking out the consent of the
Senate.
Um
Of page 12.
Line 23. That's still striking.
Confir confirmation by the
Senate.
And on page 17.
Lines 19 through 22 or actually
19 lines 19 through 24.
You'd have to undo all of that
striking.
Um,
But Mr. Chair, um,
So, apart from that, I
I'm, I don't like.
Hearing that law enforcement was
not involved in this bill.
Um, and it's making me think,
Mr. Chair, the last year I
brought, I brought a bill.
Or uh oversight of of hospital
consolidations and did not talk
to any of the stakeholders
before doing so. We did it at
the last minute, um, we didn't
do the kind of engagement.
That we needed to do.
Uh, and
Everyone said, oh, you know, how
can you make this massive change
without working with us. So,
what we end up doing is really
stripping it down.
And buying ourselves a year to
do is really intense stakeholder
engagement with everyone who
would be impacted.
Um, because I realized I
That engagement was was
essential to get it right. Um,
And so I'm kind of having
flashbacks to that, looking at
this. And I think
I think that same kind of
process needs to happen on this.
I think there needs to be a real
intentional engagement with law
enforcement, uh, on these
issues.
In order so that we can get it
right.
Um, I also have concerns that
we're not hearing from the whole
board here today that it is, it
is one individual.
Who was asking for these
changes, not the board as a
whole.
Um
Um
I, my understanding.
Uh, I wrote it down here.
I really like that you took out
private, um,
private businesses from the, the
definition of safety agency, but
I still
don't entirely understand.
What, what, why we need?
This new concept of of safety
agency.
Um
My understanding is that the,
the law enforcement retention
fund.
Is, is empty.
And does not, is not funded.
So
I'm not sure, so.
And, and funding that that the
fund is
Whatever is left after
disbursements that are made each
year is, is what funds it.
Um
And that there is not additional
funding available to cover
telecommunicators and, and
whoever would be involved under
the safety agencies. I will say
I
telecommunicators for law
enforcement, that is a really
hard job.
They actually like we, we do
not.
We're not, we should.
I think probably treat them,
give treat them the way we, we
treat, uh, other people who have
those incredibly hard, stressful
jobs, um.
But I worry that the
I don't know how it's going to
be funded under this. I don't,
and I don't know, I, is there
anything else, Mr. Chair sender.
Is there anything in HB 2 that
would provide this funding?
I'll,
I'll take your recent question
backwards, but as of right now,
I believe there's approximately
$3.5 million in the fund, I
think.
Uh, even if everything was
expended per the requests, it
would be about 1.5 million.
If this were to pass this
committee and appoint future
version, we would emphasize to
the finance team that that there
should be more money put in that
fund. The that was concerned
from law enforcement that
putting telecommunicators in the
fund was a bad idea.
We did something which
administratively is probably a
bad idea where we put in the
current version that if the fun
runs low, telecommunicators are
out.
Which means they would submit
their requests and then not, and
I got fully fully covered, but I
believe as a
As a
As a legislature, we should
ensure that that is fully
funded. The whole point is to
provide these bonuses at year 5,
1015, 20. But it's not contained
in in this bill.
But in my opinion, there's
enough money to cover the
telecommunicators.
Thank you.
Um, but Mr. Cha, I also
So
So I think I, I think I heard
you say, and, and maybe I'm,
I'm, maybe I heard incorrectly,
that you're not really trying
to, to affect the certification
board.
Uh, but you are separating.
The standards and Training
Council from the LEA director.
So I, which seems like a pretty
big structural.
Change to make and one that
That I wondered them where.
Where's the accountability for
the board.
Um, and I, and I, I, I know, I
think we.
We've all gotten emails and seen
stuff in the paper. I, I know
that there is some
Some, some drama around all of
these groups. Um,
I would really hate for us to
make massive legislative
changes.
Based on a couple of people's
drama. Um, and without the, the
input of
Of all of the people who are
impacted by these changes. So
I'm, I'm gonna have to vote no
on this, Senator. I appreciate
you. I know that you have spent
many years, uh, wanting to, to
make sure that we do have the
best training, uh, for law
enforcement in the state. And,
and I, I, I respect and admire
those efforts, but, but I, I'm a
no on this one today.
There were
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Can
you just uh give us a logic for
taking out the consent of the
Senate. I, I just, you know,
yeah, my, I just, I just tell
you my, my initial reaction to
that is, having been here and
watched the, the pendulum swing,
I think the Senate consent is a
check.
So that we don't get something
crazy going on. I'm just curious
what's the thinking as to why
taking it out. Oh, thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Senator
Worth. No, the, the, the intent
is not to take it up. Uh, in
fact, the whole point of the
substitute was to put that back
in.
Uh, so that the whole those
those are just drafting errors
cause we were working so hard,
but the, but the idea of taking
out consent of the Senate, uh,
is something that I can talk to
you guys offline on, but uh for
20 years.
For 20 years,
And any single any any house
bill that was in Senate rules in
the last 2 or 3 days.
Uh, the, the, the chair.
And the wisdom of the chair
suggested.
Senate confirmation.
Those house members that wanted
their bill to become law would
say that's a fantastic idea,
that's a friendly me. And so in
addition to secretaries, regions
and paid positions, we have
literally hundreds upon 100s of
board and commission members who
need to be confirmed by the
Senate, uh, in a, in a, in a
antiquated 30 day session and 60
day session, it takes up an
awful lot of time, so that has
nothing to do with this bill,
but that was the intent behind
the original idea, which was
never expressed to the leader.
Worship
Uh, and so that's why, uh, we're
not gonna mess with that at all
with this bill if it, uh,
there's a 0.4 version printed
up.
OK, so I guess I just, first of
all, procedurally, I'm gonna, I
wanna address what you just said
as well, but procedurally, I,
I'm looking at 0.231339.3.
Then I've got a handout that
says changes to the 0.1
committee sub, which is saying
now that we're reinserting the
advice and consent of the
Senate.
So I just want to know what I'm,
what am I looking at here? Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Senator Worth. So this cheat
sheet was supposed to be helpful
in explaining the changes, uh,
and so when, when it says
reinserting in the 0.1 version,
it was struck.
And so my instructions to ledge
counsel was to reinsert the
language, in other words, on
strike it, which was done, uh,
which was done.
On a couple of the pages, uh,
for example, on page 14.
On the bottom line 24, the
The lines were unstruck, and so
it says, quote, with the consent
of the Senate, but uh it was not
done on pages 17 and 12, so, so,
so yeah, I, I, uh, my intent was
to not mess with consent of the
Senate to keep current law as it
is.
Uh, so sorry for the confusion.
OK, that, that helps because
again, that, uh, the version I'm
looking at, and I had flags
saying this you Senator De did.
It's got it struck on page 12
and page 17, but you're gonna
fix that. And let me just say
back to what you just said, that
it rules committee.
is authorized to meet year
round.
And one of the things, and I
know Senator doing is done this.
I mean, I think that's something
that it was weird this year
because we were in election
year, which made it difficult.
But I do think we shouldn't.
Shy away from having the check.
So I appreciate you putting it
in. That's good. Uh, help me
out. I mean, I will say I also
do have concerns.
Just about hearing from
Chief, the secretary.
All the
Local chiefs that they weren't
at the table that worries me.
Uh
But let me help help me
understand there's a, we are
repealing. This is a monster
repeal section. Can you just
take us through what we're doing
here, why we're doing it, cause
I think that's another huge part
of this bill that's very easy to
avoid, you know, if you, if
you're just reading to the bill,
you get to the end, yeah, but,
but you, this, this is a massive
repeal. And I just, I wanna make
sure that the public hears
exactly what we're doing. I
see it.
So just, just walk us through if
you could so much, Mr. Chairman
Senator, thank you very much.
So, in, in doing uh the language
that was placed in House Bill 68
and then the uh
And then the amendments in
Senate Bill 19.
Uh, which solidified the
training council and created the
certification board, uh, some
money was placed in the budget
to do a study.
That study was conducted by the
International Association of
Directors of Law Enforcement.
And so they came in and did a
study of our training here in
New Mexico.
And with all due respect to all
the awesome people involved in
training here in New Mexico. It
was a, uh, a scathing.
Scathing report on some of the
inadequacies of the training.
And one of them was uh that
these required uh these
requirements in statute,
although well intended, uh, take
up, uh, they're, we didn't put
in statute.
In-service training, comma, the
very first time you do in
service training, so out out of
a 20 year career.
Officers do in-service training
10 times, and they're seeing the
exact same presentations, the
exact same PowerPoints,
literally the exact same videos,
um, and so it's not advancing
training in my opinion, and it
takes up an awful lot of time.
For example, um, the tourniquet
and trauma kit training, that is
incredibly important and must be
done.
Uh, but it's done every 2 years.
My bill that I did requires
officers to inquire upon arrest,
hey, is there any children at
home that we need to deal with,
in other words, is the arrestee
leaving minor children at home,
uh, that's gone over and over.
We're dealing with hate crimes,
we're dealing with safe
pursuits, domestic violence
training which has advanced
tremendously in the last 20
years.
Um
You know, so, so this stuff.
is restrictive. And so it's not
that it's not gonna happen.
It's gonna happen in a much more
fluid and flexible way, which
then allows the academies to
hire the best professionals they
can throughout the state to
develop, you know, uh, uh,
continuing adult education, uh,
dealing with now with the
advancement of technology, they
can do holograms and various
things to, to, uh, do some
review videos with the all the
lapel cameras, it just allows
the law enforcement academies to
do what they do best, as oppose
to uh confine them to 4 hours of
this, 2 hours of that, every
single year.
That's my understanding of the
criticisms of the of the current
structure, and, and I appreciate
that, but I think it kind of
goes back to the importance of
this board because what I'm
hearing is you're gonna give.
the board, if we get the board
right, you've got the right
folks to be able to sit down and
really develop this without
being confined, but is that a
fair way to?
That's precisely it, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Worth with the
board and the financial
resources of the board and
staff.
The board is volunteer.
Uh, it's the staff that is
hired, uh, the staff that
develops the curriculum, so
there's two major requirements.
Uh, one is it gives certain
direction to the board itself,
um, and then it gives certain uh
direction to the curriculum
itself, the curriculum.
Language
Uh
You know, maybe, maybe even too
prescriptive, but certainly the
duties of the council.
Emphasizes, you know, modern
trainings, uh, training that's
proven to work.
Uh, you know, if you do, uh,
Question and answer that those
question answers directly
correlate to the training you
receive. I mean, just I'm not an
adult.
Educator, but uh.
This is adult education, it's
not just in surface training,
watching a video or a
PowerPoint.
Mr. Cha, it sounds like we've
got.
Completely out of date statutory
training requirements.
They needed to be modernized,
and that's the reason for all,
that's the reason for all the
repeal. Senator Worth, it's a
tough, it's a tough decision for
us as policymakers to make, uh,
but I think once you have
confidence in the leadership at
DPS and the training council and
the various academies. I, I
think folks will be very
comfortable with that decision.
I just wind it up, I mean, I
think it that's why it goes back
to the the importance of this
board.
I get the board right because
again, the board is going to be.
Putting this policy in place,
and again, I, I like a lot of
what's
What's in here, but I still
have.
Concerns that
You know, if law enforcement's
not bought in, then
That really does create
challenges for us. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Others. Questions?
My brother.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, sponsor for bringing this
forward. I do have a couple of
questions I'll share with you.
I'm carrying a bill with Senator
Wirth and many others that has
to deal with the outfitting and
hunting industry.
And it's a monster of a bill.
We've tried to bring in a number
of times and we've got a lot of
pushback because we just haven't
had collaborative buy-in from
all the stakeholders.
And the stakeholder buy-in over
the interim was intensive, so
much so that we've kept sign up
sheets and we have a list of
every time we met so that when
we come forward with the bill.
Everyone had an opportunity to
participate.
And, and so I'm a little
concerned during public
commenting in this conversation
that when we're having a
community, in this case, not the
hunting community, but the law
enforcement community come
forward and saying we weren't at
the table, and then while we're
not addressing the game
commission in this bill, we are,
we are um impacting, you know,
changes to this training
council.
So, could, could you clarify for
us which very specific entities
which cities, if it was DPS, if
there were victims advocacy
groups that were involved.
And in drafting this.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator Bradley, the precipice
of this of the drafting of this
bill.
Uh, was actually a bill that was
introduced in 2014.
Uh, Bill was a House Bill 318
was introduced.
Um, and it was brought forth by
the by the then director of the
Police Academy, Jack Jones, and
it, it, it did away with the
statutory requirements.
And I remember distinctly the
hearing where we're like, you're
crazy. Why would you want to do
that? I didn't understand it at
the time. Uh, none of the
colleagues did, and so the bill,
you know, the bill.
had a
Very, uh
Colorful death. Um,
After learning more about
policing.
As you know, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator Bradley, I'm a, a lawyer
in the.
That's associated with the DOJ
APD Federal litigation as an
amici. I represent community
groups as a miki in the
settlement agreement and just,
just learning about that
process, learning about police
training. I got interested in in
police bills. Well, I've always
done police bills, but I got
interested in
This section of law, uh, uh, the
municipal league.
Under the leadership of AJ 40
introduced Senate Bill 375.
In 2021, me and Bill Ream, who
was a former sheriff House
member introduced.
I
286 or 296.
They were then merged into 375,
but unfortunately they were
vetoed because of the
compilation of this board, which
is very important.
Uh, the legislature during a
Fast and Furious 30 day session
input about 80% of 375 into.
House Bill 68, which was our
crime.
Package bill or House Bill 80.
So anyway, I've I've been part
of all that stuff.
This particular drafting this
bill.
Uh
Uh, is, is born from that. I got
a lot of input and I'm
incredibly grateful, uh.
To, uh, indivisible SOS Santa Fe
and its leadership on police
training and, and, and, uh,
Rachel Feldman, who's a member
of the Training council.
Um
The training council in the
perfect world would have had
recommendations and had an
agency bill for us in November,
December, but.
That that law has only existed
for 18 months. The law kicked in
in July, uh, year before last,
you know, the governor has to
appoint. I mean, it's, these are
this is institutional change.
This bill is a big push toward
that institutional change, so
it's, I know it's tough on a lot
of folks. I um.
But, uh, but this move continues
with that push to move it
forward. I
You know,
Didn't share interim meetings. I
didn't have the ability to do a
task force where volunteers, we
do the best we can.
I have expressed law
enforcement, this should have
been on their desk before
Christmas, it, it was finally
finalized, maybe week 2 of the
session. We got it out as
quickly as we can, even initial
drafts were.
We passed out to law enforcement
prior to its introduction, and
we're taking any and all
comments. This 0.3 version.
Uh
This bill needs to get on the
governor's desk with law
enforcement support.
So I, I know we're taking a lot
of time, but any feedback this
committee has, any feedback law
enforcement has, I'm confident,
Miss, that if we come back with
a 0.4 next week that we can have
a bill that everyone can
support, but that's.
Where that came from is just uh.
Being a prosecutor, being a
defense lawyer, being.
And listening to anyone and
anyone I could listen to to come
up with good public policy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and thank you, Senator for that
remark, and I really appreciate
the work that you and also uh
Representative Rah have put into
law enforcement bills.
But other than the only group
I've heard is individual
indivisible SOS. There really
wasn't a long list of
stakeholders, and I know it's
complicated, but I, I think
we're hearing loud and clear
that they're needs to be maybe
more stakeholder engagement and
then we'd all be a little more
comfortable and make sure that
we're not shotgunning
legislation out, um.
I, I also just wanna make note
that I'll tell you a very quick
story. Yesterday, I had some
members from my district, the
mayor of Lordsburg was in, and
there was a big heavy push on
me, a lot of, a lot of push, big
push on me because they're
trying to hire a chief of police
in Lordsburg who's been out for
9 years. I retired from law
enforcement for 9 years. We had
a lot of the top top law
enforcement entities and
agencies and anyone in this
building who can make things
happen.
And they immediately all of
them, to their credit, looked,
looked at me and said,
absolutely not. We will not help
you.
Because there is intensive and
frequent training that year to
year to year, it's so important
that for, for ourselves and for
the officers that they would
serve with, we can't, we're,
we're not going to see if
there's a way that we can skirt
that and make an allowance and
to their credit, I appreciate
that. They've convinced me that
that in indeed they are on the
right side, safety first, and
they were not going to help
someone that because of the
frequency and the the high level
of training that happens all the
time on the job. And so with
that, I, it's hard for me to
Believe that there's not a whole
lot of training in here. I, I
guess I would ask you how long
the, the, uh, the standards and
training council has been in
place. I hope that it's a well
rooted.
council that's been around quite
a while. What, what is
Because it's such the role that
they're playing in this, but I
think the ass today is that
since there really hasn't been a
collective group of stakeholders
is that you would hold this and
come back to those of us, I know
you know a lot more about this
than I do. But I'd feel a lot
more comfortable supporting your
bill if there was stakeholder
engagement.
Thank you. Anyone else in the?
General Milley.
Um,
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I also
appreciate you bringing
Just go forward, um, clearly
there's issues.
In terms of um this
collaboration or sometimes you
can't get corroboration, you
just.
Sometimes you just have to move
forward. I, I think my
understanding of this though is
that
You want police, I mean, you
want law enforcement to be
successful, and that's what I'm
getting from this spill. And I
say that because in order for
that to happen, we need to be
supportive of uh of uh, you
know, law enforcement training,
supported it any way we can to
support law enforcement to be
successful, because what happens
is,
Um, you know, uh, we get this
pushback, we end up with folks
who feel like they're
You know, that the law
enforcement has been too
aggressive and this is the
community you're responding to.
We have a new things that
happen. I mean, things change,
right? We, we have
Requirements now and we have new
new new requirements, new laws
come into place.
And um
And how law enforcement engages
with the community is critical.
There's no question.
I, I, what I get is you're not
trying to take away from the
basic training that needs to
happen with officers, but you're
looking at
You know, how do we do all these
other things so we don't have
The, you know, the conflicts in
community law enforcement that
we continue to have.
So, so I do appreciate this.
You know, I'm not sure, um, you
know, we have a lot of chiefs
here.
Um, and there's a difference
between chiefs and rank and
file, so, and I'm not saying
that you don't speak for your,
your folks, but there's a
difference. So I feel like um
If there is a way for you to at
least get the input, I guess,
uh, I don't, sometimes, you
know, you, as you mentioned as
one of Senator Bradley
mentioned, you, you want to
engage people and you're like,
well, you could participate and
they don't like it anyway, but
you still, you know, you asked
them, right? But they didn't
like it. But at least you asked
him, I guess, that's the whole
point, or you would try to
engage him. But having to deal
with the DOJ, I mean, I was one
of the people that
wrote, signed that letter way
back when for city of
Albuquerque.
I'm not so sure it was.
I retrospect, the best thing we
did, and given all the problems
that ensued, uh, but I was
encouraged to do so by rank and
file. That's how we started that
whole process.
And so I just feel like um
I think this is a, I think this
is a step in the right
direction. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
So a few things center one is, I
heard some of your comments to
suggest that you may be even
asking us to not hear this or
not vote on this, but you
haven't asked me as much yet. He
did say you want to kind of get
some input from us, so I, I will
tell you that with due respect
to everybody who worked on this
with you. This looks like uh the
type of legislation that I see
frequently when there's a lot of
cooks in the kitchen. Um, and,
um, you end up with mishmash,
right? So, so for example, if
you look at, I'll just give you
some of the examples.
And for me, this is you I as
lawyers, part of our job is to
write very clear, concise law so
that judges and others can
follow it and and apply it.
So if you look on page 11.
I'll just give you, I'll give
you the first of many examples
that I see really throughout the
bill and get it look again it
looks whenever you have bills
drafted by committee, you can
tell, uh, just cause we've done
this so long, so, uh, on page
11, you're talking about law
enforcement education programs,
and then on line 12 subsection
E, it says, with the exception
of physical fitness equipment
and technology instruction, the
program shall and you want to
talk about with the programs
shall do, and it says they shall
represent current information
and state of the art evidence
based best practice. Well, I
would hope
That the information would be
current, um, I don't know we
have to put that in the statute.
Um, I would hope they would be
state of the art. I don't know
what that means, and then I
don't know we'd have to put that
in the statue cause nobody would
know what state of the art
means. Um, evidence based, we
see that a whole bunch and
that's like the buzzword of the
of the year, you know, we're
seeing all these little terms
that come propping up, but what
is evidence-based best practice?
Well, uh, if we put that in the
law, we have to tell people what
that means, and we don't really
have any idea what that means.
The program would in paragraph
2, so it would have to include
an appropriate amount of time.
I don't know what an appropriate
amount of time means, but it
would be to integrate knowledge
and skills with scenario based
or situation-based applications.
It's all just gibberish, right?
It's just a bunch of words that
don't really have any clear
understanding or meaning, nobody
will know what an appropriate
amount of time is, no judge
could say what that is. I
couldn't tell you what an
appropriate amount of time is.
You and I might disagree with an
appropriate amount of time.
Um, and then we're to integrate
knowledge and skills with
scenario based or
situation-based applications
again, that's going to be
subject to all kinds of
interpretations and mis
misunderstandings.
Um
Paragraph 3. The program shall
be delivered in person or
online.
Um, OK, um, but why would we
have to put that in the statute,
right?
Um, and it says the faculty has
to be available throughout the
course, but I guess, maybe that
means something, but um I would
hope that faculty would be
available if they're teaching a
course.
Um, then it goes on to say, you
may, may make effective use of
simulation systems or live
actors. Again, Sarah, I think
you're probably getting the idea
there's just a lot of, again,
it's the, I'm, I'm repeating
myself, but it's, it's way too
many cooks in the kitchen. It's
just everybody throwing in
their, their spice, right, yeah,
in in the stew and and that was
really going on throughout the
bill really. Um, so you'll see
the same thing not only on a
page that was page 11, but
you'll see the same thing on
page, um.
Let's see.
You'll see the same information
kind of on page.
20
We're talking about the program
for certification.
And
There is to be a comprehensive
set of topics.
Uh, based on evidence and
science based national best
practices. Again, that, that's
unclear. There's no really good
understanding of what are
comprehensive topics.
And what would be evidence and
science-based.
And then it goes on to require
all core skills and knowledge
for which proficiency is
required, again, that's
meaningless, right, as a lawyer,
uh, what is core skills, what is
knowledge for which proficiency
is required all of that really
has no meaning or definition. I
mean, if, if their words, I
understand the words, but to
say, yeah, that you comply with
that or you didn't comply with
that. Impossible to really do,
and that all of that continues
on to page 21. So the program
has to have an integrated
application of knowledge and
skills in typical situations
faced by law enforcement
officers again.
Uh, undefinable, impossible to
know what that means. Uh, the
program has to have integrated
application of knowledge and
skills in high risk and high
liability situations encountered
by police officers.
Same, uh, the program has to
have use of knowledge and skills
in complex settings with
multiple responding police
officers. Again, what, what are
complex settings? What is, what
is those um knowledge and
skills, uh, the program has to
minimize risk and liability at
the scene again. You and I could
spend a lifetime trying to
figure out what that means,
right? What is, what is, what is
a program to minimize risk and
liability.
Um, the subparagraph G on that
page, the program has to have
attention to law piece off, I'm
sorry, attention to peace,
sorry, the program has to have
attention to police officer
wellness, so all the cops in the
room, guys, um, I don't see any
women here, so I don't mean to
be gender specific, but, you
know, what is the program gonna
be that, that gives attention to
your wellness. Um, I may have an
opinion of what your wellness
requires your family may have a
different opinion of what your
wellness requires your spouse as
well too, we just can't, we
can't write laws like this,
Senator, where, where nobody
could ever know.
what it means or or intends or
or really nobody could ever say
you met that requirement or you
didn't, right? Um, so I, I, I,
um, you probably gathering I
couldn't pass anything like this
into law, um,
And you'll see the same kind of
problems on page 23 and really
throughout. There's just, uh,
again, I
We're here's lawmakers we're
supposed to be writing and
passing laws that.
Uh, judges and lawyers can
understand and apply and enforce
and tell people this is what
this means and really throughout
this whole thing, there's so
much that really could be uh
subject to any number of
different interpretations could
never really be defined or
applied as a law, so I couldn't
support it with all of that. I,
I'll just add, because you seem
to be gathering information to
the on the analysis we got your
bill proposes repealing certain
sections of law are all those
repeals still in here?
They are words saying yes, I
think so, yeah, that's, that's
80% of the bill is repealing
those.
Statutory requirements, which in
my opinion are hindering
academy's ability to be flexible
and.
Modern policing. Yeah, I'm
looking at this, we put a lot of
work when we did a lot of this
stuff in the past, but just for
the public and anybody's
watching you, your bill would
repeal certain training,
including domestic abuse,
incident training, right? Uh, so
we're putting in language that
seems to be very loose and very
convoluted and incomprehensible
to me, and then, and then we're
saying, well, we're gonna
repeal, uh, according to the
analysis, the domestic abuse
training, child abuse incident
training.
A child safety upon arrest of a
parent guardian training,
missing person and Amber Alert
training. My understanding, if
I'm looking at the analysis is
all that's been repealed in the
law. So, uh, if I'm
understanding that correctly, I,
I don't think that's a good idea
either, Senator. Um, so those
are just a few real quick fly by
shots.
Uh, from my perspective, so I
couldn't support the bill.
Others
We're ready for a motion if
anyone has one.
Move the table.
Senator Thornton, the tale in
which we live by a roll call.
Emily, please.
And
Yes
And I do, yes.
O'Malley? No.
Paul.
Senator Stewart
And
Yes.
Be my.
No move to explain.
Uh, yes,
so your bill is table center,
you've asked to explain your
own. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, members. Thanks to
all the folks who I've spoke to,
written with and visited with
the past couple of weeks. We, we
have an opportunity, I believe,
um.
We have an opportunity with this
governor, with the current
leadership.
At DPS with the Chiefs
Association, the sheriff's
Association, uh, to move the
profession forward in this
session, so.
I may not take a lot of time,
but I'm gonna take a little bit
of time to see if that's
possible, uh, and see if in fact
this bill can can fit the
standards of statutory
construction.
And, and the uh
And the majority of this
committee, so I'll be in touch
with staff and see if that's
possible. And if not, appreciate
everyone's eyes on this. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator. All
right, uh, Senate Bill 73, Cil
Lopez still here, still not
here?
All right, we're gonna, we're
gonna have to roll hers over.
We'll, we'll hear hers tomorrow.
Uh, we did 505 previously body
cameras. There's a committee sub
on that one. Y'all may remember
that one.
And then we'll go to 507
firearms.
Maestus.
got the chair.
Which
Yeah, we're doing 505, then on
507.
All right, folks can uh
Connects it quietly, we'll go to
505.
And then we'll do 507.
And we have in front of us uh
committee substitute.
Thank you, Senator. So we have
in front of us, uh, Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 505.
Which is at the bottom 473.1,
and I'll move that for
discussion.
And uh and take it away, Senator
Cervantes. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I won't belabor this
because we went in some great
length on the bill before, but
there are two principal
components to this bill. First
of all, to capture law
enforcement on college campuses
to require body cameras, as you
all recall, you and I was taking
the position previously that
they were not required by the
law because of the way we define
law enforcement agencies. We
didn't specify university law
enforcement, so they uh wanted
or they, they were essentially
not complying, uh, and
and others were this eliminates
um uh that um that ambiguity on
page 3 and then the other issue
was this notion of what would be
the consequence or not.
Using body cameras, we went
through the long history of this
and about the fact that for a
long period of time, Burleo
County would not, um.
Purposefully would not comply,
that really prompted our need to
enact this statutorily, we did
so and um then the issue then
was what were the consequences
be? There was quite a bit of
debate about whether the word
shall or may should be applied,
and you'll see that language is
tinkered with quite a bit in
this committee sub on page 3,
line 7, and what we did and
proposed last time was to add
the words knowingly or
intentionally. That's a high
standard that shows a mental
state of what lawyers will refer
to as
rea, the, the mental component
of a violation, and so for there
to be a consequence.
Or failure to use the body
cameras, they would, you'll see
the existing language which
requires a failure to comply
with the policies and procedures
adopted in subsection A, and
that's the policies and
procedures adopted by law
enforcement. So, so they failed
to come, so an officer fails to
comply with the policies and
procedures of the agency they
work for, the department they
work for, and, and now we've
added the words knowly and
intentionally. So for there to
be a consequence, the law
enforcement officer would have
to knowingly and intentionally
failed to comply, and you all
may remember we went into some
length.
Last time that the, the part of
the um
Uh, reason for, for feeling this
was important to bring back
before us was an incident, uh,
with APD where you had the chief
of police there who his own
internal affairs did an
investigation found that he
intentionally turned off his
camera and when uh there was an
attempt to investigate the
circumstances of that the chief
of police for APD invoked his
Fifth Amendment rights. If, if
we were to allow something like
that to go, then law enforcement
officers could always turn off
their body cameras and just say
I didn't turn on my camera, or I
destroyed or didn't keep the
video because it would
incriminate me. Um, that kind of
defeats the whole.
in some cases of using footage
to evaluate law enforcement
conduct and I'll just add, uh,
and then Mr. Chairman, that if
you watch these videotapes,
you're gonna see 99+% of the
time, you're going to see very
professional, uh, law
enforcement officers doing their
job in an exemplary way, and
that should make us all feel
very good and proud and as a
former prosecutor, I'll tell you
there's nothing better than
having a camera footage of a DWI
arrest, where the defendant is
guilty, puts the need for a
trial uh out of the question and
defendants.
watch their own video footage
and usually surprised by how,
how clearly intoxicated they
were in their own footage, so
it's a good thing to have this,
we should strengthen it, make
sure it's enforced, and so
that's the committee said, Mr.
Chairman, I'll stand for
questions.
All righty, thank you, thank
you, and as promised because uh
we, we wanna see the clean
language and get folks'
perspective.
We're going to listen, go to the
audience, let's listen to the
opponents first.
Uh, folks have signed up. We're
gonna go with
A chief Wessler and Chief Hebby.
Followed by
Nearest Robert Robert's joy.
Chief, welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, Troy Weler
chief New Mexico State Police,
uh, I know that we've discussed
this at length the other day,
um.
You know, state polices in
support of the vast majority of
the bill really our only issue
is, uh, the continued inclusion
of uh shell in place of May, um,
we don't support that particular
portion of the bill. Uh, we feel
that it's important that
Uh, state police or whoever's uh
whatever agency involves is
given the opportunity to make
their uh case in court and not
uh presumed.
be wrong right out the gate.
Uh, we, we appreciate your, uh,
consideration. Thank you.
Chief Hebby followed by Chief
Nevis.
Thank you, sir. Uh, Chief Hebby
Farmington PD, president of the
New Mexico Chiefs of Police
Association. I testified
previously uh years ago when
this first came up that I came
down from Anchorage, Alaska, we
were just kind of moving to uh
in car video. We were, we were
way behind where Farmington PD
was in 2013, uh, FPD prior to my
arrival started body cameras,
and they'd had in car video for
years before that. I came down
very um.
Cynical, probably is a good word
about in general.
body cam and and even in car
video and quickly as a chief, I,
I have become a big proponent of
it.
And you've never heard me in my
11 years as chief say anything
negative about it. It has helped
us many times explain what our
officers do. It's giving the
public a chance to see how our
officers perform, and I agree
with the senator, uh, most of
the time we, we perform very
well, and when we don't, it
gives me the ability as chief to
to take some concrete steps to
either improve our performance
or make changes to our
personnel. Uh, that said, I, I
do oppose the the term shall. I
don't think that it's necessary.
I think we have faced
Many instances and in my time
with the PD where the camera
hasn't worked. Some of it has
been mechanical, and we've had
problems with our vendor. We're
actually uh in the process of
looking at at a new camera
system right now to try and
upgrade ourselves. There's been
fights, uh, there's been things
that happen fast that didn't
allow our officers to react
quickly and turn on the cameras,
but in general I'm opposed to
the shal nature of it, while
being extremely supportive of,
of body cameras, and I think
that UNM, you know, should have
them, so.
I'm, I'm, I have no objections
to that, but I do object to the
term shall.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, fellow members, um,
Just, uh, I just wanted to echo
everything that's been said. I
came up during the times, I'm
sorry, she found the of his
Cleveland Police Department.
I came up during the times when
we had little cassette tapes.
And uh when body cameras came
out, I was happy for that.
Uh, it helps us.
It helps the community, helps
police officers. It's uh, it was
life changing when.
You approach people and look at
your camera.
And their behavior completely
changed.
Because they know you're
recording them.
It still happens that folks say
I'm recording you.
We are too.
So we appreciate the body
cameras, um, uh, I do oppose
that, that word change.
Um
I think that the way it's
written right now.
Proper, there doesn't.
That word.
And
Uh
that be
it was.
Thank you. Thank you, Chief
Roberts, followed by Chief Joy.
Thank you. Um, I do want to, uh,
the specific requirement, um,
and the, the shell imposes.
In, in a, in a instant that's
happening quickly, for that to
be part of a thought process for
an officer when there's
Half a second to really react.
Um, and be effective in the
solution of something that's
moving very quickly, um, is, is
concerning.
There should be no place for
that. We need, we train them to
be able to react quickly, but to
have to make that decision, am I
going to
Pay this person's life, maybe
from another attacker, or am I
going to turn on my body camera
or relieve my liability.
Shouldn't be a part of the
process.
And when you do that,
The officers hear it
And it becomes an issue for them
in the field, in the minute.
So
That's, that's another side
concern that I see with that
that uh I would beg your
consideration. Thank you.
Uh,
Chief Joy is not here. Chief
Chris Williamstal's Police
Department, Vice President of
the New Mexico Chiefs
Association, um, without going
into what everybody else has
said, I I feel that just the May
is kind of a generalization
that.
Seems to group everyone in with
a few bad actors.
I mean, we're talking 99%.
Compliance.
How little is that?
If there are people who are
intentionally doing that, we
hope as chiefs to be able to
identify those and take action
against those people. We don't
want the bad actors any more
than anyone else does.
They're a disgrace to our
profession and everything else.
And listening to the discussion
on this the other day, there was
talk about changing out the
battery.
Well, if we're gonna tell
somebody to intentionally stop
recording so they can change out
the battery, then we're telling
people to violate.
You know, it's, these things are
Just like your cell phone. Uh,
anybody's ever mistakenly hung
up on someone instead of trying
to answer their phone, you know.
Your digits don't always work.
Exactly how you want, especially
in circumstances.
And yes, we support most of the
language in this bill.
Right. Thank you.
This chair Jason Bowie,
secretary for the Department of
Public Safety. I just want to
start off, uh, as Chief Hay
said, We support body worn
cameras, uh, my experience
within law enforcement in early
90s, it was, uh, I remember
being offered a black and white
VHS for the trunk of the car,
and I, I was, I was very excited
to have it and uh volunteered to
have it placed in the vehicle,
and I think most law enforcement
definitely supports it. Uh,
we're not opposed to
post-secondary educational
institutions having them either.
I think that was an oversight
and probably should have the
same standard. Our contention
has always just been the, the
show.
And in the shallow the language
being so so.
definitive. We really want the
opportunity as law enforcement
to have a hearing before a judge
that can decide whether you
shall be liable or or may be
liable. And so maybe it can be
explained maybe uh by the
sponsor or by uh the committee
here.
It's very definitive, and I
think that's where the pushback
comes fucking the rub with law
enforcement. We just want to
have an opportunity to be able
to explain. I believe we all,
uh, would not support anyone
intentionally shutting off their
camera, intentionally hiding
evidence uh for for any
nefarious reasons. So it's
really not about that. It's just
really about the change for
shout from uh, from May back to
Shaolin last year, this
legislature agreed that Xiao was
too harsh. Now we're going back
to the other direction again.
Um, sponsor has made several
examples of, of, uh, Gonzalez.
Gonzalez, and this, this time
Medina, but I have to uh
I have to push back on that.
That's, that's one law
enforcement officer, uh,
Amongst 5000 of them that are
doing their job, um, every day,
the way their policies said they
shouldn't be doing their job.
And, and there's a process in
place if, if, if
Anybody wants to make a claim
against that specific action,
they can do so under the current
law, this, this change is not
required. And I mentioned this
last time and I just want to
echo it again. Very proud of the
legislature and the support that
we've had for law enforcement. I
speak at conferences and and
make that mention them, and, and
I just spoke at a conference in
Riodoso, I think it was in
November, and I, I used the, the
change from shall to May the
last year as as a positive
example where the legislature
was listening to us and our
concerns.
And now we're going back to the
other direction again. Uh, I
feel a little bit, uh, kind of
going back and forth. I don't
know what I would say at the
next conference, uh, citing this
again as another example in the
negative, and I, I'm very proud
of the, the support that we do
receive a lot of positive, uh.
Changes here in the legislation.
I hope that that continues.
Sure. Thank you Secretary. We
have a couple of folks uh
speaking uh as proponents of the
bill on Zoom.
Of Miss Nat Dean.
Thank you, um.
Mr. Chair, uh, Mr. Sponsor, uh,
my name is Nat Dean. I'm a
person with multiple
disabilities and I'm a
disability advocate and I'm not
a lobbyist. I am in support
Senate Bill 505 is amended. We
need to look for the helpers.
The helpers are there.
The shift that can happen for a
person, um, is that we need to
consistency in the use of a
documentation procedure that
provides support that's not a
detriment, it can be a support.
It protects both the
enforcements, enforcers and it
protects the persons who may be
perpetrating the crime.
It is extremely important if we
cannot get that documentation,
the documentation may not exist,
but if the documentation is not
conducted, the documentation
does not exist. Equity is
equality and equality comes
through equity. My family member
was in law enforcement. I know
what the risks are. I know what
the fears are, but I have not
served as a law enforcement
official. I've served as an
advocate, and even myself of not
having the
documentation when there was a
perpetration of a crime was,
well, we didn't write the
report, but you can get a
recording of the 9/11 call, but
you can't get a copy of the
report because oops, we didn't
write one. I am in favor of
everything that supports both
sides of both uh experiences and
thank you so much for taking the
time to hear me today. My
apologies for the quality of my
voice. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mark Allen, New
Mexico counties.
Welcome.
New Mexico County supports the
substitute bill, the thoughtful
amendments that were passed.
are very helpful to law
enforcement. I spoke with our
legal bureau chief.
Who's handled many, many cases
involving
Law enforcement defending law
enforcement.
And uh his position is, is
looking at the amended language
that he supports it.
The cases, all of the cases he
has held has never involved an
intentional or knowingly
violation of, of turning on a
camera. It's always involved
some sort of malfunction or the
camera being damaged during an
alter altercation or being
dislodged. And now with this new
language, we now have a standard
to evaluate Officer conduct, and
it's a high standard as Senator
Savannah said, knowingly.
Or intentionally
And with that, we don't get to
show until you first have a
court determine that the officer
knowingly or intentionally
violated the policy, meaning
knowingly or intentionally
turned off that camera. And
because of that, with the
standard, we think that it is
very beneficial for law
enforcement. It protects the
innocent officer. It protects
against.
A camera
It's not operating because the
battery wasn't charged. It
protects against an incident
where the camera gets knocked
off. And so now we have a
standard that protects us from
Flames
The officer could have or should
have done something better,
because it's a high standard. We
request that it be.
Pa.
Thank you, Senator.
Mr. Chair, again, I appreciate
the opportunity just to respond
very briefly, if I may. It's,
it's really great, we should
feel great about all the praise
for body camera, the technology
here today. Those of us that
have been here for more than a
few years, no, it wasn't that
way, just a few years ago.
Uh, when I sponsored and tried
to pass this bill originally
very candidate law enforcement
were pretty strongly opposed to
it. Um, and so sometimes the
legislature has to kind of force
people to do things they don't
want to do.
And um that's our job and we
stand to the voters when, when
there's a response to that, but
I, I do appreciate the, the,
the, the praise for the
technology today and look at my
colleagues who were here a few
years back, and remember it was
pushed back from many of the
same type of agencies who are
here today full of praise for
it. Um, and, and that sometimes
leads us to perhaps why we're,
we're here in the first place
because when I passed this
originally, I had the word hoo.
And um we operated with the word
shop for a number of years and
then when there was some
thinking that that was causing
too high a standard, we moved it
to May.
And then we got a response, uh,
to the maze. Sometimes when you
take the foot off the gas a
little bit, then uh folks
interpret that in a way, and I,
I appreciate what you, um, Abbie
said, um, you know, you, uh, you
said that if you look at this
video and it gives you a chance
to correct the behavior of your
officers and train them, and you
do that as the chief of your
department because you're
exemplary in your leadership,
but what happens when the
sheriff, who's the head of uh
the Burlingo County Sheriff's
Department says, I'm not going
to do.
And you all can't maybe do this.
And even when we passed the law
that said you got to do this, he
still said, no, I'm not gonna do
this, right? Um, and what
happens when the, the chief of
police for Albuquerque
department says, yeah, I'm, I'm
not gonna do this, right? I
don't have to do this, and I
have 1/5 Amendment right not to
have to do this.
So, again, I, I know that it
feels like, well, uh, everybody
else is doing this and 99%, we
shouldn't do this with just
because two isolated incidents,
yeah, that's generally, I would
agree with you, except when the
people that are the two isolated
instances are the heads of the
largest law enforcement agencies
in the state.
Um, and, and there has to be
some kind of a message there
too.
The there was a description that
the UNM circumstance was an
oversight.
Yeah, we should have written
this better. We should have put
them in the bill so it was
abundantly clear, but you and
him didn't come back and say
there's an oversight. You know
what I'm saying, we don't have
to do this.
Right? They said, we don't have
to do this because you didn't,
you didn't say we had to do
this. And so we're not going to
do this.
So, throughout the history of
this bill in my work on it, and,
and uh this legislation, I've
consistently and, and repeatedly
met resistance.
Um, and that's part of why we're
here today, yeah, we got to tell
you and them, you gotta do it.
Um, and they said we don't have
to, and now I'm pleased to say
they're kind of coming along,
but it shouldn't take public
outcry, it shouldn't take bad
press. It shouldn't take uh
internal affairs investigations,
and it shouldn't take.
Fifth Amendment claims of the
chief of police to get us here.
Uh, we should make our desire a
well known, and again, I
appreciate the, the fact that
this has turned into a good
thing.
But, uh, it, it didn't come
easy, Mr. Chair, so I'll send
for questions. Thank you, thank
you, Senator Cervantes. We'll
now go to members of the
committee, Senator.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I am hoping the Secretary Bowie
is gonna come around to the
changes that have been made, and
I just got to say,
Mr. Allen's
commentary for the counties is
really appreciated. You gave us
your opinion the other day on
what the change in the language
would be without the amendment,
which I think is correct. It
would have created all kinds of
confusion. So just a couple, a
couple questions and then I
actually wanna read, uh, I
appreciate, uh, one of our
analysts, uh, Spence Pacheco,
gave me a copy of the jury
instruction on spoliation of
evidence because I think when
law enforcement hears what's
required to prove this, you'll
realize that it does have a much
heightened standard, especially
now that with this change. I
actually think this change
Helps law enforcement more than
the prior bill with a May.
And I, I'm gonna walk through
that, and I think it totally
deals with the situation of the,
the incidental battery or
something like that, there's
clearly no intent when that's
there. But the first thing I
just want to ask, Mr. Chair,
you've deleted.
One of the torts that was
referenced originally, the
negligence spoliation of
evidence. Can you just explain
the difference because I think
there's a, a much lower
threshold for a negligence
standard than an intentional
standard, you're taking out the
negligence standard, and I just
think it would be helpful to
explain.
Kind of why that's being taken
out and what the difference
between those is. Sure, and I,
and I think you're, your
approach to the question, so
what is a good one, which is,
again, we're here lawmaking, and
some of us are lawyers, and we
approached this from the
standpoint of lawyers and uh the
association of counties is
approaching this as lawyers as
well too. I think what they're
saying is they exceed less
exposure to liability, uh, to
them as counties, and we should
all be on the same page, they
should do law enforcement should
be on the same side of the
association of counties and
Laws are seeing this as a
licensed standard. In other
words, it's harder to have an
adverse consequence to law
enforcement with this language
and this change. Law enforcement
officers are, are, with due
respect, they're not lawyers,
they're not seeing it from the
standpoint of what is negligence
or what is intentional and so
forth. And so I understand that
on on 1st, 1st impression you
see word shall and may and one
sounds more harsh than the
other, but if you're really
looking at it in the totality of
all the language would it change
your rights and with the, the
burden of keeping out.
which is what this is all about,
right? If, if the law
enforcement officer doesn't
comply, the evidence is to be
kept out and there's a
presumption, the evidence would
have been bad, right? Um, and
the, the burden now with this,
with this bill being passed,
would actually be harder.
Uh, to, to have evidence kept
out, um, on this, on this
presumption. The presumption,
the presumption language is
already in there. It's always
been in there, there's always a
presumption, and, and you're
right now, you'd have to show
that there was a knowing and
intentional effort to not turn
on the camera, or to, or to not
keep the videotape afterwards,
and, and that's a pretty high
bar. And and the only reason I
would think you'd ever get there
is when you have somebody, uh,
like the head of APD saying
their own internal affairs
investigating saying he did it
intentionally. I mean, uh when
your own subordinates are
telling
you that you as the chief did
something intentionally in
violation of the policy. How do
you escape that? I mean, and how
do you say, yeah, no consequence
to that. Uh, I, I'm incredulous
to how that could be, but you're
right, Senator Worth, this is
actually, if you're looking at
it as a lawyer, this is even
harder now, uh, to, to use this
against law enforcement
officers.
I do think.
The intentional spoliation of
evidence tort has a knowing
requirement to it. I actually
don't think you need to add the
language, knowing or
intentionally in line 7. Having
said that though, I think it
just further emphasizes the
importance of that. So, uh, I,
and again, I just think, I wanna
make it clear, but just Mr.
Chair, if I could, I'd like to
read this jury instruction
because I think it will help law
enforcement understand what a
heightened threshold this is.
It's foliation of evidence, and
basically what it says is the
plaintiff.
In the case, uh, alleges that
the defendant intentionally
disposed of, destroyed,
mutilated, or significantly
altered evidence relevant to a
potential lawsuit, and in order
to prove this, the plaintiff has
to show each of the following,
number one, there was the
potential for a lawsuit.
To the defendant knew there was
potential for a lawsuit, so
clearly was engaged and
something was coming up that
they were concerned about 3
disposed of destroyed mutilators
significantly altered uh
potential evidence by its
conduct defend its sole intent
was to disrupt or defeat a
potential lawsuit.
Soul intent, the destruction
number 5, the destruction or
alteration of the evidence
resulted in plaintiffs'
inability to prove their case,
uh, clearly without the camera,
put them in that place and that
the plane suffered damages as a
result of the destruction or
alteration. So it's sole intent,
which I actually think is, as
you're saying, is a
Much heightened threshold than
having
More squishy language, you know,
maybe negligent, I mean,
negligent doesn't have that same
intent requirement to it. So I
think this actually is stronger,
and I just wanted to point that
out and appreciate it very much,
Ms. Pacheco, kind of helping me
think it through because I was
having trouble with this. You
heard me yesterday. I wanted to
stop and make sure that we
thought this through. And again,
and I still think there's
probably gonna take more time to
really understand it. And, and,
and you're right, from a lake,
when you read this and I say
layperson, I mean
non-lawyers going from may to
shall feels like you just took
away the discretion that's
there.
But by putting in the knowing or
intentionally, you've raised the
bar so high that there's got to
be intent proven, which is a
tough thing to to show. There's
got, and you, again, so I think
that's, that's my take on it,
so, thank you, Mr.
Chair remember one of our
concerns at the time and remains
one of our concerns is not this,
not even so much the
circumstance that you described
here, which is what if we got
you on the camera, the greater
concern we had at the time of
enactment remains a greater
concern is that videotape is
taken, recorded, and then
disappears, right? And, um, and
Let's face it, it happens,
right, and, and here you'd have
to show didn't get erased by dog
ate my homework. This has to be,
you have to show intent.
Somebody went into the evidence
room, found the tape, pulled it,
and, uh, put a magnitude or
something else and intentionally
destroyed it. That's, you're
right, that's the standard. And,
and ultimately, you know, for
this bill to go anywhere, do
anything, we're gonna have to
have the governor on board, and
I, I'll just encourage all the
law enforcement and Secretary
Bowie, talk to your lawyers. I
mean, have your lawyers look at
this, and I've got to tell you
right now, if you do that first
before
you continue the opposition,
your lawyers if they're gonna
advise you, well, I gotta tell
you, this is a better standard
for you than.
Thank you and just for the folks
keeping score at home, the the
jury instruction is the
documents the jury takes back in
the back room, they don't take
the statute book with them. The
jury instructions are very, very
key, and we always have to keep
them in mind during statutory
construction, Senator O'Malley.
Chair.
Um, I guess the Chiefs didn't
get the memo. This is better for
them. Uh, and I have to agree
that uh and you know that this
is this language is stronger.
I'm, I'm convinced that it is.
Um,
So, but I do want to circle back
a little bit uh about the whole
issue with the county, you know,
initially and you did clarify a
senator.
Cervantes that it wasn't the
county that objected to.
Body cameras, it was the elected
official who's the sheriff, and
I can tell you straight up
because I was uh battling this
with him at the time as the
county commissioner. In fact, I
put aside, you know, I was able
to put aside half a million
dollars for acquisition of
cameras, and he still refused.
Um, the rank and file had no
issue with that. Uh, his
deputies had no issues with body
cameras. It was him.
And it's the same with, you
know, the, the chief of police,
um, you know, he's an appointed
person. I mean, I happen to have
a good relation, I had a good
relationship with the chief
Medina. I'm not gonna get into
those specifics, but it's
Again, it was, you know, one
individual and I just felt like
we didn't need to like punish
the whole um force for for that.
So I'm glad for these changes, I
think they are improved, um, but
I think when you mentioned, you
know, sometimes you have to push
back and you have to, um, you
know, maybe law enforcement
isn't interested, you know, uh,
has an objection to doing
something, I think to, to, um,
Senator uh Me's credit, I think
as he's trying to move this,
this
with his bill, and that's why I
made, I made the statements I
did, is that you do have to look
at your training. We, uh, you
know, you have to be open minded
about it. Things do need to
change. Things do change, and we
still continue to have conflicts
and then we have conflicts
between community and and uh and
uh you know, law enforcement
because
You know, perhaps the training
isn't where it needs to be. So,
uh, anyway, I wanted to make
those comments, um, and I'm glad
to see these changes, I think,
cause, you know, I was concerned
about that as well.
Um, anyway, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Chairman. I agree that
college campus law enforcement
should wear cameras.
And I agree that body cameras in
generally on law enforcement.
is a good idea and it sounds
like the officers here uh today
agree as well. I think the
biggest concern to this is just
the liability that still puts on
officers.
And that's still found on page
3.
Section C.
And I, I first want to ask you,
uh, Senator.
And, and just your presentation,
the bill twice you said
knowingly and intentionally,
quickly.
But if I refer back to the bill,
it's or knowingly or
intentionally. And so if we, if
we go back to the case where an
officer is maybe in an
altercation and his camera falls
off.
And the scene continues.
They are knowingly it's or, and
you've taught me that words
matter, andsos, it's or.
So knowingly,
Or intentionally, that he
knowingly knows he is aware that
that camera has fallen off and
cannot stop in this heated
moment to put that camera back
on. If he knowingly.
Fails to comply with that.
He shall still be presumed.
As the intentional spoliation.
Of evidence.
You got that word right we did a
little drilling on that after
the last.
Can you walk me through that?
And I would say if words matter
if, if you're still, if you're
the shell and the May matters to
you, the end to the or in this
case matters to me. Would, would
you agree to either strike
knowingly or or to replace the
oar with an and.
Um, so, I think that the knowing
and intentionally is good, uh,
uh, and two standards in the
alternative for one, but I think
you got to really appreciate
that you got to read the next
words that follow after that
which is, there has to be
knowing or intentionally failed
to comply with the policies and
procedures adopted by the law
enforcement agency. So your uh
example where the camera falls
off, um, that's not gonna be a
violation of policies and
procedures.
Uh, and, and so there's, there's
no consequence to that. Now you
use the word liability of an
officer, so let's, let's be
clear here, and I, I wanna
reject strongly the notion that
this is us versus law
enforcement, that's not what
this is at all at all in my
mind.
Um, actually, uh, we're actually
taking away liability of
officers by this proposed law
because we're eliminating and
striking, you'll see the
independent tort of negligent
spoliation of evidence, so the,
under the existing law, an
officer is liable for a tort
claim, right, uh, because we,
our language says they can be
subject to a tort claim under
this law. We're taking that out.
Right? And, and to Senator
Word's point, we're taking out
the negligence standard, so, so
if they're negligent.
Uh, under the existing law, it
can be subject to a tort claim,
right under our law. We're
taking all that out. We're
eliminating that language so
that they wouldn't be subject to
a tort claim. There wouldn't be
to use your words that liability
of an officer. We're taking away
liability of an officer.
by this bill, if this was
enacted the liability of an
officer today exists.
So, again, I really am pretty
confident that law enforcement
huddle up with their, with their
good legal counsel, they're
gonna find out, this is actually
a much better position for them
to be in.
By eliminating the possibility
of their negligence could create
a tort, and that that's our law
now this would change all that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator, I, I still think that
by not removing the ore.
Or the knowingly to replacing
that with an and it would still
read police officers who
knowingly failed to comply with
policies or procedures shall be
presumed to have acted in bad
faith.
If they just knowingly did it,
cause if it's an oar, then it's
one or the other. They, they
knowingly or instead of together
as one and and I'll I'll move
on. Not only could they
knowingly fail and it wasn't in,
it wasn't in bad faith in which
they did that. They were aware,
but it wasn't intentional or mal
intended there.
But, but another, another word
that we had discussed, I've
heard this bill before in rules
as well, is the word
presumption.
We use it presumed in this
audience, and so you had told me
in the last committee that all
presumptions are reputable. Can
you explain a little further
what that means. Yeah, um, so
various places in the law, we
have what's called a
presumption, and presumption
means you kind of don't start,
we always like the scales of
justice, right? scales of
justice equally balanced. When
you start with the presumption,
uh, one scale is just a little
bit over the other one, we don't
really try and define how much
that scale of imbalance is, but
there's a presumption meaning
one part of the scale is a
little bit more than the other.
And it's rebuttable. It means
that you can come in and throw a
judge. Here's why, uh, this
scale should be restored to some
balance or even the balance goes
the other way. So that that's
what a presumption is, um, you,
we're all familiar, we all watch
TV, uh, we all in the criminal
law, you're presumed innocent,
right? Uh, every defendant's
presumed to be innocent, but
that's clearly a rebuttable
presumption that the prosecutor
has to go in and rebut that
presumption of innocence, that's
the easiest example that I can
give you to illustrate how that
works.
OK, so if all if all
presumptions are rebuttable,
what is a conclusive
presumption.
Let's go through the person
chairing, not the chair, chair
chair. Yeah, I don't know where
you're getting that term from
center, um, I'm not familiar
with it. I've not heard it
before. I don't know what you
you said a conclusive
presumption. I don't think there
can be such a thing. They they
seem they're in they're
internally inconsistent, right?
If it, if it's, what's your term
again? You're saying it's a
what, it's a,
I don't think there can be a
conclusive means that it's done,
it's over with, it's determined
and a presumption means you got,
again, an imbalanced.
the scales. If I can help you
illustrate it that way. So can
you, Mr. Chair, Chair, can you
assure me that presumed then
means that, that presumed or or
presumption in all cases would
still allow for, for a rebuttal.
Is that correct in every single
case
and remember that's existing
language too, the presumption is
that this is the case, but I, I
can't think of any circumstance
where there would be a
presumption that's not
rebuttable. It's, it's they they
hand in glove, they have to go
together.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We've,
we've, we've passed this policy.
We're kind of discussing this
and we're often referring back
to the most recent.
Incidents that happened with
Chief Medina.
If the May was still a show.
Couldn't we have responded.
And discipline, I mean, couldn't
we have responded differently.
We may have responded
differently to that accident
instead of saying we shall.
I mean, are there no, were there
no consequences that we could
have responded to or or APD
could have taken in response to
that.
Without this statute being in
place, there's no way that there
could have been
again, I, I want to be fair to
Chief Medina and the the city of
Albuquerque, I don't know all
the details I.
No, I wouldn't presume to have
seen all the reports. I'm sure
there were probably multiple
reports, and so I, I try not to
pass judgment on things where I
don't have all the facts, and,
and so in fairness to him and
everybody concerned, I don't
know all of those facts, um, so
you're asking what could have
been done. It's pretty hard to
discipline the chief. Um, I
would guess I imagine there's a
way to do that, but again,
that's beyond me. I don't know
how that, how that happens, I
guess.
Mayor has to act, or whoever,
whoever he answers to has to
act, but.
Um, I, I don't know what.
Consequences there are to a
chief of police who doesn't,
doesn't feel the need to comply
with their his own policies.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator. It seems that if we, if
we didn't know all the facts
that even it is even more reason
that we wouldn't need a policy
in place to make sure that we're
not.
You know, a knee jerk reaction
to what happened. There, of
course, is a third word that I
still have a problem with that,
and that is the maid of the
shell.
I mentioned to you that.
In 2023, I said that you your
exact words were that the
language was initially pretty
harsh, you know, shall be
presumed in bad faith was pretty
heavy sanction.
I insisted at the time and
pushed pretty hard, and I
thought the will of the public
in the committee, the legislator
was very strong and support of
body cameras, and so I had a
very harsh stinction. I agreed
that the language was pretty
harsh.
It would support changing the
language to May as an amendment.
It allows for just discretion on
the court, and I'm all about
giving discretion to judges when
they're exercising it, and when
they see it consistently
exercised.
Why, why, again, senator, can we
not presume that that judges
Will respond in good faith.
And why today is the shell, not
harsh.
So Senator, I would probably,
uh, use the word or or maybe
back away from the words, my own
words, harsh, and you really use
the word strict or clear, right?
A a clear sanction, and, and all
I can do is repeat the history
that I've given you, which is,
there was resistance to this
strong resistance from the very
beginning, and I, and I'll tell
you that as the sponsor.
Uh, this, again, the loving
we're having here today on body
camera technology was not the
way this was at the time, and
so, um, you're right at the
time, I thought a strict
sanction was necessary, and I
wouldn't even call it a
sanction, I actually call it a
strict result, right, clear and
strict result for not complying
and I thought that was essential
at the time because we had law
enforcement pushing back. They,
they didn't want to do, some of
them, I shouldn't say, shouldn't
paint everybody with a full
brush, but plenty, plenty of
very significant substantial law
enforcement agencies did not
want to do this.
Um, and told us all the same
reasons. We can't afford it.
Technology doesn't exist, all of
the circumstances, we can't be
expected to use this in a in a
circumstance where there's an
emergency or we're returning
fire, whatever it may be, and we
got all of that, um, and so
you're right, initially, I, I,
I'm repeating part of this, but
initially we put in a very clear
consequence, uh, which is, there
was the word shall.
And then you're right, a couple
of years later, I said, hey, uh,
law enforces said that's too,
that's too high a standard for
us. So we backed it off to May.
And I did that, uh, responsive
to their, to their advice and
input, and then, and then I, I
think we've seen the result. Uh,
Senator, you raise, you know,
you raise a family. I do too,
sometimes when you, you, uh,
when the curfews, uh, midnight
and they start coming home at
12:30 and 1 o'clock, and you
don't do anything about it, they
start coming home at 2 o'clock.
Um, so.
We, we had a, we had a show, we,
we were persuaded to take it to
a May, and I think we've seen
maybe the consequence of that,
which is um a cavalier attitude,
at least by a very isolated.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
wonder sometimes if the push,
the initial pushback isn't
opposed to necessarily wearing
cameras, but it, it's where it
goes from there.
It opens up the door, so we
continue to make it worse and
worse and worse and worse each
year. And so while they may have
been OK with the cameras, the
initial concern pushback is,
where does it go the following
year and the following year and
and you slowly start, uh, you
know, eating away that, uh, it
really, I guess rights is we
could say. I think Senator, my
biggest problem with this
particular bill is it seems like
this legislative session were
picking apples. In this case,
this is an effort to uh to be.
active?
Um, and passing body camera laws
in response to one bad apple.
And in the same session where
Proactive in passing red flag
laws that would allow law
enforcement agencies to come in
and confiscate guns without any
concern, there's a bad apple out
there.
And so my concern is this
session you, you, you can't have
it all.
I'm not, I'm still not gonna
support your bill, mister
Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you just a couple.
Uh, Senator Thornton.
So I'm, I'm an engineer sitting
here listening to all this
legalese.
And I'm learning a lot as we go
through this process, um.
Mr. Chair
I'm struggling still with the
First of all,
I think the area regarding
intentional spoliation of
evidence, I think that's clear.
If, if
I don't think anything needs to
be said. If someone's destroying
evidence.
clear something needs to be
done, it needs to be.
Uh, about punishment as a result
of that.
And I think there's not a person
here that would disagree with
that. So I don't think we're
talking about.
I don't think the spoliation
issue is the issue.
I think the issue here is
The presumption of
Guilt or bad faith.
And that's kind of what I've
been hearing from.
From the officers here.
It's this presumption of bad
faith.
Um
And
And so, so I guess what I'm
getting back to is
What is the standard to prove
knowingly.
Or intentionally.
Um
When you say knowingly or
intentionally failed to comply
with policies and procedures.
And so
How does one go about proving
that or how does one go about?
Disproving that, because you're
assuming I'm guilty now.
And I'm thinking if I'm a
Police officer and I
Obviously, um, things happen
very quickly.
In the real world.
You know, you can get into a
physical altercation fairly
quickly.
Um
Maybe driving and all of a
sudden someone's shooting at
you.
You have to react.
And um
Even getting out of the car, you
may bump your camera, may turn
itself off, and you're not, you
could care less cause you're
trying to save life and others.
Um
I, so I can imagine what that,
what that would feel like, and,
and I guess my concern here is
that this presumption of bad
faith seems to go against the
grain of what we in America tend
to think of as
Justice.
Uh, we always presume anyone
accused of anything is innocent.
So you talked about weighing the
scales, so I have a, I have a
real concern about this stuff,
so I, I wanna know how would
someone go about?
proving they didn't know or
didn't do anything intentionally
because you're assuming I'm
guilty now.
And I'm not sure how I would
prove that a negative.
How do I prove that I didn't do
something?
And that's the position I feel
that you're putting the law, the
officers in, so.
Help me walk me through that.
So there's a lot in there,
Senator, let me, let me help uh
add a few things as they came to
me as you were talking about, so
you use the word guilt a few
times. Guilt is a criminal
concept. Um, and this is not a
criminal consequence, the law
enforcement officers are not
going to be charged with a
crime.
Or violating these policies and
procedures.
Um, and so I think it'll be
important if you're part of this
committee to, to realize the
concepts between criminal
conduct and non-criminal conduct
that we're not talking about
that, so there's no guilt here.
Uh, by a law enforcement
officer, the, the law has
developed this concept of
spoliation of evidence, kind of
interesting in New Mexico, it
was a slip and fall case where,
um uh there was an individual at
a Walmart or Kmart or something
and slipped on something in the.
Um, the argument was that the
container had a defect in it and
was leaking on the floor and so
forth. And the, the uh
supermarket or whatever else
didn't keep the container,
right? And so what the law in
that case said is that we're
going to presume that the fact
you did not keep critical
evidence of the claim here, the
fact you didn't keep it, we have
to presume that that would have
been favorable to the person
making the claim, because they,
they have no way of proving
their case. The the critical
evidence that was available to
them was.
Taken from them by somebody
else, and we're going to presume
that evidence against the person
who had control over it. That's
how the whole body of spoliation
develops. So this is really just
an application of spoliation in
the context of body camra leg uh
legislation, which again, I
don't think anyone here would
disagree if if um we had a, a, a
claim of excessive use of force
and there was.
Footage, uh, taken of that.
We've seen this at the national
level, high profile cases, uh,
some, sometimes tragic cases
where an individual who's being
um arrested dies, right, because
of at least an allegation of an
abuse of force, and if you have
that video footage and then it
disappears, the law is going to
say, we're going to presume that
footage was uh favorable to the
person who did not control it,
who could not have saved it,
right? And, uh, that's a
reasonable, I think that's a
reasonable approach that I'll
just say it's consistent with
where.
courts operate.
Which is the, the, the, the
person who should have saved it.
They are worth read through all
the requirements. If you knew
there was going to be a lawsuit
and you knew you had access and
you knew to save it and so
forth. And if you don't, we're
going to presume that evidence
against you, but it's always
rebuttable. You're right, you
can always go to court and judge
say, here, here's why.
I brought a magnet into the
Into the room to erase all the
tape. Maybe it maybe a good
reason, but.
Uh, again, it's a, it's a
rebuttable presumption.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, and
Mr. Chair, I, I'm not sure that
answers my question because I, I
guess what I was getting back at
to is, is how do you
As a
That's a officer who is being
accused of
That day.
Um
How do you prove you didn't
knowingly.
Or intentionally.
Just
Destroy evidence, that maybe
that's.
Um, and, and, in the event
something occurred where.
That, that is raised as a
question, and I'm not quite sure
how I would defend myself. And I
think that's the situation. I
think I'm not talking about, you
know.
Illuminating evidence. That's a
clear cut case, I understand.
I'm just trying to understand
how I, when I'm put in a
position where I'm presumed to
have done something in bad
faith.
When I know I didn't. How do I
prove that?
Um, they would have to be on a
case by case circumstance. I
mean, so you've heard the
example of some folks saying,
well, the battery wore down or
equipment malfunctioned or
whatever else. Those would,
that's how you would prove the
presumption on your side, right,
is to show that you have a
history of using the equipment
consistently that the
equipment's uniformly maintained
and operated well. Um, if, if
I'm trying to apply the
presumption against you, I'm
gonna say you all never checked
the equipment, you, you knew the
batteries were not functioning.
and were running down and they
were routinely uh expiring
during the shift.
That's, you have to look at all
the evidence in the circumstance
case by case, but I can think of
different scenarios, right? I
mean, uh, some, some folks are
good about making sure their
phone battery never runs down,
some folks like me usually runs
down every day about 4 o'clock,
and I just stopped taking calls
at 4 o'clock, you know, uh, I
mean, I'm, I'm being, I'm being
facetious, but you'd want to
know all of those things, you'd
want to know how aggressive the
department was about enforcing
it, whether they were imposing
consequences or whether they
were doing a wink and a nod,
let's face it, right? I mean, we
know that exists too, um, in, in
different.
Uh, organizations or different
environments, all of those
things would be factors that I
can think of right now on the
fly, but you would, you have to
have really unlimited number of
considerations based on the
circumstances. Was it raining?
Uh, what was the temperature
outside? I mean, all of those
things could be factors to
consider. I'm just, again
thinking off the top of my head.
No, I'm just, uh.
Getting back to my original
question, how do I disprove
Knowingly or
And, and so it's, it's, it's a
tough, it's a tough standard is
what I'm saying, and, and so my
sense here is that
Um
And I, and I think that's when I
get back to the word shell or
may.
Because I think then the
standard allows that rebuttal.
And, and there's not the
presumption of a bad thing.
So that's where I'm struggling
with.
This is what the whole
conversation is about the shell
or May.
And I think they're, they're, I
and I can't think of an example,
but I know there are probably
plenty of examples where things
could happen and there was
certainly no bad faith.
And then I'm, I'm presumed to
have acted in such, and now I've
got a I got a.
Prove a negative.
Which is a really difficult
thing to do.
So that's, that's the, the logic
here that I'm thinking through.
And, and so that then leads me
to the question of
Putting in the shell, he
presumed as opposed to maybe be
presumed because I can't.
I can't
difficult for me to prove a
negative.
And so therefore
You can still presume, I may
have done something wrong, and
then we'll go through the
rebuttal process, but now at
least I'm not walking in feeling
as if.
I've got to prove a negative.
So anyway, that's, so I'm having
struggling with this bill, and I
know this is the key part of the
language that that we're all
discussing here. And so, but
based on that,
I, I, I can't support the bill
in this frame right now.
But if you can argue through,
through that for me. I'm, I'm
open to it.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Stewart.
Chair when I move it do not pass
the Senate Bill 505 and it do
pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 505.
Thank you, thank you, we have a
motion in a 2nd on the
substitute.
instead of explaining my vote,
let me just make a quick
comment.
But definitely I think it's good
to put in statute, though.
He asks colleges and
universities referred to in law
as public postsecondary
educational institutions, even
whether they're doing it or not,
putting in a statute needs to
happen.
This was a choice between May
and Shao, and that's a kind of a
policy decision.
The sponsor's credit, he
listened to all voices.
Uh, an amendments, and now it's,
now it's whether we should just
kind of have this higher
standard of knowingly and
intelligently shall be presumed.
Um, and so I don't quite see the
point in doing that with that
statute. I mean, it's good law
now.
Um, now it's gonna read peace
officers who intentionally
failed to comply shall be deemed
to intentionally.
Uh, spoliation, you know, like,
OK.
I think that's already there,
uh, and then we lose the
negligent aspect of it. And then
secondly, um,
Chairman Senator, the um
I don't know, no disrespect to
law enforcement. I don't know if
the average rank and file is
gonna even understand that
nuance or believe the lawyer in
their agency that says it's OK.
Uh, when we did, uh, when we,
uh,
When we, uh, created a state, a
state avenue to overcome the
federal uh common immunity.
Yes, the officer gets sued, but
the officer doesn't pay out. The
officers indemnified by the city
or county.
A lot of officers in the state
still don't believe that. They
literally think that they're
going to lose their house or
their car and they're angry
about it.
Now granted, we don't wanna make
public policy.
Sacrifices because of mis.
Conceptions, but I just don't
see the.
The point in moving forward on
this, uh, at this time, given
that
The nuance of the change that
that it would create. OK, we
have a motion to do pass in a
second on the substitute, please
call the roll.
Yeah
There's
I'm a yes.
No, you have a you have a dope
on the substitute, but before
the end of the hearing, we have
a senator work to explain. Uh,
so, Mr. Chair and Mr. Chair.
I would like to hear from
The Governor's council.
I do think they need to look at
this. I hope that they'll reach
out to you.
Uh, obviously,
Uh, Mr. Cha, can you just turn
off your mic? If, if it doesn't
make a whole lot of sense to.
create a huge
Consternation if the bill's
going to get vetoed, I, I really
do think when they look at this.
They're going to look at it the
way we're looking at this, but I
wanna have that, so I just
wanted to make that comment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Well do pass and you wanna do
507.
Thank you.
We sure are. Thank you, Senator.
Uh, Senator, this will be a
really interesting discussion
debate. I'm hoping that I always
give the committee something
hard, uh, to be up here about.
So, you know, we, we hear about
gun crimes, we hear about
violence and, and there's a lot
of attention to even this
session to uh automatic weapons,
assault weapons, magazine
capacities and so forth. What,
what we ought to recognize, I
think, is when you really look
at most gun violence crimes that
I read about, and again, I'm
relying on either our interim
committee.
or what I read in the papers.
Most of gun shootings are not,
uh, mass violence, mass
killings.
Uh, most, most, most gun
violence crimes are.
Uh, some kids are at a party on
a Saturday night at 20 in the
morning and somebody gets into a
fight in in our, in our day that
would lead to a fistfight, uh,
and resting on the ground.
Nowadays, somebody's carrying a
gun, it turns into a gunfight.
Um, gun, gun violence happens on
Sunday football games when
somebody's had too much to
drink.
And somebody makes a pass at
somebody's wife or girlfriend or
says something.
This is where our gun violence
is happening. It's happening
because really very frankly,
people are carrying guns, more
and more circumstances and um
and and um.
Probably far more than we would
have ever dreamed of, I was, I
was a young person, I wouldn't
go out on a Friday night. We're
gonna go drink beer, um,
underage at the river. We all
did it, we didn't take guns to
do anything like that. So that
may seem like a strange
introduction to this bill, but
years ago we passed a carry law.
And the goal of this bill is to
recognize that there are 3 types
of gun owners, in my opinion,
there's, there's a reasonable
responsible gun owners, and I
count myself among them contrary
to whatever else you're reading
on some of the websites or
whatever else may be. Um, I've
owned guns as long as I can
remember. There's responsible
gun owners, there's
irresponsible gun owners, and
there's criminal gun owners.
And a lot of times our focus is
on the criminal gun owners, but
I'd like to focus on the
irresponsible gun owners. So we,
so I sponsored years ago and
helped pass the concealed carry
law, which requires
demonstrations of knowledge of
the law, demonstrations of
proficiency, um, and that's
responsible gun ownership. The
goal of this bill is to
encourage more and more
responsible gun ownership. So,
as a concealed carry permit
holder, I'll tell you just if
you go through the bill, a
couple of things. One is right
now, uh, for, for we'll start
with it right now, uh, you.
You can buy a handgun and own a
handgun at age 19.
You can carry an open carry a
gun strapped on your waist at
age 19 lawfully, but you can't
get a concealed carry permit.
At age 19. I think that there's
a, a disconnect there, an
incongruity. If you can own a
gun, you can openly carry a gun,
you should be able to get a
concealed carry permit, you
should be willing to take the
class and demonstrate reasonable
proficiency so this this
addresses that.
Um, the law right now requires
16 hours of training to get a a
license. I've done it. I know
Senator Brantley and I've talked
about it, I know she's done it.
I don't know whether others have
done it. It's a, it's an
absurdity to uh expect somebody
to spend 16 hours of a class,
learn how to uh conceal carry a
weapon. I mean, the fundamentals
of owning a gun and utilizing a
gun are pretty straightforward,
right? Um, you load it and you
pull the trigger back, and
that's about all there is to it.
I'm simplifying it grossly, but
it's pretty hard to turn that
into 60.
hours, and so the burden I think
was too high. So the, the goal
here is to lower that burden
down.
Um, to lower the burden for
requalifications and renewals,
with again the idea that people
have concealed carry permits,
um, and I think that's gonna
begin to, if you'll excuse the
expression, separate the wheat
from the chaff. We're gonna
separate the people that are
going to be responsible, good
lawful gun owners, and we're
gonna hopefully discourage the
irresponsible gun ownership. And
so this that one of the things,
importantly, which is it
increases the penalty or for
carrying a concealed weapon
without a permit.
Right now, the consequence for
that is a petty misdemeanor.
That that standard, that burden,
that consequence is so low that
that when I took the concealed
carry coursework, many of my
friends who are gun owners said,
Why are you wasting your time?
Why bother carrying a concealed
carry. Why pay the fee? Why
turning your fingerprints? Why
go through all the effort to do
that, when the only consequence
of not having a permit and
carrying concealed is a petty
misdemeanor.
And, and that's not a bad
argument, is, um, the
consequence is so small of not
complying with all these laws
that maybe you just
Go naked, if you will, uh,
without the permit. So this is
to try and and change that uh to
get, uh, again, greater emphasis
on the responsible gun owners
and uh I, I think this, when in
the last hearing, I was really
encouraged because I've said
this for a very long time, those
of us that are gun owners should
be the ones who are leading the
effort to enact a responsible
gun laws and gun ownership laws,
and instead of the knee-jerk
reaction, which is oftentimes
the case of the gun.
Boy, it's just any gun laws are
bad, any restrictions are bad. I
reject that as a gun owner, I
think we're the ones who should
be uh really trying to make sure
that we leave gun laws because
we know, we know what the um
device is, we know what the
weapon is, we know how to be
responsible about it, and that's
what this goal is of of this
bill. So with that, um, Mr.
Chairman, I'll stand for
questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much. We have a
couple of folks who wish to
participate in public comment.
We have a proponent of Doctor
William.
Person
Welcome, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, Senator
Cervantes, I'm William Farisen.
I'm a retired computer scientist
uh here in Santa Fe, and I'm one
of Senator Worth's constituents.
Uh, I'm also a concealed handgun
licensee.
I stand in support of SB 507,
and I thank Senator Cervantes
for his efforts on this bill.
However, I have one reservation,
the alterations in the section
on reciprocal agreements with
other states.
I believe that these provisions
are likely meant for the
granting of licenses to those
who relocate to New Mexico
rather than the reciprocal
recognition for those who of us
who travel.
You clarify this portion of the
bill and make it clear that
those of us who cross state
lines regularly and our friends
in other states who travel to
our beautiful state are not
suddenly in violation of the law
because of revoked reciprocity
by our neighboring states.
Senator Savantes, thank you very
much for the bulk of this bill
and uh.
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. We have, um,
That's the only person signed up
to speak on behalf.
There's someone who wishes to
speak in opposition, uh,
Nicholas.
Tokyo.
Cusio. Nicholas Tusio, welcome.
Good afternoon.
Chairman
Committee members. My name is
Nicholas Tucio. I am the state
director of the National Rifle
Association, as indicated, there
are a lot of things in this
bill. I think they're moving in
the right direction to ensure
that Mexicans have the ability
to uh obtain.
carry a holder permit status.
With greater ability. Uh,
however, one of the issues from
our perspective is the.
As as indicated, the removal of
concealed carry reciprocity, um,
statistically, these are
individuals that are among the
most law-abiding citizens that
we have, for example, concealed
carry licensure holders in Texas
and Florida are convicted of
misdemeanors and felonies at 1/6
the rate at which police
officers are convicted in those
appropriate states. Uh, this is
something that harms some of the
most law-abiding citizens who,
to my knowledge, have not.
I committed uh incident in the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you. That's all that's
signed up, uh, members of the
committee, Senator Thornton.
Mr. Chair and and Mr. Chair,
right?
I like the law.
And I don't like the law. Let
me, and let me explain what I
mean by that.
Um
So
I, I'm a person who's had
concealed carry for many years
now.
And it's always been a pain to
have to go through the two year
renewal process and to get the
retraining, and then, of course,
the 4 year update on your
license.
And I've had to do that on
several occasions, um.
So, and I also have had to sit
sit through the, you know, two
days of training.
And some of it is is redundant
after you've been through it
once or twice.
Um, but it's also a good
reminder in case laws change,
things change during the course
of those 2 years, 4 years, and
sometimes you need to be updated
on those, so, so the reason I, I
like it is where, you know, the,
the idea of minimum age of 19,
at first I had I I struggled
with that and, but I understand
that you can actually purchase a
gun at 19, so why shouldn't you
be able to conceal carry one as
well.
Um
I, I was
I felt these additional trading
hours, even though they were
pained.
They, they do have added value,
so, um, so I was struggling with
that as well. And so,
But
If we're trying to encourage
more people to still carry, I'm,
I'm comfortable with that
actually.
Uh, the, the only issue that I
really didn't like, and it's
already been mentioned by two of
the folks here, what's the the
reciprocity issue. So what was
the reason for delete deleting
their authority to enter into
reciprocity, so why did you come
to that?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator, I, I
think that it's probably
Two extensive of a burden to
expect the the the reciprocity
law that exists on the books now
says we're going to recognize
reciprocity of the other states'
laws are essentially comparable
or more stringent than our own.
Um, that's gonna, that's gonna
lead to probably a great deal of
uncertainty, how do you compare
our laws to the laws of other
state and what their
requirements are, we have 16
hours, they have 15 hours, or
we're gonna say that they're
less stringent than ours and
deny reciprocity on that basis,
trying to compare every
component.
And and every nuance between our
state laws and other state laws,
I think it's a fool's errand,
number one.
2, I think we should be to quote
Seinfeld, we should be masters
of our own domain, uh, you.
Those of you all may remember
the episode, um.
So, uh, but, but, you know,
we're all accustomed to the, the
term, which is we New Mexico
should be uh determining our own
laws for gun ownership. Uh, we
have our own history, we have
our own rural uh state of uh
requiring.
Um, our laws to comport with
what maybe the laws in
California, pretty strict state
for gun laws, New York, pretty
strict for gun laws.
Uh, I, I just don't think we
want to get into a situation
where we're trying to compare
our laws with every other state
when somebody wants to come in
here. So, I, I, I would like uh
to believe that we have good
reasonable laws, and that um
anybody who wants a concealed
carry permit issued by the state
of New Mexico meets our, our
standards, our laws here, and
that we don't delegate that
responsibility over or abdicate
that to some other state.
Mr. Chair, I, I.
I understand that. I, I think
my, my biggest concern is, is
losing reciprocity with so so
that was my biggest concern or
had worked in Texas quite a bit.
We have reciprocity with Texas.
And I could carry.
even use the airlines to take my
weapon with me.
And so, um, and I didn't have to
worry about whether or not I was
going to be stopped in Texas and
all of a sudden being accused of
being a criminal.
And so and so I worry about the
other states.
Not allowing us to do things
that we currently take for
granted with those states that
we already have reciprocity.
That's, that's what was the
biggest concern I have.
my district borders the state of
Texas, right? Texas and
Anthony's across the street, um,
and so when we, when we pass
these laws we talk about these
laws between border states,
remembering too that I, I
crossed into Texas multiple
times a day, so it's not, you
know, you're your concern is a
good one, but again, uh, how are
we gonna, how Texas essentially
has very little requirements
for.
Gun ownership, and I'll just
tell you, reciprocity generally
is a concept I, I kind of
reject, generally speaking, I
mean, years ago, we in the
practice of law open reciprocity
to other lawyers from other
states, but the idea we're going
to get better lawyers, I'll tell
you the opposite has really
happened. So that's maybe a
little bit off the subject, but
this notion, it all gets back to
the B masters of our own domain,
we, we should decide what's
right for New Mexico and expect
others if they want a concealed
carry permit from the state of
New Mexico to meet our standard.
Thank you Mr. Chair, thank you.
Thank you Senator Doig.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so, so
I'm on the same topic because I,
I think this gentleman is right.
That the way we have it now, the
new language is only about
transferring.
Transferring an out of state
license to to a New Mexico
license. Um, and, and that
makes total sense to me. I think
that the language that's taken
out on page 10, if we just took
out the word transfer.
On line 5 and otherwise put this
back in. This would would allow
people who are just traveling
and have their out of state.
Uh, concealed carry license, um,
for it to be recognized while
they're here.
Um, and it would have to be, it
would have to have been issued
by another state that includes
provisions at least as stringent
or substantially similar to this
act, to the concealed handgun
carry Act.
Um, and then all this, this
other and have to have, you
know, submitted to a national
criminal history check, not be
prohibited from from possessing
firearms pursuant to federal or
state law, all the things that
we, the standards that we have
here in New Mexico.
And so this provision would
apply to someone who is keeping
their out of state license while
in New Mexico, whereas the added
language deals with someone
transferring.
They're out of state
transferring their out of state
license to a New Mexico license.
But
But I do think that, that with
this language taken out.
The person from Texas who has a
Texas conceal carry, assuming
that is at least astringent as
this is.
Would not, it would not be
lawful.
Um, and, and that probably is
something that we should deal
with.
Um, it's all.
I don't know if you want to
respond to that or or I I can
make a motion and then, and then
have you respond before you do
that, could you be more, uh,
just reiterate the page online.
Sure, so what, so what the
motion would be.
would be for the, the language
that is struck on page 10.
Staring at line 4 and carrying
over to lines 1 and 2 on page
11.
It would be to um
the word.
Revive that like, put, put that
language back and unstrike it,
except
Or on line 5 on page 10.
Transfer.
OK. Thank you.
I, I can see that
it would not be my preference.
Let me give you the reason why.
So, um, we're all using this
example. So if you have somebody
from here from Texas who's here
in the state, let's say they're
in Albuquerque, and they're
concealed carrying and they have
a permit and they're stopped or
they're or they're arrested or
they're detained, and they pull
out their Texas license, um, by
the existing language, even with
your amendment, it goes on to
say that that the recognition of
that license would depend on
several things. The law
enforcement
an officer would have to know
and make determinations that
presumably on the spot as to
whether the state of the permit
holder, so let's let's not make
it easy in Texas, let's say
they've got a permit from New
Hampshire. How is the law
enforcement officer gonna know
whether the requirements of New
Hampshire are more stringent or
substantially similar, uh, how
will they know whether the um
this qualification or revocation
requirements are the same. How
will they know that the
applicant submitted to a
national criminal history record
check.
Or how would they know the
individual is not prohibited
from possessing under federal
law or that the last of that
page of the individual
successfully completed a firearm
safety program that does those
things. I don't know how in
practice this could work, we've
been doing it, evidently, right,
so it's existing law and so how
we're doing, I don't know
whether we really do it or not.
I don't know how frequently this
ever comes up, but I, I, I do
agree with you that at the very
least, limiting the transfer
would be a good change from our
existing law, but I, I'm, I'm
still a little puzzled.
by how we recognize a license
from another state, um, and I
still still seems like the best
idea for me is to have them get
them, get a New Mexico license.
And, and Mr. Chair, yeah, I
mean, I, I don't know how it
works now, um, I assume probably
when it usually comes into play
is when, uh,
When something is happening and
it's gotten to something's in
front of a judge and the judge
is the one.
Making those determinations. I
think you're right, if there is
someone who is staying here, we
should ask, they should
absolutely be getting a New
Mexico license. It's just the
transient, the people who are
passing through that, that I
think are, are the concern.
Yeah, it's a policy question. Do
we want to have people who have
concealed carry permits from
another state coming through New
Mexico and be able to conceal
carry on the basis of that
authority from another state.
It's a it's a policy question
and I think this is going to
become an issue at the national
level. I mean, I, what I hear
from the Trump administration
and from a Republican Congress
is maybe even trying to adopt a
national reciprocity standard
and essentially say that we're
we're gonna set the standard in
Washington DC and I think
they're probably going to say,
um,
Reciprocity across the country,
right, without regard, so if you
have a, a concealed carry permit
in one state, you're allowed to
conceal carry in in every in any
state. I think that's where the
federal government's going under
this administration.
Um, I don't think that's a good
thing, but, um, I really do
think that should be a state's
rights issue. Again, I, I talked
about this on the floor today. I
said, we live in interesting
times when my conservative
friends are not of such big fans
of states' rights
suddenly, um, but one a national
standard on guns. So it's a
policy question, Senator. I, I,
if you were to strike the word
transfer and put back in the
language. I'd probably support
that ultimately, but I, I still
think removing reciprocity.
I'll go ahead and I'll make that
motion then, so it would be to
restore all the struck language,
age 10, line 4 through 25, page
11, line 1 and 2, except.
The word, except on line 5, page
10, transfer, comma.
Everyone clear on what that
motion is. All right, so there's
a motion to amend, page 10 and
11. 00, I'm sorry, one more part
would have to be part of that
motion in rules.
I, I amended it to strike.
Language on page 9 because there
was still something in the title
of this section, talking about
reciprocal agreements with other
states, so it would also be to
strike the Senate rules
amendments to the bill
reciprocal agreements we need to
restore that.
So striking in the Senate rules
amendment and then otherwise
making those that amendment to
page 10.
All right, I
All right,
already discussion on.
to.
So, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
did you say this was friendly?
I'm.
I have a couple questions uh.
I'm not a gun person, um.
Can you put a gun in your
luggage as long as it's
underneath the plane.
I'm just trying to think if, if
this is gonna affect tourism or
not. Secondly, like our tourists
gonna be like, I don't want to
go to so I can't can't take my
gun and then also.
This was put in to make sure
that any concealed carry has
the.
The exact same, you know.
Educational standards and and
seriousness with regards to
concealed carry, but didn't
Texas recently just allow
concealed carriages by.
Signing up for it or
And so, essentially, uh, but to
answer the question of how does
a cop deal with it, I think.
Right now, they probably just
see the permit from another
state and say thank, thank you,
have a nice day, you know, but.
But I think I don't know if the
Texas permit.
Would work
And whether, and I think even
putting this back in statute.
Probably still wouldn't work,
um.
I think the clearest way to go
is just to make it so that it
doesn't work for anybody at any
time. I don't know anyway.
Any other discussion on on the
proposed amendment and do it.
I just, I just miss share, I
just wanna clarify something.
You gotta look at the the
language on page 10 lines 8 and
9 that would be restored.
As it would have to be an
authority from another state
that has provisions, at least as
stringent or substantially
similar to what we're doing
here. So if Texas says you can
have a concealed carry if you
breathe. That would not be
valid. Uh, that would not get
reciprocity under this.
I think we're all, I think we're
all clear on that and, and
that's my point if.
We allowing reciprocity for
It's
They have the same strategy,
that means that Texans couldn't
do it and then that begs the
question, how do cops know what
states does do what.
Thank yous has given me an
answer. He tells me that DPS
already does that. They already
evidently do an analysis and
compare states, and so they've
already made that kind of
determination, and I think he's
also told me in his note that,
um,
Is it, is it published in the
administrative code?
OK, so, so they've done the
exercise, to answer your
question, and they they've made
determination which states are
as stringent or more stringent,
so it's not as unworkable as I
was concerned about your other,
your other question was, can you
take a gun on the plane and put
it under your seat. Um, try it.
Why don't you try it.
Next time you go,
give it a, that's, I didn't ask
that. I don't I'm
surprised anyone thought I asked
that under the plane and the
belly of the plane in your
luggage, not, not
it's like I may have said in the
seat for those who know me, you,
you can check in a handgun and
checked luggage. Uh, there are
some restrictions and
limitations on that too as well,
but I, I can assure you carry
is, is carry on probably gonna
be a problem unless you're a
cop. No good catch.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, I've
got a little amendment.
Age 3 line 1.
Oh, I'm so sorry.
I'm getting ahead of things.
Yes.
No.
So, Mr. Chairman, page 3, line
1.
I know, you know, you, you say,
well, 19 year olds can buy guns,
so why shouldn't they just have
concealed carry, and I don't
agree with that logic.
Because
You know, I taught for 30 years
and I know what's going on with
kids that are 19.
Bringing guns to school.
You know, this, you know, this
just gives them current block
You know, this, you know, this
just gives them current blockche
You know, this, you know, this
just gives them current block
to say you can have concealed
carry. We have 26 juveniles
locked up that have all
committed murder, according to
DA Bregman.
We have a serious problem with
young people thinking that guns
are so cool and a big deal and
shooting up schools and
everybody else. I just don't
think this is appropriate. I
mean, I would like them to not
be able to buy it until 21, but
I understand, you know, 18, you
get in the army, you get your
gun, all of that, but I don't
want to allow them to have a
concealed carry, so I amendment
is to strike 19 and leave 21.
If I may, uh, go ahead. I don't
agree with your logic though,
let me, let me add one
consideration to your
discussion, which is, you
remember one thing about this
bill. We are increasing the
penalties for, for not having a
permit for concealed carry. So
to your example, cuz I'm as
concerned as you are and I I a
couple of months back, I read a
story, some child comes to
school with a gun, the example
you're giving
and and from my press account,
it was all I could rely on. They
sent the kid home, they said
call for his parents and said go
home.
And that was the end of the
consequence, not a harsh enough
consequence in my opinion, and
probably yours too, so remember
this bill is taking a
consequence higher and would,
would make that a misdemeanor as
opposed to a petty misdemeanor
in that circumstance. And, and I
don't know that um allowing a 19
year old to have a concealed
carry is a, is a license to have
more. They're, they're doing it
anyway. They're carrying the
guys, they're taking them to
school. I, I, I, the reason that
we didn't take guns to the river
when we went to go have beer in
high school was because.
Our parents would have massacred
us, I mean, they, you know, the,
the consequence to me would have
been very, very great, uh, at
the time and you're right, kids
now have a cavalier attitu to
guns. So I'm hoping the
increased penalties gets a
mindset going for them that,
hey, I shouldn't be able to take
a gun anywhere I want all the
time, take it to school, show it
off, or take it to the parties
on Friday night, because that's
really where the gun violence is
happening. It's the, the one,
the one, it's not that we're
we're all very focused on mass
killings. They're horrible
circumstances, um, and they
capture a lot of attention, but
That's, that's not the majority
of the gun violence, gun
violence is in her in her family
or among friends or or kids.
And uh, so anyway, I, I
understand your point. So that's
unfriendly. Yes, thank you. Uh
senator.
Well, I'm not finished.
So, um, I, I just disagree with
that logic also. I just think
that.
Not the majority, but a
significant portion of 19 year
olds are completely
irresponsible.
And you're giving them a license
to carry a concealed gun.
It makes no sense to me.
I mean, you're not really.
You know, an adult till about 25
or 26 that brain does not
develop still developing at 19.
Uh, so, I, I just think this is
outrageous that we say, yeah,
kid, 19 year olds, go out and
get a concealed carry. You got
to take a little course to cut
it down. It's only 6 hours now.
She could do it in a day, and
then you know you've got to
concealed carry. I just think
it's crazy. It's a crazy thing
to do. She talked to DA Bregman.
Who is drowning in juveniles
doing all kinds of crimes.
Well, who knows? Maybe he would
agree with you, but I sure
don't. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would just add to that is, you
know, if you take the course,
it's, there's some fascinating
good information that I think
would be useful, so, for
example, you do learn the law,
you learn the castle doctrine,
you realize you just can't shoot
somebody because you're
threatened, you, you have to,
you learn what is the proper
exercise of deadly force and and
the limitations on the use of
deadly force, and you also
learn, of course, the legal
consequences for, for misuse of
a gun and, and that might be
good for a 19 year old to hear
what the law is, what their
limitations are, and the like
any 19 year old who takes a
concealed carry.
Of course, it's not gonna be the
kid who's a problem. I'm just
gonna tell you that, that's,
that's not gonna be the kid
who's taking it irresponsibly or
drinking and and showing off
their gun to their friends.
That's not who goes to these
courses. The people that go to
these courses are people were
very, very responsible about
guns.
But we didn't let the 19 year
olds in before, so you don't
really know who would show up.
Senator O'Malley.
So it's on the internet, OK,
well.
Never mind, though.
I'm going to support the
amendment, but we'll go back to
when it's time to the bill, I'll
make a comment on the
amendments, Senator Brantley, I
have a point on the amendment
because I think that.
Senator Stewart, you're, you're
concern is, is, is valid, right?
Because I think there's a
responsibility for from
responsible gun owners to push
back, especially when we see a
lot of youth violence. I, I
would make this point though is
that
Those 19 year olds can open
carry today.
And, and I am, I think that an
open carried 19 year old is far
more dangerous than a concealed
carry 19 year old who electively
chose to go through a program to
teach them about the laws,
marksmanship, how to clean their
gun, maintenance, storage
because they have chosen to take
that class. They don't have to
take it at all, and they can
have.
Possession of a handgun today.
And so for those very few that
choose to go by, by absolute
choice to go through that
training, you're, you know, a, a
concealed carry any of these
concealed carry licenses are
really the very best of
responsible gun owners, you
know, there's gun owners,
there's responsible gun owners,
and this is the cream of the
crop, those who continue to go
through markmanship training to
really invest and take this very
seriously and so
All I would say is it it it does
it is eye opening, but I would
argue though that those 19 year
olds who complete this program
are far safer than any 19 year
old who doesn't complete the
program and it's open carrying
today.
Be my only concern on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I withdraw my amendment.
She didn't convince me. She had
a much better argument than you
did.
And, and, and I'm smart and I
can.
And I can count votes and my
amendment would have maybe one
other person, so why, why
bother? 3, it would have 3. OK,
123. OK, all right, never mind.
I'm putting it back in.
The best let me tell you all, I
am so privileged to have all of
you on this committee and to be
the chair of this committee
because this is, this is really
an interesting debate and
discussion and um and it's
attacking gun issues in a new
way, which is a way to get both
sides working together and
strange alliances and, and
putting a tough discussion,
right? There's not a good clear
answer to this, but we're having
a good debate about how do we
get guns to be, uh, out of the
hands of kids who were.
Showing them off and using them
irresponsibly, and there's going
to be different approaches and
different strategies on how to
do that center, but I, I
appreciate the public policy
debate, we have the motion on
the table page.
3, line 1, change back to 21
from 19, uh, please call the
roll.
C
I
That
Yes.
There
Oh
Yes.
No.
Hey.
Uri has been twice amended. It
will go back on the bill for
further policy.
General.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I must admit there's a
certain amount of logic to what
Senator Brantley and we were
talking about, but
Yeah
We have, you know, we, we've got
the whole thing around
concealed, but really, when you
say open carry, people really
aren't open car. They're
concealing what they have, and
so all of a sudden you're,
you're dealing with some,
something where
You know, you have the potential
for for getting harmed or maimed
or killed.
That's, that's really uh an
awful thing, to be honest with
you, sometimes I just think, you
know,
There you go. It's just put on a
You know, a holster and let me,
I know what's coming at me, you
know, rather than, quite
frankly, you know, uh being in a
situation where
You don't know if somebody's got
a gun. You don't know what the
hell they're gonna do cause
they've concealed it, and they
may have a license or not, so,
um.
And I need to go back to the old
West where, you know, at least
you know you're, you've got
some, somebody coming at you
with a weapon, you know, um.
Anyway, that said, um, yeah, a
lot of these kids that are, you
know, even out there in the
street, um, you, you don't know
they have a gun, no, I mean,
that's, it's concealed.
And I just also want to go back
to this whole thing where, you
know, unfortunately, we can't go
back, but I remember growing up
went to.
Valley High School and we had a
lot of kids who were, um, you
know, there's still semi-rural,
so they, but we used to call
them the Stompers, they were
like bad kids.
And
so we had all these different
groups of, you know, the heads,
the e kids, the, you know,
whatever, and so, um, you know,
if people would get together at
the river and uh you know, all
the guys had the rifle racks in
the back, never did it occur to
them.
when there was a confrontation
to go get the rifle out of the
back of the pickup just never
occurred to them. And if it was
a fight, maybe there's some, you
know, chains involved, or, you
know, but mostly it was this and
Nobody was like seriously hurt
and
That's a sad thing really that
that's what's going on right now
is people just don't think
twice, and, you know, I know
this is uh
consider myself pretty liberal,
but I blame the media a lot. I
mean, we glorify guns.
On movies, TV, it's just every
image you see on a poster has a
gun.
You know, so we say it's cool.
And so of course the kids are
like, it's cool, you know, I
mean, they're, they're getting a
You know, influenced by all that
and and then also the video
games, my goodness.
So I'm gonna have my little
There's a little soapbox for
about a few seconds there, but
Yeah, I, I am very concerned
about it.
Um, proliferation of guns and.
It's very disturbing. I have
grandsons, um, and I'm worried
about them even, you know, the
oldest is 15 and, you know, the
pressure probably.
Um, it's gonna be hard and uh
And you know, it's a young boy
and, and we remem, you know, I
remember being at that age and
their hormones are all over the
place and especially young boys,
they react quickly, and
sometimes violently, so I really
worry about reducing the age
cause I happen to know that I
had older brothers, and I think
they matured about 40, to be
honest with you,
and uh to
say it, but um, so, yeah.
Anyway, thank you, Mr. Chair.
That's
I, I have a question, Mr. Chair.
Um, looking at this page 3.
Some of the lines at 19 to 21,
it's taking out.
Uh, the requirement to have a
training course approved by the
department for the category and
the largest caliber of handgun,
the applicant wants to be
licensed to carry as a concealed
handgun. Is the training
different based on different
caliber? What like, what, what
is the impact of, of taking them
out but you're
under the current law, if you
want to get a concealed carry,
we distinguish the caliber of
the gun, so what what ends up
happening, frankly is everybody
who wants to qualify for a
license takes a 45 out there,
they take the largest possible
caliber gun.
And qualify for that so that
that higher caliber license,
larger bullet if you will, uh,
will allow them to conceal carry
that large caliber and
everything below that. So if you
qualify with a 22 very small
bullets, small um small weapon.
You, you can only have a
concealed carry for a 22, but
most people have enough sense
that if they're gonna go through
2 days of training and firearms
qualification, they borrow a 45
even if that's not what they're
gonna use, I hope these these
numbers that I've thrown around
mean something to you, but 45,
probably the large
caliber on a handgun that most
people are ever gonna use. And
so you, you either get your
instructor to lend you their 45
to do the the proficiency, if
you will, the training you show
proficiency with the 45, so you
can use everything below that,
and that's really what happens
as a practical matter. I don't,
I don't know anybody who would
get a concealed carry permit for
a low caliber gun, and then
realized that the license is not
going to authorize you to carry
a higher caliber gun.
Thank you.
Thank you, just real quick,
Senator Neville brought this
bill to reduce the training for
years and you passionately
argued that this, you were the
deciding vote on concealed
carry, if I remember correctly,
and this requirement was part of
it. I'm just following up on
Senator Thornton's point about
the reduction in the training,
why does it hurt to have someone
do more?
Training and continued, I mean,
why, why is your position
changed?
Thank you. Good point. You're
right. I have resisted that for,
for quite some time, um, the
goal here is the overall goal is
to have more people licensed and
carrying weapons to show the
proficiency in the training. And
so when you, when you put the
um.
An excessive burden.
On people, what happens is a
practical matters they don't
renew, right, their license
expires and lapses, and they
just blow it off and, and
because the penalty is so low,
we kind of defeat the whole
point here of having people uh
licensed. And so, you know, boy,
I'm gonna really step in it
here. I'm not, I, I'm not going
where I should be going, which
is this should be comparable to
a driver's license, in other
words, the proficiency
requirement in my mind should be
greater as an individual ages,
so you your hand gets, well,
well, yeah, hey, look, I mean,
uh, you're, you're
Showing you're firing of
firearm, uh, how good is your
eyesight, how shaky is your
hand? How good are your nerves?
You have to demonstrate on the,
on, when you're doing
proficiency, they make you draw,
right? You've got to draw the
weapon from a, a, a, a down
position or holster position
because they want to make sure
you're not gonna shoot yourself
in the foot, right? Uh, and so
I'm not going there, uh, here.
I'm probably never gonna be the
one to do that. I don't know
whoever had the courage to say
that you got to requalify for a
driver's license more often as
you're older, um, but really,
you're right, worth the
The requalification should be
more nuanced, um, but I'm not
trying to tackle that now, and,
and you're right, I have
resisted that for a long time,
mostly probably at a
stubbornness, uh, you know, I,
I, I insisted that we show that
proficiency and my, my concern
is always that somebody um
qualifies with a gun, gets their
license, but does not, does not
train with it and, and I do, I
go out pretty regulated train
because, um, I'm dangerous,
anybody's dangerous without.
Doing this regularly, routinely,
just like if you, if you've ever
been off on a trip in a month or
two and not driven your car for
a month or two, you get back and
driving a car. It's a strange
experience for even a little
while, right? It's doesn't come
always very quickly and very
naturally, so that's the idea
behind that.
Of center ban.
Real quickly, I, I just want to
remind everyone I appreciate
this bill we have almost 3
levels of gun owners. You have
unlawful gun owners who who
should we should target that
criminal element of unlawful gun
owners. We have lawful gun
owners and then we have
responsible gun owners, and
while responsible gun owners are
lawful gun owners. I think it's
safe to say that lawful gun
owners are not always
responsible gun owners, and I
see this bill is incentivizing
those those gun owners and
taking this classes, becoming
familiar with their firearm,
knowing how to.
storm, knowing how to clean it
and, and I appreciate that and I
will say this, I've, I've had
this conversation with senators
that far too long as gun owners,
we refuse to come to the table
and address the the horrific gun
crimes and violence that we're
seeing, and we have to stop
doing that. We have to have a
seat at the table and say how do
we protect lawful gun owners,
encourage them to become more
responsible, but target that
criminal element and, and I
appreciate this bill. I think
that's exactly what this do does
is it encourages training and it
encourages.
Practice. I think it's also
important that of all the people
I know have that taken that
concealed cat class, that
doesn't mean that they're always
concealing. In fact, many times
they're not. They've just gone
through a training program to
know how to better use that
weapon, which I appreciate. I'm
also gonna look before we're
done to my friend, the NRA in
the audience who stood in
opposition to say with, with the
exception that they, they have
said we are going to recognize
re uh reciprocity is that I hope
that you now are in full support
of a gun bill that protects the
the gun rights of
of law-abiding citizens and
encourages them to become more
responsible owners. So thank
you, senator for bringing this
bill forward.
Right, thank you, Senator. A
couple of comments and
appreciate the dialogue, it's
awesome, the uh, just a
technical point if the law firm
could take a look.
So we took out um on page 3
lines 19 and 20.
We struck that out and as a
result, I believe we took out
the definition of caliber and
the definition of category
because we no longer needed
them.
However, there's some new
language on page 11, line 7, in
which those words are back in
the statute, um.
You know, proposal and category
or caliber. So that begs the
question, do we wanna do we
wanna.
Keep
The word caliber and keep the
word category in the definition
section.
Because we've, we've, uh,
eliminated the need to define
caliber because of the change on
line 3 that you may not need the
definition, but, but again, the,
the use of the word caliber.
Page 11. 7 really is is just
sounds good.
Yeah, yeah, uh, Brandon's
pointed out the word that one
thing that may help a little bit
is just the word any on line 6.
So if you say any caliber, and
so forth, so. Sounds good, thank
you, sir, thank you, and then
also just um.
You know, on October 26th, 1881.
Uh
One of my favorite old west
stories is the shootout at the
OK Corrals at least 61 dozen
Hollywood movies, documentaries,
they've depicted it pretty well
cause it was pretty well
documented. They had everybody
in the town write down what they
saw.
And uh
And the herbs walked down the
street to.
To charge the clowns with
misdemeanors for open carry in
the city, it was prohibited in
the city limits.
And you know, in order to tame
the West and win the West, they
had to chill out on open carry
in in municipal areas and.
And the Wyatts killed 3 other
clans and the West was 1, the
West was one.
That was 144 years ago and the
why, uh, the herbs rather the
herbs with their buddy Doc
holiday. They won the battle,
but the Clantons won the war.
fans won the war and so cause
now we have more guns are more
prolific today than in.
And they were in tombstone in
1881, the, the, the, um
You know, the uh,
We have to make a choice, do we
want open carry or do we want
concealed cause back in the day,
if you concealed carry and
tombstone in 1881, you were a
scoundrel, you were a scumbag,
you were a sneaky criminal
element.
Uh, because open carry was.
Was what that that society did
and everyone was relatively
comfortable, no one, no one was
fidgety, shooting each other
like teenagers are at.
At Keger's, uh, in my hometown
shooting each other when they
find out.
The guy across the room has a
gun.
Um, but the prolifer
proliferation of gun possession
and gun.
Purchas is just off the chart in
the past 16 years, the greatest
The greatest, uh
Uh, advertising campaign in the
history of the Western world was
Obama's gonna take your guns.
It's more it was more awesome
than I, I wanna be like Mike or
the heartbeat of America or ta
da ta tata by a burger, I mean,
it was the greatest.
Uh, advertising campaign ever
and so the, the, the gun
possession and gun purchase uh
uh numbers in this country is
just off the chart. The uh
So I'm not a gun person, but
when you.
My wife's a gun person, so she
has open carry and she.
You know, enjoys being Annie
Oakley and, and, and when
you're, when you get, when
you're on a list, when you're on
a list of open carry, you, you
receive information. When you go
shoot at the local calibers,
you,
you
trust me, man, you and so.
Prior to getting her open carry
and prior to, to, you know,
enjoying gun possession. She
wasn't as afraid as she is now.
Now when we travel,
He's afraid, like it, it create
the culture of fear and the and
the hype around firearms.
Uh, has created a fear factor
that that people feel they need
to carry a gun to feel safe in
public and.
That's a problem that that no
bill in this building is going
to solve and, and frankly.
It's going to be left to not
just the next generation, but
the generation after that to
figure out how we want to live
as a society.
Uh, that every other country has
figured out on this earth, but
anyway, just uh, I hope this
works. I hope this makes.
uh, those gun owners,
responsible gun owners, I don't
know if it will.
Um, but I appreciate you taking
the time to look at this statue
because we need to think
creatively in terms of policy.
cut down on the number of gun
deaths and gun shootings here in
New Mexico. So with that, yes,
please, uh, Senator, do it.
So both Mr. Chairs, um, so.
Before this meeting, and, and I,
we had talked about this in
rules, uh, on page 13.
Um
I was, I was looking at that
subsection 2 on lines 18 and 19,
and I was concerned that
Uh, cause we're getting rid of
the refresher training.
Um, I was concerned that if
someone had let their license
lapse for a long time, that they
still would not be required to,
to do that refresher training
that when they probably should
be.
Um, and we had talked about it
before this hearing looking at
that subsection one, sorry at
line 13.
And the intent was from from
what I understood was that
You would have to do your
renewal within at the outside
120 days after license expires
for it to be a renewal. I think
to make that true, Mister Chair.
Page 13, line 13, we need to
change that May to a shell. The
irony of another meal.
Um, issue. But if we don't do
that, then I don't think it's
true.
That
That if you don't renew within
120 days after it expires, you
have to get a new license and
would therefore have to go
through the training.
So I'm gonna propose page 13,
line 13, changing May to shall.
I'll move, make that motion.
We'll go to the sponsor for yeah
we have a good idea to do that.
The goal here is to
Um, make sure that you don't
have a renewal period and then
um if you allow it to go so
long, you should have to start
over, really take the course
again.
Thank you. So everyone's clear
on page 13, line 13 and uh
change made to shell any
discussion and opposition to
that motion.
Any opposition to that motion,
seeing no opposition, please
note all those present voting in
the affirmative. You have a, a
thrice amended, oh.
Oh yeah, uh, a discussion.
Or after you have a thrice of
adults in our store.
Um
I'm not making a motion.
Um, I just wanna ask you if, if
this looks like submaterial to
you.
I'd like to, I'd like the
committee to authorize a
committee sub with all the
changes, so that when it gets to
the floor, all members can
follow it carefully and
hopefully it's the house and
they can do the same.
Oh, sir, uh, O'Malley.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. And um
so I, I'm sorry this couldn't
pass up on the Ann Oakley thing.
Um, and I just wanted to, um,
just growing up that, um, two
older brothers and they got cap
guns for Christmas and I was
always the one that was getting
killed.
So I told my mom that I needed a
set of guns, and she found some
and then an open be lot, and I
had my belt and everything and.
How was that like this? So
anyway, that just triggered that
and so.
I just remember that was a lot
of fun. Thanks.
So I'm gonna
Go ahead and make the motion,
um, so we have amended thrice,
but
For those, I believe this is the
first time we've done that this
year, but the motion, uh, would
be, uh, uh.
I move
Uh, do not pass on Senegal 507
as amended, but a do pass on
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for 507, which would
have a different number, but we
have the confidence that what
we'll be reported out in, in uh
committee report will be the
substitute based on the
amendments.
So I'll make that motion now.
Yes. We have a
We have a second, uh.
We're we're fine. We're fine. We
can 3rd, we can 4th. That's 11
happy family. All right, great.
So I'll make the motion just for
procedural. I'm not touting the
bill, but we'll uh call the
roll.
Senator Thorn
Yes.
No.
Yes.
All right, your committee
substitute has a due pass, thank
you so much, I know that the
the from here. We're gonna meet
tomorrow at 10 o'clock.
Please watch because our
agenda's gonna, I think I
notified everybody else. Also
know that Senator O'Malley has,
we'll hear on Wednesday, we'll
proceed that with a very brief
presentation on an update of the
law as it exists right now with
the circuits, as you all know,
we've been doing this
throughout, uh, the last several
years, so you're looking at me,
Senator doing?
Yes, Wednesday.
Yeah, um, yeah, um, I'm trying
to, well, let's see, wait a
minute, we set it for, we set it
for Monday.
I think I think maybe we did.
I'm looking at Phillip, we just,
we just worked on this a little
bit, though, maybe it is Monday.
It is Monday. Thank you, Emily.
Yeah, I'm sorry, thank you for
the correction. We're gonna do
it Monday. The, the, the point
is we'll have a presentation
with an understanding of what
the lane of travel that we have
to operate within these days
because the feds are moving all
over the place and I think, I
think it'll be a good useful
presentation, so we'll precede
that, and we'll, I think we'll
hear one or two other gun bills,
and I just want to thank the
committee is gun has always been
very challenging, very
difficult. We're trying to work
within the federal law, and I,
I'm never one to pass.
laws that the courts are going
to strike down or enjoin as a
constitutional, so this has been
a good debate, this good
discussion, and I'm pleased to
see, I, I, I I appreciate
Senator Brantley's challenge. I
hope the NRA and those who have
in the past consistently
resisted any restriction on gun
ownership, uh, here begin to see
that the, the place to be is
those of us that are gun owners
to take the lead in, in
distinguishing responsible gun
ownership from mere responsible
gun.
This is a small step that a
really important good first
step. Thank you.
Thank you. I appreciate the
staff, I know there's some stuff
going on, uh, center.
Senators.
One can we get breakfast
tomorrow at 10 with some
gluten-free pastries.
Well, just maybe would work
we'll, we'll, we'll find
something to feed everybody
with. So if you, you, you wanna
have a preference. The, the
other thing too is before we
wrap up, I've got to tell you
tonight was, uh, just that I
really appreciate again the
committee. I, I heard in the
debate and discussions words I
hadn't heard in a very long
time. Keggers, I hadn't heard
keggers in a couple of decades,
um, and, and, and I also hadn't
heard stompers in a few decades,
um, so stompers and keggers kind
of nostalgia uh here and then,
of course, Senator, your wife.
dressed up as Oakley sounds like
a
uh.
And one more thing.
So I learned today that there's,
I think 9 states that have
passed an assault weapon ban.
So in the presentation, perhaps
you could touch on those too
that carefully. In fact, uh,
Colorado even this last week had
a bill introduced, subbed it
out, uh, in their judiciary
Committee in Colorado, so we're,
we're, you're, you're right,
this is a moving target, if
you'll excuse the pun, uh, and,
and we're trying really hard to
make sure that we are tracking
all of those things, and we, we,
we hope to work with um with the
sponsors and proponents who are
working with Senator O'Malley.
We're trying to exchange
information and give the
committee a fair picture.
Of what the courts will do with
any number of alternatives right
