thousand eighteen hi I entered
into an employment agreement
with a company in New Mexico
when I wish to seek a new
employer I was effectively on
able to do to an enforceable non
compete clause in my contract
ultimately I was in able to
remain in New Mexico to practice
in my chosen specialty and chose
to leave the state to practice
medicine I have since returned
to New Mexico but I'm still
within my non compete clause
so I'm not practicing at this
time I reach out to my previous
employer to asked to be released
from my contract and they
declined the request I'm asking
to approve the bill so that we
don't prevents providers from
coming to New Mexico or
remaining in New Mexico we have
a severe shortage of healthcare
providers at this time and we
need as many as we can get so
that it's very important to pass
this bill.
Thank you thank you and deal
Tinker with the pharmacist.
Madam chair members of the
committee Dale Tinker with New
Mexico pharmacists Association
I'll keep this brief we we
struggle with getting
pharmacists out in rural parts
of New Mexico we have a surplus
of pharmacists in Albuquerque a
shortage almost everywhere else
and so when we do get them their
if they want to change employers
these non competes prevent that
and so we would like to get rid
of that and so we support this
bill and we appreciate your time
thank you.
Yes no one signed up in support
or opposition on this bill.
So I think as you have the
members who have the amendment
although hadn't moved of the
amendment.
For you.
Do we have any objections to
adopting the amendment etcetera
etcetera I just want to start by
so much for making a change I
just want to make sure that some
psychologists want to make the
change
chair and senator they did
requests and I received a couple
emails
and Dr Emma Hamilton who is a
psychologist is the one who sent
an email we on behalf of the
second to providing that I just
have her name I don't have
that's that's fine it's just no
no changes in psychology
happened less than the one.
Right so any objection to adopt
in that in that.
Seen on that amendment is
adopted you're on the bill as
amended Senator mail.
Thank you for bringing this
forward no you're assuming that
that somebody like myself knows
what a non compete clause is can
you like elaborate a little more
I mean I get a general sense.
What exactly is a non compete
clause so madam chair I think
that Miss long actually has a
very personal story that she
could tell you about how it
affected her life and her
position.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator o'neill my non complete
clause is two years long and I
can't practice within fifty
miles of my home clinic for that
two year period.
So you can.
When she decided to be with from
the time I terminated the
contract.
So madam chair know why haven't
you know you all been included
in this in the past why is this
the less this brief on products
that.
What are examples of this.
Like that so it passes this and
verify why are.
Why the absence Madam chair
Senator the definition of health
care practitioners did not
include these individuals just
as we had to work to gain
Authority for the nurse
practitioners we had to work to
gain authority for the
physician's assistants we now
know that the independent of
pharmacists are struggling to
have enough people in the state
so they have come forward now to
assist their communities.
And I I have to ask tell me this
isn't a scope of practice bill
right.
Madam chair Senator no it is
not.
Thank.
Senator Moores taken out.
Thank you for your patience all.
What is that obviously for all
the list of
providers I talk about is that
many people like yourself
entered into a contract so these
are existing contracts that were
now know or making no on board
so they gave you a contract I'm
just saying that you
you accepted that contract to
then move the patient moving
expenses that is that you are
agency for here that the
interview and then our doesn't
act legislation within a
contracted through no longer
valid the two entities other
business costs are now we
usually have a constitutional
prohibition of
say that with the facts of this
legislation candle I.
Attracts all how are we getting
I am sure Senator that of these
people already having contracts
in place that we are now in the
vaccine those contracts with all
four.
So madam chair I'm not an
attorney but there have been
some cases here in the state of
New Mexico and actually all
there's a simpler answer Senator
thank
Enter Moores take a look at the
bottom of the page to page
through this will only apply to
contracts going forward after
the data that's not existing.
Did that answer your question
Senator.
Thank you have a four
performances and results were
basically on businesses and
individuals.
Correct.
All those on order.
Los crucis.
Stay with.
Senator Ortiz.
Someone.
Or.
Or
I was.
On.
Representative.
Hello
actually sessions we are or or.
because of our ability.
Division.
I want to.
for for four
years four million the table
along with locations Spence's
side of the
nation to
locate.
Hi this general area four major
things.
The lower half of those are
taxes.
Further discussion from the
committee.
Not all before we go to that
motion also act I think we
should outlaw all non compete
clauses and may that is.
Is a bad public policy approach
that levels
development of any number of
things.
Hi with that we're on a motion
for do not have or.
But.
we're on a motion for the past
three do a roll call vote.
Senator I.
Senator yeah.
Our.
Several U. S..
Senator Stewart yeah.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Yes.
I have to pass thank you thank
you very much madam chair did
Center Hanley Committee that
we're going to talk to her and
then jump right back to okay
thank you.
All right Senate bill two
seventy one.
Usually about.
Okay you might and might be able
to pictures on there is that
without.
Not only for the claim.
Madam chair while we're waiting
one of the reasons why I wasn't
able to be here because I did
see it on this the webcast that
is a.
Thank I don't know that's
actually a question.
If the webcast is a I could not
for online.
I thought.
That's what.
Are we are we continuing to
record while that is down such
that anyone going back and
wanted to watch this hearing
would be able to have that be
the case we're going to go ahead
and can receive the public will
still be able to to see the
Does this is being recorded and
will be up once everything is.
that that.
So go ahead and proceed Senator
thank you madam chair you know a
month and it's the lovely aroma
of four ex wives
it isn't closer to bring the
bill to you today we do have an
amendment based on our
presentation in conservation and
so if you'd like we can go over
the amendment first before we
move on this bill it's a fairly
I think a fairly simple bill if
it didn't have a lot of
opposition at all in
conservation and so I want to go
over the amendment first how are
you you have an agency
presentation to to fuses as you
what you got it okay so it's
just really clarifying language
the amendment that should be
before you it is just kind of
cleaning up some of the things
in the bill on page thirteen
striking the last on page
thirteen line sixty instructing
the last and then this was after
discussion on page fifteen one
fifteen removing and inserting
in lieu thereof three days prior
to the date this that
disposition the notice shall
includes this which is basically
on the conversations that came
out of Committee
see I think Senator Vontaze also
help with that that question
that language in and and that
language and asked us to go
ahead and modify that prior to
coming here to Judiciary today.
the so if the if there are I'll
let you process that or if you'd
like we can go ahead and and
continue on with the discussion.
That's not fair is already
ready.
It.
The issue of what the US.
If you like madam chair and
committee I can go ahead and
present the bill of four other
committee members so that that
gives you some time and if you
like we can move on the
amendment at the end however
you'd like is there any
objection to the you just wanted
to do that Senator Baca.
I.
That's just I'm gonna go ahead
and we'll go ahead with a
presentation because thank you
madam chair thank you committee
this bill has already gone
through conservation with
overwhelming support madam chair
committee Senate bill two
seventy one provides a clear
definition of decline in this
revises the procedures were in a
band in the collected or cruelly
treated animal can be placed
within agency organization where
they will be humanely treated
and cared for it also helps
remove the barriers for those
agencies organizations to have
the right of first refusal of
neglected animals and specifies
the procedures of efforts to
find at the abandoned animals
original owners before placing
them up for adoption and madam
chair I want to clarify that
this bill focuses only on
domestic courses that have
already been categorized as
livestock in state law it
focuses on processes for
homeless domestic forces and it
does not in anyway affect wild
horses in New Mexico whose
treatment and disposition
options are outlined in a
separate part of state law and
so I would actually not in terms
of time share with you the
reason why this bill is so
important to me many many years
ago I had a partner who is very
much active in riding horses and
I would go to the stables with
her and there was this one our
silo where the the owner pretty
much neglected this animal this
poor animal and I learned how to
more stall and brochure and
learn how to know when I was
behind your house you need to
know where I was every single
minute so she would kick me
because me on our is not a site
you would like to see but
they're incredible beautiful
animals and and I think of the
life that Shiloh could have had
had these agencies existed years
ago and have these protocols
been in place because this
animal was clearly neglected
pretty much HB seventy one would
US Senate bills two seventy one
would make sure that every horse
donkey and mule we'll have a
chance to get the same treatment
that others of our name Gita we
have a our sanctuary in Los
crucis called dharma our and
castle and Katherine does an
incredible job of acquiring
these animals that are neglected
rehabilitating them providing
them with shelter and care.
And food and love and they put
weight back on her she's living
a good life and I think of of
the other animals that are able
to do that but what what needs
to happen is that we need to be
able to give these organizations
right of first refusal before
the go to option because what
they're having to do is if they
wait until option then they have
to spend more money than they
have available in their brought
budgets as a nonprofit so what
this does is this gives them the
step before options so that if
there's an animal can be
rehabilitated they can say we
would like that animal so that
we can rehabilitate them before
they go through the whole option
process which may actually put
them back into the situation or
a similar situation that they
were in before being cruelly
treated and so I do have my two
experts here at Jessica Johnson
who's the chief government
affairs officer from animal
protection voters and Belinda
Carlin who is the director of
the New Mexico livestock board.
Excellent
You still have about okay so if
you'd like if you'd like to make
really quick statements that
would be great.
I do that helps thank you
senator.
Madam chair members of the
committee I would like to
express why this bill is so
important to the animals that we
rescue we do have a provision in
our history laws that that
allows the board to at their
discretion sell these animals it
doesn't necessarily have to be
to the highest bidder we do have
a process in place under a
directive from the board and the
previous director for these
rescues do have first right of
refusal on a straits however if
we have to see the our so we go
through the court process than
that that becomes different most
judges are ruling that they have
to be sold to the highest bidder
those horses are typically the
ones that need the work the most
care they're in bad shape when
we pick them up you know either
are inspectors find or it's
reported to us we recently and
and are currently working on a
extreme cruelty cases where
these horses have major stores
they were starved actually one
of them has died so this bill is
very important to those animals
that and and they need the most
care it's not that our can just
be taken and put into a feed
into a pan and throw feet out
there too after they've been
through this extreme cruelty
they need that care they need
very your care and it's not that
you can just throw feet out
there to you have to gradually
put him back on to a feat
process so the work that the
rest used to her invaluable to
these animals thank you.
Yeah.
Getting cases.
Yes I so we talk about that a
moment ago it is down but it's
being recorded so once it goes
back up the full recording of
this committee meeting will be
available to the public that
sense of being recorded we're
going to go ahead and and.
Question on we have a long
agenda to get through and and
hard stop today
by workers
Either five or five thirty
depending on
yes.
Five thirty at the latest I I
would be just wonderful
good thank you madam chair
committee members Jessica
Johnson with animal protection
voters the only thing I'll add
is that a previous version of
this bill did pass back in two
thousand seventeen
and was pocket vetoed by the
governor at that time that year
it did pass the Senate thirty
nine two zero.
Thank you very much we have
two people signed up as
proponents.
Then Senator.
I apologize I probably.
Thank all the last name but
please come on up to the Mike
and tells Act professor named.
There's only two people signed
up and you guys have ten minutes
for a proponents you can you can
have up to up to five minutes
each.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Susan
Hamidi I'm the executive
director of the our shelter and
serious Mexico we have seventy
five rescue horses on site I'm
also the chair co chair of the
New Mexico ECoin rescue alliance
which includes all licensed
rescues in New Mexico we are in
strong support of this bill for
all the reasons mentioned
already I don't wanna hold you
up but I can give you an example
we had some sort of bread
rescues come through the
livestock board that we had that
were charged on cruelty the then
we're the judge gave ownership
to the livestock board and we
ended up bidding on one of those
horses over eight hundred fifty
dollars just to keep it safe so
it's kind of unconscionable that
the state would rescue horses
and then put them out there for
a bit of the highest bidder not
knowing if that's a kill buyer
if they then up end up going to
slaughter so we really are in
strong support of this bill we
us rescues have the resources we
have the knowledge how to be
feed as it was mentioned the
have to be re think carefully
and when they're severely
emaciated it can take up to six
months to get them back to wait
otherwise you can chart shock
their systems to we're their
organs literally shut down in
the process so there's a lot of
expertise going into this we
have the resources we have the
professionals that help us with
this we also train them so that
we really consider we want good
a Quinn citizens going back out
to the public they often have no
skills no training these rescue
horses so if you imagine your
to follow up pulling your one of
these if you try that with a
thousand pound horse you have
really different results so we
feel like we're giving a great
service to the state and we feel
the horses and the.
Public is best served for these
horses to come into a rescue
that has expertise to
rehabilitate them train them and
then have really good too easy
to handle horses going being
available to the public in New
Mexico to adopt at really
nominal fees not anywhere close
to what we invest in them so we
really ask you strongly to
support this bill thank you.
Thank you we also have Cheryl
gives.
Reformist give saying I don't
know if she's here on.
And then just the best get some
before you start I just want to
announce so apparently with the
webcast we audio is up it's just
the visual that is our.
Ironing.
Thank
miss Gibson had go head will
recognize you for up to five
minutes.
Hello this is an I'm I'm
speaking in opposition to SB two
seven one I have submitted
written comments some
alternative suggestions that are
comparably seventeen the
proposed legislation B. two
seven one does include wild
horses if you will see in my
comments it cannot mission at
the rights of animals but.
Change
thing the main treatment of all
animals this legislation both
preserves and reserves I believe
in PNM at all of you are aware
that we have no seven
commendations rescue facilities
are overburdened with I'm home
that's the point most people who
have given this issue and they
are aware of that please options
for you Canadian for our wild
horses sealed bid auctions sell
fuel additive Mexico does allow
equine park more profit or
board.
The end of the month have.
Out of nine members on the board
Nothing about this legislation
advocating for the rights of
animals there is nothing humane
about the proposals it either SB
one or SB three on one thank.
Thank you Mr Senator
we will go to questions from
committee.
Early on the phone
Representative thank you for
bringing this forward well so
this includes donkeys and mules
and learning about any state so
is that that's all so what what
person just roughly about what I
in those three categories are
less than your usual forces
about what percentage about our
vision of this these.
affected by the situation madam
chair committee although had
left when my experts make a
comment so madam chair center
o'neill and would say would be a
very small percentage maybe one
or two percent however I will
tell you recently The New Mexico
livestock board had thirty one
head of the coin relinquish to
us out of this facility in doing
and about I want to say about
six of those were donkeys and
mules.
I thank you in that I don't
really understand the opposition
to this bill but I'm I don't
know what the of turn this
businesses that are whatever so
anyway I do appreciate you.
Thank you.
Very much better off.
This very special for a lot of
us but I I do have a question.
And
I lines and I also have a
question about repetitive.
What's the purpose of kind of
like this so.
I'm looking through the built on
page.
Well.
lines six seven eight.
Right the station given notice
and unless the finest family
loan within five days of
publication the notice that
again and then on.
Page twelve page thirteen lines
twenty five one.
But a straight that's not only
Klein this claim within five
days after publication notice
maybe so but the board.
The idea of.
It's thirteen.
Eight fifty to sixty that the
strays equine of the plan is not
claim within five days after the
publication of the notice you
gotta you gotta get up.
That I'm expecting.
I state.
Unless the point is the by the
legal is redeemed by the legal
owner within three days after
publication of the notice.
It would be because I can we can
answer that question madam chair
yes that that is okay that's
fantastic because I have a
circle madam chair committee I
have the circle because these
are conversations we were having
and Michelle can can go ahead
and respond to that okay thank.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Ivy Soto for that
question so what's included in
the bill are just three
distinct categories so to speak
of equines that come into the
custody of the of the livestock
borderline Forsman the first is
a stray so this is basically
when these animals are loose but
they don't know who the owner is
the second is running at large
and that is when these animals
are running loose but they do
know who the owner is and that's
the scenario where they get
three days and then the the
third scenario is a an animal
that has moved through the court
system and the court is issuing
the disposition
and and and to and then the
disposition happens to the court
so what the bill does is there
is there is existing law and
existing timelines for each of
those three categories for
livestock and what we've done is
mirror that language in each of
the three categories but then
created an equine specific
version that allows the animals
to first be offered to the
equine rescues so that's why in
when it comes to a strays it's
the it's five days for livestock
when it comes to running at
large it's three three days for
livestock.
I am not sure why it's different
and I don't know director could
explain that but that is the
reason why that the numbering is
different between the to
scenarios.
We know what's for.
So madam chair Senator Ivey
Soto.
It's my understanding and these
laws are very old but the
history is that given the five
days in order to try to locate
the owner our inspectors are
asking neighbors are driving
around looking for the possible
owner we also posted on our
website the running at large is
different typically we use that
law based off the the history
that somebody will not keep
control their livestock we
recently had a situation where
we work for the gentleman I I'd
say probably five times he would
come get his horses they be out
he can get resources they'd be
out so it's in different
scenarios that we use a
different laws.
And then finally.
I'm I'm assuming.
In the industry everybody
understands the distinction
between.
Running at large and free
roaming.
Madam chair.
Madam chair Senator Ivy Soto I
would let you go ahead and
answer that question madam chair
Senator Ivey Soto we believe
that in the two bills that we're
trying to put that distinguish
one out there mysteries are
basically
Let me let me just say that we
are called to a property and the
digit that they tell us okay
this horses on my property so we
go out and we see that APS
settle source for example and
those are typically the white
heroes on the weather's that
indicate that settles a bit on
that our so we determined that
they are livestock they are
domesticated so that becomes
industry because we don't know
who the owner is
lots of times well I should say
not lots of times but sometimes
we go to these properties and we
have to distinguish if they are
domesticated livestock or if
they are free roaming and we
hope that there is qualifying
language in the bills.
So the office manager and.
So the.
Three roaming force is not in
the straight whereas the running
at large is in the spring
correct chair Senator yes that
is correct Matt.
That.
Thank you know I appreciate I
appreciate all the work that you
guys have done this and this is
this is
The local reason we're having
conversations about the services
that you guys put a lot of
thought into making sure that
the
I would suggest.
Just a suggestion.
Chair of visits to that.
These tools might benefit from
the resources.
Traveling together.
what
the losses of thank you so much.
There are
currently not.
Yes.
And the fact that.
Through it all of them and then
not.
Then that that amendment is
adopted.
Thirty.
S. as
have a.
You have the
federal.
Senator Bob.
Senator except as a.
Senator you yes center for.
Senator yeah.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator yes.
I said to you have a defense of
the thank you madam chair thank
you committee.
Back to a Centers the phonics
now for just the one sixty
eight.
Thank.
Do.
Madam chair members of the
committee this bill is you might
think is unnecessary but it is
the requirement for the nurses
that we're speaking about today
Senate bill one sixty eight as
amended proposes to amend the
deaf pronouncement statute to
allow for hospice nurses
employed by a hospice agency to
pronounce the death of a nursing
home residents.
Currently the death
pronouncement statute only and
wells a nurse employed by in
nursing home to pronounce the
death of a resident.
this bill authorizing a hospice
nurse to pronounce the death of
a resident reserves the
continuity of care the hospice
residence is receiving we took
out of the work we make sure
that this nurse was an employee
of hospice and not a contractors
so that we really are talking
about continuity continuity of
care so the bills specifically
allows hospice nurse to
pronounce death and with me
today I have several
organizations that are
supporting it requested this
bill we have the New Mexico
health care association New
Mexico Center for assisted
living and the New Mexico
Association for Home and hospice
care so I'll turn to my first
expert the winning introduce
yourself and then make a
statement madam chair my name is
Patricia would occur I am the
director of clinical and
regulatory services for New
Mexico terrible you can pick it
up or.
Representative and and all that
yeah I'm the director of
clinical services for the Mexico
health care association and in
support of this bill to allow
these are in hospice nurses to
be able to pronounce in our
facilities it's been difficult
for quite awhile for especially
our rural areas who may not have
an R. and at night to be able to
pronounce in that we have to
find somebody to come in to
pronounce even though they are
in hospice nurse is there
they're called upon the death of
one of their residents and and
they're there to do medication
reconciliation to be with the
families and they're not allowed
to pronounce these are in
hospice nurses are currently
able to pronounce and assisted
living facilities at this time.
You.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Meggin
Lorino I'm the executive
director for the New Mexico
Association for Home and hospice
care and just wanted to be here
to say that our hospice
providers are in strong support
of this legislation as Pat Woods
occur which is saying our
hospice nurses have the ability
to pronounce death in the home
environment but not in the
skilled nursing facilities this
will enhance patient Care and
those facilities and we think
that help families have better
end of life experience so we
fully support this and hope that
you will have a two passed
today.
Thank you.
The.
Where is the subcommittee right
now wait until we have a point
taking a facial action but we
don't have anyone signed up or
or opposition on this bill so we
will go to questions from the
committee
that I was seven.
And all this other
thank you madam chair and.
Senator if you wanna go first
off of that.
Your.
Thank you madam chair not first
you're last
Page three subsection the it
says that's basically where
we're at in this language unless
there is reasonable cause to
believe that the death.
It's not due to natural causes
who determines that
specifically.
Maybe a little bit of an echo I
don't there's little feedback.
Senator madam chair and senator
the it.
The reasonable cause to believe
that the death is not due to
natural causes there are
stipulations that we in my has
to be involved in called if
there is any suspicion of a on
on death that is could be abuse
or anything like that.
Madam.
Who would call them the the
nurse watching the facility the
for the the facility and the
individual the cares I'm sorry
madam chair and senator the
actual individuals are in that
is pronouncing.
Madam chair and what was your
name again I apologize for what
occurred this would occur so
would it be possible for say a
nurse that.
Has abused or may be involved in
the death making it a natural
would be able to then make that
determination that hello my
would not be needed to be
called.
Madam chair and senator they
like I said there there are
stipulations and criteria that
we're we have to get all my
involves on any kind of specific
patients staff
and then the
The medical director of the
facility or the medical director
of hospice is someone who signs
the death
pronouncement so.
I'm just.
Do you have anything what else
to say.
Madam chair Senator Pirtle so
that is not the section that
were looking at amending today
hi at like Pat I cannot speak to
how the state has exactly
fleshed out with no money is
involved I can say that for
these individuals specifically
we're talking about folks that
are on hospice they are so the
hospice's bizrate and at the end
of life when we are anticipating
a natural cause of death.
Right.
Sure the question is could the
nurse be involved in an
unnatural death stayed with the
pillow or however you want to
put it and then they would be
able to sign off that the death
was natural.
It's not the nurse who signs off
on the death penalty I'm sorry
madam chair madam chair and
senator it's it's not the nurse
that signs off on the death
pronouncement.
The amounts that they are able
to pronounce the death and then
the medical director or the
medical director of hospice is
the one who signs the death
pronouncement it's not the nurse
there is there is a at least a
second set.
check and balance yes yes that
was just my concern I know
that's original language or not
amending it but we are
allocating Authority to that so
thank you for that I still
maybe have some reservations
there but that that's existing
existing loss I'm not really
going to go to an in depth there
but
it's it's I did not know that
they have.
Thank you.
Representative.
So thank.
I see what you're doing I'm.
Structure that you have in the
bill.
So.
The way that I'm reading on page
three.
So without your amendment.
It is unless there is a
reasonable cause to believe that
the death is not due to natural
causes.
A registered nurse employed by
nursing home may pronounce the
death of a resident of the
nursing home.
And a registered nurse employed
by hospital.
May pronounce the death of a
patient of the hospital.
That's correct is so Mr chair or
madam chair Senator we did
change you from a contract to
employee of hospice who had
already been taking care of the
individual patients so that
there would be continuity of
care.
I'm.
Right but but the thing is.
But the thing is right so what's
your amendment.
It's.
A registered nurse.
Employed by nursing home.
A registered nurse employed by
hospice agency.
More pronounced the death of a
resident of the nursing home.
At a restaurant support Bachelet
presidenta completion off of the
hospital so so I just want to be
clear and maybe I missed
something instruction.
This only applies to.
To.
Up deaths that take place in
nursing homes Madam chair
Senator that's correct because
hospice nurses are already
allowed to pronounce death at a
person's home.
They already have that authority
they don't have the authority to
pronounce their patients staff
at in hospice at a nursing home.
So it's specifically calling out
hospice services hospice nurse
in a nursing home they already
have the authority madam chair
Senator in the hall and madam
chair Senator Ivey Soto sorry I
just want to make sure to
emphasize that so these are
patients who are enrolled in
hospice with that specific
hospice so they are a whole care
at medical care is already being
managed by the hospice and
that's exactly why we need this
language added because if they
were in their actual own home
then at their deaths could be
pronounced in the family could
move on with some of the next
steps are involved
you making sure the body is
taken care of and all the things
that come next that could be
dealt with by the hospice then
and there so this is a hospice
nurses that are already these
are the patients of the hospice
nurses but because of the way
the statue is currently written
they are have a stop gap when
those patients are living in a
skilled nursing facility any for
everything else involving a
hospice patient living in a in a
facility we always say we care
for our hospice patients
wherever they call home and that
is true and till they died
because of how the statue is
currently written so this is to
update that and to make sure
that our hospice nurses can have
the full authority that they
enjoy on an already do regularly
and the home.
What is just and sort for
hospice agency.
madam chair center could you
repeat that I'm sorry what it's
just insert for hospice agency.
Very briefly.
Madam chair Senator Ivey Soto
because nurses can pronounce
death not just that not an
agency it's it's with that
licensed nurse Representative
restaurant are supplied by a
nursing home or hospice agency
may pronounce the death.
Because it's not the HSD I'm
sorry madam chair and senator
it's not the hospice agency per
se who is pronouncing death it
is the hospice nurse
Representative the complaint by.
Yes so that's why we didn't say
it just the hospice agency.
Thank.
The committee meeting on hospice
right now is that we have that
we have lost our forums so
I think what we're going to go
ahead and do it I I think we
have someone trying to get one
percent back in.
but we don't want to hold you
all here I I think discussion on
on this bill has because I
that's what we'll do is we'll
move on to the next soon as we
get a quorum.
We will.
This using come back to this
bill go ahead and take a vote on
it at that time
Senator Senator Stewart.
I want to
listen to you is that we could
offer a motion now.
That last comment how they feel
about the motion and it's a.
We we can't take official action
without a court mother way so
I'm I'm not sure that it matters
one way or the other madam chair
the reason might matters if
somebody came in move to table.
Okay so that all right so we're
gonna do passed motion
that is not another member
walking and
that we will Madam yeah we're.
I actually think we should not
do this because someone could
walk in and make a substitute
motion to table which takes
precedence anyway.
I mean even it I just a guess
this is getting to trekking
given what happened today I just
there's no reason to do this I
think you just wait for that and
then all right that that motion
is been withdrawn we will come
back to this matter once we have
a quorum thank you all for your
presentation thanks for the.
But it is listings are kind of
this.
You know the public may not be
able to see.
Senator Wirth.
All right so we are moving on to
just be it two twelve Senator
pro.
We're going to continue as a
subcommittee we're gonna get
through the bills when we get
that one more person in here we
will go ahead and take the.
I also take this opportunity to
announce that Senator Diamond
has asked that we not hear
Senate bill ninety eight today
so that has been so that will be
on our agenda.
The approach that you have ten
minutes for your presentation
and we have to have anyone.
One proponents citing that.
The no fun and safe to
administrative presentation of
statements for.
Great thank you madam chair
committee members of Senate bill
two one two and basically what
this bill does just that space
force to New Mexico statutes
the only thing that I have an we
might need a form for that is I
have one amendment that I need
to do
On a page seven line twenty
there was an additional space
force that at this time that we
do not want to add.
and that's that's yes just
because of that section.
And they want to wait on.
Thank so again because
reflection is the subcommittee
we don't have we can't offer
that as an amendment at this
time but that's certainly
something that we can come back
to.
If someone we have a quorum yes
I am sure that was all of those.
Right.
That's actually built together
orders of this.
Senator from my my understanding
madam chair Senator Ivy Soto is
is just in that section
this bill has a bunch of
different statues were reading
the Burbage and that not adding
in in that section doesn't
affected areas from.
And the senator I think that the
question is been section two
which is where that changes made
are you making any other it
looks like you are making other
changes
changes.
So.
In the rest of that section
because it really starts on page
three.
and then and then the.
On page at the end of page seven
there's no other changes of
space for for any other events
in that area.
Yeah solutions selections of the
that we just I just I just write
that that word and it doesn't
affect anything anywhere else.
By well all different sessions.
Sure right yes you could do that
as well.
And just just a clarification of
the ends of page seven I don't
see it and it's that
I just want to make sure that
we're.
It well I when I say that is the
section it starts at three but
then that.
That statute area then it goes
to a different article on page
eight.
Right off the set of the bill is
all one section and so so all of
section to go through page
thirty six actually.
Well there's just yes and less.
Yeah okay.
So so the question for you
Senator po is from page three to
page thirty.
Are you making any other changes
in section two.
That needs to be capped or can
we strive all the entire
entirety of section to better I
don't see it other things I'm
slipping through I'm looking to
confirm chair
I think this is changes.
After all.
So what looking at the madam
chair that that whole section
because we did have with correct
there's no other changes and we
just fire of support.
Why does the this interstate
compacts.
Madam chair Senator Ivey Soto
from my understanding and I have
the department defense liaison
on
they're going to be having their
state commissions meeting coming
up and that change is going to
happen but they don't want to
make that change until this
actually voted on and approved.
Our.
Process to do another bill next
year.
that that could be the case from
chair Senator but I think we
just want be preemptive in case
they could not make the change.
Okay there still is that.
And early or so on your
presentation
will sidetracked at the
discretion of the amendment
that.
We have anymore to your
presentation that's all I have I
I do have an expert on soon
Kelly Douglas if we need her
that's the end of my
presentation.
You want to go to the staff
left.
I think we're okay is there any
other questions I can refer.
Okay.
All right so we're.
You're on the bill Senator
Stewart.
So madam chair and senator so
you can tell us where else it's
change tax.
Three.
Right yes though like this word
changes.
So the breakdown madam chair and
senator would be.
We have page two of the bill.
One one.
Page seven line twenty page one
hour removing the whole section.
Now.
We have paid thirty nine.
Lines thirteen and twenty three.
We have page forty three.
Line twenty two.
Page forty seven.
Line twenty.
And page.
Fifty five.
Line sixteen.
And a two.
Actually line sixteen.
Share.
Your thank you for.
Orders to you have a change
online sixteen.
Our.
We need to do that decision.
As it is those are changes that
and then identified by
Legislative Council next time
they get to that section the
Part of the constitution.
Madam chair Senator that that
was my understanding is one of
the things that yes.
As a matter take it out because.
Correct Madam chair Senators.
At the.
Whether the chair.
Up next.
Yes I because I was just passing
madam chair.
that just.
Ran out of committee.
What they would do with section.
To.
If we could put that effective
date.
Additional effective date.
That would be along the lines of
the provisions of section two
are effective upon certification
by the New Mexico contact
administrator for their state
compact on education opportunity
the military children that the
compact has approved.
the the additional space force
to the
The definition of.
At the.
If we did that.
That of of of uniformed services
right so then if we did that it
doesn't actually go in north
statutes until under the compact
administrative supervisor.
The one.
So so that's that would be the
other option we would have very
little to.
Senator Wirth.
The statement that.
All right for a lot of time.
madam chair Serevi Soto you know
I'd be amenable to whatever the
committee thanks is recognized
you know I don't have the legal
background and what happens when
these bills so
Hi I'd be amenable to that as
long as it was possible or legal
to do it and I think my experts
would be fine with that as well.
I just want to make sure.
Whatever we're doing is legal in
the process of this wonderful.
Madam chair I I also understand
compacts there's additional
sequencing yes and I.
Centers that and amendment to
your offering or.
right now we can't really act on
any amendment but you want if
you wanted to get out what that
amendment would be is that we
are certainly yeah it would be
that share the dish of section
seven.
The militants and no actually
would add a section subset.
That would be conditional
effective.
And I can type it up all the way
that it would basically say the
provisions of section.
Are effective.
On.
I don't know that that was we
would take it out of the
legislative building the
committee the first section to.
This act are effective on the
certification.
The New Mexico compilation
commission.
By the New Mexico compact
administrator and.
And what the interstate compact
you educational opportunity for
military children.
That that the addition of space
force.
The definition of uniforms
Services.
Of.
Right now all talked out of it
but that's but that's but that's
what it would say and it and
then that way it would just it
would just add one more time
they take action.
The topic of ministry of the
sort of.
Madam chair service so wondered
if I could a ask my expert on
soon about that just to just to
confirm.
Is there a Kelly Douglas on the.
Madam chair that okay if I for
my next start.
You madam chair
yes that would be at Senator
that would be amenable that I
think it works well.
Thank you all sincerely sorry.
Office hours.
And my my understanding Senator
as the
our Republican colleagues will
not be rejoining us and Austin
o'neill had a an engagement is
to keep him from returning us as
well so we will come back to
this at all be all typed up at
that point on the will come back
this is when we have.
Meet again at some point in the
future
I since we're not gonna be able
to get a quarterback for this
meeting we're going to go ahead
and I'll go and
in recess.
Better get
this Council Service.
Please
follow up with the.
I can get you that information
on offense.
I can look at it right now that
issue is in recess.
