Asian debt collection
practitioners.
Senator Duhigg I haven't had a
chance to speak with the in
advance we're gonna roll out
want to tomorrow please the
Senate seventy one there it
won't make a difference because
we won't be needing to get the
committee report out so we're a
little bit more time on Senate
seventy one please.
apart from those the agenda is
as it stands I will hear these
in order that takes into account
a number of things and so will
begin first well with Senate
bill thirty four Senator Kernan
for for the folks that are
waiting to put on bills and
others we took our common rate
the zoom process and the and the
time demands on the committee
the proponents will all have
fifteen minutes to support their
bill in any way they choose
including expert witnesses and
identification of any public
members they wish to identify as
supporters.
Similarly they've signed and
that makes it easier for our our
resume casting to allow them in
with the sponsor will be
expected to organize that
fifteen minutes as they see fit
to cut people off to allow
people in and at the end of
their fifteen minutes that will
and the time for the advocacy
the opponents likewise will have
ten minutes for opposition if
they were organized themselves
they make you have one person or
or experts use as much of that
time as they wish if there is
not an organized opposition to a
bill then I will just a take the
the tenants allowed in
recognized opposition for maybe
one minute each.
Hopefully all that's clear
Senator Kernan you have our
first bill Senate thirty four.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee and as
I did have to experts I have
dated can Tana with the DOT and
secretary Michael Santa also
with the G. R. T. so they should
be on the did receive the link
so if they let them in and so
basically Senate bill thirty
four aunts to immense the
procurement code to provide the
department with the authority to
utilize design build.
You're meant for one hundred
percent state funded projects
and I would like to use my time
to have the secretary or Mr can
taunted to to go ahead and tell
you a little bit more about what
that means to the Department if
there.
Thank you Mr chairman secretary
Mike Santa with the department
of transportation what this bill
does is
awhile back we were given
permission to utilize the design
build procurement it was a
threshold put for fifty million
dollar projects are above there
was language in their specifying
that part of the money would be
federal money and I'm not sure
why that distinction was made my
guess was at the time there just
wasn't a lot of fifty million
dollar projects that we're all
state funded recently with the
addition of some general fund
money in order vehicle excise
tax money we do have some a
hundred percent state funded
projects it will be over fifty
million that we think are good
candidates for this procurement
option one of them being in
center Koerner and district The
New Mexico thirty one to eighty
five intersection which would be
a hundred percent state funded
it's a hundred million dollar
project some from motor vehicle
excise tax and so we're just
asking that regardless of the
funding will be allowed to use
this procurement option we're
not changing the threshold for
anything else we're just saying
if it's all state funds or some
federal funds we that would be
allowed to use its procurement
process so that's really what
this bill does Mr chairman and
we would stand for questions.
Thank you Mr chairman that's our
presentation.
Mr chair I think you're on mute.
Thank you appreciate that of the
proponents west we recognized in
support of this bill all know
them down so Matt Thompson for
Apache corporation Mike Miller
for the Permian basin petroleum
Association and jury fanning
public and government of so will
recognize the support of those
individuals and we'll go to
members of the committee
members the committee with
questions.
Anyone at all.
I'm seeing no hands ask you Mr
chairman Senator.
Yes thank you so those are just
October this bill Graham we we
keep the same parameters for the
design build is just as trucks
were we're just changing the
dollar amount.
Mr Chairman let me get let me
let the secretary confirm that.
Yes Mister chairman Senator Ivy
Soto that's correct nothing
changes other than if it's a
hundred percent state project
with no federal funds we'd still
be allowed to use this
procurement.
Okay M. M. M. M. M. M. M. design
build.
I guess a little bit confused
because I'm looking at the bill.
So and the bill keeps the
fifteen million dollar half.
It just removes the funded in
whole or in part by federal aid
highway funds.
Mr chairman that's correct so
right now the only way we could
do a design build project is if
it included federal funds and so
some of the projects that we
have now are a hundred percent
state funded but according to
the statute we do not believe
would be able to use the design
build procurement because it
does not contain any federal
dollars and so are asking is
whether it's federally funded or
state funded that we be allowed
to use this pic.
thank you very much.
I believe you're on mute again
Mr chairman sorry.
Thank you yes again any other
questions members the committee.
Pleasure of the committee
motions.
Sir Lopez.
In the past Mr chairman.
Thank you for the motion Senator
o'neil with the second is that
or is that a second scenario
that's the second.
All right were are and.
We can only would you give us a
roll call vote please.
On a do pass motion.
Senator Baca.
Senator.
Yes.
Mexico.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
Yes.
Stewart yes.
Yes.
Senator about this yes thank you
Senator Kernan you have a do
pass motion from the Judiciary
Committee thank you and your
experts will be with us thank
thank you Mr chairman members.
The second item will here today
is Senate bill one twenty three
health care practitioners
definition the sponsor Senator
Stefano X. centers to drugs I
see you with us.
Are you are presently in muted.
Thank you Mr chair can you hear
me.
yes I can now and I'm sorry that
it's that's a rhetorical
question and every committee I'm
sorry that's right you have a
Senator one twenty three it's
three thirty eight you have up
to ten to fifteen minutes a
minute center thank you I don't
think we'll need that long but
Senate bill one twenty three
west requested by meeting of the
New Mexico association of
physicians assistance to be
added to the health care
clinician definitions for the
non compete clauses and I
brought the net to ask if there
are any other providers that
requested to be added and the
pharmacists stepped up as well.
This bill Senate bill one twenty
three would add physicians and
pharmacists to a list of health
care providers who are given
protection against enforcement
of non compete clauses I'm not
sure if Russ but in terms of the
my experts that have been
involved with the physician's
assistants and of course Dale
can Kerr with the pharmacists
and I'm not sure any of them are
on.
But I'm happy to stand for
questions or hear from anybody
else.
I'm not seeing any and I'm not
seeing any of the three
identified.
for the call but I'll go to the
web host just to confirm them Mr
chair Senator I do not have any
of them in the waiting room.
All right I apologize for that
no reason to just you did fine
without him I don't have any
individuals organise that has to
be heard in opposition to Senate
one twenty three and so now
we'll go to members of the
committee members the committee
with questions on someone at one
twenty three.
I
see no members on debate or
questions the we're ready for
motions.
Senator Lopez.
Mr chairman I move it to pass.
The second for rural Senator
Stewart.
Family or on a do pass motion
please take a roll call members.
Yes.
So yes.
Senator Lopez yes.
How.
In these images to the school
start yes.
Thank you yes.
Senator Morris.
Past.
This yes.
Did you get the past.
Yes.
Yes.
Who was the okay just
connecting.
Give me one.
Yes Representative Senator Baca
is just joining.
Senator Baca your muted.
We're on a boat.
Senate one twenty three.
Senator Baca.
Senator Baca yes.
Yes yes all right very good
thank you
Senator I have a due pass on
Senate one twenty three thank
you for being with us today
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee right now the next
matter will here is Senate bill
two ninety seven Senator Hickey
I see you joined have you done
you yourself.
Senator Hickey I show the time
at three forty two you'll have a
to fifteen minutes to present in
support your bill's room Senate
to ninety seven please begin
thank you Mr chairman and I have
three experts if they could be
allowed in
mark's life sure Jason marks and
Ryan center wall.
And I will defer to them for the
substance of the presentation R.
Senate bill two ninety seven Mr
chair and Senators removes a ten
year limit in the New Mexico
procurement coat for the
purchase of electricity produced
by renewable energy and so to in
the agency the state through a
power purchase agreement and
that allows for the contracts to
extend to the useful life of the
equipment because the usual ten
year limitation would cut the
life of rig but only be about a
third of the life of the
equipment so the life would
probably go to thirty years and
as we have a lot of innovation.
In
A solar at this point it's so
much cheaper than it was and
fifteen years ago I know there's
maybe a question about the
fact that there might be
something newer that comes along
that ten year period on the
other hand yeah and it's fairly
if the technology is quite
advanced at this point and
there's certainly other things
that are of purchased by the
state that that go beyond ten
years and
Need that the extensions well so
I would like to turn this over
to our looking form this Mr
Fleischer and Jason marks my
experts thank you.
I can I was gonna read a
statement when they do testimony
LA Jason marks actually disobeys
expert witness and I'll testify
is a when we come to public
comment thank you.
Chairman so what that is members
of the committee Jason marks are
stark for Senate bill two ninety
seven
I was late switching over from
the from the this is the I'm not
sure what Senator Hickey covered
but just briefly the context for
this is that our this applies
power purchase agreements by
state and local governments and
removal Energy and this is
always going to be a contract
for a solar system or
potentially it's Sunday wind or
some other renewables that are
on the site of the public
activity and on a lease there
and supplying power behind the
utility meter and the reason why
that's the case is that it's not
legal under current New Mexico
offering utility to generate
power remotely and sell it to a
customer.
And.
The reason why you would do as
power purchase agreement is that
there are very valuable tax
benefits to owning and operating
solar system or then system
including a tech investment tax
credit but also the cell right
creation and state agency or
local government cannot take
monetizes taxed as this so
private entity was comes in a
contract with the.
The governmental and the on the
system and so if the power echo
what are basically okay because
of those tax benefits that would
not otherwise stacked.
The problem with current what is
Senator Hickey says is there's a
limited more ten year term for
PTA's or for any contract and
these power purchase agreements
are just not economic for ten
years the equipment has useful
life over thirty years a longer
these days
and it's going to be permanently
installed and so the lowest cost
per contract for a state or
local into the is going to be
for the useful life of the
equipment which today's thirty
years
It is not possible under the
current hello there is a
workaround in the facilities act
that allows contracts twenty
five years but it's a very
awkward way to do it and even
there are twenty five years is
not as cost effective as thirty
years and so this.
Go to ninety seven we simply
meant growing of to allow.
A state or local government you
do a contract that extends to
the low throughout.
longer than ten years
would still have to be
competitive leverage your
and it would save money it would
not be able to violate any of
the other provisions of the
gentleman caller state law the
only impact with the that would
have longer terms and you have
more competition for these
contracts on the private side
the state mobile contracts and
contracts with the G. R..
Thank you I think that the ends
are formal presentation Mr chair
and
we'd be happy to take that
comments against for thank you
Senator Hickey I don't show any
other individuals as proponents
or opponents I have knows
registered opponents on the
legislation with that said we'll
go to members the committee so
your insurance through your hand
is still up I don't know with
that from the last
hearing or not or of this
hearing thank you I just put my
hand up Mr chairman no all right
a question Senator them.
So.
Mr Chairman I'm just not sure
who to ask does too I don't
think it's it's the sponsor
we've been talking on the floor
about not withstanding language.
It's in the budget it's
unconstitutional and yet this
bill.
rather than
amending the ten year limit puts
in a not withstanding proficient
at the very end of this bill so
I I just think it's it's not a
it's not a very good way to
amend the bill in my estimation.
So I just bring that up I don't
know if it's on our analysis but
No we're trying to take the not
withstanding language out of the
budget and yet here we're
putting it in statute.
So it's I don't I don't know who
can answer that I don't know if
still clerk wait to a perhaps
could answer it or I see Senator
Ivey Soto waving his hand
perhaps you can answer it.
So Senator Ivey Soto waste I
take that is Centers tour
different to you.
And certainly think chairman
senator so so the issue with the
budget is that constitution
general appropriations act up
you cannot do substantive law in
the jump appropriation act and
yet when we do not withstanding
language were were effectively
amending substantive law in the
General Appropration Act so that
is the unlawful agency or the
constitutionality of not
withstanding language in the
budget the use of
notwithstanding.
within within substantive
statute
is up.
For what it's very is as Sam
shall we say
where it is within the same
section of law and it's very
clear what you're not
withstanding R. then then you
can you can cross reference
within that section.
If if this were to say you know
not withstanding the provisions
of the public facility energy
efficiency act well where is
that we don't know where that is
so you don't really know what
you're not standing up the so so
this would be the the are the
lesser side of the Sam are you
know probably just two or three
hail Marys and not.
You know sort of.
And the you know but but it is
it is something that that I
think were we are increasingly
this and nonetheless and that
the positions.
Well thank you for that
explanation I appreciate that I
just don't think it's a very
good way to amend our statute so
thank you that's all I have to
consider Stewart other members
of the committee.
Senator Ivey Soto have a
misnomer Mr McKnight I guess and
and
So I don't I don't miss our
problem with with the concept of
what you're doing I guess the I
have a I have a problem with
what you're doing bills in the
manner that that is being taught
in requests so let me explain
why.
And and where I am but we're my
Spidey sense ends up coming up.
And and and and and and and
being a little bit concerned.
So so we have a
we have a provision.
That limits the number of terms
for a contract.
And and and so the terms are set
elsewhere and then and then this
is the provision about how you
do multiple terms of a contract.
Nap you if you read what what is
the existing part of section one
thirteen as one is one fifty.
We talked about our.
Contracts for difference of time
except that they all have a
list.
And
and and so the limits right we
start off with it's it's similar
language in a way right now most
from contract for items of
tangible personal property
construction services except for
certain things right may be
entered into for any period of
time well that sounds pretty
open ended deem to be in the
best interest of the state
agency that's pretty subjective.
Our public public body Max to
exceed four years well that's
pretty limiting all of a sudden
not proceed for years.
And and so them
When we have the if it's private
counselors are more shall not
exceed including all extensions
and renewals except unless it's
on the public facility energy
efficiency and water
conservation apercent expansions
limit would affect us.
It was based on the term cannot
exceed twenty five years which
includes all central to all of
these have a limitation and then
and then M. subsection B. of
contract professional services
may not exceed four years
including all expectations and
rules are right and then and
then we've got we've got a few
things there that that are
primarily up we've got things
that are
That are.
Quite frankly paid for by
federal funds and then somehow
the bond lawyers Act equipment
in there and seven day we need
to take them out
and out of that because
just get sloppy with with with
with the relationship with our
with our clients.
But but what you have in
subsection C. R. eight is not
within the contract limitations
of subsection may.
Yes they can be entered into for
any period of time due to be in
in the best interest not to
exceed the useful life of the
facilities use the supply the
electricity.
While the state what that useful
life it's.
M. buses are most.
And and it is
and and so then.
But we got the language which
was revenue other places except
if you know we're not talking
about a fifty year potential
contract or or seventy a
potential contract I mean if you
do hydroelectric dam I guess
that that would be a two hundred
year contract that you might
enter into.
you know and so.
Our our and so then but then of
course it's it's and we kind of
meaningless because.
Our.
That payment are everyone's
obligations for associating
fiscal periods will be subject
to availability appropriation
funds really at any time you
want to get a contract the local
public body or the state just
simply doesn't.
Not appropriate any funds and
I'm apartments meaningless
about.
So but I once I find curious.
Flexibility energy efficiency
and water conservation act which
turns out.
What are.
By this time in chapter six
public finances article.
Only three.
And and so so I went to go take
a look at what what is what is
what is that act two.
Why can't we use that act even
if we were to change twenty
five.
Thirty years with with them
match what Mr Marx's saying
would be the ideal parent time.
Yes that that that covers solar
energy generating or heating
cooling systems or other
renewable energy systems at it
it it it it covers a variety of
other things that that that that
that seem to be covered by this
so we're duplicating what is
provided for them I realized the
distinction.
The station is.
R. one section six dash twenty
three that I.
Six desperately that I.
I'm correct approval required.
Approval required says that if
it's a school district.
That's going to enter into one
of these what a five year
contracts are we meant to
distance thirty years.
I have to get.
Approval by the superintendent
public construction or or which
would not be the secretary of
education.
That's a state agency they can
just do it on their own you have
to get approval by the secretary
general services.
our last it's controlled by the
General Services Department they
can't and do their own somebody
else has to review it and in
this case it would be the
executive head of the state
agency if it's a municipality or
county it has to go through the
governing body in this part of
the county for all post
secondary institutions.
It's gonna go about the
traditional higher education
which today would be this
stature of men amended support
of one which which is so that
the right of the the secretary
of higher education so all of
these require a level of due
diligence and require somebody
external to take a look at these
contracts.
In order to say oh yeah.
This is a contract where we're
going to where it's in the past
and for us.
And and so the other thing that
I noticed about this.
This act which is already
provided for the procurement of
this price action.
Inspection six twenty three dash
three which which is guaranteed
utility savings contracts
authorized.
And I'm certain it's not just
for where are you actually you
shall not enter into a
guaranteed utility savings
contract unless a performance
guarantee that meets the
requirements of this section is
delivered by a qualified
provider to the governmental
unit so you have additional.
You have additional are due
diligence that is required
Senator Hickey are you you also
we require under sixty three to
six point one we require that
there is reporting and retention
of the utility cost savings.
That would be taking place all
that and then and then with that
and then we we specified them.
In terms of local governments we
specify for municipalities which
certain revenues were authorized
for counties with revenues or
authorized which state
institutions with revenues
operates in public schools I
where there's actually utility
conservation fund that was
created
that's probably what APS is been
using as they've been putting
all of these solar panels on all
of the buildings that APS which
actually has changed the entire
pricing structure for PNM
because NPS is not now so darn
energy efficient that economic
isn't selling the energy that
that that that be selling our
right but but that's because we
have an act.
That already does all of this
but that has due diligence
involved that look back at your
bills are making.
Bill.
Maybe I'm sorry for any period
of time deemed to be in the best
interest of the state agents
your local public body.
deems it to be in the best
interest of the state agencies
local public body yeah that's
right legislative agencies us or
that local public body does and
nobody else has to review it.
Nobody else has to look and see
if they're getting a good deal
for the Energy no there's no
reporting requirements
throughout the life of the
contract.
There's there's no authorization
as to as to which revenues are
going to be using for this.
We were not.
Mr chairman and thank you with
we have not.
What is already provided for.
That allows if you need thirty
years just amend that to thirty
years overdue diligence is
already there.
And this one is just we feel
like it.
We feel like if we're going to
enter into this and then we're
committed and then and then
we're going to try to just
simply do fund at some point we
realize it's a bad deal but our
that's going to result in years
and years and years of
litigation in fact.
R. and so that's all of our
Senator Hickey I do appreciate
it very much the settlement of
what you're bringing on this but
I I also unfortunately in this
is our this.
Our.
The lack of the lack of
accountability that is provided
for in here the lack of any
limitation of the time frame
other than some amorphous.
The useful life of the
facilities and I don't I don't
like the useful life of going
home.
That that I just I just you know
I am and given the existence
already we already have.
Of the public facility energy
efficiency and water
conservation act I just I just I
just find that really
problematic and and all quite
honestly it makes my Spidey
sense go up as to.
What's the real plan on
implementation.
So thank you Mr.
Thank you senator next Moores.
If you're ready Mr chairman to
table.
I'm sorry Sir Madam proton you
see a Senator wishing to get
into the debate on all the
follow through the pro tempore
to make my debatable motion.
Thank you I appreciate that.
As for you.
So Mister chairman us Senator
Ivey Soto was discussing this I
turned to the FIR and the FIR
has away to solve all of the
issues that you brought up
I'm just going to read it K. and
nobody else has that if the
Senate bill two ninety seven is
inactive it would be beneficial
for EMNRD energy minerals and
natural resource department to
have a role in evaluating
agency proposals that take
advantage of the bills change to
the procurement code similar to
the agency's role and energy
performance contracting language
could be added to specify that
contracts are subject to review
by EMNRD's energy conservation
management division so perhaps
rather than just tabling we can
suggest that the Senator of goes
off and looks at this and
proposes an amendment to the
bill.
To put in those evaluation and
oversight etcetera.
Thank you
Senator Stewart for your
observation which I think sounds
like a question to me so I'd
like to answer that if we would
put that in the bill
I will comment and ask my
experts if they have further
comment on it I think that that
is a very good solution on I
have you pointed that out I did
read that again as I was waiting
for the meeting to start and I
think the other piece that we
would like to do is to what a
thirty year limit so that we can
satisfy the question about what
is the time limit rather than
just some sort of bank useful
life that depending upon
whatever it is for the who knows
whatever and I would just mark
Fleischer and Jason marks if
they'd like to further comment
on that please.
You go for station.
Mr chair Senator Stewart members
of the committee
It would be my recommendation as
well that thirty years not to
exceed thirty years being
certain they are we we've been
talking about a man is and this
this committee setting happen
before we get to that
The I agree with that and I
will.
Have a crop I don't disagree
with having energy and minerals
be involved in research and
review I would distinguish this
from the public this so it the
subject of the public facilities
act
a lot of that is technically
complex this is not as
technically complex energy in
those been very supportive of
solar and I don't I don't think
in the agencies were jacked to
having them fall of but.
It would definitely be a better
solution to include that in this
in this bill and also the thirty
year time period the entered the
public facilities act is just
oriented point of more calm
technically complex missions the
measures have a lot of
engineering involved and this is
a more straight forward
financial analysis and guarantee
section that the Senator Ivey
Soto look that I would encourage
everyone to look at that again
it doesn't work that well for so
for renewable energy PTA's
and that has been the problem
additional rises from.
This marks I've got a I've got
to really keep the members
questions pointed in your I I
know you'd like to talk about
this great deal ever well it
gender if we can get members to
address their questions directly
to the sponsor and the sponsored
departed expert would be needs
to I want I want quick questions
and answers are stored you still
have the port your followed by
Senator Pirtle and then Center
course.
and so Mister chairman I I
suggest we we we roll this over
and we give the senator a chance
to put in place what is
suggested in the FIR really
follows what Senator Ivy Soto
did and change the bill and
bring it back it's a very short
bill it's like one paragraph
I suggest that the changes they
have to make probably should
turn it into a committee set up
but that's what I suggest that
they do.
Thank you Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair just gonna
move to table
but if senator Morris has debate
I'll I'll wait.
Senator Moores had the same same
motion okay move to table Mr
chair Senator Moores had that
before you let me just make sure
is there any other I I again we
avoid tabling motions to cut off
debate if there's any ongoing
but is there any other debater
question on the bill.
Well I'm Mr Chairman I guess I'm
I'm on your cell.
If we're talking about.
Extended.
Chairman of three year contract.
Yes I I'm I'm I'm still unclear
as to why.
The public facility energy
efficiency water conservation
act.
Well wouldn't apply that
wouldn't be the best way to go I
mean I'm I'm happy to spend more
time with that act but it it
really it really does seem to be
an act that we've been we've had
in use for some time.
And and it was just a question
of changing twenty five to
thirty.
If you're entering into a
contract on the public to so the
energy efficiency and water
conservation act then it just
seems to be a lot of that gets
you that sweet spot that that
the expert was referring to and
so and so I guess I'm.
But I just I just a in this case
if you you know if Senator had
was to go off and and and and
work on this you know I don't
know what our schedule looks
like for those coming back but I
will say that.
That
some Senator members to I I I
personally would be more
comfortable with with with using
the existing structure of that
act than than creating a
separate farm out.
Of that that does exist
The the the what we already have
and so I just this is the
the back and so it was thank you
thank you Sir any other debate
or discussion before I take
motions.
Our this bill in conservation
although a couple of things just
for the benefit of the committee
and others some on it were in
the last two weeks you all know
what happens with committee
chairs in terms of getting bills
brought back again rescheduling
and so forth earlier I heard
some suggestion that this bill
was heard to quickly that some
unusual criticism of this
committee usually criticisms the
opposite I'll note that the the
bill has been with this
committee about nine days I
think that's adequate time to
have taken the comments that I
made along exactly the same
lines we further today after
conservation I think nine days
was adequate to put together
amendments to perhaps consider
revisions to the bill if we were
to roll this over and have the
sponsor or working with other
folks I think it's highly
unlikely as a Senate bill that
would be heard as we're still
considering Senate bills my plan
is to try and begin to focus
very much on house built in the
in the coming week but those are
my observations and comments on
the bill I will now take motions
Senator Moores I think you have
the first motion.
I move to table Mr chair.
Not available motion Emily
please take a roll call on a
motion to table.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Now.
Hello no ma'am.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator yes.
Senator Stewart.
No.
You yes.
This yes.
Senator your bill this year's
table to ninety seven.
Thank you for hearing at the Mr
chairman and senators have a
good afternoon thank you
dominating Senator Ivey Soto to
be the yes commentator on the
next case of the week for the
New England journal given his
ability to manage all that
tangential information thank you
that's a that'll be that'll be a
new observation center I was a
able to manage tangential
information like that.
It's good to have a learning
individual like you joining us
Dr Hickey
and the the next item will here
is Senate bill two eighteen it
we have Senator Shendo ready to
be and then I see you Senator
Shendo uniformed division of
income for tax purposes Senate
to eighteen Senator Shendo are
you with us.
Yes I am Representative so I
show the time before thirteen
you have up to fifteen minutes
as we discussed to some present
your bill I'll note that we have
no registered opponents to be
heard on your bill we have one
proponent Jack Burton and I show
no expert witness is registered
with the committee Senator
Shendo if it I believe but my
expert witness to secretary
taxed Representative is probably
in a holding pattern somewhere.
Mr chair members of the
committee she should be here.
Okay I'll go and get started.
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Senate
bill two.
This bill would ensure that the
certain income tax reforms that
were act enacted in the H. B.
six into twenty nine.
And a Tory for a experience.
If you guys recall the house
bill a six enacted the market
based sourcing for C. I. T. by
amending amending sections seven
dash four dash eighteen of the.
Of the uniformed vision of
income for tax purposes act.
Twenty nineteen changes to a you
you dip you dip I guess huh
that's how you say it provided
C. I. T. is due from
corporations based on their
delivering services or
intangibles to a customer New
Mexico or if the are used in New
Mexico.
The problem that we have is that
in our in our chapter.
Of the New Mexico as well multi
state tax compact.
Could arguably be allow.
In order to be allowed to see I.
T. taxpayer to elect not to
follow the market based sourcing
changes from H. B. six and
instead the taxpayer might elect
to use the model version of the
deposit that was originally
created multi state compact.
So right now they're sixteen
states including New Mexico that
are members of the multi state
compact and many of those states
have removed the taxpayers
election as proposed in this
bill.
As more more states to adopt
market based sourcing rules for
C. I. T..
So that's it and I will
if my expert witness would like
to add any more of that will
stand for questions.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
members of the committee I don't
have anything else to add I just
want to emphasize that what
we're doing here in Senate bill
two one eight is technical clean
up to make sure that all the
provisions of C. I. T. reform
that were included in house bill
six in twenty nineteen are
effectuated thank you.
Thank you all right Senator
Shendo I see no one else on your
group proponents I have no
registered opposition we'll go
then to members of the committee
members the committee on Senate
to eighteen.
Senator Moores then Senator Ivey
Soto no I Mr chairman Jack Jack
was on your about sauce if you
want to comments yes you're
right I did have check burden.
Well that's what Mr Burton.
Which.
Mr chair Senator course of
members of the committee I have
no objection to these amendments
I think there the line and
I think they're I think they're
just fine thank you.
Thank you senator Morris just
all for.
Okay Mister though that's kind
of what I wanted to hear to from
Jax as we are not attorney on
this committee always hear about
the infallibility huge process
so these of bills that we get to
our with Senator Ivy Soto times
on teachers reading you staring
so over over side I'm shocked
that there was a mistake to them
so I can't begin to understand
what this does so but US one
wanted to hear from Jack thank
you sure was.
So there Senator Stewart and
then Senator Ivy Soto I think I
signed waving your hand at me
Senator Stewart.
I thank you Mr chairman so
I'm looking at the F. I. R. this
is the net US fifteen million
dollars more.
Maybe the secretary or Senator
Shendo can save that's right now
how's that happening.
The secretary.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Stewart know that I'm
I'm looking at the FIR as well
and and that is the decisional
operating budget impact able
rather than the revenue estimate
table so what that's saying is
that it will cost TRD about
fifteen thousand dollars in
staff time you nonrecurring to
implement this bill and then
it'll save us a couple hundred
dollars of staff time over the
years recurring.
We're very all right shoot.
Right.
Your haven't spent Senator.
Those decimal places you know
but at flummoxed me
occasionally.
All right thank you Mr chair
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you very much I'm I'm
actually not trying to figure
out.
I thought he would be sent to do
a demotion for do pass your
number will get a motion and a
second center.
A little bit more discussion
time Senator Ivy Soto on
discussion yes No I'm I'm
actually trying to figure out so
if we spent fifteen and a half
thousand dollars.
That moment this and we save two
hundred dollars of staff time
how many years until we get our
money back.
On this on this and but twelve
and a half.
Thank you appreciate that.
But but also also says I am a
bit confused because because
this is the the the bullfighter
title of the bill is uniformed
division of income for tax
purposes but this is not a
uniform at Ste and and which
which goes to Senator Moores was
whether maybe some mistakes in
it this is a this is the
compact.
One of those compacts.
Although we're already part of
the compact but none the less
this is I just want to find this
is this is not from you know
from our commission that correct
Sir Mr Chairman etcetera
etcetera.
I'll defer to the secretary.
Mr chairman and senator Ivey
Soto I think you're correct if I
call your your a line of
questioning New Mexico is a
member of the multi state tax
compact which you know exists to
ensure uniformity amongst state
taxation for administration and
taxpayer use and things like
that.
Okay and and I'm not I'm sure
went out Mr Burton so this is no
relationship with the you know
from what commission correct.
Mr chairman and senator Ivey
Soto that's correct we're
uniform is is sort of talking
about that the division and
apportionment of income being
uniformed uniformity in taxation
across states.
Okay
Order right now I yeah I just I
just that that's that's the
point really off in terms of
that was kind of right at least
in the bill finder but I.
But but effectively really the
the substantive part of this is
simply eliminating the tax
office.
Right.
G..
And then
Okay I.
Wine.
Eight six.
Right which topics up as the
meeting after page four line
eleven so we have elements of
local of our elements of income
tax laws that would save
taxpayer option short for.
But what we're eliminating but
with the limited the taxpayer
option is that correct.
Mr chairman and senator Ivey
Soto that's correct and and so
the the section that's being
amended in this is bill this
this might be helpful in
clarifying is seven dash five
dash one seven dash I dash one
we're we're eliminating the tax
payer option is the compact
itself.
But then seven dash four dash
eighteen is New Mexico's form of
you did that and so what should
have happened in house bill six
in twenty nineteen if we had one
we wanted to be market based
sourcing reform that we did in
corporate income tax to twenty
nineteen.
When we.
When we changed you did that
from the model in the compact in
twenty nineteen we should have
also eliminated the selection at
the same time and so what this
election does right now is
basically saying that a
corporate income tax payer if
you don't want to follow the
version of you did that we have
in seven dash four dash eighteen
you can elect to follow the
model for men the compact and
we're just removing that to make
the corporate income tax forms
from twenty nineteen mandatory.
As intended right and I guess my
question is appropriate I don't
see where the weather patter
taxpayer option for important
on page five one eight it's
relevance.
All.
Mr chairman and Senator Ivey
Soto I'm looking that and I I
think your question is maybe
whether.
Line the words online eight
should also be removed is that
correct
Mr chairman and madam secretary
described.
Mr chairman I and Senator Ivy
Soto I think that would be fine
let me just make sure there
isn't.
Another paragraph that.
In this bill
is there that I'm I'm page six
line to coverage which also just
doesn't seem to make any sense
of the at the hatter yes Mr
chairman and and senator I think
Being that we adopted the
compact the formatting is idle
and our legislative.
You know the way that we usually
draft things but and that would
be what.
I don't.
I don't think I'm Senator Ivy
Soto Mr chairman I don't think
that the words online eight do
any harm.
Well it I mean it does Mr
chairman and madam secretary out
and shut that section of M. sica
it does seem to suggest what
taxpayer has an option.
But what I'm understanding from
you as a taxpayer doesn't have
enough.
Mr chairman and senator Senator
that's correct we would we're
removing the tax payer election
or option to use the model in
the compact you did that.
yes so Mr chairman I would move
on on on page five line eight
and page six line to to to Frank
language on each of those lines.
Mr chairman you on what you know
what Senator Baca in the meeting
are you trying to get in.
Given our web host a moment.
Would you please confirm webos
would you please confirm.
Mr chairman senator Baucus John.
Mr what I what I would actually
be four percent have a motion
with somebody of center store.
I will come back to that I did
not want to make sure I
understand your motion center of
because I heard I heard your
argument to be different than
your motion perhaps
of your motion I think is to
strike page five as an amendment
of being online eight and then I
think you said to page six point
two.
But I believe you're going to
want to go through Nibert on
page six might not correct
there.
I don't know that Mr I'm I'm I'm
merely striking.
Just just with the with the
words online eight and the words
online too so that you have
paragraph one would remain
intact and program to would
remain intact.
In an article three.
Senator your next so Mister
chairman I I know Senator Ivey
Soto just needs to do this but
this is a compact.
And you know it doesn't look
like our staff to
you know it's got these random
titles throughout I just do not
believe that we should be
amending in a the rest of the
compact.
We you know the secretary has
brought forward what she needs
to have out of here so we have
consistency but I do not believe
that we should be now amending
this compact or will be here for
ever.
I think it's appropriate for us
to do that having carry some of
these compact it's it's a hard
argument specially in judiciary
where we meant everything but it
does I don't think it's
necessary for us to go further
into this compact to get what is
done in this bill so I would
just suggest we not do this.
Chairman yeah one second this is
not a debate Center stored at
the floor.
All further members we recognise
Center I'm sort of your actually
recognized we recognize all
right comment was just trying to
go through the chair not just
going to jump in it will
certainly Mr chairman no and and
and and I'm not planning to go
through the rest of the compact
at all I'm just looking at at
that article three.
And it and and and while I
understand the the desire and I
respect the desire and and and
want to support the desire to
strike existing program one it's
just that we have we have them I
had that doesn't make it we
actually have two halves of the
don't make any sense in the
context them of a of a single
having eliminated the.
The actual taxpayer option that
existed.
And so it just I mean I I just
I'm I'm I'm concerned about the
effect.
Of of keeping in something that
suggests that there is an option
when there isn't an option.
And and then just on page six
one two that just.
I mean I I again I've not I've
I've no problems the language
that comes underneath that.
But coverage just in making
sense are outside but I have no
intent to go through and make
any other.
R. J. good with them that the
rest compact I do agree if it is
not with them with them not
format that we normally use.
R. and you know one of them and
that's fine this is been in our
in our laws since nineteen sixty
seven.
And
you're also so that is that is
not something that
Well in that regard Senator
Stewart I I completely disagree
with you it's just it's just I
the that having appears to be
misleading.
And I think that that will
create problems for the the tax
department.
Mr Chairman.
So it it center also in the
Center Sir Ivey Soto you didn't
pose a question I don't believe
you did I didn't see who was
supposed to and maybe we stated
it was just a statement one
right then I'm ready to have
either have you up concluded or
go to the next member Mr
Chairman.
If I could get a sense from the
Sanchez whether not that
different from the moment the.
I think we're in agreement with
that and.
I mean it is confusing because
we're taking the option off but
the option we're also still
there so we will consider from
the moment.
Either we can do it here or we
can
Maybe do a legal review an
instructor on the floor we have
to.
Well we're here now that's
probably moment Mr chairman them
I I I would I would receive them
with update I line eight and
page six line to to practice
providers.
Not the facts just Senators.
All right motion before the
body.
Want to take it the on a roll
call there may be some division
so is everyone clear on the
motion to motion to amend.
Sir your Baca are you can't of
your being recognized.
I did not request to be
recognised your cameras will
drive for me.
You should be thanking me Mr
chair.
White like a witness protection.
Yes Representative.
Friday night is a happy hour.
We're we're on a motion to then
what we'll call please Emily on
the motion of.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
It's.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator about this yes the
amendment is adopted.
Members the committee further
motions.
We do pass as amended the
Senators.
Need some more for the second
Emily on a do pass as amended
Senate bill two eighteen.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Yes.
Senator Morris yes.
Senator pro.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
This yes.
Senator you have a do pass.
Set to eighteen Senator Shendo
thank you.
Right etcetera etcetera you are
muted I don't assume you have
anything else to say I did say
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Very much appreciated thank you
Senator Shendo I will next year
Senate bill three eighty seven
entitle segregated bank account.
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chairman chair good
afternoon everyone Senate bill
three eighty seven is a
continuation of our effort to
requires much disclosures we can
regarding
quote unquote dark money this is
independent expert manager money
that does not have to be.
Handled the same way as normal
contributions and we were into
twenty nineteen able to pass
legislation that for the first
time did require some disclosure
but we ran into some loopholes
that raise some issues in the
past cycle so what this bill
does is add a and a one
paragraph addition to the
disclosure requirement that
provides the contributions of
more than five thousand dollars
per election cycle do not have
to be disclosed if they are
deposited into a segregated bank
accounts not used to fund
independent or coordination
coordinate expenditures are not
made to a candidate or campaign
or political committee the
problem we ran into is bank
accounts where money was co
mingled and the argument was
made that there wasn't a clear
indication from donors are that
that money was not to be used
and so
the addition of this additional
of this extra segregated bank
account will address that exact
situation
and I believe we have Mr
Chairman Ferris from the New
Mexico ethics commission and he
certainly could testify about
what they ran into on this bill
so that's what the bill does in
a very short simple way and I
think it's a it's a minor step I
will say Mr chair I really think
we need to take another big step
this it's called quote unquote
great money in other words
you've got rules that require
disclosure but you got different
entities and different shells
that are able to get around
letting us know exactly where
the money's coming from and but
that's not what's in this bill
this bill is a a one paragraph
addition I think makes makes
sense with that I would yield
Mister Ferris if he's out if
he's on I so I do.
See him there for COVID and
instantly stand for questions
first recognized.
Okay thank you Mr chair thank
you senator Wirth for for
bringing this bill we haven't
had a chance to to really talk
about it but but the I really
appreciate it Mr chair members
of the committee this this bill
this is almost identical to.
Language that the state ethics
commission recommended in its
twenty twenty in a report to the
legislature and the governor
for for amendments to the
state's ethics and and
disclosure bills what what what
this bill essentially does is is
it changes the risk of of non
disclosure when an independent
expenditure maker receives a
contribution in excess of five
thousand dollars and has a
written agreement with that that
contributor with where the
contributor request in writing
that their contribution not be
used for independent
expenditures and that is where
the ID maker goes ahead and uses
that contributors money for
campaign advertisements
currently there's a concern that
the public bears the risk and
that the public will not get
disclosure under two twenty
seven point three D. to this
bill changes who who bears the
risk
with with the addition of the
segregated bank account language
in the event that an independent
expenditure maker has a written
agreement with the contributor
that that their money not be
used to fund campaign
advertisements in goes ahead and
funds campaigns advertisement
with that contributors money
anyway under this bill the the
I. E. maker bears the risk of
disclosure and the the the state
I think would would be able to
force disclosure of of that
independent expenditure maker
Mr chair and and senator Wirth I
know that in Senate rules
senator Morris had had questions
about the the origin of this
bill what was what was
responsive to and and Mr chair
and senator Morris it was
a settlement to go she ation
with but Washington DC attorneys
at Perkins school we.
Who's who's client the campaign
or the committee to protect New
Mexico consumers
Made over two hundred and sixty
thousand dollars in independent
expenditures in support of the
PRC ballot amendment but refused
to disclose their contributors
on on a theory that that
currently to section one
nineteen twenty seven point
thirty two doesn't require them
to a cost after all they had
they had a written agreement
and so Mr chair.
Senator Morris that's that's
what this this bill is I think
responsive to and I think I
think it solves that I know I
know that the chair and in past
meetings has as mentioned that
as a businessman when he comes
across a good idea he still sit
there there there's
Representative Rapp I can
release.
What Mr chair I might I might be
paraphrasing but the that there
is a substantially similar
provision and Maryland election
code and that's a thirteen three
oh six of the Maryland election
because we're Merioles has a
similar kind of segregated bank
accounts language that in the
Maryland code they do it in the
definition section and and there
I the independent expenditure
Provision in in in this state
and in New Mexico's campaign
reporting act the work is being
done on the conditions to the
proviso but Mr chairman and
members of the committee I think
it I think it's it closes the
gap and and so with that that's
that's all I have thank you very
much Mr chair thank you my my
apologies to you Mr president
relies my mic was still alive so
my apologies to you and senator
Wirth
Center worth I don't have any
registered opposition to build
Mr for us was the only
individual identified as an
exporter proponent so unless
there's objection I'm prepared
to go to the committee I see
center start us we recognized in
center Moores was that also
request because I your hand Sir
Sir Senator Moores.
So thank you Mr chairman
You know this might be a stupid
question but what else is there
other than an independent
expenditure are coordinated
expenditure contribution to a
candidate campaign committee or
political committee for example
the PRC amendment that certainly
was a.
I mean that was an independent
expenditure.
I I just I don't see what else
there is if we've eliminated all
of this mean what else to use
the money for if you do not
using it for this.
So Mr chairman and senator.
Stewart I think what happens is
you can have a variety of
different entities and
structures so you can and and
this happens a bunch with non
profits and so you get different
Bakit so so contributors are
contributing to an entity for
different reasons and this is
again a problem that can arise
is that you end up with with
folks under the current law you
can have the current law allowed
for a contributor quest in
writing that the contribution
not be used to fund an I. E. or
coordinated expenditures and and
the problem is that that written
a letter alone was creating a
situation in an argument anyway
I I again I I have a hard time.
Thinking that it that they could
get around that but it just it
was enough ambiguity the and I
can also millions Mr fair CENIC
a settlement was reached in in
that case but there was enough
ambiguity that that adding this
second requirement that it be
put into the segregated bank
account makes it crystal clear
that that's what gets out of the
disclosure trader that otherwise
would exist so again just trying
to just clean up and and prevent
what's a really good lawyers
quite frankly and and we knew
this when we did this this is
the this is the hard part this
is one of those things that you
know we had.
Both sides play in this world is
as you well know and Senator
Moores well well knows and so
the reality is how you kind of
set the rules and then do
everything you can to.
Require the one thing we can do
wonders citizens United which is
disclosure and so I think you
know for the reasons that Mr
Ferris stated this additional.
Direction will eliminate an
argument that was being made the
disclosure was not necessary so
have a long winded answer but
it's it's a confusing area of
really complex election law and
we had some really good lawyers
and shout out certainly to the
ethics commission you know that
look at this and and I just
think we need just continue step
by step closing those those
those loopholes.
So Mister chairman Senator work
I know that I get all that I
know what you're doing it I
support it I just can't find a
reason to give five thousand
dollars to somebody to use for
something other than what's in
here.
So you're limited.
Presentation I'll give an
example someone donates to the
Sierra Club.
And again there could there
could be there's all kinds of
lanes that can exist and they've
got an I. E. they've got
something else they've got a
mixed account and I think that's
that's the concern but I'll
certainly Mr chair well Lee do
you Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto
made my input that's good enough
he doesn't have to answer every
thing.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman I'm sorry Center
Morris Marapharm targets Friday
afternoon Mister chair.
Other members of the committee
Senator Ivey Soto thank you
chairman because I have a lot of
energy so so here's here's the
thing.
Is that and it's I mean this is.
One of the situations we have to
look at the race to research law
so what we're talking about here
and you have to kind of follow
the lot the follow from the
beginning of subsection be
office three.
And so what it is is is that.
You're talking about either if
the expenditures were made in in
in in paragraph one from a
segregated bank bank account
that only goes to the
independence managers well
that's what that but then you
could have expenditures being
made in whole or in part from
funds other than those described
from a separate bank account.
And and then you have to you
have to report all of the stuff
so so getting getting to our.
Something that might sound like
an answer but isn't to what
Senator raised is that when you
look at a an independent
expenditure.
Among other things in addition
to expressly advocating for the
election defeat of a clearly
identified candidate of the
pastor's defeat of a clearly
identified ballot question it
also refers to a clearly
identified candidate or ballot
question is published in the
seventy eight it to the relevant
electorate within thirty days
before primary elections sixty
four general election.
Right so and so basically what
you what you've got is a
situation where you have
actually US senator.
And you have it you what other
other groups who are say wait a
second we do information
campaigns are to educate the
electorate and and we don't want
to have to be identifying every
single person who has given if
we take it out of the general
fund.
And so and so then for the large
contributors then at that
distance since so Senator work
during both the reforms to the
campaign reporting act as well
as the Custer meminta the PRC
but
that that that then.
You you wouldn't have to
disclose the large contributors
if they if they would make the
request in writing that the you
don't use it to fund in part or
coordinated expenditures or to
make any contributions.
What what what happened with the
committee to protect Mexico
consumers is that is that
working with the lawyers of
Perkins called a they said oh
that's a request that has been
whipped up on the request.
What amount of got a member of
very large contributions.
And treatment requests.
That more money not be used for
that purpose.
And then the committee decided
not to honor the request but
under the law they did not have
to report.
And so so that's what happened
and and so and so what this does
imply in that hole is that it it
simply says yeah sure you can
request but that request has to
be honored and the way that we
know the request is honored is
that that money is put in a
segregated accounts and it is
not used for that purpose in
response to that request.
Nope and I and I see Mr Ferris
taking a step up and down.
In because that so it was so
that that is what this does and
and and so and Mr chairman I
would I would move it so it just
to be recognition this time I
would with a do pass on that.
Rather discussion before you
take the motion saying none.
Sure I we sort of has a motion.
There's a second from.
Senator do hang.
Emily would you please call the
roll on the do passed motion.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
it's.
We did not hear you.
Sorry yes.
Yes ma'am all.
Senator Wirth no.
Hello yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
You yes.
This yes.
Who do passed motions Center
worth thank you Mr chair members
the committee rating seven will
come next to Senator Padilla
you've been waiting I'll note
just a see we still have Senator
Baca.
I don't see him order your yeah
I was going to suggest you know
if you look at center to do it
she has wonderful studio
lighting it almost looks like
it's of you know professional
professionally lit studio Center
pocket you should you should get
her to give you some advice on
lighting.
I appreciate that Mr chair we'll
take you up on that but
unfortunately you can't to
improve my face so we'll just
kind of stuck with that.
We'll always Mr house of that
kind of ready set us back to say
he would also have to develop
certain global that's not
considered to the cast.
What what think we better move
on to Senator Padilla is our
next set Senator.
Senate bill two oh two.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee have a bill that
I'm bringing before you from the
secretary of state's office they
asked me to help them with this
and it's a it's a.
It's a real simple bill which
I'm sure you I'm sure you hear
all the time but essentially it
just demands a few sections for
corporations statutes to capture
all the names of businesses that
transact business in New Mexico
so we hide behind any other name
can't play a shell game you
always have to report we are and
how you're doing business and
what your call and everything I
do have and that's that's
essentially that the bill I do
have to experts that are here
from the secretary of state's
office Christine Chavez who is
the director of business
services there at the secretary
of state's office and Dillon
Cate laying who is the council
at the secretary of state's
office so that you're now Mr
this if you would like to say a
few words with your permission
Mr Chairman to allow these two
experts to be part of your your
hearing today of course are you
have fifteen minutes to promote
your bill you begin at four
forty nine you
are Mr this a brief entry
introduction on what why we need
this and and then we'll go to Mr
line for a brief discussion as
well.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Chad Simons and service and
say this is services director
and I'm here to give a little
bit of information about this
this bill this bill is going to
provide transparency for our
office and it's also going to be
able to assist our customers as
well as other businesses to
determine whether or what you
know what members are in that
the actual
this is an to disclose all the
members so
this is basically just a
transparency bill that's going
to better assist everybody and
job it's a win win for everyone
so that's pretty much all
acronyms.
Thank you Mr president Mr line.
Thank you Mr chair Senators and
in addition we want to capture
just your operating business
name as well as your legal name
just just for full transparency
for
I'm doing a an operating
business in in the state we have
individuals sign up
corporations LLCs partnerships
I'm and so this is just to move
to to capture all all business
names at easy is either the
legal name of the operating name
in the state of New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll wrap
up with and so it's a real
simple introductions this is
also for not for profits that
are registered there and then
also for four agencies as well
they just all have to come
through they are and how they
operate what their names are and
provides extra transparency
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Padilla I show
no the register proponents
although Jack Burton your
identified on this bill but I do
live shows you as a proponent
but I also have writing from you
as an opponent Mr Burton so
either way you're the only last
person identified in connection
with this bill so Mister Burton
you're recognized.
We'll go to committee.
Mr Burton.
Mr Burton your muted.
To bring your microphone is
muted Sir.
Mr burden I don't know what
you're speaking about your
microphone is muted we're not
hearing you Sir.
Well we like your backdrop berry
much Senator Pirtle.
You Mr chair thank you senator.
Thank you for bringing this
forward having just recently.
Part of the new business that we
were going to operate with the
DNA found it quite interesting
that we didn't have to register
that with anyone or tell anybody
that that's what we were gonna
operator that the GPA was tied
to some other LLC so I found it
quite interesting that we didn't
have that in other states do can
you tell me Mr chair Senator how
many states have similar
language.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
ask Mister Lang or miss Travis
to address that.
Okay thanks.
Mr like.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle we don't
have any information I know that
it is common in in a couple of
states
California being one I can get
that information to you.
As soon as possible.
Mr chair Senator maybe Mr Lang.
Law prevents municipalities
whenever you apply to your
business license from from
requiring this language.
Mr chair Senator Senator Pirtle
I'm I'm not aware of that.
Restriction from municipalities
not incorporating for instance
that an LLC not requiring an LLC
or
or.
Mr chair Senator.
Unisa polity
right now under current law
required registry and DBA.
They applied for their business
license.
Mr chair streamlined.
Mr chair Senator Senator Pirtle
If your question is can a
municipality were.
Can you ask that question again
in the require that the elves or
the the the DBA name and they
register.
Mr chair Senator yes so the
municipality whenever somebody's
getting a business license
within that municipality here
for.
County if counties require it
they require the business to
disclose and register their DBA
name with the county or city.
I.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle
I don't know how to be a
municipality would would require
that information I know that
this statute regulates
businesses just in the in you
know for at a state level when
registering that already I don't
I don't know what what the power
of the municipality has over the
business to it to require
certain additional requirements
outside of the the statute at
issue for the state.
Mr chair and senator I think
when when you apply for your
business license I don't think
there's anything preventing them
from saying you know what is
your LLC and then what are you
going to do business as or what
what is your deviating going to
be is there anything preventing
this municipality from from
doing that currently.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle I'm not
aware of any restriction on on
on that.
Thank you Mr chair and senator.
Thank you senator.
It also bring.
That's it Mr chair right.
Senator Ivey Soto restaurant Mr
I'm I'm I'm actually gonna ask
that.
The sponsor return more with
this bill.
All possible.
And I want to tell you why
that's that in that is that that
great what thank have.
In this bill while I like.
It operates complete and the
reason why state it seems
awfully complete.
Is that it it has.
At the time of adopting the
articles of incorporation.
All for example look at page
three.
Our.
We get online to so this would
be with this would be for a
Problem normal business
corporation in this section.
All right that that at the time
the R. arcs of corporation
adopted.
The name of the corporation and
of different the name under
which it proposes as active as
the New Mexico.
Now if you look at though the
messages right well if you look
at fifty three thirteen one
however.
Is that you have that that the
That is the amendment of the
articles of incorporation.
And and and and among the
reasons to amend the articles
corporation is a change of its
corporate name but we don't have
a change of its DBA.
And so just like in the last
bill.
Where where we created a
structure that would allow
someone to make a request and
then you know workout well you
made the request we're not going
to honor the request right wise
under under this act.
You only polity BA if at the
time of incorporating.
Okay ons inspection do that
before nonprofit.
M.
In and then
This Madam that you have for for
profit.
R. if you if you lay out the
Thank you proposed to transact
business under a different name
but but for example are you know
if I if I'm been doing business
and I I to start transacting
business under a different name
there's nothing here that says
that I have to let the public.
There's nothing here that says I
have to tell anybody what name
I'm planning to use and
Representative myself on.
And so and so and and it
wouldn't take much it'll take a
few more sections of law but it
would actually them provide the
transparency that that was
Thomas was talking about in
terms of ensuring that
that it's not just what you
would proposed as your name but
also as you as you start doing
business under different names
that you have to register that
with the secretary of state.
And so and and like I said I Mr
chairman in center Padilla up
you know I don't that that that
would not be a
Right I think that's a bit
fairly quickly be done between
today and tomorrow it is it is
I'm not areas of law and having
to capture enough different
sections of law that the I
wouldn't want to try to do it on
the fly but but wouldn't.
And so Mr chair.
I suspected they brought it back
with those little sections in
there that would be fairly quick
the house.
Chairman.
But it's a at the moment though
this is this is
a programs going dream come true
of the sure we're going to we're
going to.
Representative not wanting we're
planning to do but we're just
not going to propose to do it at
the time of preparation let let
the public.
This gentleman that would be
possible.
Mr chairman I can support that I
actually agree with the with
Senator.
We can't hear you Mr chairman.
Thank you the proposal is to
roll over the bill of the
sponsor some additional time
again I'm discouraging the
committee from doing much of
this because again that just
fills an agenda that I assure
you is already full for the
remainder of the next three or
four days however are
And and all committee members
realize that regardless of
whether we anticipate pass bill
today Saturday or Sunday if
necessary to me to already be
reported the same Monday morning
when we're next on the floor.
So I so I don't see a delay if
Senator Padilla it we can get a
bill put together are you
working with others that we can
hear me very very quickly we'll
put it back on the schedule but
let me make sure that that we
use this opportunity for any
other discussion debate or or
questions on the bill so we
address everything and ideally
perhaps even the.
The consideration for a break
for a quick hearing.
On the bill also other because
they're committee members with
questions I heard the sponsor
willing to work for some
additional amendments and delay
postpone a vote until tomorrow
anyone else with questions.
All right all the sensitivity of
ice I support what you're doing
it is a great frustration of
money when trying to identify
who I'm dealing with is a
company I'm I have one case
right now we're a local hospital
in Los crucis everyone knows it
is one name that's the hospital
name of course is not really an
entity at all it's a it's not a
it's not a real thing that so
DBA for a corporation that
nobody knows and and then that
corporation is a as a parent
corporation which is another
name in that corporation as
another parent name on top of
that so it becomes a challenge
for us to know and frankly there
have been years of litigation
months of litigation and
hundreds of attorney hours of
discovery trying to figure out
who owns what and and who really
is the responsible party in that
litigation so I as for what
you're trying to do it's good
for transparency and I'll look
forward to even a better bill
when we see next.
Thank you Mr chairman if we can
we will have everything ready
for you to start your meeting
tomorrow thank you look forward
to that the next matter what
here is Senate bill two forty
seven as amended juvenile life
sentences without parole.
Senator Sedillo Lopez and you
have a co sponsor from the
house.
Thank you Mr chair I don't I
don't see her Representative
Hochman.
Will you know she joins us for
option forty seven the time is
five oh three Senator Sedillo
which you'll have up to fifteen
minutes let me advise you and
the committee of we have
registered expert witnesses at
least I along with the Sanchez
and I see probably in the
neighborhood of about twenty
five proponents identified on
the bill I see approximately ten
or twelve opponents on the bill
Senator Sedillo Lopez I trust by
now you're familiar with our
procedures here in the Judiciary
Committee when we start you'll
have fifteen minutes to rely
upon any experts or recognize
any proponents you wish to
recognize within that fifteen
minutes after that the
opportunity for advocacy will
have passed to the opposition
right now I do not have anyone
as a spokesperson or organizer
for the opposition so that said
they'll be ten minutes a lot for
opposition and I see
approximately ten a person who
registered so will recognize you
to them for about a minute
otherwise Senator Sedillo Lopez
your of your title to use the
fifteen minutes as you wish and
the time is five oh four you can
begin.
Thank you Mr chair I appreciate
that the committee's indulgence
with this really important bills
has as everyone knows juvenile
law or has many no juvenile law
and the gentle juvenile system
was developed with the with the
concept of rehabilitation in
mind adult punishment adults the
the goals of that are read
reparations reparations
retribution and rehabilitation
all three of those things so
what we're looking at is we're
looking at a juvenile who gets
sentenced for thank a difficult
difficult crime and get
sentences in adult and right now
that juvenile has to wait for
thirty years before they're
eligible for parole what I'd
like to do is I would like to at
this moment just turn it over to
the experts for my experts here
I have done only no I have very
karmic Health what else was who
is the district attorney here
and she's going to speak about
this bill thank you.
Good afternoon everyone and and
thank you for inviting me
Senator C. so the Lopez chair
Servan tastes and members of the
committee I speak to ask Miss
I'm my name is Mary Carmack all
twice and I speak to you as the
district attorney of for the
first additional district I
might my district encompasses
Santa Fe County Rio Arriba and
Los Alamos and I stand in
support of SB two forty seven my
support for this bill is based
on the recognition that young
people have the capacity to
change and on my desires a
prosecutor to advance a justice
system that aims to rehabilitate
young people not just punish
them I believe the amendments to
this bill that I've changed it
from its its initial
the initial writing that
increased the the the initial
incarceration period from ten to
fifteen years and the longer
time period between review
reflects the concerns that I had
for victims and survivors of
violent crimes while also taking
into account the capacity for
juveniles to change
One of the reasons that that I
support this bill and I do for
the most part I I'm not standing
for the New Mexico district
attorneys association I'm
standing on my own asked the
district attorney for Santa Fe
but I accept the science that a
juvenile offenders are unable to
assess risk unable to assess
consequences before they act and
are often impulsive and
commit crimes that they don't
fully understand the
consequences of and I also
accept that the science that
says that those those young
people can change and can be
rehabilitated and that is why I
fully support this bill thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair now to the
only Wilson.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is to not only
Wilson I am a staff attorney at
the ACLU.
In our state there are seventy
five people serving sentences
longer than ten years for crimes
committed as children.
Many are serving sentences that
mean that they will spend the
rest of their lives in prison.
Many of already service decades
some over forty years for crimes
committed when they were
teenagers.
These are sentences that tell
children.
It doesn't matter what you do
for the next ten twenty years
ago by.
It doesn't matter what kind of
person you become or the ways
that you commit yourself to
repairing the harm you cost.
You're telling them that it
doesn't matter and we don't
care.
But it does matter it matters
because all children are capable
and worthy of redemption.
And this must be fixed.
The New Mexico courts have been
called on to answer this
question for twenty years and
Justice Boston is going to tell
you a bit more about that but
each time the courts have looked
at this our judiciary has said
that the legislature is the body
to address this but for twenty
years the legislature has not
acted.
And in the meantime there are
people in our state who continue
to serve adult sentences for
crimes committed when they were
children that deprives them of
the meaningful opportunity for
release of the Supreme Court and
our state courts have said they
are required to have
it will not be long before our
judiciary is asked to look at
this again it's my full time job
at the ACLU to litigate the
sentences and there are matters
pending in five or thirteen
judicial districts.
If the Legislature continues to
decline the court's invitation
to fix this problem.
Courts will act and the
legislature will be divestiture
from the opportunity to have a
say in what this fix looks like.
I I am aware of the presence of
many family members in this
hearing today on both sides of
this issue.
Each one of their story should
inform inform this conversation.
We know that justice is not a
zero sum game.
To extend compassion to one
person does not mean that my
compassion for another person is
diminished and to celebrate a
rehabilitated and changed person
is not to minimize or trivialize
the harm that they cost.
As a community and as the state
we can expand the parameters of
our concerns to include both
people who have experienced
greater harm and those who have
committed it.
We do not honor victims and
their families by failing to
acknowledge that children are
different and that they can be
rehabilitated.
We can do both and this bill
does both thank you.
Thank you Mr chair we have
Carissa McGee.
There are in order to connect to
the local twelve.
I'm I'm I'm I'm sorry I don't
know I'm Chris maybe I don't
know if I was asked to speak yes
your next ms McGee hi I'm sorry
I I apologize for that high yes
thank you so much I appreciate
the opportunity to speak in
support of Senate bill two forty
seven.
You know I am I am one of your
very own I am a proud New
Mexican citizen and
My my jury doesn't really begin
there though it begins like far
too many others with the
presence of an uninvited
unpleasant and most often
unreported experiences of
childhood traumas.
You see I grew up in Los crucis
the honest four daughters raised
by a single mother in my dream
was to be a basketball star I
was actually quite a talented
athlete that dream was shattered
when I was sixteen and had
experience my first mental
health breakdown any eyes law
when I committed my first
criminal offense.
One judge do not to be amenable
to treatment and sentenced me
that twenty one years an adult
correctional facility I was
seventeen years old right the
prison compound.
I spent the first few years
incarcerated both mentally and
physically but nobody cared not
even.
It wasn't so a community based
organization called project echo
into my life and enabled me to
reconnect with the greatest
power any of us could ever
possess hello I found a new
sense of hope in the darkest
pits of my of my despair and
with the camera minder that I
have wings and wings aren't
meant to be caged government to
fly so I took off.
Luckily I was one of the violent
youthful offenders that have
light at the end of my tunnel I
have a date for for parole board
hearing.
After more than eight years
perspiration I knew I was no
longer the lost childhood into
the system I was undeniably a
changed woman a changed woman
for good.
Thankfully I was given a
meaningful and timely second
chance at this thing called
life.
And if I may say so myself I
have that second chance of the
park.
I successfully completed growing
appropriations I earned my
associates last summer and I'll
begin graduate school this fall
I work full time project echo or
I go back into eleven of the
prison facilities across the
state to continue to pay it
forward by providing them with
hope.
I co founded a nonprofit
organization called women in
leadership which helps other
women impacted by the criminal
justice system I appreciate
basketball for the high school
middle school use in the state
and I wrote and published a book
titled trustor struggle which is
a novel based on my true story
to be an inspiration for others
who might find that they're also
struggling.
All of these meaningful
contributions and so much more
possible for me because I have
been afforded a meaningful and
timely second chance I did not
do this alone I needed the grace
of the courts and the compassion
of the people.
I am the face of what it is I
suffer from mental health
disorders and learn to overcome
I am the face of what it is to
be a violent felon convicted as
a child and when given a
meaningful and timely second
chance I approve that redemption
is possible.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chair of Mr Steven
Taylor.
Chair members of the committee
they're not president.
Then Mr chair I will go to that
Justice Boston.
Mr chair I see somebody's.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the of this sow
Committee.
I'm Richard Boston to recently
retired I was on the Supreme
Court of before that of the
court of appeals in New Mexico
what twenty years.
Twenty years ago.
Now well I speak in behalf of
this bill because I sat on a
case in the year two thousand
two but I want to just RigCount
you ever so briefly.
ball state versus Joel ira Joe
was fourteen fifteen Alamogordo
New Mexico one over a period of
time he sexually assaulted and
abused by his half sister who's
younger than him virtually but
guilty in the only issue before
the court judge reader writer
from Alamogordo most what to do
with it.
the judge decided not to send
services juvenile but rather as
an adult so the question was the
length of the sentence.
Five or six different of
felonies and the judge of course
have the discretion to sentence
them all at once R. and we have
to run concurrently so just be
one sentence or consecutively
worried string about for a long
period of time.
Judge Richard was concerned
about the protection to the
public what with this young man
be like ten years from now
twenty years now and so forth we
didn't have any reason for
optimism based upon the
testimony at the time and there
was no mechanism in the wall it
would have the system reassess
this young man we got to be
twenty five or thirty five where
to see what the changes would be
and and once you become an adult
it was a tragic case.
The judge read chairman lamented
that absence in law when he
took.
The draconian step saying well
this man is guilty of this
Senator sexual offenses and I'm
gonna make sure that by the time
he gets out of prison you will
no longer have any sexual urges
that all and so we Senator to
ninety one years we won it won't
even be eligible for parole.
For forty six years have that.
Now that case was taken up to
the New Mexico Supreme Court
after I retired from the court
they are the same case they
issued a lengthy opinion.
And they are.
Articulated the same frustration
they said the statute I mean
this system may not be
unconstitutional because nothing
of a law that prohibits it but
that doesn't make it right.
What we the courts can't do
anything it's up to the
legislature to intervene and
come up with the statutory
scheme that would allow for some
periodic review.
That would enable the system to
assess
the person and see whether it
was appropriate or not
appropriate for release.
That's where I stand in support
of this bill maybe there are
other ways of achieving the same
thing but this is a good friend
conscientious effort to achieve
a result which I think is long
long overdue.
I do know that approximately
half the states in the nation
have something like this in one
form or another so New Mexico
isn't just to be on the cutting
edge what we don't want to be
the last one in the nation it
would be comfortably in the
middle.
In my view the only thing the
said that the legislature should
not do is to do nothing thank
you Mr.
Thank you former of Chief
Justice Boston we're at up to
fifteen minutes Senator Sedillo
Lopez Justice Boston please hi
to glory of for me please
all right.
The other proponents to ask me
recognize and support the bill
included the following on
mention all of them Kim Chavez
Cook with the law offices of the
public defender Victoria gamble
Mexico correlation for the fair
sentencing abuse Steve gamble
Rebecca Roberts will of setting
up for racial justice Adam I'm
mak BA I believe Martin gear
Senator hall dean Jensen quite
might I'm Michael Martin current
we were with the New Mexico
coalition for fair sentencing
join angle Diana cash Jessica
Marie show Bloodworth with
inside allies of banks with New
Mexico coalition for fair
sentencing Victoria Campbell or
in Gomez with Mexico youth
justice coalition for not a
Trujillo with gold futures Erica
Rivera Jessica brown directly
impacted family members Stephen
d'espagne been Baur chief public
defender Shannon police in New
Mexico coalition court for
sentencing you can merry cross.
Thank you for all of you and
your participation in our mind
folks we also get email in our
in our mailbox that is directed
to the committee we're now
Open to ten minutes of
opposition to the bill I've not
been are identify I've not had
identified to a single
spokesperson organizer for the
opposition and so I have the
following individuals who
registered to speak in
opposition.
I'll note the first four members
each of you will have one minute
given the of that the number of
you who asked we recognize so
Nathan spoke
Eliza minnows mehndi Walters and
Clint well born in that order
please for the first for each
for one minute the nation's
collect are you on the phone.
Mr Chairman can you hear me yes
you're recognized for one minute
Sir.
Thank you senator.
Some other sister was the victim
of a brutal home invasion which
is viciously attacked and left
for dead by now enter.
Now I sympathize with that to
get you out there is a second
chance this bill is not the
correct way to do that this bill
allow early proper all do not
criminals no crime there that
it's a mash shooters rapists and
murderers all automatic come out
of the pro after fifteen years
and the elderly and every two
years after that.
This bill imposes to severe
burden on crime victims by
forcing them to a direct
extension number from hearing
and it's not that right out to
the horrific offenders and make
it was better to eligible for
early parole.
We oppose this bill not because
we're angry or particularly
because what hi the perpetrators
because we just want to be able
to live our lives without being
and confiscate here we want to
be able to put the pain and
trauma we have good behind it
and get the bills are shattered
lives as best we can but we
can't do that if you're
costs would be enforced we live
these crimes and the cyclic
wrong here.
Now the reality is thank you how
mass shooters right this can
apercent murders decades of it
has helped with the convicted
ranted community fourteen in a
family struggling numerous grow
hearings whenever you the chance
to the perpetrator has been
suggested be ability yet it's
just causing of unnecessary pain
thank you Mr why someone you
know please by one.
We have as many of those.
Eliza Williams.
District attorney know Manny
Walters.
Mr chair I'd going on.
The supplies in my nose.
I just.
Hello if you'd like to go to the
next one on the left go back.
Many Walters.
I thank you I'm speaking against
Senate bill two forty seven my
mother was murdered in a mass
shooting in August of twenty
seventeen although the shooter
was sixteen at the time of the
shooting he was sentenced as an
adult in February of twenty
nineteen to forty years in
prison attending multiple
hearings was very traumatic and
I was relieved to the finish of
the process under this bill this
young man to be out of prison
just eleven years from now
fifteen years after committing
murders this bill will possibly
allow very violent offenders to
be re introduced into society
without solid evidence that they
will not commit another crime it
would be irresponsible and
grievous to allow people who
committed violent crimes such as
murder to serve only a small
fraction of their sentence
especially when the act was
premeditated under this bill
victims and their families to
possibly have to enter this
process every two years until
the offenders out of prison
forcing them to relive the
doctor multiple times I urge you
to reject this bill this type of
allowance for parole should not
be given to violent offenders
such as the young man who
murdered my mother thank you
thank you the client will work
please be admitted if you're
with us.
Twelve or.
Mr chair this was it the bill I
was going to speak on all right
hello I have the next
individuals identify Barbara
Simons and Denise Madrid David
Abbey fresher in that order
please.
Barbara someone's.
Yes Sir I'm reading this on
behalf of Kathy Garcia in two
thousand eight John gamble was
convicted of murdering my son
Joseph and sentenced to sixty
years in prison.
This was a premeditated murder
one week before hand Joseph told
me he was scared of gamble and
his brother they were telling
people they were gonna grab
Joseph beat him and light him on
fire I looked Joseph in the eye
and I told him I would protect
him.
Yeah we're Joseph dot gasoline
took Joseph to a remote location
he beat him with his hands and
then tried to shoot Joseph the
rifle misfired so he be Joseph
with the rifle stock until it
broke.
Gamble lit Joseph's body on fire
making him unrecognizable.
Just be two forty seven is
devastating to me and my family
I can't relive this fifteen
after fifteen years and every
two years afterwards where I ask
it is Joseph opportunity to
start over thank you.
Thank you.
In a small drip please.
We have miss Madrid.
R. and and on muted the.
Our current.
Or not.
I'm sorry did you say she is
muted on muted.
Connecting them on and move on
to give it a minute I move on to
next want to go back.
Next I have is every Fischer.
The Fisher and I'm the daughter
of Christie who is also one of
the women publicly murdered by a
juvenile mass shooter at the
Clovis carver public library
three years ago I sear SB two
forty seven would serve to
encourage future violent
offenders to follow through with
their plans and hurry up and do
it well they know they still
have a chance to get out after
fifteen years of their sentence
teenagers are intelligent and
resourceful the argument often
used in favor of such bills is
that the teenage brain is under
developed but one hundred
percent of us in our.
Went through the same
developmental stages don't
separate yourself from your past
you understand the consequences
of murder cognitive failure
isn't to blame for the violence
is the failure of empathy
conscious and morality why do we
ask are used to begin planning
their entire lives the moment
they enter middle school if we
believe they're still developing
basic social skills and knowing
right versus wrong it is because
we know the capabilities of
youth minds are far greater than
their handicaps it's a choice to
go to school.
Hello.
That's what I have to say thank
you very much what we turn back
to the needs Madrid you're
recognized for one minute.
The card on you now.
It is with great your mute
microphone is muted.
The needs moderate your
microphone is muted.
I will go on Matt Baca.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
Matt Baca chief counsel at the
office the Attorney General we
stand in opposition to the
single provision that allows for
periodic two year review after
the initial.
Hello near me.
you know.
Mr chairman.
It on the.
The webcast if you can you to
webcast and.
It's.
In your calls web hosted with
the web host please mute is
moderate and recognize Mr Baca
Mr Baca.
Thank you Mr chair all just
quite brief as I mentioned
spending as in the provision
that requires a two year review
at our office is heard an
overwhelming outcry from victims
of violent crime and the trauma
that they feel when they have to
continue to go through parole
review hearings.
Really is something that should
be considered in this process
and and we're hoping that the
the body will consider that as
part of of any reform they take
on also just know very quickly
that it was pointed out that
rehabilitation is the purpose of
the children's code in this
instance where you are trying to
basically create a new a mean
ability hearing through the
parole process the body should
recognize that those are two
fundamentally different things
so I child that the judicata as
a delinquent we'll get treatment
and then you could actually see
if it works.
You send a child to DO see they
are not getting treatment and so
then to creative create a up or
treat a parole hearing as a sort
of subsequent de facto
immutability hearing seem sort
and identical to the purposes of
the overall legislation so
really we don't stand against
that the overall intent of this
bill but really just that
provision that requires such
frequent reconsideration.
Thank you Mr Baca we still have
two minutes left for opposition
I have Jessica thrown Doug will
be Doug Ford and Barbara Rolo
the registered in opposition we
can hear about one minute from
each one of you not much more
Jessica for all of your on the
call your recognize.
Thank you August two thousand
seventeen sixteen year old
Nathaniel delay came into my
workplace with a backpack
containing two handguns he was
angry with light and made a
video stating people need to pay
with their lives your first
thought that the internet
exacted revenge at public high
schools plan you decide the
library was a sufficient setting
for soft targets within seconds
of game unloaded guns on
celebrity seven patients telling
injuring and traumatizing I was
shocked that he claimed the
lives of my friends the vehicles
health act forced me to remember
to dial in Mister Horsey angered
surgeries funerals counseling
physical therapy in transition
to a new job all within months
of the shooting struggles
continue to learn how to help
PTSD was number twenty any of us
would make for ourselves but is
money for a lifetime along with
the pain and scar my are a
visual reminder everything
everyone I lost as B. two forty
seven is an absolute disregard
for what you members and victims
have injected it does get to
return to normal life after
fifteen years not wanted Percy
are gone forever and the rest of
us pick up the shattered pieces
of our life and carry on I
believe the numbers without the
census getting number because
the crimes read twice
legislators supporting us to
forty seven so what are hard to
find it's not with that that was
the more active writing that
this bill is the.
Thank you Mr on of Doug Ford for
up to one minute.
Doug Ford.
For
sure we go over budget is Mr
always we've got some more bad.
some going on with your lives
she still talk only let her
finish.
One.
Hi Mr chair reported you can
turn off the webcast and use
your computer audio.
Mr for was that direction clear
Sir for anyone on the call if
you're watching the webcast and
then be leading to the zoom call
your on a delay we're getting
feedback and other difficulties
so Mister for you need to turn
off your we're webcast rely upon
the zoom conference no recognize
you if you do so for one minute.
Okay I apologize so I'm those
Ford thank you for letting me
talk on chief of police to close
police department August twenty
eight twenty seventeen
unfortunately my great city
became part of the fraternity of
communities affected by an
active shooter.
shooter Mr Jewett.
The missile response was to go
to my high school and close
Mexico and actually perform his
access codes high school.
Decided to lay down a relaxing
when he did he over slept in the
target them because my library
which is part of opportunity we
lost to library employees to
city employees and we had for
those who were shut.
In the action of this shooter.
Should you have a manifesto you
put it on video you know exactly
what he wanted to do.
I don't care what his age was he
thought this through and he knew
it is action we're going to be
and he affected this community
greatly for the rest of it's
it's time effect all the first
responders everybody that was
involved.
We stand in very staunch
opposition to this bill and
anything that would bring
anybody like that back to this
community cause more crime thank
you thank you chief one last
speaker Barbaro mall if you're
on the call your recognized one
minute.
Thank you good evening Mr
chairman and committee members
my name is Barbara and I'm the
district attorney for the
thirteenth judicial district I'm
representing the New Mexico
district attorneys association
we stand opposed to this bill as
written even with the amendments
that have been made with
negotiations parole eligibility
after fifteen years is not
something we can endorse the
majority of other states that
have adopted similar laws have
made parole eligibility
especially for first degree
premeditated murder I get to be
able to speak.
From twenty to thirty years or
higher some juveniles may be
able to be rehabilitated to the
there are no longer a danger to
society but it's wrong and
dangerous to assume that also
juveniles can be rehabilitated
or that their brain development
or lack there of was the sole a
primary reason for the horrific
crimes for every six Astoria
there's a tragedy to re offend
Center early release this bill
has not been sufficiently vetted
with all stakeholders in a
manner that would allow the
lawmakers to make the best
decision for their constituents
particularly victims who have
been seven who have suffered
tremendously from juvenile
offenders we stand strong
opposition to this bill as
written thank you thank you
we've heard well over thirteen
minutes of oppositional go to
members of the committee.
Members of the committee.
Mr chair of the co sponsor who
is arrived and also I do have an
amendment.
That was prepared.
Of.
Is the amendment I don't know if
everybody got the amendment so
Senator your amendment should
been presented with your bill in
the fifteen minutes along with
the participation of your co
sponsor we're now on committee
committee members and many
questions I don't know do you
have a committee sponsored
amendments under I believe I
believe Senator o'neill of will
is will sponsor.
By Senator on it was hand raised
we recognize Senator o'neill.
Chair and yes the amendment you
know first of all I would point
out that that the folks behind
this bill.
The sponsor and advocates have
worked really.
Really extend themselves to the
to the dust and the AG's office
and other folks and it made a
rule changes I have to say this
was a bill that I presented on
the interim committee a couple
years ago year and a half ago
and it was quite a quite a
helpful the beginning of this
process and I think I just want
to acknowledge that the folks
you know sponsoring to seventy
nine right now.
Really are in dialogue with the
with the stakeholders and
victims and all kinds of folks
so the bill you know hearing
loud and clear Matt Baca is
but I would concern also the I
mean my goodness the concern of
of victims that are being re
traumatized with the every two
years
I would making a mess I'm
proposed amendment that that be
every five years
between the these hearing so
again in its original form this
bill would call for every at the
ten year juncture a parole
hearing would would be possible
it's now fifteen years for these
juveniles that have been
sentenced as an adult and so
we're the the the sponsor that
changed the intermittent time
from two years to three years
but I would like to make an
amendment at the request of the
sponsored the every five years
there wouldn't be a parole
hearing every two or three of
the every five years potentially
if there was report was the
granite.
So that would be my amendment
every five years I don't have
the bill in front of me but but
every five years instead of
every three years
that makes sense.
Senator hold on Senator Sedillo
Lopez we go to the chair so
please wait to be recognized.
Senator o'neill has proposed an
amendment we're gonna need some
greater specificity
I don't have the bill with Santa
as somebody had the bill on the
committee there generally when
we make unemployment we refer to
pages line number and this right
you need to be changed yes so I
Senator Lopez you have the page
and line number.
Miss Mister chair.
There is a correction I
apologize I I thought that this
was a taking care of the other
change is that it would be every
five years until you reach the
thirty year mark at which time
adults have a parole hearing
every two years so would be five
years has law up until thirty.
Okay.
Okay that makes sense so we're
in the bill is this again I
don't have the actual amendment.
Okay so please Center o'neill
would your will to go through
the chair Sam would you Senator
Sedillo Lopez.
you all can talk amongst
yourselves some other time right
right now I need to know page in
a line number of a specific
command are also have to roll
over the building have here
maybe we aren't so I'm
Senator Lopez I needed to find
that that I'm.
And my number I don't you know
members of the committee this is
co sponsor Hochman Vigil I think
the page numbers page line
twenty one hello.
Three page eight line twenty one
Mr chair here o'neill Senator
Sedillo Lopez Representative
please go through the chair you
all are jumping all over each
other and I know I know you're
trying to help one another right
right creating chaos in our
committee I apologize Mister
chair so page eight line twenty
one as stated by a co sponsor
they Hochman Vigil
Representative.
That is the line in question.
Nice to see a number of you were
trying to jump in so we'll get
to Senator Baca center Ivey Soto
in a moment.
Senator Senator o'neill you can
you can
Referred to one of the experts
on your group or your co
sponsors but I need to know a
page in a line number with a
specific amendment you identify
age line up page eight line
twenty one now you have to me
what you want to do at that
location so I would like to
changed from three years to five
years.
And then.
As as odd Senator to Antoinette
Sedillo Lopez mentioned about
the at thirty years center would
be every two years because of
the you know because by then as
an adult you're you're a.
Guaranteed every two years to at
least be considered for parole.
After a thirty year sentence.
Thank you Center o'neill for
explaining the reasoning behind
the proposed amount.
I need something with greater
specificity so
let me.
The one last time Senator
Sedillo Lopez or thank you thank
you Mr chair on page eight one
twenty one if parole is denied
the juvenile offenders shall be
entitled to a parole hearing not
less than every change two to
five years thereafter.
Is that the proposed amendment
yes Mr chair.
Discussion on the proposed
amendment in.
Committee members I see a hand
on the amendment.
Senator Ivey Soto on the
amendment.
Thank you Mr ciroc Center
balking ran as a I don't know
what's on the amendment real
quick Sir Bacchus on the
amendment.
Yes yes Mr chair it's on the
amendment right now I'm sorry I
saw center Baca before you
Center Ivey Soto it allows
Center Bach on the amendment
that center I was so.
Mr chair I I don't see the
amendment can somebody direct me
to where it's at yes it was
mailed out and just give me a
day in time so I can at least
find it look at it.
Senator Baca there isn't we're
making the amendment now.
So as I as I understand it the
sponsor did not send out the
amendment.
And so I as a committee member
and making that amendment with
the help of the sponsor and co
sponsor.
Page eight.
Okay so for.
Thank you Mr chair a I was I
thought the Senator o'neill was
still speaking and so all right
we have to finishes his
amendment I'm.
Were you able to find it Mr
chair Senator were you able to
find the page and quest Mr chair
Senator last you said was page
eight.
And then you stopped at that
point Mr right so again I need
my mic sponsor my co sponsored a
state where on page eight.
No matter thank you Mr chairman
I think yes.
Mr chair
on page eight line twenty two
strike to.
And turn that a change that to
five.
Thank you Mr chair in full
transparency the rest of it says
unless the offenders subject to
earlier eligibility for parole
pursuant to any other provision
of law adults are eligible after
thirty years.
Mr chair your muted.
Come back tomorrow yes I
understand.
Under current law I'm sorry been
talking to someone else we're on
we're on that proposed amendment
just changing the two to five is
that it you checked other
discussion on the proposed
amendment I have the Sir Baca
and then Senator Ivey Soto you
were asked me a recognize on the
amendment.
Much.
Rates.
I'm sorry Mr chair still have
before I.
Just know that you know Mr chair
this is a little bit
inconsistent with what we've
been doing procedurally you know
I think it be appropriate to to
allow the sponsor to to the.
Place the amendment more
organized manner presented to us
I think we could accommodate
that we've done it for other
people and you know that we can
have something to look at here
rather scattered at this point
but let me that that's all I
have a question floor thank you
let me let me ask of the sponsor
this Senator Lopez is instantly
amendment that you anticipate
organs but others no I do not
anticipate anything else this is
really in response the Attorney
General and and deputy Attorney
General Baca had been meeting
with victims and I want to say
that because of the zoom and the
pandemic we have not had the
opportunity to visit with
victims in a in a satisfactory
way but because of those
meetings we learned today that
That five years would really
ease a lot of heartache and pain
with this bill and so in
response to the victims concerns
we're changing only one word the
two to five.
Mr chair if I may as as
Just interject it is a very
simple change it is.
Two to five that is the entire
change once we sorry for the
confusion about where in the
bills etcetera but it's an
extremely simple
change and it's hardly
unprecedented in this committee.
All right center back I
appreciate your concern I'm
gonna try and be consistent
however I do recognize when our
last two weeks and we're rolling
over the number of bills today
into tomorrow the changes one
word I think it's simple enough
for the committee to appreciate
to have the Sanchez
representation she's making no
other amendments to the bill so
I'm gonna take the Center
o'neill's a motion as in order
and will be fully debated and
vote on that proposed amendment
all note also this bill for the
Sanchez benefit of this bill has
been with this committee for
almost two weeks in this
committee ample time to have
prepared amendments for the
committee in a written form in a
way we can give proper
consideration to but given the
and given the amendment
simplicity when I consider the
motion in order from Senator
o'neill so we're on discussion
of that one amendment that one
change any further discussion
committee members Senator Ivey
Soto.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr went.
The.
The problem that I have and this
is what happens with with a lot
of these bills aunts aunts you
you have a bill that comes in
and has based on research it is
based on our our.
experience and and then and then
there are cuts that happen along
the way so that by the end of
the process you don't have.
you don't have a limiting the
anything approaching what the
bill was intending to do
initially and so let me your
example of that when this bill
was in fact.
in order as as as I understand
it in order to get the.
Agee's on board as well as to
get
miss all twice on board are B.
R. page.
Eight line fourteen.
What's that about commanders of
the anti and how the procuring
after serving ten years of the
sentence what's changed in
fifteen years.
And we have to the committee
right well that's result by
itself you know what we want to
make it to some sort of
insurance tem we're gonna make
it fifteen I know we get to the
next committee and now with the
next committee the prosecutors
have yet another well you know
now that you to that one and
that's not on it right now
if you already have adopted that
one.
K. to the fox.
And so and so then of course
committee instead of the
something else at some point
when I have a bill that doesn't
at all reflect what was
introduced the purpose.
So and so Europe Mr chairman.
The R..
I do not support a changing this
from two to five.
if it does get chance to to I
and I think we need to relate to
them consider
striking thus the the Senate out
the Public Affairs Committee
amendment going from ten to
fifteen.
R. although I do hear very
clearly.
The concerns from the victims
and and I and I do have Mr
Chairman an amendment to propose
regardless as to whether this is
adopted allowing a victim for a
relative of a victim up to up to
ask for peace in their life and
not to be continually contacted
with these hearings.
but but otherwise though the
problem is like I said in the
first hearing this one from ten
to fifteen years for the
national hearing now we're going
from two to five years for
subsequent hearings at some
point it just doesn't R. it just
doesn't.
hi I have the the the bill just
doesn't resemble are where we
started off with so so I do not
support moving from two to five.
If we stick with two I will not
make an amendment to strike the
Senate how the Public Affairs
committee amendments are however
If it does pass I'm gonna make
that motion because of that
point and if we're doing every
five years so we should start
where we start off with the bill
after ten years in terms of
reviewing to see where somebody
is in their life all I I I'm and
I'm a part of part of what we
have an optional system as we
caught a corrections system.
And and is begin is a perfect
example of what happens properly
in a corrections system.
When you go to prison.
At age thirteen or sixteen.
They're not gonna come back up
for a hearing until.
Another fifteen years that's
that's W. life right there.
That is such a horizon that it's
difficult to see the light at
the end of the tunnel.
Part of the insidiousness of
what happened in the Senate
Public Affairs Committee already
with this bill thank you Mr
thank you center this so in
opposition the amendment of
Senator o'neill you've just be
recognized on the amendment yes
thank you and and I I always
respect my colleague Senator
Ivey Soto however.
This bill has been vetted and
and you know there was presented
at our this is in no way shape
or form in my opinion is that
the whole nature of the bill
changed by these very reasonable
responsive changes to through an
ongoing dialogue which is what
we're this bill started with
with
at that time that summer I
reached out to all the victims
in the dust and you know this
this has been a lot a lot of.
Excellent work is gone into this
bill there's also a Senator Ivey
Soto I don't know if you were on
the criminal justice reform
subcommittee this all started
with the print presentation
years ago from a group from the
C. called the fair sentencing
project and so the notion that
that the whole bill changes that
we make when in my opinion is a
reasonable adjustment to to the
to the input we're getting from
the district attorney's and the
AG's office I don't have any
problem with that however I am a
little concerned that the
goalposts seem to be moving in
terms of the AG's office in the
dust I thought the dust were at
neutral that was my
understanding because of the
accommodation that that the
folks made in **** but I I all
these are good faith this is
comes out of the dialogue that
we do as legislators and I think
as a former victim advocate
victims need to be heard and I
personally don't have a problem
with fifteen years I don't.
As a as a way of of of hearing
these the pain in these victims
voices so I think this would
still be extremely and it would
be a be a remarkable it would
have a real impact on the
juvenile justice system it's in
line with a lot of our criminal
justice reform it is you know
Senator we often try to reach
some kind of consensus again I'm
a little concerned I hear what
you're saying about how this
keeps changing but on the other
hand these are reasonable very
very simple changes in response
to a very real concern so that's
all Senator ladies and gentleman
well the proposed.
Or any other discussions.
We're gonna take a roll call
vote on the proposed amendment
the proposed amendment deals
with page eight one twenty two
changing the word from two to
five.
One word change and wait on that
amendment please roll call.
Senator do.
Yes.
Senate Bill.
Yes.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator about this no.
The show for for on the
amendment.
The amendment is not opted into
discussion of the bill you.
Members of the committee.
I see the other Center Ivy Soto
discussion or motion R. Mr
chairman I have a proposed
amendment if the host could give
me R.
very privileges real quick.
All right Sir Ivey Soto I'll ask
you to note the time its five
fifty four you still have a
number of other issues before
the committee.
Currently I will try to be
expeditious about this one's not
model redundancies I'm getting a
lot of redundancy certainly so
Mr Chairman what I'm proposing
is on page ten it may lines
thirteen fourteen.
When start.
A new subsection aft's.
We would also re letter
afterwards.
What what state as is shown on
the screen.
If the victim a roll of a victim
of the offense for which the
offender is imprisonment entire
file written request for the
parole board asking not to be
contacted to submit a statement
in future hearings as provided
for by paragraph one of
subsection C. of the section I
completely agree victims have a
right.
Determine whether they what what
their PCS for some victims their
peace is knowing what is
happening in the case.
Our other victims of their
peace.
Is moving on in their lives and
not knowing.
The victim needs to be in charge
of that however.
We should not make that decision
on behalf of the victim but we
should always respect the
victim's choice in this matter.
And so therefore I do make note
of the amendments are.
That is on the screen.
thank you.
Thank you the host with the
return me to a full screen so I
can see members on the proposed
amendment I see Senator Duhigg
wishing to be recognized on the
amendment.
Senator do in thanks Mr chair
there needs to be some mechanism
for them to opt back in.
Meant that they they do you want
to be contacted at some other
point in the future.
Mr chair you start doing any
other discussion.
Many others all right Senator
Ivey Soto I just have a question
and is this really necessary
cannot gonna family not let
folks know they don't want to be
contacted more the case in that
said we need a law to do that.
Are actually up Mr chairman are
under victims bill of rights
they are required to inform the
victims.
And so in fact we do need a law
to the to our so that certain
victims can have the peace that
they would like to right thank
you I'm persuaded others on the
proposed amendment center
o'neill on the proposed
amendment.
Senator Neil yes I certainly
understand the up.
Where Senator Ivy Soto is coming
from the the problem is that I
have with this is that.
You know a family is going to be
extremely interested in what's
going on with the case.
And so yes this helps I guess
you know in terms of the
retirement is Asian but the way
the parole is you know when I
was the executive director of
the general probe order was my
job to make sure that the the
you know that the victims groups
were notified about a hearing it
was my job to make sure people
got their so I'm just a little
I'm just trying to you know I
can see on the one hand yes on
the other hand no we don't want
to re traumatize I think if we
can all agree on that so
whatever whatever we can do with
this legislation to your answer
that concern I'm for so let me
just hear the debate thanks
thank you anyone else on the
proposed amendment we'll go to a
roll call vote on Center Bach on
the amendment Mr Chairman
personal quickly but I'm sorry I
recognize I recognize Senator
Baca first place all.
I'm just real quick I'll be
brief Mr chair you know we're
we're just putting these people
in a heck of a position here
basically you know I I
understand Senator Ivey Soto is
concerned what is trying to do
and I really appreciate that but
however we're asking these
victims families to essentially
put their head in the sand don't
tell me anymore I don't want to
hear anymore what's going on
with this case and you know that
in itself is all so different to
a whole different mindset in a
whole different challenge for
them I would believe that's all
I have thank you Senator Baca
anyone else Senator Ivey Soto
I'm gonna come back again sorry
sort of stretch if there's
anybody else wants to get in on
this transfer on with all right
center Ivey Soto thank you Mr
chairman I I actually I I
appreciate Senator knows how
much is actually correct
I just added a sense of the
individual relevant to this
filed a request for students
subsection inform the parole
board
our desire to be for the future
hearings I think that's right
and and on the whole point is
precisely we should not be the
deciding this for the victims
the victim needs to be in
control.
The amendment on the screen is
amended for the committee.
There's been a change
modification of the amendment is
there any other discussion on
the proposed amendment for we
take a vote on the amendment.
Again I don't have a full screen
with the amendment on my screen
but that the US and the one also
should be recognized all right
we're ready for roll call vote
on the proposed amendment Emily
on the amendment please.
No.
Yes.
So yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator pro.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Yes.
That amendment is adopted.
Committee members.
Wants to forty seven as now
amended twice over.
Stewart Mr chairman the do
passed as amended on Senate bill
two forty seven.
Pat adequate discussion
opportunity for amendment.
I see no others Russian to get
into further discussion ready
for roll call vote on two forty
seven as amended repeatedly
Emily on the do passed motion
members roll call please.
Senator Baca.
Sir.
No.
Yes Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Yes yes.
Well.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes.
This yes.
Zero six one it would do passed
motion on two forty seven as
amended.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee members
the committee it so now a little
bit past six o'clock it's my
intention to take a ten minute
break to give our staff and all
of us a few moments will return
at fifteen minutes after the
hour six fifteen and we'll hear
one more bill tonight Senate
bill thirty two.
Of there are a number of
individuals who wish we
recognize so it may take us some
time but it's my intention to
complete our work by seven PM
that's going to be my goal and
I'm gonna try and hold the
presentations and speakers to
that goal Senator before we take
a recess.
I was just wanting to know how
many other bills so the rest of
these will be on the agenda for
tomorrow that's correct you may
recall the beginning of the of
the
Committee meeting today sent
seventy one was rolled over at
the request of one of the
committee members to do some
amendment work and Senate one
seventy nine was rolled over at
the request of center at a meal
at his request so we'll roll
those over and then those bills
that we have not heard today
will also be rolled into
Saturday please realize we
already had a pretty good agenda
for Saturday.
Which is why you all are getting
some resistance from may to
rolling bills over
but but we're making progress so
we'll we'll talk again at six
fifteen please be prompt of if
you're prob will get to a of
click sooner conclusion today
thank you Mr chairman.
Real quick before we go into our
recess I do think my
understanding is that there is
no opposition to Senate bill one
forty one R. and so if that is
the case of there's no
opposition if we could just take
a quick look at that after
thirty two.
We may be able to.
This is not what if there is
opposition
we'll see we'll see what the our
looks like center I have a
feeling that Senate thirty two
may take some time.
We'll see at fifteen after thank
you.
Yeah for about just don't worry
about me.
If the committee members would
please turn on your camera's
live to the extent you can a.
So I know that we've got a
quorum.
C. A. centers to consider
Stewart.
Lopez good you know I've I've
always noticing it's always the
women.
Their own time.
No.
No I get it.
Tell you before a very well
trained.
You can resend Senator he goes
my you got we train like right
on.
Well some woman someday it's
going to appreciate that very
much.
All right we've got a quorum of
the committee.
The next bill to be heard is
Senate bill thirty two.
Senator Gonzales and Senator
McKenna I don't see Senator
homes Senator Gonzales.
Senator McKenna I see you ready
to go Sir McKenna a reminder for
the way we do things and the
Senate Judiciary this year with
COVID and zoom conferencing you
will have up to fifteen minutes
to support your bill in any way
you choose to either with
experts for by going to the
audience I am relying on you
entirely to run your show so
it'll be up to you to cut people
off of their taking too much
time in your estimation it'll be
up to you to interrupt them and
it's up to you to recognize them
as you see fit but at fifty
minutes your opportunity for
promotion of your bill ends do
understand.
I do chairman thank you all
right very good and then after
that we'll hear of the ten
minutes of opposition to Senate
thirty two I have.
Well in in as proponents I have
about ten individuals who have
register themselves I assume
you'll recognize those as you
see fit.
Senator and then in opposition I
have about a dozen folks who are
identified in opposition they
have not I.
By me that they have the
spokesperson or a common person
to organize the presentation so
simply take that ten minutes and
divided by the number of
individuals and recognize them
very briefly to be heard in
opposition so Senator McKenna
it's now six twenty three you
have fifteen minutes Senate
thirty two.
Thank you chairman thank you
members of the committee good
afternoon and thank you for
inviting to hear SB thirty two
asked ended two one nine seven
four zero.
Dot one wildlife conservation
and public safety act I am the
co sponsor along with Senator
Gonzales he may join us later
chairman and committee members
is presently experiencing
internet connection problems.
Chairman and honored members I
have supported this legislation
for years in New Mexico before I
have the honor to serve along
with you in this in our amber I
served as a citizen lobbyist and
offered testimony.
Offer testimony.
Why our state needs to outlaw
the use of traps snares and
poisons on our public lands.
As a citizen lobbyist I
purchased a leg hold trap at in
New Mexico retailer for sixteen
dollars and ninety nine cents
plus tax I to this day cannot
open it without carefully using
my feet.
Now add needing to have to do
that physical ability under the
high stress circumstance of
trying to three three dog cat
yourself.
If something caught my leg hold
traps near were exposed to
sodium cyanide the pain is
severe.
Injuries included broken bones.
Sever tendons deep cuts
dislocated joints broken teeth
permanent maiming and more often
than not death.
Many non target wildlife species
are maimed and succumb to their
injuries due to a cold traps
snares poisons such as M. forty
point.
They are used by USDA wildlife
services.
The those species the non target
species include dogs cats
raccoons the Mexican gray wolf
which are supposed to be
protected under the Endangered
Species Act skunks deer elk and
others.
Welcome the amendment.
A few years ago I visited USDA
wildlife services in Washington
DC.
To discuss the use of like cold
traps snares and forty force the
W. Tommy at that time.
They work.
I knew at that time advocacy to
end the use of these barbaric
devices would entail a lot more
time.
As a society we should not
condone this barbaric practice.
Thank you chairman and committee
members I now would like to
welcome miss Jessica Johnson she
is legal counsel for our
protection New Mexico.
And she will serve as our
subject matter expert we then
have to the seven individuals I
believe more supporters and will
abide by their time thank you Mr
Sen.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
chairman committee members my
name is Jessica Johnson I'm the
chief government affairs officer
for animal protection voters and
I really appreciate the
opportunity to come before you
tonight I just want to take some
time to describe what Senate
bill thirty two does and also
what it does not do.
So the bill prohibits all traps
including leg hold traps body
gripping traps and cage traps as
well as snares and wildlife
poisons these prohibitions only
apply to public land which is a
defined term in the bill is so
it does not include private land
it also explicitly excludes
sovereign Indian nation tribal
and public lands as well of that
as well as the inside of any
structures that may be lawfully
placed on public land.
There is then also a list of
eight exemptions or exceptions
listed in the bill and so those
include adjusted clarifying
exception that this prohibition
applies to traps and it does not
apply to any other lawful
hunting fishing archery falconry
equipment or any other
implemented in hand
it also excludes that the
prohibitions don't apply to the
taking of birds fish or rodents
not classified as for bears so
any rodents that aren't beavers
muskrats and nutria.
There is an exception for a
government entity taking action
used to protect human health and
safety by using the prohibited
devices the department of game
and fish US fish and Wildlife
Service and Conservancy
districts can still use these
devices for ecosystem management
which is also defined term in
the bill there's an exception
for bona fide scientific
research also it defined term in
the bill
there is also an exception for
the department of game and fish
responding to nuisance or
depredation complaints so in
those cases the department
itself or its agent can utilize
of non lethal traps or snares to
address those complaints so
those devices allowable would
include cage traps let hold
traps and slid snares.
It would still not be allowed
for them to use body gripping
Act kill traps or just
regulating next years.
The final two exceptions there
is a case traffic section in
order to and this is for anyone
to protect their own property
crops or livestock that are on
public lands or to recover lost
or feral domestic animals and
finally at that there is an
exception for an enrolled member
of an Indian tribe nation or
pueblo when trapping is
conducted for religious or
ceremonial purposes the bill
does establish misdemeanor
penalties for violations of the
law and the law takes effect
April first of twenty twenty two
so that would I keep the
effective date of this bill in
line with the right regulatory
here that the department of game
and fish follows so we'll go
with that I will stand at to be
available for questions and I
will allow the committee to hear
from others.
Thank you miss Johnson.
Mr chairman and committee
members we have missed Mr Eddie
Estrada.
Thank you chairman said about
this and members of this
committee for taking my public
testimony today my name is Eddie
Estrada and I'm a resident of
Dona Ana County here and at the
New Mexico and I work for the
endangered species coalition.
A lot of my work is centered
around bringing awareness around
the endangered Mexican gray wolf
and protecting this imperiled
species it's one of the most
imperilled rules in the country
and with only eighty seven
wheels here in the wild in New
Mexico they're facing many
challenges and traps are a huge
obstacle for recovery efforts
here in New Mexico forty six
Mexican gray wolves have been
trapped over the last two
decades.
Eighteen of those ranger for
required amputations and seven
resulted in death to put this
issue into a bigger context in
our neighboring state of Arizona
where trapping is already banned
on public lands only four wheels
have been injured and traps so
the difference is this.
The detrimental impacts that
traps have on public lands it's
clear and so I'm humbly asking
the members of this committee to
please support SB thirty two and
help endangered species across
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you Mr Estrada next we
have doctor show loot and.
Please forgive me if I
mispronounce your name.
No that was perfect thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members I live in New Mexico and
the National Guard or
conservation manager for project
priority in the former wildlife
biologist for the New Mexico
State Land Office I also come
from three generations of
farmers as a PhD scientist I
state confidently science
doesn't support legal trapping
as wildlife management.
Water conservation understands
the biodiversity and ecosystem
health and function is best
managed by protecting natural
process sees and cycles trapping
is management is a can the
bloodletting as medicine
biologists might have one spot
trapping accomplish something
but we now know trying to manage
wildlife like cash crops is
harmful the ecosystems jabbing
will not affect populations
coyotes nor do we needed to they
self regulate and have done so
for millennia driving does
however from populations of less
common imperiled species likes
with fox and Lobos is just
mentioned the best available
science points to nonlethal
methods to prevent livestock
wildlife conflict finally we
don't need science to tell
strapping is wrong the unending
instances where the public
encounter straps is evidence
enough we support Roxy's law to
ban public land strapping.
Thank you doctor route next we
have Mister decker to lido
indigenous community organizer
go ahead Mr Toledo.
Mister chairman Senator our
community is not the way to.
Very good thank you next we have
Mister bell at Incheon is a
ranch I'm catching County.
Mr chair members of the economic
committee bill is there he
muted and not speaking.
Mr Addington can you hear us you
can speak now.
Hi can you hear me now ma'am.
Yes.
Yes thank you madam chair yes my
name is bill Addington we have
to we have the clarify ranch
your is your box is also own
land in battle New Mexico impact
on County on the fourth
generation rancher and former.
We've never had a desire or have
ever allowed in my family my
grandfather any of us to allow
trapping our ranch we are
protected office and watch our
new barn cats during calving
season coyotes and other
predators usually only kill
livestock when there's no other
game they can usually eat such
as in a drought that's the time
you want to watch a cat.
While I have been regulating
themselves for millennia.
I always and not lines actually
help price species by killing
the week second battles with
strength of the game gene pool
of the species that cry on.
Finally.
Personal experience within forty
four the call caught Clio
together that we signed.
Thirty eight special card I was
nearly killed by it when I
picked it up on our ranch then
they're sitting probably fifteen
years place by wildlife services
the federal wildlife services it
went off in my hand if not for
the win that day I would be
speaking to you here today I'm
confident if it opened up cuts
in my hand and that was signed
I had in my hand so I'm lucky to
be here today and that's why our
one reason I'm so adamant and
passionate about eliminating in
forty forced I submitted
testimony to Peter doxology who
has a had a bill in Congress to
stop this on federal land when I
support this will wholeheartedly
thank you.
Thank you Mr Addington next we
have to Garrett down across from
the wild.
Good evening Mister chair
members the committee chairman
across New Mexico while I'm a
multi generational Pueblo lance
hunter and angler I also ran a
trap one with my big brother's
little boys so I know a thing or
two about trapping.
The fatal flaw with snares and
Michael McConnell bear traps on
public lands that they all have
the potential to
indiscriminately catch me and
kill wildlife.
The potential for mismanagement
of wildlife populations and
increased mishaps with pet
owners is simply too great to
continue utilizing trapping as
legitimate method of wildlife
stewardship.
Trapping flies in the face of
the north American conservation
model for two reasons one of its
primary tenant supposes the
commercialization
commercialization of wildlife
out of the public trust it also
opposes wanton waste of wildlife
they are recreational trapping
on public lands need to come to
an end is an avid hunter and
conservationist.
It's all about our reputation
this point men women I want the
court of public opinion did you
just is ethical humane and
responsible my craft.
The support sample thirty two
thank you.
Thank you Mr Haasan I'm next we
have missed Mary Catherine right
from this year.
Hello thanks committee members
Mr chair thank you all right
activity your money hello.
right right funding until we're
doing some technical work over
money I'm sorry about that.
Etcetera etcetera cannot remind
me we're we're we right now with
your speakers I know yet chair
of an across the.
Yes and yet sure
For some reason I'm not I'm not
hearing.
Semacam.
Senator McKenna yes here said
it's fine I'm sorry give me just
a moment please okay.
If the zoom operator could look
for his name.
Okay well we're doing that
perhaps miss Mary Catherine
right could from the Sierra Club
could speak all right and I've
been keeping track you have a
four minutes left in the a lot
of time etcetera so.
We'll have a please direct the
zoom host to we want to have
admitted and four minutes to
complete.
Very good and I do see Mr Jason
Thompson there okay Dr Thompson
could you speak and then my last
expert will be miss merry
Catherine right thank you
chairman.
At thank you Mr chairman members
can you hear me.
Yes.
I think it I'd like to be a
doctor some day but
that was agreement aims Jason
Thompson I'm a I'm here at the
register lobbyist for the New
Mexico veterinary medical
association we appreciate the
Sanchez and bringing this bill
forward I know there's been a
lot of a add comment placed on
this so in the interest of time
we just really appreciate them
bringing this bill forward and
veterinary association stands in
full support of the bill and we
urge the committee's passage
thank you very much for your
time thank you.
Thank you our last is miss right
go right ahead Liz Ray.
Hello Committee members Mr
chairman thank you I'm Mary
Catherine ray I live in the
outback of Sikora county and I
volunteer with the Sierra Club
and track the New Mexico when
people reported dog being
tracked a trap for U. N. M. dot
org their email comes to me the
panic the dog screens the
difficulty opening the trap and
the loss of peace of mind and
reluctance to return to the
place that happened are all
common features of these
reports.
I've also had to rescue my own
dog from the trap my least dog
from a legal track on National
Forest land near our home new
regulations adopted last year
with a change nothing about what
happened she and I were both
injured now I don't return to
that place in winter it might as
well say keep out because I
never want to hear my dog scream
like that again.
Some people have worse outcomes
including incurring veterinary
and medical expenses our
experiences belie the claim that
traps are selected and to me
they are nicer please support SB
thirty two thank you all.
Thank you so McKenna that
completes the time about it for
support well Mexico to
opposition I'm gonna read the
names of those who have
registered to speak in
opposition to the bill.
and you'll be admitted in this
order by our web bow's please
note a couple of things if you
have been watching the
proceedings.
On the webcast
on I suppose there's been
conference have you been on a
webcast you need to discontinue
that connection immediately if
you're on both of them at the
same time we'll get feedback
will get echo you'll be on a
delayed response and here
testimony will have to mute and
and not recognized because it
it'll be incomprehensible to us
so the other thing too is when I
recognize you you need to you
your microphone probably if not
we'll pass you over and go to
the next person there may or may
not be time at the end for us to
come back to you.
With all of that said all
recognize each of the following
individuals for one minute given
the number that have asked to be
recognized so in this order
Joshua Stevenson tied Jackson
Tiffany Rivera Ellery Tucker
Williams and Jacob of we have
time to recognize each of you
for one minute and then we'll
see where that takes us the time
is now six forty one we're
hearing opposition to the bill
will start with Joshua Stevenson
I see here here and here my
phone is open so you're
recognized for one minute.
Mr Stevenson.
Mr Stevenson your Mike is open
and we see you in our zoom
meeting I'm not hearing you Sir.
All right we'll go to the next
person tied Jackson.
Hi Jackson please yes Sir can
you hear me I can Mr Jackson
recognized for up to one minute
Sir good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Todd Jackson I'm speaking on
behalf of the New Mexico
conservation officers
association today amber opposed
to this bill all the legislature
heard this bill two years ago
and given the department
direction to address dropping
related complex as a result.
The commission out some of the
strictest dropping laws in the
nation and those laws went into
effect this season
are anecdotally all right now
what our officers are saying in
the field and it's too early to
tell for sure but what are
officers of staying on the field
is that this seems these laws
seem to be working and the
conflicts have been reduced.
We have some we have a lot of
concerns with this bill
this trapping is supported by a
number of wildlife management or
wildlife biologist associations
and I don't have time to list
those however it's readily
available and finally one of the
major concerns that the officers
association have is that this
will further degrade relations
between law enforcement and
public and NMC I believe that
this bill is unconstitutional.
Conservation officer will be
placed in a no win situation
where they either must ignore
potentially illegal activity or
they must verify the ethnicity
of those correct rating on
public land thank.
Thank.
This Rivera.
Mr Chairman can you hear me yes.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
evening Techni Rivera registered
lobbyists for New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau the bill
before you up propose is to
remove at extremely important
management tool that would
greatly affect the livestock
industry and the viability of R.
calf crops as it prohibits the
use of it an extremely effective
management option for public
land lessees it's just as
important to protect our
domestic animals and their
babies as it is equally
important to protect our
livestock the cattle industry
contributes nine hundred ninety
three point eight million
dollars to the New Mexico
economy and is ranked second for
agricultural cash receipts in
the state the best way to reduce
public trapper conflict is
through equal education and
outreach to both parties we must
ensure that each party is taking
on the required responsibility
to safely and beneficially
utilise public lands which
belong to all of us we recommend
granting additional time to the
game commissions rules which
were recently adopted so that
they can read their full
benefits thank you for the
opportunity to comment thank you
very much Ellery Tucker Williams
followed by J..
In that order please Ellery
Tucker Williams.
Chair members of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
comment on Senate bill thirty
two my name is Valerie and I'm
the rocky mountain states senior
coordinator for the
congressional sportsmen's
foundation appearing before you
today opposition of Senate bill
thirty two over fifteen thousand
people have signed an online
petition against Senate bill
thirty two and each of you have
received a coalition letter
signed by twenty six
organizations have both the
state and national level
opposing this bill highlighting
just how detrimental Senate bill
thirty two will be to wildlife
management in the state if this
bill were to pass the department
came officials ability to
utilize trapping as a necessary
a critical tool and wildlife
management would be severely
limited and would no longer be
able to rely on trappers for
their system to population
control data collection
depredation mitigation or human
wildlife conflict resolution it
is submitted by trappers
provides information overall
population numbers sex ratio age
structure disease problems and
numerous other factors that
influence the health and
sustainability of wildlife
populations without the
participation by the trapping
community the department will be
forced to take person and
funding away from on the ground
conservation priorities to
continue the central yet basic
data collection efforts in the
state between twenty thank you
Mr all right I think you're on
this was it was Williams I'm
sorry Jacob hub for.
Mr chair take a trip of COVID
not present all right the next
is Kerry Romero.
Care Meryl.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Kerry
**** Romero registered lobbyists
for the New Mexico council of
outfitters and guides we stand
in strong opposition to this
bill it is overly broad and
unnecessary the concerns
expressed by the sponsor an
expert have already been
addressed by the state came came
commission for rural.
It would be one thing if this
bill were attempting to codify
that rule into law but this bill
goes way above and beyond by
creating a blanket trapping ban
on all New Mexico public lands
much of New Mexicos public lands
are very very rural.
These areas never see a hiker
biker or a bird watcher trapping
is the only recreational
activity taking place in these
rural areas.
Additionally much of New Mexicos
public land is checkerboard with
private land boundaries and
extremely difficult for the
general public to access these
lands should not be included in
this bill additionally it
banning trapping will not
eliminate the need for trappers
trapping is a wildlife
management tool used by every
single wildlife agency in the
country all this bill does is
change trapping efforts from a
source of revenue to an expense
this bill eliminates the game
and fish's ability to generate
license revenue from trappers
while at the same time
substantially increasing the
agency's cost burden to manage
wildlife please.
Thank you very much
do we have Michelle frost
Maynard followed by Lauren
Patterson if you're with us
Olmec wrecked recognized
Michelle frost manner next yes
Sir thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee
Michelle frost manner speaking
on behalf of New Mexico cattle
growers and more growers we
oppose Senate bill thirty two.
We track predators to protect
our livestock in raging
infrastructure which is our so
economic and our livelihood we
are the individuals closest to
the land with a working
knowledge of impacts and control
nuisance wildlife populations
impose.
Trapping is an effective
management tool which extends to
urban areas in our state as well
USDA aphis field offices provide
wildlife damages damage
management services on a hundred
and forty nine properties last
month the loan dealing with
nineteen different species
including coyote pocket gophers
ravens that was causing property
livestock and agricultural
damage the Albuquerque district
alone loan pre K. traps to make
mitigate Nick nuisance
complaints about skunks that
we're beginning to and have a
cooperatives property for these
reasons and reasons previously
stated we stand opposed to
Senate bill thirty two.
All right thank you miss frost
ms Maynard Lauren Patterson
please.
Are you with us Mr chair Lauren
Pattison is not here right and
earlier I had tried repeatedly
to recognize Joshua Stevenson I
think I see him still here he
was having difficulty Mr
Stevenson very recognize of the
you yourself you have one minute
your.
Mr service chairman.
Judiciary Committee my name is
Joshua Stephens and I am the
district for director New Mexico
trappers Association we keep
hearing over and over follow the
science with this bill SB thirty
two I urge you to follow the
science the American fish and
wildlife Association with north
American model of wildlife
conservation support regulated
trapped the rules set forth by
New Mexico department of game
and fish follow best management
practices who studies have been
improved.
Designs since nineteen eighties
and continue to this day we
strongly urge you to oppose SB
thirty two.
Thank you Stephenson all right
we're.
Included with our advocacy in
opposition will now go to
members of the committee.
Members of the committee of you
show me by a shop as a witch to
be recognized up which on my
list.
members the committee.
Questions or comments
discussion.
Many at all I see Senator Pirtle
Senator Stewart.
let's see if I see anyone else.
Berlin store then Ivey Soto.
Anyone else I will take that
order Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee of
hopefully there was an
amendment.
Email to the committee.
I think it was email to Emily.
This this is your amendment
Senator.
And Mister chair members the
committee yes.
Right we have it on our screen
Senator explaining.
So you know the intent of this
legislation legislation Mr chair
members of the committee is for
you know areas of public land
where people have dogs and
things that could accidentally
get in some of these traps so
this just ensures that we're
talking about the public land
that is accessible to the public
New Mexico's unique we we see
you know school sections that
are on the middle of a ranch and
and want to ensure that that a
rancher can can
use the same management
practices on private land that
he can on on a public piece of
land that's not even accessible
by domestic animals or or hikers
are people so this just ensures
that the intent of the bill is
maintained
and and that's that's all this
amendment does Mr chair members
of the committee.
Right Senator Pirtle the
amendment
What the bill only get it in
context.
Center I'm trying to understand
your enrollment in context if we
can put the amendment back up on
the screen.
You're you're proposing to
insert afterwards structures.
Yes chair is it is after the
word structures that's a portion
of the definition of public land
where it starts to describe what
is not considered public.
just defines that that
lan that might be public but not
open to the public would not be
involved in this so that
the areas where as we've heard
this to be called Roxy's law
would be the questions that that
that this applies to but when we
have one section of the L. M.
within a private ranch that that
that's not the the public land
that's that that this would
apply to right we're on
amendment members the committee
for discussion in the I had
earlier seen centers during
center Ivey Soto to be
recognized I believe on the bill
but on the amendment itself
members of the committee.
On the amendment.
So.
Senator Stewart your recognize
Mr Chairman can we go to the
sponsor and her expert about
whether it's friendly or not yes
thank you for the reminder I
neglected to do that Senator
McKenna proposed amendment
please would you describe it as
a favorable or unfavorable.
Thank you chairman and
I was just confirming with my
subject miss Jessica Johnson we
deem that unfriendly and I would
like for her to explain why if
you don't mind chairman very
briefly please.
You Mr chair I I think
you know that when I look at
there are definition of of
public land
I feel like it's straight for it
I'm just not sure exactly how
much additional acreage would
then be open to trapping
if Senator Pirtle the amendment
were adopted I would also say
that you know.
Protection of at the public and
their pets is one aspect of the
bill but it is not the only
reason why advocates are pushing
for the bill there is a desire
to also you know protect
wildlife of from trapping on
public lands.
Senator you have for.
That's all Mr chairman I just
wanted to hear from the experts
from the sponsor on the
amendment thank you thank you
for the reminder members of the
committee on the amendment.
Hey further discussion on the
amendment.
Thanks saying we have a motion
for the amendment by Senator
Pirtle.
Mr chairman I move to table the
amendment.
Right here with the non
debatable motion to table family
which you but for the roll for
us on a table in motion motion a
stable.
Senator.
I
I'm sorry.
Yes.
All.
A moment a moment please let me
start the roll call over.
Let me start over first of all
some of you have your Mike's
open I know you need to have a
vote to vote we have heard
Michael but would you turn down
the music or the TV or whatever
else is going on in the
background to because when you
open your Mike we're getting
everything else that you're
doing in the meeting so you've
got background music or things
please either turn it down or or
vote your Mike only long enough
to both please and we will start
again were on a table in motion.
Senator do Hank yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
So.
Okay.
Sorry about.
Yes.
No.
Hello.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator bonkers yes.
That amendment is tabled not
adopted to the bill.
back to the
Yes that I have wrecked over a
request to be recognised sent
Apryl you would still have the
floor followed by Senator then
Senator Ivy Soto center pearl.
Senator Pirtle has disconnected
Senator Stewart followed by
Senator Ivey Soto.
Mr chairman I move a do pass.
I know you're not ready for but
that's what I'm ready for.
Well it's not that I'm not ready
for it Senator Stewart I try to
allow for opportunity for some
discussion.
But I'll come back to you for
motions in a moment Senator
Lopez was at a second or is that
a discussion that's the second
so we have a motion and a second
is there further discussion by
members of the committee Senator
Ivey Soto.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and also chairman handout this
summer we cannot.
I do have a few questions on the
bill and as a review of the bill
of the R. so my.
I guess I'm there's a couple
things on this list in a
confused about.
And and that might just simply
needs a little bit of
focus or tightening so on page
three begin online three.
I see the definition of
governmental our government
entity.
And our so Mr chairman and
center McKenna.
Our government and the needs a
local state or federal
governments binary agents and it
goes on.
Up or we will the chairman are
which are we able to regulate
the federal government.
Chairman and senator Ivey Soto
I'm I would like to defer.
Question too the expert Mr
Johnson.
Yes thank you for that question
Senator Ivey Soto so I in in
cases such as the as the US and
and how it's played out in other
states which have enacted at the
spanner similar bands such as
Colorado or Arizona there's a
federal agency called wildlife
services that as a matter of
practice and policy has
respected state's laws when they
pro headsets
at entities from engaging in and
using traps there's a place and
so yes and it in effect we do
have that ability.
Mr chairman Senator McKenna and
and that was Johnson this
District respecting and
regulate.
And and and so really has a
frankly as a as a matter of
federalism we don't have the
right to regulate the federal
government's.
And and so well I'm accepting
those cases I spoke for the
program would have explicitly
is invited to do so I'm I'm not
I'm not aware of that happening
in this case whether they
respected is different from
being regulated by.
And so
I'm I'm going to
And then
You also have.
Down below lands minister but in
that states under public land
grants administered by the nexus
for service the federal bureau
of land management the National
Park Service United States
Department of Defense.
Pretty sure the masses
from an offense is really
interested in and one.
Our ability to regulate them.
So
I know it's it it is our.
It is of some concern to me that
that that this feels like we are
over reaching beyond our our
statutory authority.
I am being informed by one of
our analysts.
That that one does not include
the part our friends there may
be there may be a level of
regulation that is permitted on
this issue.
But the robin Defense is not
among those.
So certainly on that one Mr
chairman on page three line is
twenty one or twenty two.
I would I would move that we
strike the United States
department of finance.
from the bill.
Sure we cannot hear you.
I'm sorry Senator Ivy Soto you
for a proposed amendment and
looking for let's see Senator
McKenna you'll you'll
characterize that as from your
own family first well please.
I'm want to confirm a chairman
and the thank you senator this
Soto I want to confirm the the
rationale for deleting the
United States Department of
Defense please.
Mr Chairman so we cannot we
don't have that forty.
So we can are we waiting on you.
Yeah I'm I will I would like to
ask Miss Mister Johnson she
could offer a perspective to
this.
Mr chair recognized.
Mr chair and Senator
you know I I will just say that
you know I think there there
from what I know at what it what
I believe there is some military
owned land that is you know
wildlife live there the public
may gain access to those lands
and I I do know that other
states have applied there
trapping bands to at lands owned
by the department of defense and
those provisions have been they
have not been stricken as
unconstitutional so
I I do believe that we have the
legal authority to do so and I
know that that the FIR did
address some of these points
So it would it would be
preferable to keep the language
and but that's just my own
little perspective.
And.
The I'm sorry I hope we're money
to my immunity you are muted
yeah probably no we're we're
enjoying some technical issues
over here on my end at the
moment from Senator Ivy Soto is
proposed amendment.
Mr chairman I will I will I will
note that what are.
analysts at as has provided me
from sixteen CYFD actual six six
sixty eight.
ET J. through I'm.
R. is that is that are the the
secretary of the interior.
R. is it allowed to
find such.
Authority pursuant to state law
and are allow that but the
department of defense is in a
different department of the
federal government.
What what can I take from that
Senator Ivey Soto that the that
the authority does not extend to
the problems it's.
We're still on the amendment let
me look for other committee
members on the amendment with
questions or comments.
Give me a moment please Iran
apologetic apologetic but.
Right I think for whatever
reason cannot now see members of
the committee those on the
amendment wishing to be
recognized.
We see the hands.
On the.
We are not have sort.
What.
There being no other discussion
will take a vote on the
amendment.
Chairman and may I say something
of course.
Thank you chairman I'm white
sands missile range is that
department of defense authority
purview.
As.
All right I think I'm back with
you all in great apologies.
Sen Macatawa sure if we're your
question again with.
Yes thank you chairman yeah my
question was one of confirmation
that white sands missile range
is under the purview of the
department of defense and my
subject matter expert said yes
and my concern is that is a vast
piece of property and I'd be
really really concerned about
how many bears and other non
target animals
could be harmed maimed killed
I really would want those
agencies to work under humane.
trapping techniques.
I think you were on a you passed
motion for an amendment one
amendment Senator Senator Ivey
Soto.
We'll do it by roll call vote.
Mr chairman for about.
Senator so yes I'll just point
out that when we pass laws in
New Mexico is not based on what
we wish people would do but what
we have the authority that to
help them to.
We don't have the authority we
just don't have the authority.
Roll call vote family on the
amendment.
Now.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Stewart.
No.
Yes.
Senator Munoz
Well Sir.
Emily the vote forty two hello.
Anymore is not adopted.
Mister right I do have a
question about the policy on
page six winds five to seven.
If you could explain to me.
R. Y. it is.
This is not apply it so we so we
we clarified of this does not
apply.
Two lands held in trusts.
For innovation tribe or pueblo.
So they're scrapping allowed on
land so the prospect in mission
from level.
Why then why do we allow them
dropping by enrolled members of
federally recognized Indian
nation tribe or pueblo on on non
native plants what is conducted
solely for religious or
ceremonial purposes.
The short answer is because
they're sovereign nations.
Restaurants that are because I
understand their sovereign
nations in terms of what happens
on Indian nation tribe or pueblo
lands.
What this bill does is that's
explicitly permits.
And all members of the nation
proper Pueblo to conduct the
very propping you're complaining
about on non innovation probable
let's.
Very good and chairman and
Senator Ivey Soto because I have
I was not present when that
portion of the legislation was
worked through I'm gonna defer
to Mr Johnson because she has
that institutional knowledge
that I don't.
Thank you Senator I Mr chairman
and Senator Ivey Soto as a this
is one of the provisions of the
bill that is a very New Mexico
flavor it is unique to us and it
was included as part of our
ongoing discussions for many
many years with stakeholders and
we landed on this because it is
nearly identical language to an
exception written into federal
law at the migratory bird treaty
act
allows a.
Rules members of tribes nations
and problems to possess eagle
feathers and to take eagles
where we're now other
individuals can't and so there
is precedent for this it is
constitutional and that is why
we included at.
And and and and I guess I would
just say that I mean I I.
The definition of public land on
page three.
The unit line twenty three says
public land does not include.
Big of a line twenty four land
belonging to or held in trust
for an animation probable so
clearly trapping is allowed on
an Indian nation tribe of of.
Okay for.
Thank we say we have the
provision of doing on public
land.
That's a line used online twenty
one on public land the public
land does not include.
And imagine travel bottles.
But them but then we allow
enrolled members of federally
recognized admissions tribes or
pueblos.
On land but like I said that is
clearly not public lands.
That is not in the nation tribal
public.
And and I guess the the concern
that I have is.
That that we heard testimony.
Senator McKenna by your experts.
About the horrific nature of the
straps.
About the horrific consequences
of these press.
About about the horrific use of
of the poisons with the straps.
And yet we're then saying and I
get recognizing the sovereignty
of other nations tribes or
problems.
But then we're inviting members
of emissions rise above those.
To perform the very heinous
activities.
Our land that is not of Indian
nations tribes or pueblos.
About that we're disallowing.
non indigenous people but you're
not in business you can't do it
if you're in business you can't
do it in the very same place in
the very same at and so seven we
can I guess I I I would ask you
what is the public policy
behind.
Chairman and Senator Ivey Soto.
I'm the question is what is the
public policy about that.
Well Mr chairman and and and and
certainly cannot if we're if
we're creating an exception.
Thank if you're not native you
can't just do it but if you are
native you can do it why would
we create that double standard
on land that does not that is
not made of land.
Chairman and senator Ivey Soto
again I'd like to defer to Mr
Johnson.
Thank you at Mr chair and
senator Ivey Soto you so yes to
directly addressed your question
but the public policy is to
provide that.
Balance between you know the the
prohibitions of the bill and
also the government's I clearly
establish interest in preserving
our native American religious
and ceremonial purposes so what
this exception is not is just a
blanket ability for anyone of
native American and at that.
just a necessity to to trap for
and and sell the for is to make
a profit this is very specific
and so you know to harken back
to how the US fish and Wildlife
Service administers this
exception for the use of eagles
in eagle feathers there is an
annual application process is
pretty straightforward that has
of the individuals register
their identification what tried
their rules with and what
ceremony they are conducting
this activity for and so that
that is the policy behind this
exception and so Mr chairman and
Senator McKenna could you.
Please educate me as to the
religious ceremony.
Indigenous religious ceremony
that requires.
The R. the use.
R. I. traps snares and wildlife
poison.
For purposes of capturing
injuring or killing an animal.
You are doing.
Chairman and senator Ivey Soto.
I'm.
To get to your question I want
to refer back to what Mr Johnson
just said about working with the
department of interior.
I did that a number of years so
that I could have my own start
my own regalia.
Of four needs went when I dance
R. and on the pueblo.
because for years I have been
borrowing regalia from relatives
and friends.
And and so I think this was
about nineteen ninety one so
that I submitted my application
for an eagle.
And it took some time but I did
get my eagle and the way these
raptors are found sometimes
their found because of
Conflict with power lines
they're hit by vehicles
unfortunately some are
succumbing to lead poisoning so
anyway the department of
interior follows that list of
those.
The requests and paperwork is
filed.
And then the raptors sent.
so to get to your question of.
Why are
Why are for bears in New Mexico.
tracked.
I'm.
So I've never tractors I don't
believe it I think it's very
barbaric.
I'm not going to representative
any tried it this year in except
for my own.
And and I think so and I respect
You know it's one of those
situations you have to agree to
disagree on your fellow
indigenous people.
So I'm I'm not going to offer a
blanket reason of why they do
what they do.
I just know that.
I wouldn't do it and that I
follow the federal regulations
of
Of asking for a protected
species carcass.
and it worked for me and it it
can work for other indigenous
people and I would like to offer
Mr Johnson sometime if she wants
to expand on what I said.
thank you and Mister chair at
Senator McKenna I I think you
spoke very eloquently about and
I don't have anything further to
add.
Mr chairman and so we cannot
would you.
What I mean I will note that
there's a there's a big
difference between the federal
process where you actually
bother application you you know
that's you you did it with them
with them the opposite provided
this is the this is simply a
blanket exception from the rule
together but could you could you
please educate me as to any
ceremony.
Any religious or ceremonial
purpose.
From any in addition proper
Pablo.
R. that that that requires the
use of this heinous practice.
If you can but you can tell us
about.
Chairman and senator Ivey Soto
that is private religious
information that I will not
disclose in a public space.
What can you tell me which
Indian nation tribe or pueblo.
I have some some.
Chairman and Senator Ivey Soto I
will not.
And so I will just I will not be
able to support this bill.
And if if we're not doing this
in a manner that that actually
is consistent or that provides
the the transparency necessary
the very transparency that you
went through to get your eagle
feathers which is not being
provided for in this bill thank
you.
Chairman.
Two passed.
Chairman.
The chairman I we can't hear you
I don't think you can hear us.
Current events if you can hear
us please.
Okay there's a through pass
motion from Senator Stewart.
Senator Lopez.
Mr.
Like.
The.
Would you like Emily call the
roll.
Okay.
Wait.
There is.
With their.
My.
All right can you hear me yes.
I'm now Phillip Lara going did
you all might recognize.
Wanted to pass motion I saw a
second from Senator Lopez.
Chairman.
Before you take the vote
it's actually necessary McKenna
Senator McKenna but you're not
have been asked that question is
there's all recognize you for
just a moment to please run a do
pass motion well we have an
amendment my experts show that
we sent in on February ninth.
All right the our being what it
is
Senator McKenna.
I want this bill I want I want
to build an ark Committee.
Was that one.
Working on.
There was.
February ninth.
The amendment has been with us I
won't.
Sir McKenna do have a sponsor on
the committee for your
amendment.
Chairman of clarifying you're
asking do I have a sponsor.
Just a moment please.
You'll hear me.
At night but I can hear you now.
All right Sir do you have a
sponsor on the committee for
your amendment.
I'm I would like to ask Senator
Duhigg to sponsor for me.
Mr chair yes all sponsor
it's a very good moves an
amendment this is seven point
zero point one as I understand
it is that right.
Two one nine seven four zero
point one yes.
All right we have a motion for
adoption of that amendment
district we see them thank you.
Senator can you please explain
amendment.
Sen McKenna your microphone is
muted.
Pardon me page two line nine.
After the directing traffic want
to insert.
Does not include corral.
No I I we would be we're reading
that what is explanation please.
Your muted again I'm again I'm
here chairman
I would like to defer to Mr
Johnson.
Care
There was
some concern that that the bill
would impact corrals that are
used to capture light livestock
and horses on public land
and just to clarify that that's
that's the purpose of this
language that this this bill
does not affect the use of
Corrales.
Members the committee on the
amendment first of all let me
states the Sanchez amendment so
sort of friendly amendment
members the committee on the
amendment.
I move to pass on the amendment
Mr chairman.
Then Senator Lopez can I guess
there's a second area all right
unseen no other need for
discussion on the amendment.
We'll take a roll call of the
moment please and only.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
You yes Senator this yes.
Senator that amount was adopted.
We're back to the bill Mr
chairman I move the do passed as
amended on Senate bill thirty
two.
Circumpolar that we're do pass
Emily please take the role to
pass as amended.
Senator okay yes center I'm so.
No ma'am.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Thank you yes.
Senator Vargas yes.
Chairman.
What do passed motion.
Committee members not the our
seven twenty seven.
I will stand in recess there
will be an amended agenda
showing the bills rolled over
from today will meet tomorrow at
one thirty.
Please plan to be with us all
about the same time tomorrow six
thirty or so my goal will be to
make enough progress that we do
not have to meet on Sunday but
please leave open that
possibility all right.
One thirty two more stability
than thank you very much thank
you chairman and members of the
committee.
