Representative.
I'm here today to speak about
the topic of gun.
safety.
Or whatever.
For the legislation is squarely
records legislature for the so.
The importance.
That follows legislation trying
to address the issue of guns is
a realization that we have is
this report receive news station
on matters going on some but
this this report this report
membership.
In recent years
So with that new law firms
reporter for patients that.
Will we
have a framework for the work.
You for.
So that.
Staff.
It's very brief I most.
Why work brings us here today on
the stuff.
Los.
The national rifle association
so each of the last two
addresses for.
No I I for forty five minutes we
do bills.
So sometimes we.
Fauria from up in the hot seat.
This on.
Okay so I am going to be
discussing the tent the recent
very recent brewing decisions
and how that where that puts us
and then I think that the the
presenters will talk about
decisions and from various court
after that that that are
affecting lot presently
in order to understand brewing
there's really a very short
history that you have to
understand which is in two
thousand eight justice clearer I
for opinion and in Heller that
said that the second amendment
is an individual right.
How are concerned Washington DC
law so two years later the court
said and it is an individual
right that has been in McDonald
was the case same five four
split that said that the
individual right.
My god.
All right.
I can do that and make sure it's
it's might not even be on says
it's on.
Okay.
How the that I will do that.
So we had a Heller which was a
decision in two thousand eight
that said that the second
amendment was an individual
right it wasn't a rate attached
to Alicia it was an individual
personal right to keep and bear
arms a twenty ten K. then said
that was also an individual
right incorporated to the states
and limiting states and
municipalities
like any other individual right
that had been incorporated
through the Fourteenth Amendment
this one would be to that's the
McDonnell decision it was also a
school yet a five four.
So that was the last time the
Supreme Court really weighed in
on the second amendment and till
New York state rifle and pistol
association the brew in which
all just called brew and that
was heard on last November third
of twenty twenty one and the
decision was published June
twenty third twenty twenty two.
So brewing involved plaintiffs
who are challenging the New York
state law on the issuance of a
of concealed carry permits New
York had a law that permitted
concealed carry if the person
requesting it could make a
proper showing of danger and in
many counties that was just all
you had to say was I I I I want
a gun for my personal protection
but in most counties in New York
they had set up a standard that
said you have to show
A special need for self
protection distinguishable from
that of the general community
and notably in New York City of
many many many thousands of
applicants something like
fifteen hundred total concealed
carry licenses had been issued.
So writing for all six justices
justice Thomas.
First rejected the prior
rejected the idea that this was
a a scrutiny yes that there
would be any means ends yes.
And set up an entirely new
constitutional yes with regard
to the second amendment.
So the new test would be whether
or not
there was a tradition and
history of regulating arms in a
fashion close to what a state
municipality or the federal
government was trying to do now.
So in other words in order to
prove that a law does not run
afoul of the second amendment
protections afforded to
individuals.
Any lobbying defend it has to be
justified under you have to be
able to point to a close enough
analogy and
Effectively eighteenth and
nineteenth century America that
allowed you to that where they
where where there was previous
regulation similar to what the
states trying to do now it will
stand and so one of the things
that that they specifically said
that the majority opinion
specifically said would stand
was the motive Kerry so state
that does not allow open carry
as long as it does allow
concealed carry would be okay
you can you can say that you
can't open carry if you carry
concealed you could say that you
can't conceal carry if you
granted the individuals the
right to open carry but what you
could not say is that they could
not carry.
There were a couple of
restrictions that the majority
opinion admits are or or that
everyone in the majority opinion
agreed on which is it's been
historically permissible to
restrict felons from possession
of firearms it's been
historically
And traditionally acceptable to
restrict firearms from sensitive
places and the sensitive places
actually comes from the earlier
decision of Heller in which the
court noted
sensitive places like.
Churches schools government
buildings and and a lot of cases
interpreting it we also talked
about polling places.
one week after the very decision
was released the court the the
Supreme Court then vacated
decisions from.
Several federal courts of
appeals including
decisions that had upheld bans
on on air fifteen style rifles
including decisions that upheld
bans on magazine limits and
including decisions that had
upheld
bans on concealed carry
obviously.
So.
Ultimately and then.
That leaves you in a position
where we're stuck with a very
subjective standard the standard
is can you sufficiently and all
can you sufficiently analogize
this statute that you're trying
to pass in twenty twenty three
to something that existed state
in seventeen ninety two or
seventeen eighty seven or
nineteen ten.
Some of the things that actually
have been analogize to it would
be.
But and and sometimes is
sometimes that the analogies
allow for certain types of bands
and sometimes they've been used
to clearly strike down bans so
one of the critical issues are
are key issues and some of the
legislation before us this
session is for example
restrictions on eighteen to
twenty year olds possessing
firearms.
And so that issue has come up in
terms of the minimum Melissa
age.
Which was raised in seventeen
ninety two from sixteen to
eighteen and then a eighteen
fifties law that allowed that
that forbade providing pistols
to minors so where the law will
allow you to say under eighteen
and very likely will not allow
you to say or be a very
difficult yes to say for people
that are between eighteen and
twenty.
There is a part of the through
an opinion that doesn't get
perhaps as much attention as it
should and that's that the
decision was actually reached
neat way required a concurrence
opinion so the concurrence
opinion was written by justice
Kavanaugh and Chief Justice
joined into that opinion and
Justice cabin on noted that he
was in complete agreement
explained that he was in
complete agreement with the
majority opinion he only wrote
to underscore that.
The opinion does not reach
certain areas so what he said is
that this opinion based on the
to vote concurrence does not
mean that you cannot restrict.
handgun possession ownership for
use by for example people with
mental illness or who are
mentally disturbed that's kind
of important because that
actually wasn't a fact in the
case that was before them and
absent those two votes Justice
cabin on Chief Justice Roberts
the decision that they those
votes were necessary for the
split on that decision.
The.
That's what.
The difference also reviewed.
The State Council.
Sentences for everyone your what
it does for the presenters to
**** of in house or to give us
the framework of the process of
the law which you can use it for
the consideration to the
legislation this session.
I need to give us a.
Advocacy.
The history of.
Right so what we want to know
what what is the current size of
the loss of those of the.
Request that presenters speakers
with so with that in the future.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
octant consulting me in the
room.
Great thank you well thank you
so much for the opportunity to
speak with the committee this
afternoon my name is David
Pacino time to deputy chief
counsel at Giffords law center
to prevent gun violence which is
the legal arm of the gun
violence prevention organization
founded by former congresswoman
and gun violence survivors
genetrix so that as as the chair
seven aster today and make an
appreciate the invitation to
speak in an effective manner the
state of second and trace drugs
more perspective on to that I'm
going to go through briefly K.
and brewing K. we'll be
highlighting elaborating some
points Mr Cummings made an
attempt to kill highlights the
points in operating in that we
can percent but pourtant unable
speak briefly to the survey
what's the the landscape look
like after the group decision a
lot of that is of course still
in progress you know work wrong
month eight of of the outpost
brewing world but some some
trends are already starting to
commit the murder come clear and
and what was the church Cruz
continues to develop.
So
that's coming said the bottom
section of the jurisprudence
really begins two thousand eight
with the district of Columbia V.
Heller decision there this
spring our holding for the first
time that the second amendment
includes individual right and
it's specifically holding that
the district of Columbia's
prohibition on keeping a hand on
the legislation on hold was a
constitutional.
Justice Scalia said that there
was no doubt important justice
now on the basis look at
industries that the second
amendment and for individual
right to keep and bear arms of
course the right was not
unlimited this is the first
amendment right to free speech
was not thus we do not think
that the second amendment to
protect the right of citizens to
carry arms for any sort of
complications just as we do not
with the person on the to
protect the rights is to speak
for purpose.
I want to note examples of
permissible limitations
including prohibitions on
carrying concealed weapons and
identified a non exhaustive list
of presumptively lawful
regulatory measures including
longstanding prohibitions on the
possession of firearms by felons
the mentally ill loss of income
and sensitive places like
schools government buildings and
conditions and qualifications on
the sale of commercial farms
also noted that laws banning
dangers usual weapons were
within the second amendment and
finally that the house should
not be read to suggest the
invalidity of laws sort of our
accidents highway all those
points because group did not
overrule Heller ruined by its
own terms is only expanding on
what justice Scalia.
So how are still the more so
important law and while through
in is what concrete training
that methodology to test a
little questions used to
evaluate the second amendment
it's not invalidating anything
that was written in that.
Mr Cummings also mentioned the
McDonald's case and I just want
to pretty quickly to reiterate
as he said that the point of
that Casey is the concept of the
corporation so the district of
Columbia V. Heller case of
course involved block district
Columbia office federal law so
those open question about
whether the second amendment
restricting the state's largest
federal government and McDonald
says it restricts the state as
well so those the fact pattern
was essentially the same and the
outcomes such as to those cases
together staff concert that the
second amendment protects
individual rights against the
federal and state governments.
Domino's decisions the lower
court's election turban in the
second in the context of a lost
based on the guidance from
Heller noted we how did not give
an explicit Tax will very often
used in constitutional law have
multi part passed on to assess
the constitutionality of of
statutes under different
questions provisions we didn't
have that our so the lower court
did was they took the guidance
as an hour develop their own yes
this is a two part test which I
briefly required under its first
part asking the question of
whether challenge law imposes a
burden on conduct important
within seconds and industry part
of what it was within one of
those present law categories
hello
and also additional evidence
about whether the regulation
issue was within the second
amendment and then after that
step and move on to step two
this old from mark which would
be at an evaluations and
screaming so it's are you in a
level of interest of the
government based on the level
treatment of course will ply and
how closely tailored the
government's interest has to be
to accomplishing that interest
just helpful to tell the means
has to be to that interest so
course replied different chairs
of scrutiny on that issue was
never fully resolved but ended
up not mattering in the end
because when the Supreme Court
again took office economic basis
for when justice Thomas said
that the second part of that yes
doing that means and scrutiny
analysis was not part of the
second amendment that was one
step to.
So that majority opinion number
one he wrote step one of the
predominant Primark it's
probably consisting of health so
that's the part about finding
out whether it's account statute
is within the presumptively
lawful categories or whether
it's consistent control
tradition.
but Ben McDonald not support one
means and scrutiny in the second
in the context instead the
government must affirmatively
prove that farm regulation is
part of the historical tradition
that delimits the out of bounds
with the right to bear arms
Corman onto the ballot laws
which according again under the
authorities have discretion to
deny concealed carry licenses
even when applicants as I
statutory criteria usually
because the applicant has not
demonstrated call disability for
the role Maestas against
question about licenses to carry
concealed handgun Pueblo of the
Courts specifically pointing to
here is the discretion available
to the licensing authorities to
provide based on exceptional
criteria.
That the court held violence the
second amendment so the same way
Heller had and never will you
which was that you can't
prohibit the possession and come
home for substance the now will
ruin is that you cannot have a
license Ortiz have discretion
when issuing concealed carry
license also made it clear that
many regulations became the
second amendment rights a
constitutional process task
because I said it from hello to
all things Heller still
intrigued majority opinion also
emphasized that it's holding was
another regulatory straitjacket
more regulatory function and
that many common regulations
such as restrictions on guns
places continue.
to concurrence is no one from
justice leader who wrote that if
you decide to nothing about who
purchases gone across the street
next person gone what kinds of
guns can be available for
purchase and Justice capitals
concurrence joined by the Chief
Justice emphasize the court's
narrow focus on the specific
provision of law which just
talking about that was the
discretionary piece the proper
cost standard which was present
in several states but not New
Mexico just have not further
clarified that states are still
permitted to impose licensing
requirements so long as they're
objective and that sense of
restriction prostitution twenty
summarized it was like this
properly interpreted the second
amendment allows a variety of
gun regulations.
So that is the the state lower
courts are left with coming out
of the group decision and as
they did after Heller to have to
determine what the methodology
is for future patients so Romero
a court must first internet
challenge law programs the
rights and you rated within the
tax the second amendment to keep
and bear arms if it does the
quarter looks to history to see
if there's analysis storable
statute indicating of the laws
commercial under the second
amendment you can see that this
is a lot of what was in the old.
One of the hell or.
Key and local question is how
one identifies an analogous
statute justice Thomas writing
majority opinion says analogical
reasoning requires only that the
government identified well
established Representative
historical analog not just local
twenty two even a modern day
regulations not of that bring
your personal precursors it may
still be analogous enough to
pass constitutional muster court
but the court was looking to how
and why historical regulation
for thirty seconds right this is
a really key point supporting at
while we do not now provided
just a survey of the features
that render regulations were
relatively similar under the
second amendment we do think
that Heller McDonald point to at
least two metrics our own wines
the regulations program a law
abiding citizens right to armed
self defense as we stated
however repeating about
individual self defense is the
central component the second
amendment right.
So that's the procession of the
current state of the Supreme
Court jurisprudence we need to
do is take a look at Law
challenged person second
amendment rights to keep and
bear arms and if it does then
you will to store precedence and
how and why the struggle
presidents were enacted in order
to determine whether the
challenge law fits within the
second amendment this
constitutional court has to stop
them.
In the months since the group
decision number of course have
applied this framework to
evaluate the economic basis some
of our expressed some difficulty
in quantifying through is yes
this isn't necessarily out of
the ordinary we have a new
constitutional passing and then
down on the methodology is in
some ways novel it's not so
something that quarters used to
doing the kind of two years of
school and also something as
important president
constitutional law courts are
used to doing on this historical
analysis will not unprecedented
is in some ways and all.
And the results of court
appointments have been mixed
some also help some construction
and some point of reached a
decision on the same law as I
said that's not to say
unexpected and we expect that
the jurisprudence stabilize over
time at the moment is decisions
are largely coming from district
point those will be appealed in
insubstantial number to get help
point fire I'm gonna
consolidated number of course
she opinions it's also very
possible this report might take
up on this basis in order to
to get further guidance as to
what needs
so as promised I wanted to spend
more me time highlighting small
selection posed for in cases the
first is a recent decision out
of the fifth circuit called
working me this is a federal
prosecution of an individual for
a violation of the statutory
provisions speaking CYFD nine to
two G. eight that provision says
if you were subject to a
restraining order and there's a
court finally your risk of
harming our domestic partner or
a child and you are prohibited
from possessing a gun the court
struck that provision down.
despite the fact that you had a
court finding unlikely danger to
the best partner shut the court
said that provision on its face
was unconstitutional.
The court held that they were
not sufficient and now this
colonial or civil war era laws
provide for future firearms by
those who pose a risk to
specific individuals as opposed
to categories people and the law
is therefore unconstitutional
under proven so sensitive
quarters requirement for any
sort of lost interest this that
you have a historical precedent
within the category people as
opposed to protecting specific
individuals so query and and I
want to point your query to what
extent that maps onto the how
the why in our system Bruins
just gauge
it's also worth noting that this
is now viruses in our cross
country and face the challenges
of this prohibition for decades
and and overwhelmingly they have
upheld and and we see that in
jurisdictions across the
country.
So speaking to District Court
decision very quickly in in the
Southern District California
decision called those
responsible for their own poll
California law data sharing and
the reason I have this case
since it allows the sharing
under data with researchers the
court held that there was not
within the second minute because
it didn't restrict it would keep
and bear arms of course we noted
that the regulations are right
doesn't.
So that's an important section
of that first up run and now
says on one occasion highlight
very briefly as a case called
Reese the ATS I think this is a
case in Mr comments medical
would to as well that report of
health constitution of federal
law prohibiting handgun sales to
those under the age of twenty
one on the basis coming up on
appeal it's from the western
district of Louisiana to the
fifth circuit interestingly
important taxes this but the
other one about laws and
constitutional however the state
of Texas not receive the peel in
that case so we're likely to
have that actually fits
circumcision from the other
direction so we have an interest
circuit split this one on that
issue this is something that
likely will be resolved in the
coming months and years so we
want to thank you again for the
opportunity to present that
perspective and to present those
views and and hope it will be
used to the committee thank you
very much.
To
are you the service for a long
time that I have a certain
trades that are this is here to
be a lawyer for thirty years of
those the notion of collective
your both sides of an issue of.
Will.
Representative Roybal
association I.
Director of the office of
litigation
we're just scratching their.
The reason we tried a human
resource.
Very.
I do hear you thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee can you hear me
now we.
Whether the issue for about that
certain we'd like to go to your
your perspective on the process
of the law the second.
All thank you Mr chairman thank
you for having me.
I think the best way I could
describe the current status of
the second amendment litigation
is that it is in flux as others
have said it really does start
at least moderately in two
thousand and eight when the
Supreme Court ruled that the
district of Columbia's brand
operable of firearm within the
whole market will handle it for
the whole
violated the second amendment
because the second amendment
reserves and individual right to
keep and bear arms within the
whole.
Now shortly after that.
We really saw a floodgate of
criminal litigation here because
criminal defense attorneys and
public defenders they had cases
pending and they had something
new make it are creating so.
The race second amendment a lot
and didn't really have a whole
lot of success are on the civil
side McDonnell the Chicago was
the next big case and that held
that the second amendment was a
fundamental right and therefore
was incorporated to the states
uh by a.
Fourteen amendment.
I'll after that you see the on
going off likely to vote of
civil litigation because now
there are more civil points to
be had.
And the Supreme Court kind of
goes why it for about twelve
years it did issue decision in a
case called higher tanto in
twenty sixteen which held that
standards were arms within the
meeting of the second amendment
and invalidated a Massachusetts
law banning those.
But for the most part didn't
really say much you had a few
the Senate's for petitions
hearing more
but it was relatively quiet then
it gets a real one.
In twenty twenty two and.
It was another landmark decision
it really I would say and
validated almost every prior
second amendment decision out
there at least in some regard
because the lower courts have
all by the long yes so.
I now you have a new test which
is you look at the text of the
second amendment are the key
words there are the people keep
and bear arms so if it does
cover amid conduct that in the
paper in the analysis shifts to
the states and the states to
have to come up with historical
analogues that are both
relatively similar relevantly
similar I apologize meeting they
should at how and why component
and justice Thomas gave an
example that grieving hats of
the greater trucks they're both
great but.
For several years kind of and
they're so you look at the how
why.
And the they must be you.
Representative of the historical
tradition.
at.
In that our wires don't
necessarily try to.
On we still don't really know
how many the store and what's
the most the.
The court ruling seems to say
that three is not enough and we
know what.
just discovered I was sitting on
the DC circuit he said that six
was not enough otherwise that's
still something that I think
will be sorted out over time.
and.
That's happening fairly quickly
I checked west lots of it and
ruin has been cited two hundred
ninety four times five quarts
and it's only eight months old.
So we will see where this goes I
think a lot quicker than it did
in the past Haaland
I think the other thing to note
that others have is for other
cases we were got grant a few
remand orders with low oil.
Are one of two of those were
magazine cases out of California
and New Jersey another one was
challenging Hawaii's Kerry
appropriations and another one
was out of Maryland are
challenging the state's
ran on somewhere out of
automatic rifles.
The lower courts are then just
goes back down to the district
courts with the exception of the
Maryland semiautomatic rifle
case
the fourth certificate seventy
keep that one in her oral
arguments in the summer I
believe and so we should have
something from that relatively
soon.
That will be the first circuit
court opinion
some I automatic rifles of which
should provide some more insight
on how the other ports will
we'll on crystallizing bans.
Also.
But the federal market there
relief quickly here.
And I think that the court shows
the grand vacate and remand
those.
A little significant because
when the Supreme Court Graham
vacates and remands K. it means
that things there is a
reasonable probability that the
court of appeals might come to a
different outcome in some
respect.
Also the fact that it chose to
do that is an indication that
the thanks we might have a
different outcome of the
state's.
It also took another case and
grandbaby to remember that are
more in the I hope that was out
of Massachusetts.
And it was kind of a weird forty
well were.
Of if you had a prior
misdemeanor convictions and
because of that she put it
purchase a firearm but he was
allowed to do with one.
so he challenged Senator.
But I think with those opinions
we are seeing a lot happened now
especially in the area of all
somewhere about it rifles and
magazines there were eight
lawsuits filed challenges the
Illinois based law that we
passed laws so madam chair
rifles one T. R. O. was issued
and state of the power cord left
that place.
I saw twenty two act somewhere a
automatic rifle lawsuits in
federal courts.
What are looked at today.
in Oregon there was a new we
passed Irma purchased water and
I just seem restriction there
are five lawsuits challenging
those one temporary restraining
order was put in place by the
District Court I'm sorry about
the state Superior Court and
that was left in place I would
work on Supreme Court.
We're probably about a dozen
other lawsuits challenging
magazine restrictions
All of this support level it's a
one out of Rhode Island is a
on appeal to the first circuit
right now.
I think another area we're gonna
see a lot of litigation soon
it's in the cases who are the
people under the second
amendment who have the right to
keep and bear arms
the Supreme Court has said and
for that.
In the bill of rights context
those same people first St
people in the second amendment
before the ninth and the tenth.
So I just think where that's
going to come up largely as an
age cases because people of the
age of eighteen to twenty they
do have first amendment rights
and Representative Fourth
Amendment rights so they should.
Senator within the people who
have second amendment rights.
And there's not a lot of
historical tradition on
restricting the.
I just think.
That's a quarter when we grow
one of the quarter there says
what our state seventeen ninety
one for eighteen sixty eight
today because we don't have to.
But it also says that the
technology but there's a
scholarly debate over what the
appropriate time frame is and
then says we traditionally gone
with seventeen ninety one as our
time for.
Also.
I think with that seventeen
ninety one it's probably going
to ultimately be development
conference and I think we'll
find out this issue very soon.
There's a couple cases before
the eleventh circuit right now
there's one for the for our.
There's.
One before the fifth circuit
and.
There's a few in the district
courts especially in the fourth
circuit right now after school
that.
The twenty year olds have the
right to keep and bear arms.
All.
As we just places came up I
think that's going to be another
area going forward where we're
gonna see a lot of litigation
Barbacena specially in New York
and New Jersey.
R. one junctions has already
been issued against most of the
sensitive places that were
restricted New York's concealed
Kerry improvement act.
to a temporary restraining order
was just issued.
In two separate cases New Jersey
again setting aside most of the
places that.
The state of New Jersey decided
to ban under its act.
And.
Another area I think you're
going to see a lot of litigation
is.
Under the protection of lawful
commerce in arms act although
this isn't necessarily second
amendment related.
There is already a lot going out
of the District Court right now
where the states decided to
impose.
Different versions of public
nuisance laws and.
Trying to pull the gun
manufacturers liable for an
injury that ever comes out of
one of the products even when it
was done by criminal third party
action.
All the protection of lawful
commerce in arms act generally
prohibits that District Court in
New Jersey will that wages last
month and are issued a
preliminary injunction against
the state there.
There's also student Delaware
and there's one up on appeal the
second circuit in the state of
New York so.
I think we're gonna see a lot of
that in the short term.
What moving everywhere in the
short term and long term to so
those are my comments thank you
for having the and I appreciate
the opportunity if you need all
right.
We have to.
It's built for us today for
committee questions other twenty
questions or discussion will.
Representative Ezzell.
Thank you very much Christopher.
Presentations and I appreciate
also the people.
Secretary legal analysis.
I guess.
Yes my question is is what.
after after the
Fisher Committee staff has
looked at this and let the we've
got.
what are the areas where.
More regulation of firearms this
is permissible how are provided.
Kind of Robert actually it's
exactly that.
the case earlier this year your
case.
Visibly felt about that but I
don't know that all the things
in hello would fall five
seventeen and one issue.
And so the.
and I got the sense for Mr
Cummings that the two concurring
Cavanaugh concurrence.
Have a little more flexibility
is that great another
interesting question.
About exactly that I decided I'd
like to know if the concurrence.
You know with software that with
the two in the concurrence solid
on this seventeen ninety.
One issue.
I'm kind of getting a sense from
the presentations that that
seems to be the direction but
times right in the same.
The same issue.
There's no one else.
So one more thing I will say I
mean I got we obviously we had a
debate today on the floor about.
You know with guns in polling
places and it sounds to me I
mean I got the sense that
certainly.
There was a historical reason to
restrict firearms from sensitive
places churches schools
government buildings and I think
Mr Comey's even set polling
places
you know the other thing that
jumped out at me to.
You know with.
Was the issue of zero.
The the storage issue.
And and that there was a
historical right to.
Address storage to prevent
accidents and I think that's
relevant obviously we've got
Representative is built here and
that's what that's on I want to
get into the building that but I
just those are things that
jumped out at me that seem like
lanes that even even putting on
our **** going back to seventeen
ninety one which is pretty
amazing to me that that's what
we're doing but that's what the
court has sent so even doing
that though.
Still are some wings here I
guess it might take to I think
the point that that gentleman
from the I. R. from the NRA
said.
Everything seems to me to be
completely in flux so I also
think we gotta be careful if
you're trying to think that we
can predict exactly what's going
to happen because.
You know again.
We had this discussion already
Bill on nuclear.
You know regulation preemption
and and obviously we have a
responsibility as a legislature
to.
Listen to the constituents we
represent and and and the
proposed legislation and
ultimately it's going to get
challenged in the courts and
self I mean it just sounds like
everything's all over the place
in terms of how this is going to
be for provisions and it's all
happening at the district court
levels of for calling up the
circuit courts.
Just the boss thanks Mister
chair.
For sure.
Can anyone shed any light on why
in the world would have to go
back to seventeen hundred for
looking for gun laws to say we
can do it today.
I
mean I just it's just mind
boggling to me.
Of course I'm looking at you you
asked you asked there any quite
I don't know who to ask about
that.
The presidents of the United
States who point it's.
The current one.
When you get a chance to to the
dollar yeah right that's kind
of.
One.
Senator was asking those.
Pass a law saying that there's.
The state will not regulate.
Any firearm where you have to
manually load of the the kind of
powder and.
But if they also got regulate.
Because that's the same for.
Search and so forth I give up.
The.
So I tell the presentations of
the.
Three.
The seven to nine months today
is is the ratification is a.
As the committees for the score.
The judge says that there has to
be some historical basis for the
second.
because most of the committees
and to be able to equally
puzzled over there so it's
right.
The state storage ring at the
suggested there's a
constitutional restrictions
president if you.
presentation of.
So call us so.
The state after salts
those results.
That does all of it is.
What is only trying to tell me
what that may be but I think
what other we've got an age
restriction proposal that's in
this committee right now
increase the age.
The.
That sounds like that so
integrator it too so this is the
worst position.
What I am but I didn't do what
we
are to leave the public to
believe something valuable what
we're doing is not likely really
happened fact.
The service people.
Passing laws to and from but
this is private with my
colleagues but we often get
asked to send a message to pass
a bill to send a message that's
that's kinda antithetical to me
as a lawyer I think we're gonna
pass laws not send messages
and so is this a lot of.
Pass a law that.
Lows the constitutional
limitations.
But it sounds like we have a lot
of for the period to test the
courts and and.
Stay with the.
Policy makers and.
Which is of the legislature.
Yes yes those loan service.
This is.
Thank you all the information
the state was able to.
And the.
Questions.
Business of the bills.
I just want to.
Before we begin I just want to
thank you for what you're doing
in this committee.
Patients as a non attorney.
I just learned something in
everyone of these presentations
so I I think it's crucial that
we do this and I just like the
direction you're going I just
wanted to tell you that.
The president you know the if
you ever feel.
A little bit on clear of the
server supplication of where by
the I don't do constitutional.
Price for us
can you private is the.
Tax laws a very specialized Act
so you're not going to.
RT just when you have.
Gastrointestinal issue we know
that we all seem to know that
the public but laws if we
specialize in this is not
interim looking at center worth
but I don't think he practices
in this area Senator Ivey Soto
percent good practice for you
all.
Michigan.
You should be able but.
Are one of the servers for this
is not and there and we all need
that that background cation so
roll we're getting so thank you
I appreciate the funding of
helpful advantageous we have
Senate bill thirty five eighty
seven I was told of some
importance to hearing one before
the other so I think we've got a
right thirty five to forty seven
make sense.
A way around thirty four thirty
five okay and everyone agrees to
that.
So we'll do that we'll hear
eighty four thirty five we have.
Register the number of
individuals to speak in support
and opposition so we need to
leave time for that I'm going to
ask Miss Sanchez to always be
mindful of the procedures that
we follow here which is to put a
time limit on advocacy so what
will here fifty minutes in
support of the bills will here
fifty minutes in opposition
proposed a little differently
because my understanding is
there is agreement
zero one million there has yes
so what what I'm gonna do is a
set of during that time
limitation for each of the two
bills amount to consolidate the
will to some as the proponents
to divide their time into twenty
minutes and advocacy and then
the opponents into twenty
minutes of opposition and I'm
not aware of any
almost note for note drugs can
we register on either one of
these two bills so please be
mindful of that as well too you
can talk yourself out of a
unopposed bill you're not
mindful of that so you've got
from twenty minutes centers all
we would have to I hope you.
Side between the two by the time
how you wish to present this so
if you have thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee
Thank you very much for allowing
us to do this together we did a
lot of work beforehand because
there were some so given
significant differences in how
the two groups were working
together and what they they were
trying to accomplish there about
six hundred and fifty folks in
New Mexico to provide the
services that C. R. NH provided
there are a little over sixty or
sixty five A. A.'s that provide
the services that they provide
in going through the process of
of preparation here we have
probably about three or four
issues that were significant we
did work that out right before
this right as the session was
beginning and that's where we
are now I want to thank Senator
Hickey for being open to bring
his folks to the table I know
that we got all of our C. N.
A.'s together to to work with
his group as well and we we did
find resolution here in terms of
the big differences were really
around where the practices could
take place based on the skill
set in the certifications of the
to the individuals have
and we did agree that we would
maybe ask for three the
proponents to speak after we
introduce the legislation and
then from each side three from
C. S. C. R. N. A. side and three
from
the a side so essentially Senate
bill eighty it's an effort to
update the language in the nurse
and PA the nurse practice act to
reflect current practice of New
Mexico certified registered
nurse anesthetists the RNase
updates antiquated language as I
mentioned in the NPA it ensures
the New Mexico siRNAs will
continue to work
only in their there there is
where they are trained and
certified it includes
independent practice language
for all advanced practice
registered nurses from the
facilitates our facilities will
continue to have a choice in
composition of anesthesia teams
the folks that support this
legislation of the New Mexico
border nursing The New Mexico
Spain Association the New Mexico
association of nurse
practitioners are trying to go
very fast Mr chairman somebody
wants to move quickly New Mexico
State University about school of
nursing in the New Mexico state
university's college of health
and social sciences.
The big changes that occur in
eighty that you you'd want to
know about our on page two lines
twelve to thirteen it strikes
out
the a in a in a section to keep
more statute current in case a
name change occurs at the
federal level page three lines
one through three it's important
to place choice of type of
anesthesia model in the
facilities hands due to the
unique ranges of needs from each
one of the facilities and the
things that they provide the
facility bases their decisions
on how they want to operate
operationalize organization
services based on patient
population graduated recruitment
that providers and and how their
rate access to care will be
greatly affected if strict rules
are placed in in statute each
hospital credentials to health
care professionals which limits
them to the purse specific scope
in in their hospital and
according to the New Mexico
nurse practice act any C. R. N.
A. R. and is a lot to administer
botox which I know it's been a
question before we we arrived
here administer botox but cannot
do so without proper training in
the in a clinic that is run by
a nurse practitioner Page three
line six through eight and
that's a strike through the
reason to strike through this is
the a collaborative practice
arrangement requires a position
this is also a question that we
received before we we came here
today requires a position to
sign charts and or be a sponsor
this year and so they are not
unsupervised they are not left
alone to to to kind of do
whatever they want it also
suggests that there is written
documentation for collaboration
and how they would do that the
procedures with which they would
do that the arrangement can and
will cut off the pathway to
faster effective care also there
are too many professionals to
list that this would affect
Professionals to list and if one
is left out or added on it'll
take years to amend the statute
again and so that's why we chose
to address of the way that we
did in the bill I do have
experts that we're here on
Monday Mr chairman the to live
pretty far away and
Yes doctor mia Austin and Dr
Christine I'm sorry me Austin
who is a C. R. N. A. N. Dr
Christine anu who who is a C. R.
N. A. and
Will come to them if we if we
need them I I want to have them
on on hand but they're not
physically in the room and then
I'll hand it over to us Senator
Hickey to introduce this piece
of legislation that we are co
sponsors by the way I need to
build we work very closely.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee members I'm bringing
forward Senate bill thirty five
which fixes the not fixes it
adds to a bill that was passed
to a number of years ago
allowing programs for anesthesia
assistants to exist at the
University of New Mexico at that
time the ratio of.
SEC allergist to anesthesia
assistants and it it was the
three to one after seventeen
other states who been updating
their bills it's now recommended
that it go to four to one and so
that is one of the significant
changes the anesthesia
assistants are baccalaureate to
to have a two years masters
both doing didactic as well as
in the clinic on the floor
training and so they.
are trained to be at the
induction with the
anesthesiologists then the
anesthesiologists can leave the
room but they have to be within
the suite of aware of the ours
that we're that decision the
operations are taking place and
then they have to be there at
the extirpation
there is one thing in the bill
that we're correcting is that
very often in local anesthesia
the emergence from anesthesia
particularly knee or hip can
take place eight nine ten hours
later at home so that don't
happen I can be there at the
that that period of emergency
the bill also clarifies that the
anesthesia assistance will be
limited to class eight counties
all five of the class say
counties Santa Fe burn a Leo.
San Juan Dona Ana and I am
making a I thank you yes where
the particularly where the
University of New Mexico Medical
Center has academic programs as
well it's also of that size the
otherwise is pretty straight
forward in the bill they are
very tightly supervised that
sees it what's the patient has
been in induced into anesthesia
they are they're monitoring
should something happen the
anesthesia has to be the
anesthesiologist has to be
within this week but they are C.
P. are fully certified can
handle anything on an emergency
basis for the ten seconds it
would take for the
anesthesiologist and sometimes
it could be a mentor to if there
happened to be on another floor
doing in the induction
or spinal anesthesia and the and
then it removes the sunset that
was in the original bill so is
that they can
be in class eight counties in
New Mexico one of the things
that we're addressing here and
as we work through the issues is
is the fact that this state is
so short on providers any kind
of providers and as we know lots
of specialist and anesthesia is
a specialty and the C. R. N.
A.'s in the indices is
assistance are also specialist
in that area as well and there
is room for everyone here to be
able to do the practice and so
the more people the more
friendly we are the more people
more we're gonna have in the
state some hospitals
because of some shortages and
the dynamics are actually not
able to do surgeries elective
surgeries that's pretty hard in
these difficult times for
hospitals so again
what what what we learned is
that everyone plays well in the
sandbox together.
Or however you want to put it
and
sure there are bumps you know
I'm sorry if there's a doctor in
a rural there's always a
potential for a pop
but you know other than that
they are all working very well
together I it was a real
privilege for me to be able to
work this out with Senator PDF
we are in complete agreement
and we've fine tuned and I fully
support that eighty and as well
as
presenting a thirty five.
It does have an amendment for
our yes and I do have an
amendment on page four line
eighteen through page five line
to remove the brackets and line
through
on page five line to after
restrictions insert
That is one of the.
Thirty five thirty five I'm
sorry on page five line two
after restrictions insert
quotation marks in compliance
with the federal services for
Medicare and Medicaid services a
supervising anesthesiologists of
participate this is to meet the
CMS requirements and state
requirements for billing and
they're they're different in
itself but we had to cover both
bases with that and then on page
five line to strike in person
participation in Sir in lieu
thereof in person.
And so I would
recommend to the committee that
we past the amendment and then
move on to passing the bill as a
whole.
And as we mention Mr chairman
with asked for permission to
have up three folks speak in
favor of each one of the bills.
Well we've got the amendment
from is first of all so before
we get to.
some support take a moment on
the.
About that.
Questions on the amendment.
Sir do.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
reading this amendment this
completely addresses the concern
that I have on this bill
But whether you have language in
there that would have the the
supervising doc actually be
there in the room with them so
so I appreciate you bringing
this month thank you.
The question.
Mmhm I'm trying to.
Senator sentiment has are the
kind of.
I'm trying to I have one.
In fact.
Representative two.
So so okay of.
It serves.
Supervising as to do all of this
shoppers.
In person.
The most demanding aspects of
the SCG L..
Do you have planned.
It optimal induction emergence
as a.
Yes.
In and then the if apple pies
the situation I talked about
when you're doing local it would
be applicable in that situation.
Yeah I guess Mr chairman I the.
Yes.
Expanding on what the most
demanding aspects.
Means.
The the in the most demanding
aspects I'm gonna turn that over
to one of my experts here.
And or two with the NCC our.
Donald anesthesiologists.
Thank you Dr McDonald an
anesthesiologist at Krista
statements in here Santa Fe the
most demanding parts the
procedure pretty much laid out
by CMS but essentially their
induction inducing the
anesthetic emerging from the
anesthetic or any
Any procedures during the case
the placement of invasive lines
or if there are any demanding
part to the procedure where the
patient's vital signs might
change.
Then the a would call us and
we'd be there in seconds to help
amount to those of the demanding
aspects.
Thank right at the chair yes but
I'm reading.
So first of all.
Induction system paid for line
twenty one.
So what we're putting into
action.
On twenty.
Do you have no I'm sorry I don't
have the number.
In front of me here for for what
we have Mr Williams.
current for.
Struggling.
Right so there are four more in
the presence accepting the
receive.
The reason during interaction.
General or residual has.
Very emerged from general.
The presence of supervising in
the office and the office we.
And we did availability the
operator of the.
I was
there.
Important.
The staff.
He also has.
I would be both restrictions.
And
restrictions.
And the life of the federal
centers of.
K. to medicate okay Medicare
Medicaid services.
Supervising as the job is not
participate.
In person for the most demanding
Office of the institution
planned for the doctor will
induction Americans our
international markets.
Yes.
Yes Senator and Mr chair
this is language that we have to
have in there for billing
purposes for CMS to have it and
so that's why it's repeated
again.
And I are you can you can you
can raise your eyebrows all you
wonder low or or talk about
buyers being high being low.
CMS regulation is the high bar
and we have to.
Put our laws for billing
purposes into their language so
that's why that's there.
Mr chair Senator.
At eight which is.
The that.
Mr Chairman
correct me if that doesn't seem.
We will is that.
And and I don't know that were.
Senator meeting at.
The really equipment that.
Senator Ivey Soto and Mr chair
we took a lot of patience to
talk to the heads of New season
bill our state of New Mexico to
trying get this language right
for billing purposes and that's
why it exists as it does.
Okay what is being.
and then.
Yes thank.
Representative extension.
Have.
Senator a public understand that
but I don't see distinction
happens and I I see the the
language of thought that I would
be significantly more candidly
Lucy goosey the language that we
already had to pay for the wall
at the last page that your
personal.
Have.
Yeah so I mean I think I guess
for sure if you were struggling.
Finalized eighteen to twenty
five okay for.
Sen lines
What page I.
I just want to say this I don't
I don't know that you need.
Additional language at all.
Thank you senator and Mr chair
we potentially have some
national people and they say
that this is the requirement of
CMS and the language and that's
why we have it in there and I
have learned multiple times over
many years not to mess with CMS
language.
Do.
Even right the wrong.
Right so is there.
Yes on the amendment I'm just
wondering if there is another
amendment coming after this
ammendment that's directed Mr
chair Senator Ivey Soto are you
planning on amending this at
some point.
How to deal with the and I'm
asking you that because it
depends on whether all support
this amendment or not yeah if we
don't get all.
We don't have to.
This is been a motion to restore
the struggling with instruct
the.
Thank you Mr.
Make sure.
We wanted to do things through
all their own time so close we
just to.
Send questions.
The.
Instruct the.
In Memphis right.
That was.
additional program through the.
We insert I want those.
That are very much appreciated
thank you your experience with
the US hi to those folks on time
to.
The fact that they believe that
a law firm Water.
Your lawyer and for with.
Senator is the right and
practitioners are and so that
system.
One of those centers Medicare
Medicaid
By the supervising the CEO of.
Sen Roseanne.
The.
On whatever their requirements
are and this is you know it is
and I presume you're always
going to do that to the state
law the state of the funds the.
centers for Medicare and
Medicaid reimbursable.
If you read out that that was.
Or that children Representative
for.
Two of those are going to pay so
I just I don't think that has
anything to our state I don't
think that's going on trial.
The seven seven we're gonna
where your rules.
We Senator.
So that that's my concern was
proposing.
Hello.
Resources Representative percent
per patient.
The language of reasons
One
person.
For the most demanding that so
easy.
That goes to the most ever by
laws here's the tournaments the
first station for the most
assets.
That was the most.
Rescue the doctor here
Representative is.
What is the most demanding
aspects of it and this is.
But it was a.
Estes including the valuable
all of us really.
Jeff.
May.
Question
those are.
Okay.
Nice.
Of
course which is of my shoes yes.
How does that.
Somebody participating for the
most demanding aspects.
Of essential plan.
After induction versions all of
us just saying.
That somebody in person Senator.
Yes and as the anesthesiologists
we do use our judgment as to
what is demanding parts the case
however CMS does define what
those demanding aspects are
those points and that's the
history and physical exam
examining the patient before
surgery.
Determining what the end of each
plan will be being present
induction emergence and the
placement of any invasive lines
or any procedures that are done
such as spinal anesthetics of
Durrell's or nerve blocks so
those are that's the list that
CMS calls demanding parts the
procedure and with.
Respect for your profession I
think we that.
I put that as a law clerk
This
will receive maybe because there
is an.
They then to.
That was made available that was
made contract.
The questions the purpose of
yeah the reason is that okay
this is a loft laws have
loosened anesthesiologists
headed.
and independence on what.
Chair to require.
Have to do that for those has.
I guess what I'm getting at the.
You should lie with version one
thousand managing your.
And but to do so.
Facts Mr chair just go back to
page three on the bottom.
So this is basically.
Promulgate rules.
Laid out here so.
If you're gonna have a word.
That's a whole nother question
whether you know we want four to
be.
Making that call but I think
this is all of the work rules
for operations will section is I
think that's important in terms
of.
Page three on the bottom line
twenty five the board shall
adopt rules that the wall all of
this so we're getting out
guidance that that'll.
We are giving them off but I
would think that the going.
You're right you have to have to
be the list needs to be
somewhere so that the different
members of the doctor needs to
use a discretion but we're
talking about the the a in the.
The other is underneath and so
they need to be under the
there's got to be cigar also.
I think the board would probably
that but I certainly see what
you're saying there about the
the language.
The purpose
of.
The report process.
So why are we not satisfied with
that role.
The.
but folks were strong enough.
Yeah.
That sponsor.
I think that my concern.
The last.
It but what we did was.
With the gentleman but.
Look at what your amendment.
This is certainly the.
A new program that we just.
In compliance with the federal
centers for Medicare.
Medicaid services residences
also suffered this fate.
A person off.
The most of any aspects of the
SCG all of as the zip line.
Budget striped including if
applicable induction emergency
authority so that.
But that way you've got a late
with that says follow up the.
They're one of the world's.
That would be a friendly
amendment Senator thank you.
I made
Working off of the amendment.
would be on.
There were two other members.
This to answer.
After the.
Just for the work then.
Which would be a lower case.
Would be of prepositional I.
And then okay I lied three.
After the work plan struck the
rest of that.
Thank you I will induction
convergence and then the number.
Remember the rest.
However the sponsors say that
from the moment but we're not
gonna do that kind of surgery
today on this bill what we're
gonna have to come back with a
revised version I'm here the
more the rest of committee
members would vote on the a lot
of heads nodding affirmatively
office in those two
Let's hear this topic out so
you get this which guides the
deposit amount.
but but services.
It's not track.
So if anyone else with regards
for the Sanchez
This particular bill.
I.
What.
But according.
I just I still services to.
Because again I think that we're
still.
According to Medicare and
Medicaid
we have.
Thank you want to get paid
Representative.
CMS and do I really have to tell
you that is a long reproductive.
Comply with those guys and don't
get paid.
What we roll over the amendment
but I do think if you do have
some other proponents so so what
we Representative recognize and.
And do justice to them so will
there of the remaining people
the proponents on a compact that
will.
So we have Richard Evans your
full.
And these are.
And Chris Paul Pogba's homes so
we recognize the to the two of.
Resources we concluded that
there still enough time Mr
Chairman can we go to eighty and
attempt to make we don't have
any amendments or anything would
like to continue to move that
one of.
Because the reason for that is
for.
It already introduced to I
didn't have anything else to say
unless you wanted to go to the
proponents or go to questions or
whatever you'd like to.
Have someone backstage Committee
members all along.
If the
user.
We have registered me Austin Dr
Channell.
Receipt of.
So so Mister chairman if with
your permission I know that you
want to stop at five thirty
which is in about the lower
twenty minutes are there my
experts actually that you just
name so we can go to the
questions from the committee
I'll just refer to those folks
you mentioned if we need to go
to the.
Maybe
log.
I.
Proponents so one question for.
Yeah.
Because of the weather is a I'm
gonna take a vote on the.
because is that this.
With the proposals I I think
that the table one for the
solution the other.
I also want to that happens we
will try to schedule.
So what's the question.
So we will start.
One form of the question.
Your.
Proponents of the centers of the
there is here the proponents are
actually are experts and I can I
just say one small little I do
what I will take your direction
are we want to see Mr chairman
and committee but the the the
portion that's under discussion
for thirty five we have moved
beyond the differences that we
had so I think that you know
however you want to proceed
we're.
Yeah for the size of the New
Mexico couple we take a vote on
the and of our offense to and I
will continue to appear with the
senator and help them through
this as well.
But I'm more than happy to wait
are we.
my and thank yes actually.
Because this was difficult
getting everything together I
and and and if you would be a
very Abel's every bring both
back at the same time sure and
we will come back with the
committee sub so that it's
completely cleared up and we're
not thirty five Thomas yeah
thirty five.
Your.
Of the
server also see on schedule one
is built into the schedule and
was asked to make sure I stayed
with the other because of.
S. requirement really take
messages.
So they're still talking about
Senate bill the.
The next.
I don't see.
so.
Share.
I don't think we're gonna get
your bills etcetera sorry about
that.
Absolutely on that.
Working on comments on thirty
five of the the the.
I always used to go to the.
What is
of I'm just curious.
Are these.
That is move in harmony with
each other whether the most
harmonious thing would be a
committees of.
That merges the two of them
together.
Get that worked out the.
The ideal
Sanchez.
Next.
Mr Mr chair.
Others.
Hello I guess the whole thing.
So is
this thank you Mr chairman then
make a recommendation to Senator
Ivey Soto.
And make its recommendation to
honor all.
And I hear the recommendation
for.
That.
After you Senator after you've
tire of all of this here there
is a place for you in Washington
DC I can give you the office
number at CMS where you can go
through and change the language
in the bills and then live
through the horror of a hundred
and thirty five thousand pages
of regulations to CMS that this
stuff gets buried in and find
also where it contradicts itself
multiple times and and so I just
just for your if you're thinking
Hey you know I'm I love the
stuff they would love to have
you there.
You thank you all of their.
I have a case.
Responsible for all triples
right.
Back to the Act eighty.
I would I know the vice chair
has some great comments wanted.
Of all feel that way after with.
If you would still mentor to
those practice lofty with him
some time so
Practice case back on when you
settle education gonna get CMS
to approve a settlement and if
you don't you don't make sure
the right hole the federal law
makes the lawyers level we look
at of.
Are fairly back in next years
white knuckle because if we
don't get that right and will
protect them as they have us on
the hook as lawyers for for
their claim and.
In our lives really difficult
think about that everything K.
you've got to get CMS to approve
the settlement and that means a
better review everything that
you've done as a lawyer on the
case Senator do it.
Thank you Mr chair Sir Senator
we talked about this on the
floor and they are getting
respect we talking to the eight
thousand four one.
Of it actually.
So this is a bill eighty makes
so the siRNAs can practice
independently I'm looking at
page two the spell as starting
at line nine that subsection B.
that really describes the state
of the the legal scope of
practice for C. R. N. as in New
Mexico which is preoperative
intraoperative and postoperative
anesthesia care and related
services.
So then we go down to see where
it talks about how that happens
and right now under our law in
that operative contacts siRNAs
have to work within a a team of
the has a dock on it which makes
a lot of sense because.
You're never going to be doing
operative care probably as as a
single person or is just as a C.
R. NA but the especially because
you're not performing surgery
this may
But what this bill does is for
state that this they could that
practice independently so this
their scope of practice is still
the same pre op pre operative
intra operative post operative
care and how they can do that
independently
and they are not required to
work with if he and overall team
they're not they do not have
supervision
Center you here to talk about
this bill that that they are
supervised but they are not
under this bill
So and what I'm thinking of Mr
chair is I was just looking them
up online I found about eight of
them there's about eight of
these
strip mall pain clinics in
Albuquerque at least where there
are advanced practice nurses
doing ketamine infusions.
That makes me incredibly
uncomfortable right trouble need
the idea of doing recreational
academy in fusions of the strip
mall with out the dock on their
supervising that is a recipe for
I think I'll be able to get
really hurt
and so anything we are doing
that is making that more
possible under arms off of
I'm not a fan of and and that's
what this is exactly what what
this would do also looking at
page three.
So it says so all that language
about.
First or sure all right so I so
don't want to confuse the but
unless it ties directly into but
you know really where we were
coming from here was and I do
have some experts that are
already on line if you're not
going to ask them to chime in
here a little bit but but again
this is the only health care
that will occur in in rural
communities in New Mexico and
some rural communities and
that's why we we felt it was
important to to put the language
in about the independence and
and even though they're
independent the the facility
where they work there might be
other professionals that work in
that building as well and so
there they can that that's why
you go to page three the top
lines one through three four in
collaboration with other health
care providers that might be in
the same health care facility
and so it's not like they're
just simply out their own flying
the plane all by themselves
administering whatever and.
On their merry way to the next
patient that they're they're
they're in collaboration with
others in the health care
facility Senator Mr chair I am
because I just yeah absolutely
can be on there and not there
the requirements that they work
in collaboration with others is
explicitly removed here they
still can't if they want to but
they do not have to and that's
the crux of this bill and that
that's the course of my concern.
So can I just my experts
determined I I'd really like to
hear from them as well on this
one.
Dr I'm sorry of.
This Austin if you can please
try to.
you hear me.
Set of just having somebody
check could you address the
specific question to specific
expertise decision answered very
directly Senator do you have a
question or do you have a.
Sure and so Mister chair ma'am
I'm I'm sorry and your last is
also with a C. R. N. A..
What.
What three intra and post
operative care.
Does a C. R. N. A. find where
you do not need to be.
Collaborating with any other
part of the medical team and and
you're just the only one doing
that.
We almost we never not
collaborate with the medical
team we have a surgeon I want
the surgery done
we collaborate with them and
what type of anesthesia would be
appropriate for their surgery
and then we also affect the
patient and what type of
anesthesia would be appropriate
for their in in regard to like
for health needs and what the
status for them to have so pre
op the tax for the third and we
talked to the patient we give
free up medications and drop we
you that's that that that kind
of CENIC and then post op we
control thirteen and
find any really for their issues
that they may have so Mr chair
Senator what I'm hearing is
they're doing what it already
says here in the statute and I
don't know why we need to change
that why we need to now give
them the opportunity not to have
to be able to do anything
outside of the context of that
medical team
I'm not hearing here is
something that we can't do that
something we have to be able to
do independently to serve some
population that we cannot do now
and that is why we need this.
And and instead by making this
change I I think it I think it
opens a lot of
And and and.
What will go back to miss Austin
if if we need to but I know
we're short on time and I know
this is kinda just laying out
the issues because we're gonna
come back on all of this I just
wanna make sure that that I I am
not surprised me with anything
else we weren't we're come back
on this next time
so looking at page three with
that language about so basically
what this would have a three is
a certified registered nurse not
this anaesthetists function in
either an independent role or in
collaboration with other health
care providers in accordance
with the policies of the health
care facility and Mr chair the
reason that.
That is giving me pause is
because previously we spoke with
the Legislature spelled out.
In quite a bit of detail here.
How.
How we want to.
These kinds of advanced practice
nurses to to work.
In a way that I assume
that and now we're saying for
you can do it in accordance with
whatever policy you come up with
healthcare facilities so one as
far as just consistency and
standardization across New
Mexico.
That's going to be a change from
facility to facility but to I
think it is abrogation of
legislative authority to now say
you can decide basically how the
scope of practice is employed
according to your policies not
us as the legislature so I I
have a problem with that
striking out that let page three
the language of the strike doubt
stricken on lines six through
eight
cut which is read collaboration
include systematic formal plant
planning and evaluation between
health the health care
professionals involved in the
collaborative practice recently
I think that's a good thing when
I asked what had been struck one
of the reasons that that was
given was a because that would
require us to to have had a
chart have it all I've written
that the collaboration charted
that's a good thing we
especially as lawyers who work
on cases like that we we want
things charter we know that if
it's not in the medical records
it's not it doesn't it's all it
doesn't exist I want that
collaboration try and I think
that charting the collaboration
also protects providers
Having there's I don't see what
I I don't I have a I don't
understand why there's a good
reason to to remove that.
But I think that's really those
three things is for moving
that's making an independent.
Allowing for how the scope
practices employed to be set by
policies of health care facility
and eliminating.
That does that clarifying
language about what
collaboration means which is
basically the whole bill.
We do have three points that
we've been talking about
throughout the day Mr chairman
and and one of my experts I
would like to we still have six
minutes it's alright can I have
been trying to can I have the
respond to those three items
hello realize the committee
members we have questions but.
Thank you we're gonna roll to
the next meeting our I'm
assuming a future meeting anyway
so much of the full
opportunities center I just I
just want for you to understand
for the committee trump has a
big we you know we just say will
we to turn the Mike or somebody
says give us your thoughts and
it turns into a whole stream of
consciousness sort of thing from
people so that's why I ask
because that's west Senator
going to ask you a question try
to get a direct answer but I'm
it's your your bill you can have
her and just talk but I don't
know three specific items that
we like to have Mister chair I
want an answer to the what what
is the independent completely
independent role that's
envisioned with this language
that that's what I want to note
what's the answer to that so if
we can respond miss Austin with
the independent what sorry Dr
of the New Mexico New if you can
respond to why the independent
languages request needed here.
Hi yes Mr chair of members of
the committee.
Representative Albuquerque for
the past eleven years I current
practice of persecuting the
Google assistant.
where I practice before my daily
and is the duties independently
and without supervision from the
position and SDL just off that
night and on weekends I.
You provided in the hospital
provides care to these
critically ill patients
understand that in two thousand
and one governor Gary Johnson
signed an opt out for New Mexico
meeting.
Sako is removed from federal
supervision.
For Medicare for CMS patients
and that allows us here is to
work independently.
Often siRNAs as a primary sole
provider of anesthesia in rural
and urban Texaco.
Understand that in rural areas
CRTs are the only entities are
providing.
There we work in collaboration
with the senator as is often has
exam we're not there and the
sisters there.
There are twenty Sierra only
practices in New Mexico provided
much needed anesthesia care
critical access hospitals
throughout the state.
Senate bill eighty simply revise
codified updates language within
the nurse practice act to
function and to describe how we
practice every day.
Practice in the hospitals.
Throughout Mexico.
So Mr chair and and and and
Center doing senator Wirth so I
guess which which really.
Same thing same issue going to
have Senator serve on this also
Mr Chairman we take a deep
breath so I can get my comments
out.
I I just want to help you with
your vote count there so.
I really appreciate that I just
love coming here
you know start singing you a
song but bottom line is as we
like state in south Philly the
bottom line is it thirty I and I
I know we're not gonna want to
hear this but I and I hope the
experts they're already doing
this in a lot of in what you
just heard this modern updates
the the the law here in New
Mexico so that everyone's on the
same page and everyone's doing
it the same way and just like
you heard in a lot of parts of
rural New Mexico this is the
only type of care that they're
going to have available to them
so we need to do this for this
class of C. R. nature these of
these members of the nurse
practice act.
To use on the floor of the New
Mexico so we're in the venture
gonna come to make one Mr chair
just not the I think what we
heard was that the summers of
New Mexico C. N. R. C. C. N. R.
A. as are the only anesthesia
providers but we didn't hear is
that they are the only ones.
Doing the opposite like do we
operative care which is what
their scope of practice and so
what I heard was they might be
the ones doing it rather than
someone like Mr I'm sorry doctor
McDonald but
But me that does it will they
need to be in.
and frankly the fact that we've
been I I mean I don't buy that
is the opt out from Johnson in
two thousand one under Medicaid
read this means that our state
law has been abrogated for the
last fifteen years and it kind
of disturbs me that that
apparently has been the practice
Because I don't think that's
appropriate but that Mr Chairman
have a little bit time I I don't
want to take a left.
We're.
You know I also want to hear
more about the strip mall
situation because that causes
makes me pause.
Is that really happening and and
and.
Part of the state who's doing
that and because that it would
seem like that wouldn't I mean I
I hear that in a limited lane
under Medicaid Johnson may have
issued an that's how everyone's
been working but that certainly
maybe this is well again getting
Academy shut the strip mall you
probably doesn't qualify for
Medicaid maybe it does I don't
know the answer to that but but
that's an interesting I just
need to hear more about.
That's a scary sight and I and I
completely eight understand and
respect.
The role as being provided
because I think there is a
critical role here is being
provided by by siRNAs and I just
but we got a weird situation
where what I'm hearing on the
zoom screen.
It's very different than what's
in the the law so I I can I get
completely.
Trying to get the law to track
and katakana.
What the practice is the
question is.
It's it's what's happening out
in the in the gray areas that
aren't in the Presbyterians in a
lot of this is where it's weird
where there's just more about
their more garbage and that's
just what I'm having some
trouble understanding.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee may I answer that.
There's really not a question
that I believe you can answer in
front of you so thank you for
the offer but you know we're
running short of time
again I do respect to all the
that are appearing remotely by
zoom again.
Every we have an unlimited
number of people with unlimited
number of opinions and and we
want to be heard on things and
so I really try to keep us to
focus questions that that's most
useful for you for the service
of this.
We have another one of the
issues.
and then discussion between.
Sarnia's and.
And this is all this thank.
Almost was what the definition
of support and and there's a
it's a family torn apart
supervised.
The reservation converts
provision of that.
I don't know the extent to which
independent is a two part here.
That we may not be we may be
reading it one way and there's a
term of art otherwise.
But but but if it is used as a
term of art.
Up with an explanation of that
someplace.
Would be helpful I think for us
to understand what is what we're
trying to get to.
Thank you so both independent
and supervised I will bring
Senator.
That is.
What is it.
I can we're at the witching hour
I I struggle with at least a few
of my colleagues in the page two
point eighteen term independent
role because well there's two
things I struggle with first of
all subparagraphs C. reads
really awkwardly to me does it
doesn't really make sense to the
with strapped that so
it is the way it reads with the
changes certified registered
nurse and that this is function
in either an independent role
for the goes on site it's that's
like a declaration
and and that seems a little
strange to me to be that way
it's worded I don't want want to
be talking with drafters you
know we're usually words words
like may and shower real popular
with us in this commitment and
they're popular in the law you
may gives authorization but
discretion shall is mandatory
and and here this doesn't either
doesn't say more challenges as
here's a thought for your.
which is they may they can do
this for that and and then I
struggle with the this was a
this or that one of the rules is
independent role I'll just tell
you Senator you know you know if
you and I talk about this this
is for you doctors of those all
of you
I do medical malpractice cases
for plaintiffs and.
It for those that don't.
Which was very common these days
for it frankly many people to
have independent contractor
relationships with the hospitals
for the groups they belong to
and so forth that's one of the
challenges we always have this
business lawyers trying to
representative what is who's
responsible for a bad outcome
and the hospitals and and
frankly the medical groups and
doctors are all very creative
and making sure nobody can
figure that out you'd be
surprised I took a deposition of
a CEO Mountain View hospital a
month ago and asked him who in
the hospital and he had no idea
and us who writes his paycheck
and he doesn't know and asking
where the checks we he's the CEO
of the hospital
they don't know that very
surprised economic times I
depose Dr who's your employer
and they get it wrong I mean
that you know they'll give me
one name of their paycheck
because by somebody else or tax
returns somebody else and you're
you're smiling but I I hope this
is no big surprise but used
center because you would be in
the business I I'm not computing
on the bill motive but I'm
suspicious and so when you say
it's in the the the person here
maybe an independent role I
wonder whether that means they
can be they can create an LLC of
their own their own corporation
that's not uncommon for a doctor
to create their own corporation
Dr because not exited from
doctor creates our own LLC their
own corporation which has no
assets right and so they they
are responsible for about
upcoming used to them and
there's nothing to so for the
more than happy to say zoom away
I've got no assets right you've
got nothing to collect from good
luck and and that's not where we
want to leave anybody I'm sure
so when it was as they can be an
independent role I'm concerned
about that I'm concerned about
with that independent rule means
I don't think anybody wants that
to be an outcome so also with
that same we've given you
hopefully some good guidance and
will work with you I I'm not.
I'm not adverse to what you're
trying to accomplish I think we
all realize New Mexico's got
challenges delivered health care
in rural New Mexico I appreciate
those of you that are here that
want to do that and make more
care available to folks but but
right now I think there's some
clear ambiguities in in what's
being proposed this particular
bill so.
Anyone else have to my folks.
With additional guidance to be a
lot of folks want to work with
you and and I think you're
you'll get to a good place to go
but more work right thank you
we're done for tonight thank you
very much we'll see a Friday.
