And I like to allow love
significant loss of time for
proponents and opponents they
can fully develop an argument
and then do so and in an
intelligent way so the goal here
tonight will be to do this will
will begin with the house bill
seventy five representative Ely
you'll have.
We're gonna go a little bit
longer on some of these bills on
these a little more complicated
so Representative Ely you'll
have up to twenty minutes from
our usual fifteen to advocate
for your bill you can reserve
any part of that that you'd like
for rebuttal argument if you'd
like one and I leave it entirely
up to you representatives in
presenting your bills to decide
who you want to admit in and for
well how long so I rely upon you
to decide the order that you
have experts are proponents
speak I rely on you to cut them
off so that you can make sure
that you get through all the
folks you want and that way you
really control your fate as far
as I'm concerned.
So we normally do fifteen
minutes but given the complexity
of some of the bills and I we're
gonna do twenty minutes for you
representative Ely is all that
kind of clear to you yes I'm
sure it is clear all right and
then for your bill
Representative
Can see here.
I got for you.
The as expert witnesses rate
Vargas Kathy Levin Giuliana
crew.
And then I've got about.
A dozen proponents I can give
you the rest of the list sure
he'd like.
Well let me let me read your
mind because the zoom operators
working off of my list okay so I
just let me know if there's
people that you don't not want
to necessarily have a submit
orders people were missing so
right now I have I have my go
hello Sir Brittney so this
Nicholas Cordova as respite Sir
Shelly Spencer families right
now
Micaela Schaefer and Dr Barbara
Mack any in that order the soon
host.
With the admit people in that
order unless you direct
otherwise and up until we
exhausted twenty minutes.
How's how's that list I'm
actually on the gets we we have
changed our because of the
concerns that were expressed so
it's Kathy robin rave Argus our
first are sharing as respect for
our second.
Then the rest we will not be
including except but there are
additional children to single
Kerry brindar and Troy Clark.
Those are are
one two three four five percent
with that couple in there but
there I experts and I don't
expect will take twenty.
I'm back I'm hoping we don't
proposed.
It was a you said Linda Segal
and who else when a single Kerry
border.
On.
These were the issues with the
New Mexico Medical Society and
Troy Clark who's with the New
Mexico hospital service here.
We're broadcasting.
I believe I've been told we are
been told the only thing that's
really down at this point is the
email right which is that the
truth the problem with the email
was only that that's where we
send out links to folks to join
the committee process so that's
why I asked to make sure in the
case of a Representative
utilizes a presentation that
these got everybody joined in
and they're all here and the
zoom operators Gautam and ready
to admit a.
How should the public I I'm
sorry so I I so they'll be
they'll be doing public judgment
but I would at the way you
pronounced it yes I would just
as soon have the wall there this
will just your all's partner
twenty eight people of listed
Linda Siegel Kerry grander
intron Clark in addition to
Kathy Wylde rave Argus and
structure.
That's all right.
Of course your twenty minute
show Representative yes Sir
thank you very much it's let's
see I'd make sure we've got our
quorum looks like we have that
and we're good to go at seven
forty seven so I'll clock you
clock yourself and dollar up to
twenty if you haven't started
I'm gonna stop by that time I
will be very weak Mr Chairman.
Did you I Mr Chairman were you
taking role first regional
champion I'll jump right on it
all right so Mr chairman members
of the committee
I'm we have reached a compromise
of all of the district players
and what is a very complicated
field are the medical
malpractice field and so rather
than doing what I had planned on
doing on the amendment that is
in part all of you and I'll just
give you the two oh two number
is two two zero seven seven
eight point one and what I'd
really like to do is is just
actually introduced to you kind
of the people that were involved
in the negotiations so it's
Cappy love who as an advocate
and avoid a repeat for patients
all right Vargas who is also a
where for patients as well as an
insurance expert Linda Siegel
whose lobbyist for the nurses
Carrie Brunner who's a lobbyist
for the New Mexico Medical
Society are Troy Clark who is
the CEO and president of New
Mexico hospital association so
I'd like to do is I'm gonna
start with Dr Kathy love for her
just to say a few words and then
what we'll do is we'll quickly
just turned over to the
committee to talk about the
amendments and I can visit about
the US only have Japanese you
all talk first editions are.
Mr chair R. zoom operator can
you send the link to Senator or
Senator troubles thank you Mr
chair R. senator Morris I sent
went to Pirtle send it again we
have been having trouble with
that email so Senator Moores if
you'd like to forward that we
can that be great I'll send it
again as well you Mr chairman
I've just used yesterday's link
we don't have an email just use
yesterday's link Morgan Roberts
sent to that one thank you thank
you Mr produced Representative
all do that.
All right I will restart it says
seven fifty assuming everybody's
here go ahead Representative
yeah I'll turn it over in his
life just say a few words and
then what we'll do is we'll the
seventy words about the
negotiations and that as there
are questions about the
amendment all of them will be
available to talk to our that
we're going to go from the start
with the slide Kathleen.
Okay thank you chairman serve on
tests and members of the
committee representative Ely
this amendment as Representative
Ely said it is the result of
many many hours of discussion of
the hospital association who
also coordinated with the
medical society and the nurses
the threshold concerns that we
were dealing with when we were
negotiating these amendments.
Was making sure that patients
are seriously injured and their
families are taking care of
protecting doctors so we can
have a safe and thriving health
care system in New Mexico
holding those who make mistakes
accountable so there's an
incentive to fix broken proper
practices and make healthcare
safer and also very importantly
to shore up the patient
compensation fund that is on the
brink of collapse right now
this compromise Services schools
and it is make no mistake a
compromise on all ends of the
spectrum
and the major points of the
these amendments are
that first of all hospitals and
outpatient facilities will be
treated differently than
independent providers and so
what I refer to hospitals I'm
talking about hospitals and
outpatient facilities
the caps change for hospitals
the cap is raised from six
hundred thousand.
And it's on a graduated system
in twenty twenty two it will be
a four million dollar cap the
next year for the next year I
mean next year five and a half
the next year six and then from
then on it's a six million
dollar cap for hospitals plus
the cost of living increase
every year going forward
included in the hospital counts
are all medical print providers
to sort of fall under the rubric
of the hospital's Caesarea
please login tenants doctors
agency nurses
The law that has developed
around the medical malpractice
Act will stay intact essential
eat a sensible agency remains
untouched by these amendments
the exceptions to that cap or
you need to damages are not caps
because punitive damages are are
important way to deter future
about conduct the compromises
safety and health care past and
future medical expenses will not
be capped in other words a
patient who is catastrophically
injured and is going to require
home healthcare like futures
surgeries other treatments in
the future
Those those expenses will not be
capped so that patients are
taken care of forward for the
all the treatment that they need
in the future.
And these medical expenses will
no longer be administered and
paid out of the out of the funds
so the the office of the
superintendent of insurance just
simply doesn't have the capacity
to operate like this insurance
company and so it was very
important patients that they not
have to keep going back every
time they have a future need
they don't have to go back and
sort of have this mother may I
system where they have to go and
ask for permission to get this
future treatments
so instead there will be lump
sum pay out so that patients can
purchase and new movies and so
that they were so that they can
get insurance and ensure that
they have their future Mets
covered and the reason for this
graduated system is that
everybody agreed that we've got
to shore up the patient
compensation fund and so we're
attempting to stabilize it by
having sort of a graduated
system were intentionally the
hospitals will can be completely
out of the frontier bill still
be in the medical malpractice
act but no longer in the fund
and so no longer will the office
of the superintendent of
insurance have to DO these
actuarial studies to make sure
that these big corporations are
paying their share into the fund
as well what I'm gonna do is
because we got a number speakers
but I want to do is I I know we
have described the whole thing
and I don't mean to cut you off
but I'm gonna want to get
through all of the speakers and
I'm probably I'm in charge of
kind of cutting people off as
we're doing this presentation so
I'd like to if you don't mind
level I I know you have a lot
more state but I think it'll
come up with questions Richard
this sherry and as for Spencer
they're all okay.
Yes thank you think
representative thank you Mr
chair members the committee my
name's as our Spitzer and I
my wife and I my wife sherry
she's sorry she said again are
not ready for that we up.
We embark to start a family some
years ago and she became
pregnant with twin girls
You know those are the pregnancy
went really well.
We we went to the hospital for
the delivery decisions were made
that
a vaginal birth was the best
possible option for positive
outcome M. A. R. K. our second
daughter was in the bridge
position
meaning her feet fever first.
We went to the hospital
Her first daughter was born
without incident perfectly
really
three hours for three hours a
doctor attempted to deliver our
second daughter
And she was just fixated
severely in during the birth
before C. section was performed
she was revived after birth she
lived for four days before
before she passed away.
And I just you know has as a as
someone who's been a victim of
of negligence I I just
I want this committee to know
how.
How tragic and how also the
circumstances are and when this
happens us we were you know we
were inside an operating room
inside a hospital
you know a C. section could and
should have been performed very
quickly
and I think it's questionable
whether or not a vaginal birth
was was even the the proper
advice course of action.
And there is no there's no path
to justice in the current system
there's absolutely no path to
justice the current system is
incredibly cruel
and I would say this compromise
from the perspective of the
patient is not perfect and it is
not full justice but it's better
it's better than what's out
there it's better than the
cruelty of the current system
and this whole time of also just
ask all of you to recognize you
know so so often this
legislation has been framed
about doctors or doctor
hospitals or about attorneys but
it's not just about those those
who have been and will be
injured by acts of gross
negligence and the impacts of
those are are great and severe
so thank you for your time
at I do hope you'll support
This legislation thank you thank
you and then we have Linda
Siegel.
The single are you there.
When are you out there.
Maybe having problems of people
getting and is Kerry Brander
there.
Mr chair members of the
committee them.
Our goal is not in the waiting
room.
Okay I know she wanted to talk
and I wondered we talk is Kerry
wonder there.
Yes Mr chairman.
Chairman and members of the
committee Kerry robin Ruiter
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico Medical Society the
professional organization
representing more than three
thousand active practice
physicians across the state the
medical society would like to
thank our partners at the
hospital association for their
tireless work negotiating with
the trial lawyer Association
this past week the report of the
discussion is the agreement
before you this evening nearly
all of the interests of the
Medical Society and those of the
broader network of the New
Mexico clinician coalition.
Include the nurses that Mexico
representative are reflected in
the amendment as with any
compromise no one got everything
they asked for but given how far
apart the stakeholders have been
the fact that we were able to
reach an agreement is a
remarkable accomplishment the
medical society accepts all the
provisions included in the
amendment as presented by
Representative Eli there may be
a discussion about a very small
technical fix that needs to
happen but I will leave that to
the representative to discuss we
agree to the cap provisions the
modifications New Mexico medical
review commission and the
changes made to participate in
the patient compensation funds
the definitions have been poured
over with a fine tooth comb and
they are reflective of the
agreement reached this
negotiated amendment is very
delicate and complex we have P.
due attention to every word on
the page and we urge the
committee to pass the amendment
as agreed to and presented by
the parties thank you so much Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and I think Linda
Segal is now in Mr chairman.
Bill to meet the language that
meets the criteria of what we're
trying to open that we support
for religious.
And I believe finally Linda she
goes unmuted hello yes Mr chair
are members of the committee
thank you Linda Siegel
representing the nursing groups
this legislation has been a long
time coming for my clients I
first started trying to amend
nurse practitioners and nurse
midwives into the mad now act in
the early two thousands of
course everyone opposed the
medical society and the trial
Laurier's healthcare delivery is
changed dramatically over the
last twenty years in PED's have
a huge role in delivering
primary care as well as
specialty care CNN's deliver
mostly in hospitals thirty three
percent of all the babies in New
Mexico and for the first time
ever all the players have
converged to support each other
doctors nurses and hospitals
this substitute language has
been carefully constructed
through many hours of
negotiation and renegotiation
and it has achieved the full
agreement from all of the
parties involved not everyone is
happy with the compromises that
have been made but perhaps that
indicates the value of this
product we strongly encourage
you to support this carefully
worded negotiated agreement
thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee let me start with a
little bit of a confession
I I'm not going to tell you that
I'm an expert on mission and and
if you start asking me about it
I'm not going to be able to
answer that question this is an
incredibly complex and the to
just feel and as some have
called me on this bill I am no
amendment you lie I am pleading
with the committee this is a
very careful Committee like
house judiciary but this is a
document that almost any word
change can have unintended
consequences and I stay on
intended because it's such a
judge's area I won't be able to
tell you the change and eight
o'clock I won't know what impact
has but they money and the other
thing that I would point out to
the committee is even all the
people that I just called on
we're negotiating agreements all
sherry yeah that doesn't sound
too bad they still have to
report back to other groups and
other people some of whom
weren't even in the state we are
clearly running out of time and
if we start teaching her way is
yes amendment we are going to be
in trouble and so what I do I
know what I'm doing is unusual
and unorthodox what I am asking
committee to do is understand
these are the actors in this
very complex would take the
system to trustees actors
because the other ones are going
to have to live with the
amendments that they propose I
there was a small change I don't
know what was going to propose
it it was senator do we hate
what with that Mr chairman and
members the committee I hope I
kept within like twenty minutes
and we will stand for questions.
Representative you're.
You're good on time
Representative so
Covered I think everybody who
you had asked to recognize we
did not have anyone registered
in opposition is not only the
part of the meeting where we go
to the opposition so we'll go to
members of the committee.
before we do I want to make of
my own disclosure importantly I
do do a medical malpractice work
in my my practice law and I'm
studying the bill carefully to
see whether anything in here
with implicate any pending cases
that I have actually just okay
questions about that but will
come to me as the chair last
with regard to how these things
affect on the basis that are not
pending particularly with the
admission of additional health
care providers so with that said
we'll go to members of the
committee Senator doing did you
have an amendment.
Mr chair I was just going to
move the amendment to that it
that representative Ely has been
referring to if there was
another one in addition to that
I might need to.
To figure that out real quickly.
No because I understand that the
amendment is proposed to Senate
Judiciary Committee substance
house bill seventy five.
That is that correct Mr yes
right now it's the motion before
the body is there a you
mentioned the sponsor supports
the proposed amendment.
Is there any discussion of the
pending motion.
For the substitution Center
Stuart yes you are yes thank you
Mr chairman I just want to make
sure that I have the right one
so I can get the two oh two
number.
And Mr chair it is to to seven
seven eight point one that's
correct Mr chairman all right
thank you that's what I have
thank you.
Thank you all right we're on the
pending motion for substitution
any other discussion Mr chairman
and Mr chair.
Our
homes are.
Which are not I'm a little
confused the the the the sponsor
at the beginning said he didn't
want any amendments and I was
encouraging us to adopt an
amendment.
Yeah I I'm talking about and
then then to the amendment
Mister chairman Senator and by
the way this is not a substitute
this is an event just to be
greater by yes but you're right
hi other than disbarment.
You're just.
But I want I don't want the
amendment then how about that
thank you so that's what we can
do you just want to be
amendments of the cement
correct.
This is just a Senate chairman
Senator the deal.
One of the committee before I
ask a question Representative
I was just pointing out that we
weren't going to do a substitute
that this was an amendment
correct that the terminology
being used was a substitute.
You're right it would would be a
Senate committee so.
Thank you
Let's see here so yeah I read
the title and says proposes
Senate Judiciary Committee
that's what I got from but
you're right we want to go back
to the house.
here's what I understand going
on Representative we're
sensually striking what is the
bill and making this the bill is
that right
Mr chairman in a back that's
correct this yourselves we go
back to the whole process again
the house that's what we want
yeah which is why.
So there's no question we're not
gonna do that.
I want to make sure that they
were everything that's been
done.
On the today elsewhere is being
replaced by this as an amendment
Mr chairman that is correct.
Anyone else in the committee.
Thirty one is there any
objection to the adoption of the
proposed amendment.
Racing.
The amendment is adopted members
the committee with other
discussion.
Senator yes thank you Mr
chairman
So.
I have a question about the
effective dates so you have
three sections that are
effective July one twenty twenty
one and then you have one
through six and eight to twelve
and fifteen through seventeen
that's January one twenty twenty
two.
Can you explain or someone
perhaps this cap the love for
well as you want Representative
Ely to explain why we have done
this a differential effective
dates Madam chair and I mean the
government later I'll president
started president I out there
were but let me turn it over to
you all
is law I think she requests that
Mr.
Mr chair Senators of the
committee
the reason for those different
effective date is because we
have the big challenge of trying
to shore up a fifty six million
dollar deficit and the patient
compensation fund and so in
order to accomplish what was
right for patients which is an
increase in the cap so they're
adequately compensated but also
chair of the fund and give the
hospitals an opportunity to pay
off debts for the the OSI to do
a proper analysis of what they
need in the fund we did a
graduated system.
At graduated system Mr chairman
meaning.
We know what.
Mr chairman and senators the
increase of that house the
capture increased is that the
first year the caps good four
million for hospitals and then
each year after that they go up
half a million until they reach
the five year mark at which
point the cap becomes six
million dollars with the cost of
living increase for hospitals
for independent providers which
would be the nurses and the
doctors they're going from the
six hundred thousand dollar cap
to seven hundred and fifty and I
think Mr chairman and president
I think that that Mr Vargas
pointed at the text.
I think you might be a question
Senator well Mr Vargas thank you
Mr chairman president the reason
for the July one date of this
year is that another significant
change with this legislation is
that we are removing the
hospitals.
Action clinics and their
physicians from requirement of
having to go through the medical
review commission.
As I'm sure a lot of folks are
aware since the hospitals were
let in the medical review
commission has experience
somewhat of a backlog and you
know hospitals did not
necessarily want to keep their
physicians.
In having to go through the
commission the individual
physicians in fact wanted to
stay with that so we were trying
to effectuate that changes
quickly as possible so in the
hopes anyway that the medical
review commission would get
unclog to move a little bit
faster.
Right thank you for those
answers that's all Mr chairman.
Thank you very much Senator
others questions.
There is the committee.
Thank you very much that Mr
Chairman.
Right our our Representative Ely
I I hear what you're saying
about about not making changes.
R. I guess what I what I like
those is is.
We'll go through and see if you
can explain certain things are
within within the also have
somebody else who is present be
able to explain certain things.
On the side of the okay Mister
chairman Senator course.
So.
You
go through this we have the the
definitions that you have in
section forty one dash five dash
three.
And and and while I know that
the issue of the word.
Seven AM in person action
includes a corporation
organization and Elsie of right
of other things actually on the
uniformed definition person.
You is rig with we've already
got a brighter things there but
but but you'll.
On a business entity some
explain our business entity is
distinct from corporation or
organization.
Mister chairman Senator let me
turn it over either as lovers
departures what workings wants
to jump in I think they're the
ones that can be seen by Argus.
Mister chairman Senator Ivey
Soto that business entity fix
was inserted at the request of
the hospital corporations and it
actually addresses a specific
case there was a case of the New
Mexico Supreme Court where
some lawyers and their clients
were trying to get around the
medical malpractice act caps by
not suing the doctors but suing
the practices that they worked
in I. E. the corporate entity or
the LLC or whatever.
Important they chose to practice
medicine and in that case the
New Mexico Supreme Court
acknowledge that it would be
unfair to have the physicians in
the practice be qualified health
care providers in the medical
malpractice act within not give
the business entity whatever it
may be that they practiced under
the same benefit and so I think
what we wanted to do was make
that legislatively clearer in
the active self and so that was
to address that concern.
okay.
And so.
What we do it within the context
of that of the.
Of the litigation.
I'm.
They are the next one hundred
hospital you do you to find a
hospital the hospital.
And if we were in the in the
health code that might make more
sense to me to the final
hospitals hospital is there
definitions of hospital under
the public health code.
We're under.
Four point in the in the
statutes and our after forty
one.
And so and so what is it
possible definition of a
hospital when defined in the
context of a hospital.
Mr chairman and Representative
and again Mr chairman and
senator Richard on which you are
Mister Parker's.
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto the
definition of a hospital in the
the licensing act is.
Fairly plain Jane it's not as
specific as it is here and the
reason that this particular
definition was more specific is
that.
The stakeholders agreed that we
wanted to be abundantly clear
when the courts are interpreting
this act that they understand
that the employees working in
that hospital.
Would actually when what amount
practice claims brought would be
subject to the hospital cap as
opposed to the individual
practitioner cat.
So we went on in the definition
if you look at it this is
subsection B.
it hospitals or facility
licensed as a hospital in the
state that offers inpatient
services nursing or overnight
Care a twenty four hour basis
for diagnosing treating and
providing medical psychological
or surgical care for three or
more separate persons who have a
physical mental illness disease
injury or rehabilitated
condition or are pregnant and
may offer emergency services and
again the.
The goal here is to make sure
that it's clear the hospital is
not out outpatient facility and
it's not the independent
provider within the definition
goes on as I mentioned to
include the hospital's parent
corporation subsidiary
corporations or affiliates if
incorporated or registered New
Mexico it's employees locum
tenens in those is often the
physicians that are just kind of
part time borrowed for the
emergency room providing
services at the hospitals and
agency nurses so again we wanted
to be inclusive to make it clear
that when people are practicing
in the hospital either as an
employee or as a locum tenens or
agency nurse that the claim
would be subject to the hospital
cap rather than the individual
providers.
Within the definitions as a look
at the.
Definitions.
What currents in and and
Representative we were just.
But a fair amount of time last
night on the on on HB for.
And the current one the main
issues that we're dealing with
their and escalation to the
proclaims Act which is a
different part of.
One of the Senate after but
occurrence here.
Seems to be seems to be at a
distinct occurrence.
and so does this come out of
specifically met now K. all Mr
chairman and representative bill
off the light or.
Or or or how is it that
occurrence of this case is
different from parents within
the context of the Civil Rights
Act.
Mr chairman and our Senator
alternate again organised regard
is sent for Mr Vargas is
purposes I'm sure he he may or
may not know the state house
bill four was the civil rights
bill that the Senate action on
last night.
What council by mater of just
briefly this is Joseph
I think in the interest of time
and we're right in the session
unless there's objection by
anybody that can do you don't
have to go to the chair unless
becomes cumbersome Senator Ivey
Soto you can direct your
questions directly at Mr Margus
let having to go to
representative Ely less
Representative Eli objects are.
Thank you Mr chair they'll
certainly short things up.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto the
answer your question there
currently is no case law on the
definition of occurrence as it
has appeared in the medical
malpractice actions nineteen
seventy six
that has caused people to try to
draw guidance from cases
involving the tort claims act
particularly the tools verses
state K. but that has resulted
in varying rulings from
different District Court judges
so what we sought to do in
amending the act was to define
occurrence in a way that made
sense in the medical malpractice
contacts because if you think of
the tort claims act for the
Civil Rights Act context there's
usually only one is that whether
it be a shooting a car accident
well in a rest we're is in the
medical malpractice contacts
there can be a continuum of
events where there can be
separate events over time that
because distinct.
Injuries or are basically
distinct act medical malpractice
and so we wanted to encompass
that and we went on further this
is actually in our definition
but the bill drafters straighten
us out and told us it wasn't a
definition but if you look under
limitations of recovery which is
section three of this ammendment
Three J..
Takes what we had in our
definition but the bill drafters
thought made more sense to go
here explaining that the term
occurrence shall not be
construed in such a way as to
limit recovery to only one
maximum statutory payment is
separate acts or omissions
because additional or enhanced
injury or harm as a result of
the separate acts or omissions
and I can tell you the case law
on tort claims which I refer to
the full versus state K. is
actually has a different
definition than that and so we
tried to capture something that
made sense in the context of
what we experience in medical
malpractice cases as opposed to
what you might experience in a
tort claims or Civil Rights Act
K..
Thank you you are thank you very
much Mr burgers you mentioned
the the section.
You're in with limitations on
recovery as I was reading that I
didn't find many limitations on
recovery
So the water so what the
limitations on recovery.
Okay.
Senator first of all right now
as the act stands there is an
absolute cap of six hundred
thousand dollars.
Plus medical expenses plus
future medical expenses as
incurred which means you know if
you need if the jury finds that
you need future medical expenses
as a result of medical
negligence you go incur that
expense and then you get paid
back and we've found that that
system is cumbersome and not
usable and is too much of a
burden on the patient
compensation fund in the office
of the superintendent so it has
been restructured and the
caption change.
There are two caps no one can't
for hospitals and outpatient
facilities it's a higher cap and
then a lower cap for individual
providers and individual
providers are what this act
which was passed in nineteen
seventy six were really intended
to be and that is local doctors
practicing either on their own
or in groups and their cap is
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars.
Question medical expenses only
instead of doing them as incur
there now done as a lump sum and
there are of course punitive
damages available if there is
such conduct in the case that's
the individual provider cap
that's distinct from now the
hospital and outpatient facility
cap which starts beginning
January one of next year at four
million dollars plus medicals
plus punitive damages in certain
cases that cap increases over
the next five years until it
reaches six million dollars and
it caps out at six million
dollars on January one twenty
twenty seven and there it shall
remain.
Or.
What that six billion dollars of
is is distinct from the
individual provider cracked.
Act.
Mr Clark has something to have
excuse me just one clarification
Mister chair early sat Senator
Ivey Soto.
Mr Vargas mentioned that it
stops at six million it it
ceases to increase automatically
by increments and then adjust to
a CPI adjustment thereafter so
it doesn't actually stop at six
million in twenty twenty seven
on annual basis it will adjust
for the consumer price.
so I'm.
Thank you for that operation of
a spark so I'm I'm I'm I'm a
look at some place of hearing.
One of things that was added is
that is that any one party
within ten days of the asphalt
by the respondents.
Are you have a hearing conducted
via.
Video Conference.
With everybody appearing
remotely.
I certainly understand that in
the in the period so special
care that we're in right now I'm
wondering what the what the
public policy is behind that
well as probable.
Thank you Senator Ivy Soto the
public policy behind that is to
make the process more
streamlined and more accessible
it's very difficult to put one
of these panels together because
you have to first of all
everyone who participates in the
panel it's made up half doctors
have lawyers they're all
volunteers they're doing it on
in their free time they're doing
it for free and we have found
with the influx of claims over
the past few years since the
hospitals have been and it's
more more difficult to schedule
a hearing is more more difficult
to get people's schedules to
work and by providing that
option and it is optional they
can have he can still have in
person commissions if and when
it's safe to do so but we wanted
to make it more accessible so
that that process was more
streamlined and frankly it's
probably a lot cheaper than than
having you know brick and mortar
having people come in and staff
and the as it is the medical
review commission has a very
limited budget I believe last
year and the year before they
ask for additional sums because
they didn't have enough money to
cover their budget and we're
just trying to do everything we
could to make that process
easier.
This doesn't hearing here is not
a court hearing is that correct
that's correct that's the
medical review commission
hearing that and again I think
we mentioned earlier the
hospitals and outpatient
facility physicians will no
longer be part of that process
but the individual providers
will and that will basically
remain the same as it has been
since nineteen seventy six and
that is before my client into an
individual provider they'll have
to submit their application to
the medical review commission
have a hearing before the
commission and then once the
commission renders its decision
whether it's yes or no you have
a right to sue in District
Court.
Senator Ivey Soto this also
allows for doctors who are
around the state not have to
travel to Albuquerque to appear
for one of these hearings and
also doctors and lawyers who
would be on the panel not to
have just come from Santa Fe and
Albuquerque it provides more
participation.
But what we through
What's the hospitals are out of
the fund.
And that happens.
Well six o'clock.
Now.
Five point seven years through
to help.
That serve you round up six
years at the instance of.
okay so my point seven years
now.
Hospitals are the fund at the
apple app but but the six
million dollar limitation
remains on hospitals that
correct Senator that's correct
hospitals retain all the
benefits of the medical
malpractice act except for
participation in the patient
compensation fund so at that
point they have the six million
dollar cap that increases by the
CPI index but they can choose to
ensure that.
Excuse me I'm sorry you can
choose to ensure that they can
self insure that however they
want to provide for that
liability.
Okay so so there are so they
they're they're on their own
enter the paying six million
dollars for clay.
Rector no longer part of the
patient compensation fund and
you'll know that there's a
provision in there that requires
that to the extent.
The deficit in the fund can be
attributable to particular
hospitals they're required to
satisfy that debt and get it
caught up before they leave in
five point seven years.
And and.
And that's a fifty eight fifty
seven million are not set.
That's a projected fifty seven
million dollar deficit we don't
really know what it is.
Mr Burke
yeah part of what Mr Vargas
referring to us over.
The next five years the
identification of breaking out
because several of these claims
have mixed job our judgment that
spoke against a provider
hospital so we're just gonna be
done to figure out how much this
is fifty six is attributable to
hospitals verses the providers
and have that time for both
sides to settle up to get their
deficits back to raise our
ballots and and and who will be
resolving those accounting
issues over the next couple of
seven years so included as I.
Finally is asked that question
including that we had to have
the office of the superintendent
insurance still with their rule
but we have included are me let
me get to which section a
oversight committee to work with
them to ensure that that happens
you'll find that.
Slover Mr Vargas if you're
quicker maybe finding the
section for that begin.
Leave it is section thirteen.
Section eight I believe that
what I'm sorry I'm not I'm sorry
I'm wrong.
It is that back section fourteen
the patient compensation fund
advisory for.
We established that to still
work with the office of
superintendent insurance
superintendent would still be
ultimately in charge of setting
those premiums but working with
an actuary and then having a
third party review to consult
with him on that to ensure that
the assessments of the
surcharges are sent such to
achieve the elimination of that
those balances that deficit by
the end of five years.
And what is the dispute
resolution on that in the
process.
I'm sorry Senate in which
process.
All right so you have a director
is working on it you've got the
you've got the.
R. a commission.
Folks working on it.
They assess everything somebody
disagrees as a result of this
agreement.
It's a million dollars.
Well.
Senator the oversight board is
to work in conjunction with the
office of the superintendent so
presumably the office of the
superintendent will retain
professional actuaries who will
come up with reports and that
it's up to the superintendent to
make those decisions but the it
by re board made up of all the
various stakeholders would have
oversight and if you look in the
in the section creating them
they also report to the
legislature once a year so if
there would be some kind of
dispute that would be the
process would be to the report
to the legislature.
Okay so let's disability more
clear about this so I'm hospital
I get it I guess a six point
five million dollars of the
fifty seven million dollar
deficit my cancer telling me
that we're only into this for
three million dollars.
What we resolved that that a
report the legislature's not
gonna resolve.
Dollar gap about my cancer
saying versus what the actuaries
are saying in this in this
process of trying to find a
You know that that.
That that resolution would occur
the same way it should have in
the past and that is by
following the regulations that
were promulgated by the
superintendent of insurance who
is the fiduciary of that fund
there are regulations that
provide for ways to deal with
that it's an administrative
agency it follows the
administrative procedures act
now and so it would go through
the administrative process that
never happened before but we had
a different superintendent and I
have all confidence in
superintendent till.
Through an administrative
process within the OSI correct
and and then there's a hearing
process already defined
elsewhere and all but I believe
so in fact that that.
The superintendent now is
required to follow the
administrative procedures act so
we've got we have a process.
That.
Senator Stewart ginger that
commission the oversight
commission may be
addressed to consult with the
superintendent alternately the
setting of the surcharges would
be the responsibility of the
support that we think are.
Okay.
Mr chairman thank you very much
representative Ely that is
actually the most informative
presentation you have ever.
Thank you senator I was very
articulate was nine yes you
thank you Mr.
Okay so does that everything
from you that is everything from
the site yes okay other
committee members a question
Senator Stewart.
Miss Mister chairman I want to
move a do pass I know you have
the issues but I want to get
that do pass on that table.
House Bill seventy five as
probably amended.
I think everybody knows issues
but we're talking about this
bill tonight Senator.
Well no I mean I'm just saying
that I know you're going to want
to talk about the bill but I
want to do is to pass so there
you there I did I was trying
some humor with you
emeritus the work is too late
for humor I'm too tired for
humor try some more.
And we'll we'll we'll try to get
this is that is that all from
you for right now Senator yes
I'm trying not to be
contemplation.
All that work that in during the
session so.
For all Senator o'neill yes I
would just like this second the
confirmations Senator Stewart a
motion.
Work on commissions.
The second and then out to your
comments Mr chair.
We.
Anyone else you can drop your
hand for now I think Center
o'neill yes.
Other members of the committee.
They will also.
So
I understand very much your into
your wish Representative Eli hi
going to honor it I'm not going
insist on amendments but I'm
certainly gonna ask those on the
call to perhaps give me some
reassurance on some of my
concerns and to consider whether
there's not need for further
work between now and the end of
the session.
For to start that I can't recall
the year that they met Mel Act
was enacted all right we'll know
the answer that Mr Vargas will
nineteen seventy six nineteen
seventy six nineteen seventy six
thank you and since nineteen
seventy seventy six.
Almost half a century we.
Mr Vargas ms love others many
others on this call litigate all
day long the interpretation of
the mid now at.
In many of us are in the middle
of that litigation today and the
and what the definitions meaning
with the language in the act
means and we've been doing that
since seventy six and there's a
lot of cases that have been
decided trying to construe what
the legislature meant.
So I I start with that as a
precaution because the last
thing I want to be doing is
enacting a new med Mao Act and
starting another half century
trying to interpret what this
act means in in leaving
ambiguity or questions for the
courts thank I know we're we're
joined tonight by chief justice
we hills so.
He here may appreciate the
sausage making process a little
bit as well to.
The subsection C. of the
definitions redefines healthcare
providers to add additional
health care providers including
certain certified nurse
practitioners and set aside so
that would include RN's is that
is that a certified nurse
practitioner within that
definition.
Mr chair that's correct.
in and I know that all of these
would now be health care
providers so one of the first
questions I have is
the effective date of this is is
a.
Not yet passing but but for
ongoing litigation and I'm sure
of Mr Vargas ms Levin others you
know there there's ongoing
litigation in cases where the
question is whether a certified
nurse midwife or nurse is
qualified under the actor table
will be qualified and that so.
What what is a core gonna do
when they see that we agreed to
provide health care provider to
include these additional parties
now even though the act becomes
effective later on does does
that pretty which decide that
issue for pending cases.
Mr chair I believe it has no
effect on pending cases the
effective date of the of the
substantive provisions including
the definition is January one
twenty twenty two
we have a strong body of case
law in New Mexico about
retroactive application of
legislation we have the case
referred to as beavers and you
look to to the beavers factors
and none of those would be
present in this particular acts
of the effective date of January
one twenty twenty two would be
the first time a nurse could
qualify as a qualified health
care provider but remember it's
not an automatic thing they
still have to meet the
qualifications set forth in the
act right now I understand I
understand.
The retroactivity and the
factors but here's my question
is that right now there's
litigation ongoing as to whether
the act in its present form
includes nurses are not there
there's a dispute about that
with your greatness of ours.
Senator I would agree with you
and I would add that to
the fact that the legislature
amended the act would be strong
evidence to a trial court today
that the prior version did not
include the.
Well and I and I and that's a
great are you and you and I
would make it and in the
hospital probably say what the
legislature intended to have
women and that's what the they
did so now so you know that that
I I I understand I don't know we
can predict what the court's
going to do with that I get a
little more trouble with
subsection do.
you're defining a hospital here
I'm I'm particularly of
dissatisfied with the second to
last paragraph which says a
hospital includes a hospital's
parent corporations subsidiaries
or affiliates incorporated and
registered in New Mexico I'm I'm
sure in your cases my counsel Mr
Vargas and I don't mean to
food and the others who were on
the call I'm just you've taken
the lead for answer my questions
so.
often times when you're trying
to find the adequacy of
insurance you're looking at
parent corporations or subsidy
or other corporations at least
in my experience there rarely
rarely if ever incorporated or
registered in New Mexico and so
here we're defining hospital to
say that as I understand this
you could only.
Try to join a hospital Parrikar
duration if it's incorporated or
registered in New Mexico.
And that's that's part of my
concern for the court would say
that they would say for example
if if the defendant was state
memorial Medical Center in Los
crucis which is a DBA for PCH
Los crucis bank which is a
subsidiary corporation of
lifepoint health bank which is a
subsidiary of five point health
services you know the drill
have we not precluded joining
those parent corporations by
saying that hospitals defined to
include the corporation
subsidiary or parent only even
corporate or registered in New
Mexico.
Senator act Mr chair Senator
actually what we've done is.
In the scenario that you just
pointed out where they have a
parent corporation in another
state we have excluded them from
participation in the medical
malpractice act there is no cap
on suing them.
So this is actually quite
beneficial to the scenario that
you outlined.
Okay I understand I understand
what you're saying.
Of so any references in the act
of hospital would include
exclude a parent corporations
H..
Mr chair Senator corporation
other state that is correct
learn.
The the other trick of I hope
that we've covered here and help
me to understand or see that too
is.
The way that a health care
provided is defined now in this
act the health care provider
includes the hospital is that
right.
Mr chair that's correct that's
that that that is one change
from the nineteen seventy six
act okay.
But what has changed is.
To see if we look at.
Some of the caps and
limitations.
If you look at the limitation on
recovery the section three
paragraph Hey.
What the new language would do
which would be to establish the
the six hundred thousand dollar
cap already remains the same but
it's a from a practice claims
brought against health care
providers for injury death a
creamy for January one twenty
twenty two so since we've
defined healthcare providers to
include a hospital right already
because often but now we're
adding in the cap the cap with
the will to health care
providers are we not camping
hospitals to six hundred
thousand dollars what this
language.
We are until January one twenty
twenty two the effective date of
this amendment we're basically
keeping the status quo.
So that's the intention is to
cap hospitals of your
introduction.
To maintain the status quo for
the remainder of this year
before the effective date of the
act this year that is correct
and then going back to the the
definitions section on hospital
independent provider one of the
things that of course I know you
you handle a great deal as to
why is the
Matter of a parent agency
ostensible agency and such so
when when a
Health care private provider or
the way independent provider is
to provide.
And it's and it if you look at a
provider it says so certified
nurse practitioner clinical
nurses as who is not an agent of
the hospital or outpatient
health care facility so for them
to be an independent provider
they must not be an agent but is
that always going to be
litigated issue and the agency
of the of somebody like I'd say
a doctor who has privileges and
who's not an employee of the
hospital but the the example of
of of the father who spoke with
us earlier about coming in to
say the emergency room and not
being given the option of
anybody but it's in the drive to
deliver a trial.
Mr chair that is correct and
that's and that is eight I think
a.
Example of just wanted.
We strongly negotiated deal this
was there were attempts to try
to legislate away ostensible
agency and as part of the given
take in those we left it
untouched and left it to the
courts.
Okay all right that's that's I
guess what I wanted to hear I
want to make sure that that's
going to continue against be an
issue that will fight about.
Mr chair that's correct in in a
in a what I want to make sure
that the the definitions here do
no harm to that.
We're quite cognizant of that
time share mmhm.
Yeah because if you go if you go
back up to.
Hospital definition of hospital.
It includes and after the after
the Representative I gave you
earlier for a parent or
subsidiary corporation
registered in New Mexico the the
following after that so my
client is the word employees.
So employees evidently of the
hospital or the hospital.
I guess what is in place of who
just it just says
In other words with the semi
colon there it employees and
locum tenens providing services
of a hospital so the question
that would be if you've got a
doctor's got privileges the
doctors employee he's not an
employee of the hospital but he
certainly than ploy if whatever
his practice group maybe so the
that that doctor is not going to
be covered within the hospital.
Sure the intention of this is
that is the hospital's Louise.
Yeah I would feel a lot better
that's what it said
And I guess will imply that and
and hope for the best with every
gets litigated but but it I
understand that maybe that's the
only possible understanding what
that says but but it just says
employees this.
It says I'm sorry and
Representative employees
providing services of a hospital
so you may have employees of any
number of different people
providing services at a
hospital.
And and they would be defined as
the hospital.
Mr chair if you I think if you
read it in context and.
In our Supreme Court has made it
clear that we have to read the
entire acting context the fact
that there is a separate
definition for the individual
providers I think makes it clear
that in that particular
definition of hospitals
reference to employees of the
hospital.
Yeah well I hear I hear the
hospital saying that's the
intention I hear that's what
you're saying the intention is
is just one of those areas were
you nice to be able to at two or
three words and make that
abundantly clear not litigate
that issue but again if it's if
we reach the untouchable place
that burden on that issue that
may be what what I was thinking
is that maybe the one area that
we're gonna look at between now
on the floor so it's a good.
Or texting me this was the thing
that I had anticipated so that
maybe something you'll see on
the floor it's a it's really an
excellent point and so with a
few words we might be able to
fix it that's the plan we're
just we want to make sure
everybody's on the same page.
Representative well I will tell
me this taxing.
Yeah.
Ran into a Juliana Kubin.
Valerie and rave Argus and Kathy
law I got the whole kit and
caboodle out here right good
good well I want to call a
friend with the one.
We do I need to call a friend on
this.
Yeah yeah and and then one of
the key definitions again as an
independent provider this all of
this is for the with us the
committee I hope you'll indulge
me for a little longer this all
gets very complicated and the
relationships between doctors
their practice groups of
America's cited earlier he
didn't refer the case but the
Baker case where the whole issue
was about the implied
application of the act to a
physician's practice group so
that when the doctor was
practicing under a corporation
that the act was silent about
that but you but Mr Vargas
accurately explained the court
decided that we had to assume
the legislature meant that a
doctor's practice group as a
corporation was was intended
even though the doctor you know
practice that was not included
in the definition of the of the
health care provider.
yeah if you look at the if you
look at the independent provider
definition the languages sticks
out to me here's we we listen
I'm a people certified nurse
clinical nurse at center this is
who is not an agent of the
hospital or outpatient health
care facility again that's a
little troubling to me but Mr
Vargas maybe help explain what
that means when we're saying
that they're not an agent issue
there's always going to be I'm
always you and I are always
gonna argue they are an agent of
the hospital are we Mr Vargas.
Mr chair that's correct and and
as I mentioned that was part of
the negotiation there was an
attempted to do away with
ostensible agency in this act
and that was one of the
negotiated terms so we agreed to
is that we would let the courts
decide that on a case by case
basis so that still belongs to
the law.
So you and I would argue that
the doctor there is an apparent
agent or an ostensible agent of
the hospital and and this
definition says that if you're
not an agent of the hospital
then you're an independent
provider but if you are an agent
of the hospital what are you.
Mr chair you are just that an
agent of the hospital and that
can be proved either as a and
express agent or an ostensible
or a parent agent.
Which the hospital with a back
breaker is the level.
Sure that's correct.
Okay to do other areas that I
know probably you all spent
hours and hours working on
I hope we'll talk more about it
either tonight or between the
end of this bill.
I've spent.
Years now on appeal I'm gonna be
very careful with the justice
Vigil on the call litigating a
success of torque freezer case
and you all know the jury
instructions the complexities of
the paying case and others on
the success of New and
concurrent towards but if you
look at the definition of sub
paragraph hi which is what.
Senator Ivy Soto was asking
about for a definition of the
current currents.
This to me almost seems
inconsistent with successive
in New successive and concurrent
port fees are why here's why
it's is the current means all
injuries to a patient caused by
health care providers success of
acts or omissions.
That combined concurrently to
create a malpractice claim I I
really can't understand how that
can be were to the way it is you
have to explain what you're
intending here because when you
say that you're talking about
success of accent occurrence in
successive acts or omissions
that combined concurrently.
Concurrently I think in
successive acts are the are the
antithesis of one another what
what am I missing here.
Mr chair the intent of this and
this actually had two or three
more sentences after it but as I
mentioned earlier the bill
drafters in their wisdom thought
that the two or three set
sentences after belong in the in
the limitation section but the
intent of this was to make it
clear that if you had one
surgery.
Where there were multiple
practitioners whether they be
multiple surgeons nurses
whatever and each of them
committed an act malpractice in
that surgery.
Is that that would be one
occurrence however we also
wanted to make clear that if
there was a subsequent act
malpractice that either enhance
or create a different injury
that that would be an additional
occurrence or separate
occurrence and so that's what
you find under the limitation of
action section I think it's
subsection J. the further
explains the availability of
multiple occurrences.
Yeah I which really strongly
suggest you call terribly this
one.
That's that's the tip my map
these claims out all the time I
I I really do think that this is
the right for litigation
with with the with the reference
here to successive Act the
combined concurrently to to be
one occurrence I I understand
exactly what you're trying to
cover Mr bargains and I and I
agree that if there were
successive acts you have the
divisible injuries that are
required for success of port
fees are liability but here were
saying when occurrences when the
their injuries that are caused
by successive acts.
And we usually define success of
acts as the game into distinct
injuries right and usually of
some some different time element
so forth which I saw later in
the bill but then but then this
is combined better combined
currently I don't think you can
have both I just really don't I
don't think you're gonna have
success of acts that combine
concurrently to create a claim
so I'll leave I'll leave the
issue we I put our legislative
but
I really do think that that
sections gonna get litigated
It would be my expectation and
that's important because of
course that determines the caps.
What are not apply.
Let's see we we got to the
caption you explain that for me.
Should be gone by really
committing everybody for in a
lot of work and a lot of
What a compromise from everyone
concerned on on the subparagraph
J. is what you're referring to
earlier.
Well again director Miss Mister
Vargas we're gonna do we to
redefine occurrence.
It reads it shall not be
construed to limit recovery to
only one statutory payment.
If separate acts because
additional enhanced injury.
So.
That's consistent with what you
told me earlier and I and I
agree with that.
The patient is suffers two or
more distinct injuries as a
result of
in different times the title to
the cap for each injury that
make coverage of the committee
that may cover their earlier
definition and the concern
although again I'd really like
to see that earlier definition
perhaps forty differently.
In the.
Maybe as far as I'll go tonight.
We.
Yep that's all I have for you
thank you very much thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman sure
anyone else with their.
Right Sir Stewart added do pass
motion no amendments you got got
your wish Representative I
appreciate.
We'll see you will save it from
we'll save a for marijuana.
And your figure to about twenty
two in the morning I think
all right we're on a do pass
motion.
Any further discussion.
Roll call please only do pass
motion and only.
Sen.
Yes.
Yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes
Senator Lopez.
Yes.
Worse or worse yes.
Senator Pirtle.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Generally yes.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Yes Sir Representative you have
a do pass eight one
congratulations thank you to
everyone worked on this thank
you Mr chairman thank you
members the committee chair.
Okay
What we have members of the
house here there are a number of
items on our agenda that I
believe we can take quickly and
still leave adequate time to
deal with I know the big one
that everyone wants to get to
tonight.
The first one I'd like to
propose the committee here and
take quick action on with the
house bill twenty nine.
We've heard the identical Senate
bill this is the no
discrimination for hair
of it so Kerry from the house
our by Representative Stapleton
and we for.
Yes.
Thank you now.
Right
I love I love it when I pick one
right I knew you all would jump
all over this one so.
Is there any objection to the do
passed motion on house bill
twenty nine no school
discrimination for here.
All right saying none Emily
would you please recorded two
pass on twenty nine house bill
twenty nine as amended.
I would like to next proposed to
the committee house bill ninety
one.
Representative Trujillo.
Do I see you in here anywhere.
Mr chair I told Representative
Trujillo that present this.
I'm sorry that was me that would
be speakers we're now did you
say you're prepared to present
that one.
I yes Mr chair all right let's
do that one minute to it's
pretty quick house bill ninety
one.
Thank you Mr chair house bill
ninety one increases the
mediation fee and for metro Corp
by ten dollars.
And I have to experts we could
let in if we need to but.
Who are your experts.
They are.
The C. R. Robert Padilla who is
the CEO of the metro court and
re troll monarch.
Yes.
All right there's a motion for
the past creases the free metro
court any other discussion
seconded.
Thank you.
Any other discussion is there
any objection Senator Ivey Soto.
Also I tried getting I really
don't hello I'm sorry I'm sorry
it's just I'll just say I just I
think increasing of P. at this
point is on a one of the many
things that we have for access
to the courts
but it's arbitrated much of the
work that we've been doing and
on and really we should be we
really need to be working to
stop the
The B. R. reliance very programs
have on fees that are paid by
people who use the court system
and if it actually disrupts
access to the point system.
And it and actually I think
results in a fairly regressive
tax to people wind up having to
go to court.
and so I'm I will not be
supporting this.
Tonight I appreciate what
they're trying to do I thank you
all of the arguments of what
they need in order to be able to
do mediation
etcetera I just I just think we
should be covering this.
I I think that should be covered
elsewhere without without
charging people are in the court
system for this so that's all.
Sorry thank you sorry so anyone
else discussion.
We're on house bill ninety one
is amended.
Missy slide show hands any
objection to the do passed
motion Senator center pirtle
sorry so center Moores.
Propose Senator Baca is a user
Baca opposed.
The remaining members of the
committee.
In the affirmative you have a
due pass you can report to
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you Mr I am expert money
pay next proposed to hear Senate
bill three fifty two.
Of this would be on behalf of
Senator Campos but I don't know
as anyone here for Center
Campos are able to present that
bill for him.
We.
After.
Is.
Okay.
Give me a second I'm the reason
I'm proposing that one even the
absence the sponsor was that
Senator Pirtle my understanding
is that you reviewed and thought
that bill would be appropriate
for us to consent.
Mr chair after consulting with
the.
Senator Baca he wanted to look
at a little bit closer.
All right well role that one
over that will roll over Senate
three fifty two.
I'd like to next proposed if we
have a representative for house
bill one twenty seven homeless
youth ID cards Representative
Johnson Stansbury are either one
of you is committee.
I see with your hand Mr rock a
limit for are you here to
support present that bill.
So can you hear me now yes.
Can you hear me.
Yes Sir we could hear you I I
did have a chance will.
Okay I did have a chance to look
at three fifty two if we could
step back for just a moment and
I'm fine with that if if a
senator for wants to consent to
that.
Okay you want to briefly explain
the bill.
How all do so three fifty two is
a two page bill.
That adds languages says courts
reach probate shall be located
the county seat where the
probate judge service of the
clerk office shopping in the
county where the court is
located in a probate judge may
sign orders related to the
probate court matters from any
location in the county where the
probate judge serves as the as I
won't read almost the entirety
of the bill.
We do pass.
Right there's a motion for the
past.
Senator Pirtle center balking
want to second amendment.
Also I can it all right.
Just as we how are you this
bill.
Your minutes are.
Just muted.
I just to indicate that the
Legisla- that the judiciary
supports the bill Mr Chairman
but I have nothing else that
thank you I'm sorry could you
repeat that Sir I'm sorry to
hear you I I am here to act to
indicate that the judiciary does
support this bill but I have
nothing to add to what you said
Mr chairman thank you all right
very good that should Maine you
got all the lawyers.
We'll see is there any objection
we have a due pass motion by
Senator Stewart the second by
Senator Ivey Soto.
Because he he's in trouble with
one of your colleagues.
So so he second going to go back
and just to be able to tell
everybody Senator Ivey Soto in
the court taught what a great
guy he was timely
second by Senator Ivey Soto is
there any objection to the do
passed motion on Senate bill
three fifty two to allow orders
to be signed by a probate judge
anywhere in the county.
Racing no objection order point
Senate bill three fifty two with
a do pass justice thanks for
being here you're welcome to
stay with us all night long as
we talk about marijuana.
The next bill I propose for the
committee is as I said earlier
house bill one twenty seven.
If we have so Representative
Johnson Stansbury or anybody for
them would you speak up please.
The title of the bill was
homeless youth ID cards.
Anyone.
You Mr chairman I think we heard
the Senate bill on this on the
floor already I'm I don't
remember the number of that or
who did it might have been
Senator Lopez but.
We we heard we heard the
companion already on the Senate
floor.
Mr Chairman program was ID cards
or persistent cricket scores as
the secretary.
I think it was the same thing
you can't get an ID card without
a birth certificate or so it was
it was some way to help homeless
youth get ID cards so they can
get a birth certificate without
their parents read signing for
it because some of them are
without parents if I remember
correctly.
Yeah I remember that bill to us
I'm sure just to make sure this
will if so should be a problem.
Members members the committee
the new languages is to an
existing statute subsection KA
and what it reads just very
briefly is unaccompanied
homeless youth shall be
permitted to apply for receive a
real ID compliant identification
or extended identification
without the signature of an
adult and then there's a
definition for a homeless
individual.
A little bit different some.
Different than what we look at
before.
The F. all right well we don't
have a sponsor here in the looks
like.
Yes.
All right.
I'll take the motion.
Second.
Senator do I'll take the second.
The committee members I'm going
through these quick we're trying
to help us move our house
friends get built out of this
committee before we get into the
weeds.
The.
So
we're on a do pass motion is
there is there anyone who
objects to continuing with a do
pass motion.
In the absence of the sponsor
anyone you o'neill your.
Yes thank you and I don't
necessarily object that this the
difference was with the other
bill that we are on the Senate
floor a social worker or
somebody in that role could
could act as a parent for the
homeless youth so that's what's
missing from this particular
bill but I support the bill but
that was the distinction.
Is there any objection to the
concluding the debate discussion
and taken the do passed motion.
On house one twenty seven as
amended all right seeing on is
there any objection to the
adoption house bill one twenty
seven as amended on a do bass
motion.
Thanks seeing we would you
report a do pass motion on house
bill one twenty seven and I
really do hope before you house
members leave tonight.
You know whatever you've heard
about this committee is just not
true.
We're very efficient.
We're hearing all your bills we
we love you guys we really do.
Yeah I can see.
All right
I propose next house bill two
twenty two I think we saw yeah
we've got representative
Thompson.
With that I think you're co
sponsor with Senator Lopez is
that correct this is the special
education on but at.
Correct Mr chair.
All right Center Thompson you
can probably gather we're trying
to make some progress tonight
I'd like for you to present your
bill taking no more than ten
minutes using that submits to
recognize any experts or
proponents that you wish to
recognize will that work yes Mr
chair so real quickly
I have been working in special
ed set for thirty six years my
son who has autism is thirty
years old he started in special
ed at the age of three so I've
got nineteen years as a parent
with him and special ed
embarrassed to say thirty six
years working in the field and
I'm sure that all of you Mr
chair have heard horror stories
about what happens in to special
at our families and kids in our
state they are not getting what
they need they are and it's a
disaster there's a lot of
lawsuits so Mister chair and
members of the committee what
what we decided to do was to do
a special weather but position
that is not located within PED
because PED does have some some
ways that you can get some
satisfaction theoretically
I'm my family had to go to to a
lawyer and get a mediated
agreement which the school
immediately turned around and
did just the opposite so rather
than the beginning court we
moved him so this happens all
over the state so what we're
trying to do is set up in on
budget program within the
developmental disabilities
planning council so that
families who who hopefully
before they get to their wits
and has a place to go and it and
advocate to help them get
through the system and with that
Mr Mr chair my experts are is.
Out west blue makori and I
believe I don't know if she's
been allowed in the act.
Mr chair members of the
committee hi she wasn't awaiting
rounds out now that she's here
never mind.
thank you Mr chair.
Representative you can recognize
or acknowledge anybody you want.
It is is LSD on.
there's use go ahead Alice.
Good evening members of the
committee thank you very much
for hearing
house bill two twenty two I'm
the purpose of this bill is to
ensure that families across New
Mexico's families and students
with disabilities across New
Mexico have an advocate in their
corner we have out folks I'm
across the state who have
schools for example have there
are school districts teachers
have the teachers union we have
PED who takes a neutral role we
don't really have something for
families and the purpose of a
house bill two twenty two is to
make sure we provide that
resource to families and also to
make sure that when folks enter
this special education system
they understand their rights
they understand what options are
available and this information
will be made available to
families every single school
year will be provided to every
single student and it will be
posted in a prominent place in
the school I'm but we want this
to be a statewide program that
will budget every student who
enters this and special
education system I'm we work we
want to be in we wanted to be in
that developmental disabilities
planning council because at it
needs to be a neutral party
that's separate from PED that's
separate from the schools I'm
and one of the biggest reasons
why Pete at the PC is a good
place for as we have all the
state agencies that are
necessary to problem solve for
students with disabilities for
example HSD D. O. H. CYFD we're
about to place at CC early
childhood in our department and
our council's while and so all
the various and PED of course
all the various state agencies
you can really problems all for
kids with disabilities RT said
honor council we also have I'm
disability rights at the PNA
said on our council.
And it's just a really good
group to do that problem solving
collaboratively thank you very
much thank thank you very much
as anyone else the
representative Thompson here
from.
Sure we will go with that all
right I don't believe we have
any opposition register on your
bill.
So we'll go to questions from
the committee.
Okay do pass Senator Baca
Senator Stewart center Baca.
But you have a question does is
earn appropriation Mr chair and
representative with this bill Mr
chair and Senator Baca it
started out with the
appropriation and we were told
it was not going to be in H. B.
two so that the appropriation
was two for two hundred ninety
five thousand dollars and with
my junior money and another
members seventy five thousand we
are up to two hundred fifty
thousand and if the governor the
governor is very much on board
actually
we came up with the idea
together so it will be it will
be recurring next year about
it's during your money to get
started Mr chair Senator well
don't hurt your case now
Representative.
But anyway and I I was just
asking that Mr chair and
representative because just
because of the legal counsel the
added there and the posting and
distribution of material but you
answered that question so I'm
all good thank you.
Thank you any other committee
members questions Center Morse
and that center Lopez thank
thank you Mr archer thank you
Representative up we do have
spokesman we're some arms
present programs state
government including.
Of the lieutenant governor's
office has a robust on sponsors
programs to do things our server
create another office have you
look at some of the current on
the program for better
efficiency and leveraging the
resources were already spending
for those kind of programs Mr
chair and senator Morris special
education that the that the
document that PED gets the
parent that offers to parents is
a hundred and paid a hundred
pages of legal gobbledygook and
this.
Not just any but someone can can
understand the the legal
ramifications around special
right there's idea on the
federal level their state law it
it's that very it needs to be a
dedicated person our position
who understand special let's
lock because it is very very
calm it would be like saying
you know let's let let's let
that back Cook do that do the
plumbing it doesn't work that
way.
Thank you madam chair
representative I'm sure the
lawyers appreciate being called
Cobley couture former certified
so I appreciate that thank you.
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
wanted to say thank you
Representative Thomson and miss
McCall I and advocates for your
advocacy where our system with
regards to for support for
special education students and
families needs work this will
make a big big difference for
many in our communities thank
you.
The other members of the
committee Sir Marcia had a soap
assume that's an oversight.
All right anyone else.
All right pleasure of Senator
o'neill.
I would just point out one more
reason why House Bill junior
rocks and we need to do that
every year thank you.
Thank you could you remind me do
we have a due pass motion
already yes Mr chairman I did a
do pass and also.
Thank you very much I appreciate
that it's it's hard when I don't
know how we're committee
secretary sitting right beside
me but in the event that we're
gonna do passed motion is there
any objection to the new passed
motion.
I'm seeing none at all.
Of Representative you have a to
pass on the committee substitute
for House Bill two twenty two.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you for
being here tonight all right of
Mr Chairman Representative yes
Representative Stewart Senators.
Representative Servan tastes
were you going to do one twenty
eight.
I am going to do one twenty
eight Senator Stewart thank.
I I know we've got a lot of
folks anxious to get to
marijuana but I'm it would
really with some encouragement
from the president pro tem she's
helped me get through the number
of bills that we can get through
quickly today along with
leadership on both chambers and
so we've been able to do some of
that some of these are very
important bills
let me start next with
Representative Cadena if I can
Representative Cadena on house
the committee substitute for
house bill one fourteen my
understanding is this is the
same bill we heard previously
with you but you prepare to make
some modifications is that
right.
Mr chair thank you we didn't
actually present this bill in
your committee I've been in
front of you before and I'm
grateful for the time this is a
bill H. B. one fourteen that I'm
running in collaboration with
the law office of the public
defender's but I was grateful to
have extensive conversations
with members of your committee
and leaders on both sides of the
aisle in my chamber your is to
simplify this significantly H.
B. one fourteen and we've sense
can your Committee amendments on
this bill was originally
designed into parts to eliminate
the habitual offender
enhancement for simple
possession and then to allow the
judiciary discretion to decide
when and how to impose of the
remaining Vigil offender
enhancements in order to make
this to simplify this effort and
to really get to the heart of
the matter which is moving away
from mandatory minimums which
have not shown to improve public
safety here or around the
country and move more to
individualized sentencing we've
offered you amendments that
eliminate the simple possession
half and and just focus on not
making sure the judiciary
instead of having to enforce the
the shell individual vendor
enhancements now having room to
consider the circumstances of
the case and decide whether
leveling those sentences is
appropriate with me today I have
Kim Chavez Cook from the law
office of the public defender is
available to answer any
technical questions and Mister
chair if appropriate we have two
people in the audience to weigh
in and support very briefly.
Right before we go there let's
make sure that we get our
procedural work done there is an
amendment and representative
Cadena to the committee is that
right.
Yes Mr chair we had heard at the
request of your committee to
draft a committee set up but
given the the our and
understanding procedurally what
happens if this at the committee
so comes back to the house we've
put those same changes into an
amendment as well so we sent
those out to your committee Mr
chair okay and can we get those
up on the screen the amendment
plaint.
Would that be me Mr chair or the
style so it should be ours it'll
be up in a thank you.
Well we're getting that document
on the amendment will come back
to the moment we'll move the
adoption amendment let's go and
take you said you have an expert
Kim Chavez Cook with you miss
cook I'd like to recognize you
for two minutes please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you members of the committee as
the sponsor said this I am Kim
Chavez Cook with the law offices
of the public defender and this
bill is designed to really get
at a subset of cases for which
the mandatory sentencing is not
Justin will not be in the
interest of justice where judges
themselves wish that they have
the ability not to compose them
and keeping in mind that judges
would absolutely still have the
ability to impose the
enhancements to the full extent
that they currently have in
cases where that is appropriate
I want to bring the committee's
attention to a written statement
of support that was submitted to
by retired judge Michael the
help from the first you
additional district who served
for eighteen years and expressed
that he would have like to have
this in fact when he was a judge
and to assure the committee that
judges will impose the
enhancements when appropriate I
will refrain from going into any
further detail and save any
additional time for answering
questions of the committee thank
you thank you is could back to
you representative and explain
the amendment again please with
the with the amendment on our
screen.
Thank you Mr chair so here we
have first we're striking in
item one what we had levels in
language in fact that was
actually attach that
representative Representative
Lane made on the house floor
that was going to copy language
all the way through our bill on
simple possession we are no
longer including simple
possession here or that
elimination then.
So my screen is moving around a
little bit then.
What we're doing here is.
Erasing the language that will
define simple possession and
made it clear that we are
eliminating it thank incomplete
in a complete way from the
develop and enhancements
and then finally we've done that
we've repeated that action and
then finally on point seven
striking subsection beat when we
previously had to provide a
simple possession we then
delineated different kinds of
not capital offenses but now
that's unnecessary because we're
taking out the other relational
definitions.
Thank you Representative.
All right the in before we go to
committee members on motions and
discussion this note that we had
a registered number of
supporters of this bill Bennett
Batman Bauer New Mexico office
as a public defender and the
cash Rikki Lee Chavez Mexico
criminal defense lawyers Erin
Jones ACLU Emily come back drug
policy alliance
and Stephen d'espagne Americans
for prosperity New Mexico I am
sorry that your last name any of
it we are back to the committee
on the proposed amendment and
the bill for discussion Senator
Stewart I move to pass on the
amendment Mr chairman.
We're on the amendment second
for the motion Senator o'neill
Senator Lopez all right Sir
Lopez on with the second on the
amendment any discussion on the
proposed amendment.
Is there any objection to the
adoption of the amendment.
All right we'll record the
amendment has been adopted
pleasure the committee with the
motion.
We'll do pass as amended.
Thank you Senator Stewart
Senator Lopez with the second.
Any other discussion.
All right we're gonna do passed
motion as amended.
For house bill creates of super
also one fourteen is there any
objection to the adoption of
this bill.
As amended.
All right seeing none employee
please record all members voting
in the affirmative
Representative Cadena you have a
do pass on your house bill one
fourteen twenty seven as
amended.
Thank you committee have a good
night.
We went pretty quick does
anybody want to slow down.
Mr Chairman I just want you to
do the bills for Representative
deciding on who's been with us
for almost two hours now.
And I believe I would be here
the whole time as well.
There are plenty recall to.
hi I have reviewed everyone of
these bills I really haven't
read everyone of them and so
we'll hear next of
Representative Nibert on
choosing the order based on
those of the faster I think so
not who's been here longer but
which one what will dispense
with more quickly so of
Representative night work on
house bill sixty six this is an
amendment to the uniform
commercial code to I understand
that I know how much everybody
wants to hear about the uniform
commercial code.
yes Mr chairman it is a uniform
law compression our update for
the uniform commercial code
article bind and it basically
adds to definitions what appears
on page thirteen one appears on
page twenty one are there some
minor touch up language on page
twenty nine the defined term is
used on page thirty three
which and we touched up some
language there page thirty four
we have the word yes.
And then the page thirty cents
it repeals section thirty five
dash one dash one Sam Graham
that would be the
our substance of the of.
The bill if you would like me to
go into any of those items are
to be happy to I also have Mr
Jack burden on the telephone if
I need to go to Mr Burke.
Representative as I understand
it these are changes that are
proposed from the uniform all
commission is that right.
That is correct Mr chairman
there are it would sheep are
article nine are allied with the
recent changes the the major
changes are having a definition
for full public finance
transactions.
Hi very good the questions of
the committee or motions on
house bill sixty six as amended.
Anyone here for Mr Byrne.
Senator Lopez.
Mr chair number to pass.
Motion for the past by Senator
Lopez a second by Senator Moores
is there any objection to the do
passed motion by members of the
committee.
Saying Representative Nibert I
was right we can get you out
here quick you have a do pass on
house bill sixty six.
Thank you Mr chairman thank your
Canadian per share all right
with some encouraging meant from
the president of the Senate will
next year.
House bill one twenty eight the
committee substitute for one
twenty eight school personnel
background and training.
Representative Sarinana.
Thank you Mr chairman health
bill one twenty eight as amended
I do have an expert witness can
I call him Munoz co.
Mr chair members of the
committee Marty is joining now.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman
this this legislation is
regarding ethical misconduct in
the public schools
Excuse me we go Mr Chairman.
I'm sorry if you miss it.
Mr chairman what twenty eight as
a result of the
The task force that we had the
issue of ethical misconduct by
employees in the public school
system has been a priority as as
behavior continues to happen
across our schools in New Mexico
it happened about a month ago
and and now pre school and this
is not a safety issue for kids
it not only is it a safety issue
it's also costly as you since
nineteen eighty seven the New
Mexico Nipsey as reported eighty
million dollars in insurance
payouts associated with claims
of improper touching and has
received an average of nine
point five claims per year for
instance is happening in New
Mexico public schools the bill
addresses the current hiring
locals for school employees
under this bill applicants for
new employment including school
volunteers and contractors are
required to disclose reports of
child abuse or neglect or
misconduct that is tied to past
employment with the applicant
was in the position that
involved unsupervised contact of
children
this bill updates the definition
epidemics conduct this bill
creates specific duties for all
employees in the public school
system to report misconduct and
child abuse the bill includes
processes that happen after
report is made to ensure that
the investigation cross
collaboration tracking occur the
bill puts more effort and
emphasis towards investigating
reports about the ethical
misconduct the bill expands
training to include school on
tears contractors everyone and
expands the content of training
And the biggest part of the
training is it makes everyone
where everyone in the public
school system aware of the new
responsibilities the training
explains at the close kind of
professional responsibilities
and invent and investigation
procedures the guilt the bill
creates a process for the for
these employees in schools and
interacting with children to
report ethical misconduct to
PED.
I'm the bill creates a duty to
report for school district
employees to the superintendent
or PED
and if there is a is a report it
must be acted upon immediately.
if the allegations of ethical
misconduct is criminal in nature
PED is required to immediately
notify the law enforcement.
See the bill creates a new
section to provide detailed
process that that's similar to
the CYFD process but it's
specific to the public school.
And it does model that
children's code
the report of non additional the
abuse would go straight to law
enforcement's and this bill is
required to requires mission
instead to protect the identity
of the alleged victims and last
the report requires PED to track
ethical misconduct reports
specific to those who have been
found to have committed ethical
misconduct with that Mr chairman
I like to defer to my expert
witness Marty ask about.
Right yes I'm I'm Mr chair I
just want to be make sure it was
okay to speak.
You're ready go Marty Mike so I
thank you Mr Mr chair of the
senators members of the
committee I I I will say that
I'm general counsel of the New
Mexico public school insurance
authority with me is a regional
area but I'm gonna speak to to
this bill I'm also middleware
for thirty one years really they
get a number of cases for
schools claims against schools
more importantly those member
this task force to house
memorial task force fifty seven
which is a gathering of real
first class profession
educational professionals who
all brought to the table these
issues that were
coming forth with regard to at
educational it ethical
misconduct in schools so I would
say this is a very important
piece of legislation designed
with great efforts to protect
children and students from
misconduct which has as this
Representative SAINATO as as
reference has occurred
unfortunately and we've had
significant consequences do that
misconduct I think that what
you're looking at here is a new
law that would heighten
responsibilities for schools to
report misconduct it heightens
responsibilities for schools to
investigate misconduct not look
the other way not what the
school year expire without
looking into things that in the
past have not been investigated
properly it heightens
responsibilities not to allow
the school to to ignore a
problem and to face it head on I
think the other thing that that
the representative mentioned is
it's going to really truly
recharge the batteries necessary
to keep an eye out for improper
grooming behaviors improper
conduct and really the training
aspect here The New Mexico
public school insurance
authority in conjunction with
the various schools and charter
schools are gonna play a very
significant active role in
training personnel in terms of
what to look for and and how to
address the.
These issues it's going to
really energize I think schools
to prevent these problems for
happening as Representative John
Sarinana mentioned there has
been significant liability due
to these things I think the most
important thing here is not
really the liability but to
protect children and protect
children from bad actors and
that's what we're really trying
to do and I think that was
really the just of the task
force and this has been through
some changes there's been some
amendments of sanitation
Committee great work on behalf
of of folks who who who put this
bill together and I would really
urge for the protection of
children students and state in
Mexico to pass this thank you Mr
chairman thank you Mr speaker
will
Representative anyone.
Right.
Senator Stewart Representative a
senator Jeff anybody else you
need to recognize Mr chairman of
that was that that's it thank
you very good you've got to do
passed motion from Senator
Stewart other Senator Lopez with
the second is there any further
discussion by members of the
committee on house bill one
twenty eight is amended.
Do passed motion on Senate bill
one twenty eight.
All right saying
you have a new pass
Representative on house bill one
twenty eight thank you Mr
chairman
Representative you also have
house bill thirty one military
justice code sex crimes yes we
hear that acts of a house bill
thirty one
Mr chairman I have issue of
expert witnesses later Rubin
failed in Alexandria Taylor.
Mr chairman house given the time
Representative I'm gonna ask you
to conclude your presentation in
ten minutes please.
Recognizing that for your
experts and anyone else you want
to admit in support the time is
now nine thirty four.
Thank you Mr chairman
I'm here to present house bill
thirty one as amended this bill
is to modernize the current New
Mexico statutes chapter twenty
military affairs article twelve
code of military justice section
fifty went right been cardinal
knowledge the statue is
currently made up of three
paragraphs and it was
last amended in nineteen eighty
nine so
what this does is it takes a
three paragraph statute to a
pretty sizeable Bill R. it
doesn't change the name rape and
other sex crimes is broken up
into eight different parts right
sexual assault aggravated sexual
contact abusive sexual contact
group of threat defense and
specifically marriage is not a
defense for any conduct issue
and prosecution under the
section it talks about consent
and elaborates on the
definitions Mr chairman this
this bill modernizes in detail
the Newark New Mexico military
co twenty dash twelve dash fifty
one so that it aligns with the
federal military code article
one twenty of the U. C. M. J.
pursuant to twenty dash twelve
dash three these changes would
apply to all members of the New
Mexico National Guard when not
in federal service federal
services need to the president
called into active duty then
they would be under the UCMJ.
Major General Nava the adjutant
general of the New Mexico
National Guard is in full
support of this bill and this
bill was endorsed by
the military Veterans Affairs
interim committee and with that
Mr chairman I'd like to defer to
Elena Rubin felt.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Elena ribbon filed and I am
the legal director for the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs I know we have
limited time and our deputy
director Alexandria Taylor is
going to speak a little bit more
about this bill so I will keep
my comments short and reserve
time for any questions that the
committee may have I just want
to say on behalf of our
coalition thank you for hearing
this bill and we we hope you
will support it and I'll turn it
over to miss Taylor.
You Mr chair members of the
committee my name's Alexandria
Taylor and the deputy director
at the New Mexico question of
sexual assault programs
Representative Sarinana did a
wonderful job summarizing the
bill I would just add that in
the other committees one of our
experts who could not be here
tonight is lieutenant Colin
Chung the New Mexico National
Guard and they are in full
support of this update at
Montoya clone has stated that at
one time the New Mexico military
justice act was actually in line
with the use the image that you
see in J. and the New Mexico
military justice act just has
not kept up with the updates to
the UCMJ so thank you for your
time this evening.
Thank you very much and that
concludes the time we've set
aside for advocacy.
I don't have any registered
opponents on the legislation
I'll note that we had our email
system here in the capital go
down for most of the afternoon
so if anyone was trying to be
registered by sending an email
in opposition we may not have
you.
And I'm looking for any show
hands or anyone who wishes we
recognize in opposition
otherwise I will I will soon
there is no opposition and will
then go to members of the
committee Senator Stewart moved
to pass.
So motion for do pass on house
bill thirty one in the second
any further committee question
or discussion.
Is there any objection to do
past motion on house for thirty
one is amended.
Thanks saying none
representative here showing as a
do pass on house bill thirty one
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you committee.
Will next year.
House bill one twenty five.
Representative hopefully he'll
are you with us yet I see Mr
chair.
One twenty five you've got up to
ten minutes great thank you so
much Mr chair members of the
committee appreciate you hearing
me on this very busy evening
house bill one twenty five
modifies licensing requirements
for certain behavioral health
providers allows for the
completion of supervision
requirements for counselors and
psychologists but utilization of
about technology allows
extension or renewal for both
temporary and provisional
psychology and social worker
licenses during a public health
emergency and it reduces the
counseling and therapy board
from nine to seven members to
which must be members of the
public and with that Mr chair
members of the committee I want
to call over introduce my expert
witness it is a regulation
licensing division director
Linda Trujillo former
representative Lente Trujillo
she wants to make a presentation
as well.
If.
Mr chair members of the
committee Linda Trujillo just
joined they may not have heard
you.
I'm sorry Mr Prater I you just
you just dropped off and you can
you say that again.
Yes we.
We have secretary Trujillo she's
needs mute her microphone out
okay.
I'm here I'm here.
You're recognized you thank you
did you want me to speak on this
bill.
If you want to quickly just give
a statement director if not I
can proceed it's up to you you
go ahead and proceed
Representative.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman that will stand for
questions.
Yeah we don't have any
registered opposition that I
know of so with that the members
of the committee please one
twenty five move to get past.
Right so notion for the past
second by money vice chair.
Senator o'neill.
For any further discussion.
Right seeing none is there any
objection to do past motion on
house bill one twenty five.
Tracing.
We do have a due pass
Representative one thank you Mr
chair appreciate it all right
yes
I do have another bill on your
agenda Mister chair if you're
willing to hear it let me see
that I think that was gonna take
a little bit more time
Representative so let me proceed
and come back to you.
And I say that recognizing that
that we may get to a place where
it's tough to hear any others
but we've we've got rolled over
the house bill twelve and house
or a house Senate bill two
eighty eight for some time and
so I'm going to proceed to those
two bills.
Start Representative Lewis is
here also for a quota.
Thanks I've seen her and she's
been very patient and I
appreciate that very much of the
the challenges of of that will
have Senator and Representative
is that's a very lengthy and
complex built I think's gonna
take us some time.
I I think if we were to do that
would have a hard time.
Getting to the marijuana
legislation cannabis legislation
and so I'm I'm gonna propose
that we proceed to that
legislation and then look for
the earliest opportunity
probably tomorrow for any
remaining items on the agenda I
regret you waited and
that you've spent the time doing
so patiently but we we've got as
many hospitals I could possibly
do I really do think that there
a very strong press to get to
the cannabis bills tonight and
so getting close what nine
forty.
So with my with my apologies
will proceed to house bill
twelve and the Senate bill two
eighty eight well first your
house bill twelve.
Given the size of the bill the
Expectations for the
legislation.
We're gonna go a little bit
longer than the usual allocated
time and and allow up to twenty
five minutes as opposed to the
usual fifteen sep twenty five
minutes for the sponsor to
advocate Representative maybe
the first time you're with us
this session so you have twenty
five minutes to do with as you
choose you can admit any experts
you can admit any witnesses are
proponents you wish to within
the twenty five minutes you can
reserve any part of your twenty
five minutes to read but any
opposition I'm after your twenty
five minutes will allow up to
twenty minutes of opposition.
The challenge we have right now
is I don't know that I have to
register opposition again we had
some challenge because of the
internet issues here today so
I'll do my best to see if we can
recognize anyone who wishes to
speak in opposition on to to
House bill twelve and then I see
Senator Pirtle.
With his hand raised on his
Senate bill two eighty eight so
before we get you started Center
portals or something that you
want address before we get
started.
Mr chair I do have an amendment
on house bill twelve for the
second time when we complete
that it essentially would put my
bill and so we can either hear
my bill where we can hear about
my bill in a minute which ever
since the chair.
Because we have a house bill
over Center pretty what we'll do
is we'll begin with house bill
twelve and then we'll take your
motion to amend it once we've
heard the presentations that are
I.
Mr chair that that the suits me
just fine thank you all right
very good Representative it's
nine forty three of twenty five
minutes.
Thank you Mr chair I appreciate
the time thank you members of
the committee I'm here to
percent house bill twelve file
with me is my co sponsor
representative on that role
metal and we also have a number
of experts that'll touch on
different parts of the bill one
of them is miss Emily Kaltenbach
way believe has to be admitted
to the to the zoom we'll have
Megan Dorsey who as you all know
works out of the speaker's
office will provide some
technical support with regard
twenty of the criminal elements
in the bill and then we also
superintendent Linda Trujillo
who who also will serve as an
expert and I believe she's
already in those rural rural
Mr chairman of the committee
while the operator allows those
experts in
I want to talk a bit about this
bill house bill twelve
regulates the use production and
sale of cannabis and cannabis
products in the state of New
Mexico this act creates a
responsible in a very tight
regulated system approve
licensees that with strict rules
and regulations developed by the
state regulation licensing
department.
Mr chairman of the committee
forty states have already
legalized
the state of Alaska Arizona
California Colorado Illinois
Maine Michigan Montana Nevada
New Jersey Oregon South Dakota
Vermont and Washington and DC.
We only two of those states have
legalized through the
legislative process
most of these other states have
have legalized through a a
ballot initiative of of a vote
by the people.
If we legalize this year we
would have been at what we will
be the third state to legalize
to the legislative process why
is that important well Mr
chairman of the committee a lot
of the headaches that have been
experienced in the
implementation of these
legalization frameworks in other
states have been due to the fact
that things were rushed quite
frankly ballot initiatives were
placed on a ballot the election
would take place in November by
January a lot of these places
have to implement their
programs.
I don't believe that that's the
right way to approach
legalization was chairman of the
committee I believe that the
best way to approach such a
complex topic such a complex
task is to do is to do it
through the legislative process.
Which is why we are here in
tribute Committee.
Mr chairman of the committee
this is not the first time that
this committee has seen.
A version of this bill and this
is not the first time the
legislature has addressed
through its processes the easy
issue of cannabis legalization.
Not to go off to far back in
time but in twenty fifteen
former representative bill
mccamley introduced to cannabis
revenue and freedom Act in that
legislative session that bill
was referred to five house
committees I don't believe it
even got a hearing that year he
later re introduced a bill in
twenty sixteen to twenty
seventeen.
That in twenty nineteen is when
I kind of took the reins from
former percent mccamley.
and we introduced the cannabis
regulation act that year Mr
chairman members of the
committee that year the cannabis
regulation act actually got
through two house committees and
the floor and the floor of the
house it got through a Senate
committee before running out of
time.
In twenty in that interim the
governor think of the now
governor of Michelle Lujan
Grisham created the cannabis
legalization working group which
took that bill which had been
worked on since twenty fifteen.
And brought together a panel of
experts public health experts
law enforcement folks from
industry patient advocacy groups
and others
that working group created and
wrote what you heard last year
which was I believe is Senate
bill one fifteen
which which came through this
committee.
From that work Mr chair members
of the committee we have built
upon it we have heard from those
who have had concerns including
your committee Mr chair and
we've made some changes to the
bill so that we can try to make
it a little bit more
you know a little tighter than
it's been but I do want to
reiterate Mr chairman of the
committee you know this bill is
not a fly by night operation I'm
very proud of the work that's
been done.
Clearly by the drug policy
alliance in this Kaltenbach but
also by our oracle Sanchez and
the different experts that we
have worked with over the last
few years and trend over the
last few weeks the bill in front
of you Mr chairman of the
committee was
introducing the house obviously
it was it was heard in the house
health committee where they made
a number of changes that
committee with its expertise in
health and what not made some
changes it was then referred out
to the house taxation revenue
committee where are committee
made a few more changes are
particularly around the tax code
the building got out of the
floor of the house as you know
Bible by thirty nine votes which
was you know a lot of a lot
better margin than we had twenty
nineteen twenty nineteen we
passed at thirty six thirty four
this year we pass it by with
thirty nine votes in the
affirmative this bill then went
through the Senate tax committee
where it was amended again you
know based on their due
diligence and based on the
wisdom of that committee they
adopted a number of amendments
that were presented by Senator
Senator worth and now we are
here I am quite frankly we are
here to seek seek your input to
you know for for you to address
the issues that you see in this
bill and to hopefully help us
make this bill better and if it
is if it is the will of the
committee of any of this bill is
so is to move out of this
committee that you will all get
your chance to make it better Mr
chair members of the committee
so with that I'd like to pass it
on to my co sponsor
Representative Romero who can
share a few words and then to
ms Kaltenbach as well thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
chair this is been really
incredible journey I think for
so many people of course the
public who have on any bill that
I've run in my and now in my
second term has not had as much
enthusiasm as many eyes on this
piece of legislation and with
that said Mr chair members of
the committee you know we've are
grateful to have been able to
get this bill into the Senate as
of March ninth and so we're so
grateful today to actually
finally be able to hear this
having gone through the process
and understanding that many many
people have many interests in
this bill.
and what we've heard different
sort of ideas floating around as
to how we got here I think it's
important for very open very
available very accessible as to
why we want to hear this as as
best we can and get the best
piece of legislation to the
governor through this committee
and and on to the Senate for so
I want to thank you all for
doing that why I'm so supportive
of this piece of legislation in
particular is that it is
inclusive of I think a lot of
components that we've seen both
through the house and now in the
Senate that includes not only
act and economic diversification
of course saving the state money
bringing in new revenue and
promoting consumer safety but
really is a is a broad fame
framework that also reduces harm
that comes from the
criminalization of cannabis and
really looks that restorative
justice in communities that have
been ravaged by the war on drugs
and you'll see in our piece of
legislation which the only piece
of legislation that is made it
this far along the pathway that
has these racial equity
components and protections
especially for those in the
medical cannabis program which
is been throughout this bill and
drugs process one of our primary
foci throughout getting this
bill to this point
you'll find it in our bill
eliminations of gross receipts
tax for medical cannabis
patients consistent with our
values and not taxing taxing
medicine you'll find community
reinvestment fund supporting
communities of color
disproportionately affected by
the war on drugs and then
finally we've removed all of the
earmarks out of your chambers
interest in making sure that
this has sort of the the right
sort of legs that needs to make
it through the elected process
with that of Mr chair and
members of the committee this is
been a labor of love for so many
people and so.
Something that we are absolutely
certain that New Mexico needs in
twenty twenty one not only with
the public interest but in the
recovery that we see for our
state are moving out of a COVID
situation and into the future of
of of our new economy so with
that I think will yield to our
expert and support staff that
have been with us throughout all
of this time Emily Kaltenbach
and superintendent Trujillo who
was there when we amended the
bill just last week and
Senate tax to be able to talk
about some of those issues and
of course why we are so Eaker
and I able to to be here today
thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee and
then we come up drug policy
alliance and we've been really
honored to be working on
legalization of cannabis in New
Mexico for almost a decade we've
also been deeply involved in
legalization efforts in many of
the states that have now have
don't use programs that from
engaging stakeholders grassroots
of work to drafting legislation
and that includes.
States like California Colorado
New Jersey among many others I
oversee our resident state
offices in California New York
our federal office in DC And
here in New Mexico right now my
colleagues are working on
similar legislation in New York
state we hope that will be the
next state after New Mexico and
legislation in in DC that we
know that you see ready allows
possession and legalizes
possession but they don't have a
tax and regulatory system and so
we're working on that and we
recognize that standing up a new
industry will making sure it's
right for New Mexico is super
complicated their issues related
to public safety balancing the
interests of small and big
businesses how do we protect our
use our roads interstate
commerce so legalizing a
substance that once was a legal
is very complex and I really
believe that all the work we put
into this over the many years
is shows how complicated it is
but also how important it is to
get all the voices to the table
so couple told is comprehensive
like I said it reflects the
voices of New Mexicans reflects
best practices from other states
states that have learned and
improved their legalization
programs.
but what is most notable and
Representative Romero mentioned
that is it puts New Mexico
families before big business it
doesn't just create regulatory
and taxation structure it
includes social justice and
equity strong public health
protections which are critical
and it appears the years of harm
that criminalization of cannabis
is placed in New Mexico families
and also the years of harm from
problematic drug use which I
know many of New Mexico families
are very traumatized by so we're
really proud to work side by
side with Representative
Martinez Representative Romero
representative Armstrong and
senator Ortiz Y. Pino update
work tirelessly and carefully
paying attention to every detail
in the hopes of getting cannabis
legalization just right for New
Mexicans so I'm honored to be
here and I'm happy to help
answer questions thank you so
much.
Thank you Mr chair the last
thing I'll say before turning it
over and if you wanna go to to
to those in the audience.
You know that this bill has
three foundational principles
the first one as Michael sponsor
mentioned is is ensuring that we
protect the medical program
there are patients who depend on
it their patients whose quality
of life depends on it and and
and we do not take that lightly
the second one is ensuring
racial justice in this
legalization framework we
believe strongly that we cannot
create another more time million
dollar industries on the backs
of brown and black people in the
state lastly Mr chair members of
the committee this industry is
going to have to be supported by
a smart regulatory and tax
system framework I'm and that's
what I believe we've
accomplished in this bill Mr
chairman the committee is this
bill perfect probably not I'm
very proud that this bill is
essentially a live it breeds the
vols this bill is not static I
don't believe
that any one of us has the
perfect idea and that idea must
not be amended or changed that
is the process of the
legislature and that is the
product of committees such as
yours Mr chair members of the
committee where you are subject
matter experts and and we quite
frankly
not only are hoping that you
change our bill and make our
bill better but we actually
expect that you will do that
because that is why your
constituents and do here and why
you serve on this committee I
can tell you
being the legislature now for a
six seven years I take a lot of
pride in the work that is here
in front of you and should this
bill forward should we legalize
cannabis in New Mexico this year
I can assure you that we will
all be back next year making
tweaks that's the way it should
be and will come back the year
after that making a few more
tweaks and the year after that
making a few more tweaks because
good policy and good law should
be involving special.
When we attempt to do something
as as big as as this Mr chair
thank you chair thank you
members of the committee we are
open for.
Mr chair muted.
Thank you sorry about that in
addition your presentation
representatives we had the
number of individuals who well
let us know their support Chad
Lauzon
them I wonder Rachel woods
Andrew Goodman Paul Gibson Brian
Rogers sorry I usually identify
with the group's been lower than
your is with New Mexico campus
chamber of commerce Paul Gibson
as we retake our democracy Brian
Rogers with Rogers farms Jeffrey
Lawrence with the reason
foundation and Richard how to
meal those were additional
proponents.
We also had.
Three individuals registered in
opposition.
and so will recognize those
unless I do did you want to
recognize any of those
proponents you have still some
time Representative.
I'm.
You have another eight minutes.
You know in the interest of time
I I think we can we can go on
and one.
All right very good of the
registered opponents of in
advance we're just Justin
adjacent Barker Paul Garcia and
Kathleen data do we have any of
those individuals in our chat
please Mr chair kat Kathleen
data and Paula Garcia in the end
is in call all right given the
few number of registered
opponents of poker CEME
recognize for four minutes
followed by Kathleen data for
affirmative.
Yes good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for this opportunity to
speak with you my name is Paula
Garcia I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico sic
Association and we appreciate
the work that has led to the
current form of HB twelve and we
want to acknowledge the
attention given to the issue of
equity for communities
disproportionately impacted by
cannabis prohibition but we are
here to us that the equity
provisions be more inclusive of
rural communities that will be
impacted by the future
production of cannabis we have
proposed a friendly amendment
that addresses some of the
unintended consequences of
cannabis production on rural
communities we are referring to
are proposed amendment as a
rural equity and water amendment
specifically we are proposing
language in section three that
is more inclusive of rural
communities in terms of
decisions during the rule making
process secondly we are
proposing a cannabis equity fund
which is based in large part on
a recommendation from the
governor's working group report
that was also included in the
twenty twenty version of this
legislation and thirdly we are
proposing some stronger language
on water while we appreciate the
HB twelve mentions the
requirement of having a valid
water rights are proposed
amendment goes a step further to
ensure that the application for
a license is also in compliance
with the rules of the local
water provider which may in in
rural communities could be a
mutual domestic water consumers
association and a second
community debt or some other
type of entity.
we appreciate the hard work to
get H. B. twelve to this point
we feel that our friendly
amendments built upon the equity
provisions in the bill rural
equity must be a key objective
of legalization much of New
Mexico is rural and cannabis
legalization could have profound
impacts across the state.
In in many in many positive ways
but also unintended consequences
and we are seeking to mitigate
those it is therefore critical
that I think as land grants and
other historic rural communities
have a seat at the table and
included in the decisions
regarding implementation of this
act equity resources such as
start up capital and technical
assistance should be provided to
rural communities in order to
compete in the emerging cannabis
production market those are what
we are proposing Mr chair thank
you for your consideration thank
you for this time and thank you
for your service.
Thank you Mr Garcia Kathleen
data.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee and sponsors I am.
Then before then before you get
started which I'm gonna
recognize you affirmative okay
what's your time thank you thank
you Mr chair
I am generally in support of
this bill with the exception of
a possible conflict of interest
that pose a risk to the consumer
and patient health and safety in
just one month in California a
hundred and sixty eight thousand
batches of cannabis we sampled
and tested by independent
laboratories two percent of the
flower tested failed due to
contamination that represents
about three thousand batches
totaling six point eight million
doses of contaminated material
which would have been consumed
by the consumers but was kept
off the market the rest of the
story is that the economic value
of the contaminated material
kept off the market is about
sixty eight million dollars
clearly you can see what a
producer would not want to be
subject to independent testing
it's purely economic there is no
other reason than it is at the
expense of the health of the
patient and the consumer New
Mexico has independent cannabis
testing labs are subject to
rigorous scrutiny by the state
national accrediting agencies
national proficiency testing
this is to be certain that the
results are valid and unbiased
this bill would allow the
producers to vertically
integrate all cannabis functions
except education and certify the
safety of their own products
there is no public benefits
allowing this and it will not
reduce the price of cannabis if
this becomes law New Mexico will
be a national out liar Apollo
population of one no other state
allows cannabis to be safety
certified by the grower in fact
nearly all other states don't
even allow the grower to select
their own samples for
independent testing and require
that sampling be taken by
independent third parties to
eliminate cheating bias and
fraud by growers the people
behind the movement to to.
S. or on drugs suggest
microbreweries and
pharmaceutical companies test
their own products in the
cannabis is no different however
pharmaceutical drugs are FDA
approved subject to extensive
clinical trials and
synthetically manufactured
according to narrowly define
requirements and approved
procedures in clean rooms
Canada's by contrast is a
biological material grown in non
sterile of facilities with
natural substances such as back
one of where the environment is
not or cannot be tightly
controlled or workers outdoors
where manure and other
pesticides may have been used
comparing a pharmaceutical drug
created in a sterile environment
under FDA control procedures
with the cannabis plant growing
in a field is misplaced.
It is also said that producers
should be.
Not be given the responsibility
of educating their own employees
so this bill creates a separate
third party license for
educators if users can't be
trusted to educate their own
employees wire producers trusted
to certify the safety of their
own products please I'm in this
bill for the safety of the
consumers and the patients and
allow independent testing to be
the preferred method of
certifying the safety thank you
very much Mr chair members of
the committee.
Into a believe that is all that
we have registered in
opposition.
I'm not seeing anyone else
indicating.
I wish to be admitted.
Appearing on our zoom call or
screen.
So well with that will consider
the testimony presentations to
be completed and go to members
of the committee Senator Pirtle
a indicated that know you first.
Thank you Mr chair this of the
committee have my amendment I
believe it's the point will for
version.
What is the total number please.
Emily do you have the two oh two
number please of the.
Two two zero.
Eight six five.
Point five.
Okay sorry.
All those amendments to.
Thank you for that and we
appreciate that weights at the
top of our email inboxes we're
all inundated with emails
and Mr chair members of the
committee with this amendment
does is it essentially takes
Senate bill two eighty eight
which I am more than happy to
explain
and puts it in place of house
bill twelve there's quite a few
issues with house bill twelve as
we all know as as all of you
have probably read house bill
twelve and for Republicans my
colleagues one of the biggest
issues was the social justice
issues and the fact that we feel
that there should be two
separate pieces of legislation I
will note that Senate bill two
eighty eight passed out of
Senate tax business and
transportation unanimously with
all Republicans of leaders three
out of four Republicans present
voting for Senate bill two
eighty eight it takes a little
bit of a different approach and
and all highlight some of the
differences between it and house
bill twelve and and then the the
most important is I think how we
set up the governance over
cannabis regulations so house
bill twelve goes into TRD with
all respect to Mr hero I think
the world of you but I I don't
think you're gonna be in this
position forever and so I think
we need a little bit more
control over this and a little
bit more oversight by the
legislature so it sets up the
cannabis control commission with
which consists of five members
but it also includes the
secretaries of Ag and economic
the environment department in
the department of health in an
advisory capacity so that
they're there to give their
advice but the five members
would require the
consent of the Senate which I
think is very important
but you know it it it approaches
cannabis in a little bit of a
different way it approaches it
more as a as an act product
and then it's.
Its main point in purpose Mr
chair members of the committee
in drafting this legislation and
and now and this ammendment is
the put the illicit market out
of business and so I think with
all of the things that we're
thought input into this
legislation that was the goal
from the beginning is how do we
but the less than market out of
business and then at the same
time protecting public safety so
I think that's that's the two
major points of this
we put the production under the
department of act which I think
is important because right now
they are in charge of him and
him licensing so it fits in with
something that they're already
doing so when it comes to being
licensed you will apply with the
department of ag they have
expertise in ag products and
crops and it's also board to
note that that my license
structure for production is
scalable so if you want to grow
three plants you would apply for
a license and it would be
scalable compared to somebody
that is doing a license for
thousand plants so that we entry
into the market is low the cost
of entering the market is
extremely low and so that we
don't push out some of our
smaller growers.
the tax structure is also
important I think it's important
that we keep as much tax in tax
revenue in the hands of the
local governing bodies as
possible so there's a six
percent excise tax to the state
to the county to the city and
then you add gross receipts tax
on top of that which comes out
to about fourteen percent and I
thought important just to start
out on the lower end of what the
experts say because in New
Mexico very seldom do we lower
taxes so let's start low if we
need to come back and raise it
and we're very good at doing
that so I think we'll have that
ability in the future the other
four point of of this
legislation is the last
possession up to two ounces and
sixteen grams but you have to
have a proof of purchase so it
helps our police officers know
that you purchased your cannabis
legally and that you're not
purchasing from the black market
because again we we don't want
the black market to thrive so
this just allows our our
officers to know that you have
purchased it legally or that you
have a production license to use
your own.
another important part is that
we don't put a plant count cap
we don't limit licenses and why
is this important we just passed
house bill two fifty five and it
took forty one years to to take
that system that has been
failing and have some type of
reform that's going to help
economic development so we don't
want to create that same system
with cannabis another important
pieces that has a dual licensure
we already have cannabis
producers license now that me
very high standards and so to
get this program up and running
they will be licensed first but
just for a nine month period
and then another portion which
Mr chair and members the
committee we all know is public
safety and how important that is
so this creates a fund or the
ability for the department of
public safety to find a drug
that drug recognition expert
training for all of the police
officers within the state and so
this is important not just for
recognizing people who might be
driving under the influence of
cannabis but under any substance
whether talking paint or cocaine
or any type of drug they'll be
able to recognize that but also
preside provides a way for
funding for creating and the the
ability to test people to see if
they are currently high and not
just as we have now where you
can see if somebody's use
cannabis within the last thirty
days another important piece Mr
chair members of the committee
is that this language in the
point five version allows for
the discounted license
dispensaries offer dispensing if
they allow consignment of other
products so our small producers
are going to be able to afford
the bill million dollar
buildings in places all over the
state to dispenser products but
if other people who have a
building want to allow someone
to come in and sell consignment
their product they'll get at a
discounted license.
So we thought that important to
to allow the ease and easy
entrance in the market lowcost
and then there's also the option
of a coop so co ops could be
formed multiple producers could
could come together and form
an entity that thank you also
have a dispensary
with the changes in tax we had
the tribal cooperation language
that Senator Shendo wanted
interstate regulation and no
plant counselor no license
limits that senator Candelaria
thought to be very important and
then it was brought up to my
attention between taxed here
that we didn't have a
prohibition on drive throughs
which are kind of interesting we
have that on on alcohol so we we
went ahead and added that
language that you can have a
drive through cannabis store I
think there's one or two already
in existence in Albuquerque
which is concerning and then
what we pulled out from the
original language there is a a
one mile
limits that the can cannabis
dispensaries could be within a
mile we decided with a little
bit of discussion amongst the
other sponsors that we would
pull that out because there's
already language for local
control and zoning so if
Albuquerque wants to have a
green mile they can Russell
doesn't and they can put in the
proper regulations to ensure
that that doesn't happen and
then we remove the local opt out
that was something that I I had
to compromise on because I am a
huge local control guy but we
don't want to create that that
checker board that we had under
the alcohol system.
so with that Mr chair I will
stand for questions on the
amendment.
Thank you.
Discussion.
You can see hands on the
proposed amendment at this time.
See who we recognize on the
amendment anyone.
Recruiting.
Saying no discussion on the
proposed amendment.
The members the committee
friendlier yeah that's a good
question thank you of the
sponsor Representative Martinez.
Your of your position on the
amendment.
Thank you Mr chair I I
appreciate the amendment and I
appreciate Senator Pirtle so
hard work on it but it is an
unfriendly amendment.
There's a there's a motion for
to pass on the amendment.
Substitute motion to table.
I'm gonna take the tabling
motion next I'd like to Senator
Stewart will allow for some
discussion before the tabling
motion I'll I'll re I'll take
the tabling motion back.
You're you're table motion will
have the presidents over the
past motion as.
We can discussion.
That because it was immediately
done the do passed so all come
down and we'll just chat.
Right yeah let's do some of that
tonight I think we may be here
for with one another for the
evening so let's see we can get
along I didn't hear anybody
Senator Baca that you want to be
recognized on the on the
amendment.
Yeah I had a quick question
involves the bill and the
amendment but maybe the sponsor
the amendment can.
can answer either one it doesn't
matter.
Share so as you know Mr chairman
of and even my my colleague
there from chair of Chavis
County I consistently reject the
these measures and the reason
being in my basis for that is is
really the lack of testing but
what's encouraging is is that
the are you training for the
police officers this is really
all that I think they have right
now to detect marijuana
especially when somebody's been
on the street Mr chair and so I
guess my question
would be to
of the the sponsor of the
amendment
does and I and I saw that you
you have a if my correct and and
that you said there's a fund for
DRT training set up within the
amendment.
Mr chair Senator that's correct
not only does it fund the DRT
training but will set up some
funding where DPS could contract
with you know a laboratory or
somebody to create and we're
trying to discover a way to test
for the metabolites to determine
if somebody is currently
under the influence of cannabis
as opposed to right now they can
test and see that you use
cannabis in the past but they
can't tell through a test like
you can with the breathalyzer
that you are currently under the
influence so hopefully if we can
get some funding into this we
can make some some headway into
into that technology Mr chair I
don't know if it be appropriated
by if I may it does concern you
then and if I ask the bill
Sanchez what are what measure
for testing for detection does
their bills have.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator Baca full for the
question you know the through
the appropriations process as we
already do that right so I don't
think you need to have it in the
bill the appropriations
committees both on the house and
Senate side the LFC as a craft
every budget at its it is a
craft a budget every single year
would be able to utilize a part
of this revenue to to go to DPS
and to train more drug
recognition experts that's you
know that's that's appropriate
but added the U. to have in the
bill out of the you have to
mandated in the bill this is my
experience Mr chair and and
Representative has been though
that that
the G. R. E. person what we have
now or very limited personnel
that are trained in that area
and all the small teams
is there any expansion for that
and your bill.
Thank you Mr chair and and
senator Bob that there is no
expansion of that in our bill
and you know part one of the one
of the criticisms of our bill
last year was that we created a
number of different funds in
appropriated money in different
ways one of the ways in which we
appropriated money once through
R. A. L. public safety fund that
included drug recognition expert
so in light of those concerns
that were raised in the past we
remove those sections from the
bill but you know as a it is
somebody who serves on the
legislative finance committee I
can tell you to me that's going
to be a top priority should this
legislation passed because we
will need more drug recognition
experts on the streets that's
that you know that's the right
thing to do.
Okay thank you I I think I think
you've answered my question
Representative and thank you
senator as well or your response
to the provisions within your
amendment.
All right members of the
committee on the proposed
amendment I have next R. o'neill
we we pending tabling motion
which I think once the committee
discussion on the amendment is
completed Senator o'neill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator pearl for bringing this
forward you know I guess I feel
you know this is been such a
topic Romero one of bills to
competing marijuana bills still
feel like very much a layman and
us but certain themes have come
up for me I'm very intrigued
first of all I really like your
approach treating this as an
agricultural product that's
quite refreshing and makes a lot
of sense to me but I'm concerned
about your lack of a restriction
on licenses thank what is the
reasoning there I mean should we
be protecting you know the
existing folks that have really
put themselves out there in an
instrument are away.
Can you can you explain why you
don't believe in restricting
licences besides like some
parallel to house bill two fifty
five which I don't think it's
quite relevant.
Well
Mr chair Senator o'neill I I do
appreciate that and in so the
current licences will we'll be
able to under my legislation
have a nine month do a
licensure.
Call it a head start if if we
may where they will be able to
sell recreational cannabis
before licenses will be able to
be purchased from everybody else
that's not currently a holder of
a medical license so that
portion is there I don't believe
house bill twelve has that so
there is a nine month head start
for for those that already have
a license
quite a few of the other states
do not either limit plant count
or limits licenses I think when
we start limiting licenses we
create a value of something that
as a state is really it's not
something you know it's like
your driver's license is not
something that you know can't be
revoked if if you don't play by
the rules so we want to ensure
that we're not creating
something of value by limiting
the licenses think about
business people as I'll be
created to get around all of
those types of regulations
weather is forming multiple LLCs
or whatever it is to get around
plant counselor or license
restrictions so I think if we if
we open it up it's more likely
that are small growers will take
advantage of these licenses
people growing one hundred or
less plants will we'll more than
likely be the majority of the
licenses and so that's what we
want to see want to see our our
almost farmers farmers market or
farm to table type businesses be
able to thrive so if we limit
licenses
then the licenses will just be
in the hands of those that want
to produce large amounts of
plants so that's not what we
want we want our our farm to
table business is that right
okay well thank you of Senator
and and in a related van tell me
about plant counts were where is
your amendment on plant counts.
So playing counts was a an issue
that that was very important to
a lot of members that I didn't
have it I my original language
didn't prevent the cannabis
control commission from putting
plant count limits in but
because of some of the other
Sanchez they wanted to ensure
that that there was gonna be
plan account so that was my word
and moving forward that we would
incorporate that into my
legislation and so that's the
consensus that was have that
came from a few of the other
Sanchez but I think what if you
put plate counts and it's one of
those arbitrary numbers that you
know which number do you pick
how high you go what what is the
end result and and the reality
is you put plant count numbers
and and businessman as as most
people will tell you Mr chair
and senator will find a way
around those types of things so
let's just be open if you want
to permit those then it's a
scaled license so the more
points you want to plant the
more money you paid to the
Department of actor your license
and I think that's the fairest
way to.
Okay so you're you're pretty
look
Free with the number of plant
plant counts right I mean it's
kind of an open market approach
in in Mr chair Senator I think
that's the the best approach
because we don't want to create
a shortage of supply and that's
one of the biggest concerns that
would with plant counts that you
see now with the medical program
it creates a shortage of supply
and and where they're filling
that but shortage with I don't
know I can't speak to that but
we don't want to have a shortage
of supply because then that
props up the price and a higher
level we prop up the price at a
higher level the illicit market
is still able to come in
backfield in need and that's not
what we want we want to find
that sweet spot where people are
able to make make money growing
cannabis and that the state
receives a fair amount of tax
revenue but that we but the
illicit market out of business
well again while and that last
point is really resonated with
me it's it's I really like how
you targeted the illicit market
and maybe that the focus of your
amendment of your bill to eighty
eight so anyway I'll listen to
the big to the debate but thank
you for bringing this forward.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator.
Discussion Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman so I I
want to appreciate Senator
Pirtle on to some very
thoughtful
bill that you outlined you
outlined it well I like the
training of the police officers
also I like other aspects of it
I am bothered by the not having
any aspect of social justice and
I know you said you wanted that
a separate bill I think the
folks that have been working on
this for ever are less
suspicious.
Of the idea of a separate bill
that perhaps we would just pass
the cannabis and then the social
justice aspect would not be
passed and when I have talked to
folks about splitting the bill
under those two
and saying you know they would
have to just be side by side as
we move forward that would have
to be one number part would have
to pass them both but I'm also
suspicious of us doing that so
can you can you explain why you
just really did not want that in
your bill and how you see us
passing of the social justice
issues we have many many
minority students in jail or
prison because of marijuana.
And it's not fair we have people
in federal prison doing twenty
and thirty year sentences
because they were growing or
selling marijuana and now we're
trying to legalize it it's just
a fairness issue that just eats
at people and and it eats at me
so I guess if you can explain
more about how you feel like
what that we could move forward
with that I would be interested
in hearing that.
Mr chair and and madam pro tem I
definitely appreciate that you
know my biggest concern is we're
creating a new penalty with
regard to selling to minors that
that was not in place before so
in my in my opinion you could
potentially let somebody out
that state was just in for
distributing or or something
minor but since this this crime
of selling to somebody under the
age of eighteen didn't exist
there was not the ability to
charge them under that crime are
we letting somebody out that
David would have violated
somebody under this crime and so
I think we need to separate the
two issues
so that we're not muddying the
water are we talking about the
legalization and regulation of a
crop or we talking about a very
important issue of of social
justice and and criminal justice
reform because colonel Justice
Reform and regulation of a crop
in my opinion should be
separated and it creates a
situation now where where
instead of discussing how we're
going to regulate cannabis we're
discussing about I social
justice and I think if we can
separate those we would have
much more intelligent
conversations and really get
down to the nitty gritty on how
we need to do that as well it
seems to me that we're halfway
paying attention to how we
regulate cannabis and we're
halfway putting our attention
into social justice and we need
to put a hundred percent of our
attention into each issue.
Well Mister chairman Senator
Pirtle I really appreciate that
added to what you're talking
about but I don't see that
happen in actuality I don't see
any social justice reform but
coming from your side of the
aisle I'm sure I'll be corrected
here pretty soon but for the
most part the social justice
issues comes from our side of
the aisle and if they seem to be
discounted by yours and so that
really is the reason both of
them I believe our in house bill
twelve is that it's too easy to
focus on you know what we're
regulating a new crop and not
dealing with the social justice
issues so I I I hear what you're
saying but it doesn't seem that
that's what's actually happening
so I I am.
And I hear the social justice
community loud and clear
because it's it's these minority
students that wind up in prison
so.
That's all but but thank you
thank you for your thorough
explanation you know if we
didn't have house bill twelve
before us I might be a less less
anxious to table yours.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam pro tempore your anyone
else members the committee.
So I'd like to echo Senator
o'neill's comments I thank you
very much appreciate you
approaching this as an
agricultural commodity.
and I've heard the suggestion
that we want social justice and
I guess the the challenge for me
is to knowing what part of the
bill of social justice and what
is maybe something different so
for example throughout the the
bill that we have under
consideration at the amendment
but the bills there's a number
of references to.
Because so Senator was point out
people in prison and and the
trying to turn that around and I
I support all that.
Then I don't know whether social
justice includes those
provisions of the bill we have
any consideration at least let
me let me pause for a moment.
Representative I hope during the
night you'll correct me many
times I've seen I've seen so
many versions of this bill and
so many amendments of your bill
and Center portals bill we got
new amendments this morning
others but a lot of criticism
for our delay it etcetera
etcetera and frankly I've been
wanting to see you know what was
gonna happen with all of this
before I started to dig in and
trying to study a bill but but
At least the version of the last
version the bill that I read
this before us on house bill
twelve.
There was a if I recall at least
the version I read the what the
what the fee to obtain a license
for producing was a hundred and
twenty five thousand dollars is
that still in the bill.
Mr Mr Chairman there was some
amendments adopted in Senate tax
which I believe probably change
that amount Mr here what do you
do you have that in front of
you.
Miss Mister chairman members of
the committee the fee is two
thousand five hundred dollars
for the license and then extra
thousand dollars for each site
so each promise that you have
had the limit of a hundred and
twenty five thousand dollars was
no greater than and if you do
the math you would literally
have to have fifty or more sites
to even reach that hundred and
twenty five thousand dollars
that was the cap the maximum
that of of licensee would have
could get to.
Okay thank you in into the to
the point of both center store
in center pirtle you know this
on the social justice and social
challenge for me because again
the the folks that imprisoned
and have connections and so
forth I fully support of on the
the efforts to try as I said
turn that around on the other
hand the bills at least again
correct me no one of course is
the bill that I read
provided that that the granting
of a licence for an individual
to produce all retail whatever
it may be could not be turned
down based on a prior history of
manufacturing or distribution of
any of any drugs at all
including in my my my concern is
methamphetamine or other drugs
so is that part of the bill
still in there that that
individual could have those
connections and that kind of
history and then that could not
be considered in the granting or
denial of a license.
Mr chair that that is still in
the bill and you know it's it's
up to the to the regulating body
really to to take into account
the totality of the
circumstances so if somebody was
cooking meth you know two years
ago and has a number of
convictions I you know that
person wouldn't be licensed but
if somebody was you know
Doing something twenty years ago
was convicted rate there you
know that rate there due to
society and has been a good
person sends that person should
be automatically barred from
this new industry so it's still
in the bill.
Right and I wouldn't disagree
with you under the sun are you
again although of I think you
and I both agree to read the
bill that that's left open now
was the the decision guesstimate
based on whoever reviews that
history and I and I guess the
reason I bring it up is because
you know I don't know whether
that's considered part of the
social justice component of the
bill or not I would assume
that's what you all would call
social justice
but but I would I would
distinguish that from perhaps
the idea of trying to get people
beyond convictions arrest
histories for drug use you know
getting getting somebody who has
a history of drug distribution
or manufacturing getting them
into the marijuana business to
me is not necessarily what I
would call.
In restorative justice or social
justice but that's that's
semantics I guess we would
probably disagree about that I'd
come back to Senator pearls Bill
I really do also appreciate in
bringing up the illicit market
I think everybody knows that I
have concerns about where we go
with this industry I think most
people probably know at least
the reading that I ran into this
last fall where there was a rate
of many law enforcement agencies
multiple law enforcement
agencies on the Navajo
reservation where they
discovered a thousand Chinese
immigrants producing thousands
and thousands of pounds of
marijuana using hotel rooms in
Farmington to package distribute
and so forth.
And I think Center pirtle makes
a good point the concern with
illicit market I'm sure we all
share that can't imagine anybody
think that was a good thing to
have a thousand Chinese with
children.
producing marijuana on the on
the Navajo reservation but but
the reality is that that's so I
think that that's sometimes
inevitable in a lot of things in
our society and.
My my ultimate concern here will
be the illicit market and in my
experience my expectation
probably coming out of Mexico
even more so than the
reservation principally because
it'll be easier and cheaper
that's ultimately the the easy
way to do that.
so anyway I I appreciate very
much what you're trying to do
here
Senator Pirtle I think we know
that the horses are lined up
behind a different bill.
and and and I hope there's a way
to take what's good from your
ideas into the the bill that
probably has the horses to to
get be on the line and and I
hope the sponsors of that bill
will we'll take this hearing and
look at your proposals and and
really consider them while I you
and I are both farmers and and
you and I Senator I gotta tell
you there's far more regulation
of the chili we produce and
manufacture David would be true
of the marijuana in this bill.
We have very strict FDA
compliance a great deal of
inspections.
Constant testing we have labs
you know on on our chili
production and and we have very
very strict tight controls other
mandated by the government in
our production imagine you're a
dairy producer doing very
production highly highly
regulated
and what we're doing here is
we're we're authorizing the
manufacture of drugs of
recreational drugs that would
really have none of that
oversight and I think that's
unfortunate none of the testing
independence I guess I should
sessions an oversight but now
one of the testing oversight
that you and I have to follow so
I think there's a lot of good
things your bill several things
when trying to say but but I
also expect that we're going to
be focusing on a different bill
also Centerville you want to
come back.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
following up on some of your
comments you know it's very
helpful to have these two bills
I began comparison contrast is
very helpful in a lot of ways
but I you know note this is an
unfair question to my guy from
the north valley I was work so
hard on this bill and I really
respect that but is there
anything in Senator pearls Bill
that you like.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you my Senator center o'neill
you know I I think you know
Senator Pirtle and I actually
had a meeting of the minds in
twenty nineteen that bill that
passed the house
if you haven't if you haven't
watched that tape if you're a
nerd like me of legislative
process is go check that out we
were in the middle of debate and
pirtle Senator I have been
talking for a while that session
and we agreed.
To to to move forward a
compromise bill out of the house
that year much to the surprise a
lot of people I think center
Pirtle certainly brings a great
deal of of of experience and a
great deal of of of passion for
this issue and I really respect
that is there anything in its R.
Pirtle will that I like yeah I I
you know our bill house bill
twelve actually do not have a
plank.
Our bill passed the house
without a point count I share
his perspective on plank I think
plan counts or arbitrary I don't
think they really serve the
purpose that we think they do
but once our bill was heard in
Senate tax we heard loud and
clear.
From that committee we heard
loud and clear from Senate
leadership to senator Wirth that
in fact there needed to be some
way to manage the plants because
as a new industry we just
weren't sure what was gonna look
like.
And so we agreed up I personally
agreed a little bit begrudgingly
to to have that amendment impose
a plank on time on on our bill
but I share Senator Pirtle spurs
Bective on the issue of plank.
Furthermore.
I share senator portals
perspective on small business
that's why our bill has a micro
business license that can be
fully vertically integrated that
means if you are a farmer
somewhere you've got a little
plot of land in the north
valley.
With two of your buddies you can
come together and get yourself a
greenhouse and you can grow up
to two hundred plants you can
manufacture the product you can
sell the product right for
pretty inexpensively.
You don't have to be one of the
big corporations to participate
in this industry.
Still there's there's a lot in
common I think but I think there
there are some distinctions as
well you know the social justice
issue what I you know the the
there there's not a section in
our bill that is a social
justice section of the bill
social justice is embedded
throughout our bill the
microlights senses are an
example of racial and economic
justice right it's a way for
people of color to be able to
get in to the industry.
Social justice is not limited to
the expungement mechanism or or
you know not having an automatic
bar against people with prior
convictions for participating
those are the bill and they're
very distinct obviously but
there are a lot of different
layers of this bill that I think
really respond to the needs of
communities of color and quite
frankly the demands of
communities of color to be
included in this new industry
so you know I think there's line
commented I think I think the
vision is very similar you know
but there are some important
distinctions.
Lastly Mr chair and and and
senator Neil you know you you
mentioned the illicit market
I think going to be doing my
presentation just because of the
time constraints.
But you know the the reason the
the the the biggest driver for
me doing this work.
Is because I believe to my core
that once this country legalizes
cannabis.
The world's biggest.
The world's biggest consumer of
illicit drugs United States once
we legalize cannabis.
We're gonna put.
We're gonna put cartels not
completely out of business
involved if you study the
history of cartels baby ball for
hundreds of years in fact Mr
chair Senator Senator o'neill
one of the sort of godfathers of
Mexican cartels.
Set up shop in the town of four
tallies New Mexico believe it or
not.
This is over sixty seventy years
ago.
Our bill.
Her pearls Neville and any other
cannabis legalization bill
really.
Is.
It in play in terms of ensuring
that the illicit market begins
to decrease and that the listed
market can can can finally be
dealt the blow that he needs to
be dealt cannabis accounts for
roughly sixty percent of the
cartels cash crop it's a it's a
big cash crop right in order for
cannabis to be wrote produced
and sold it didn't take that
much.
Okay.
You know manifold these other
things they take the
manufacturing process that's
pretty time consuming and
expensive cannabis it doesn't.
These cartels are used to
selling cannabis to our
communities by legalizing no
matter if you take Senator does
bill or or our bill or some
other bills you're gonna make a
dent in the less than market I
guarantee you and once this
country legalizes you are really
gonna make it that last word on
this issue Mr chair and senator
Neil Mexico is poised to
legalize recreational cannabis
they're this close to legalizing
and they will become the world's
to this point the world's
biggest consumer of of legal
cannabis if they legalize the
United States once we do so we
will be by far the biggest
thank.
Thank you Representative thanks
and I'll listen to the debate
thanks.
Any other discussion Senator
Stewart.
So Mister chairman I have a
question for Emily Kaltenbach.
This call.
Mr chairman pro tem happy dance.
Thank you Emily so Mister
chairman.
do you remember when Arizona
voted to legalize adult use
cannabis.
All Mr chair and and madam
president they just voted to
legalize last November of twenty
twenty.
So Mr Chairman.
They Arizona has been up and
running with adult use cannabis
for at least two or three
months.
Is that correct Emily.
Mr chair and and madam president
yes and most recently they
started you did they there is a
little bit interim between the
vote November and when they
started but yes as of twenty
twenty one they are getting off
the ground.
Sh so Mister chairman is just so
amazing to me that other states
can do this and we are mired in
which Bill which regulation how
to do it whether or not we have
plant counts how much tax I mean
it's just unbelievable the and I
think their overall tax is
something like twenty four
percent a with a significant
amount going to cities and
counties so
It it's just it's just very
difficult I've my desk is
covered with amendments and
bills and I know we're running
out of time.
You know we just we just don't
seem to be able to do this very
quickly and it's it's father son
so.
that's all I just wanted to know
so it was less than a year in
other words Emily before they
had adult use cannabis up and
running.
madam president that's correct
and they also included equity in
there ballot initiative so
social justice and equity is now
reflected in almost every state
legalization bill that's being
that has recently passed or is
under consideration.
So Mister chairman Emily and
what did that what did that
ballot initiative look like how
did that include equity in in
the in the state.
What what did it say I mean how
did they do that.
Madam Mister chair madam
president a couple of items one
they're allowing home grow which
we believe is an equity and
social justice provision so
they're allowing adults to grow
up to six mature plants which is
reflected similar to house bill
twelve and similar to Colorado
they also created a fund to set
aside revenue to help small
businesses because typically
people of color can't get the
same capital and other business
owners and so they're setting
aside in creating a fund to
allow to ensure that there's
more equity in the market.
Right thank you Emily thank you
Mr chairman.
First thank you all right I
think that looks like all the
committee discussion Senator
Stewart had a table in motion
I'm I'm gonna take it back not
because I support it but just it
seems mean perhaps we could just
go on to other amendments.
Well I just love all those
could.
Good feelings coming from the
committee denied.
Cup of coffee that's my
reasoning.
Senator Stewart has withdrawn
the tabling motion the pre
seeding motion which it
superseded was the two passed
motion.
I think of senator Morris was at
center Morris with a do pass
motion.
Chairman I think he should drop
his do passed motion to.
What are we where we making
these motions when we just move
on to other amendments to
twelve.
Senator Stewart you may be able
to persuade Center Moores but
I'm following the parliamentary
rules that you know very well
the tabling motion took
precedence over his two passed
motion you're tabling motion
being withdrawn were back on his
two passed motion.
Center more center of you're
still with us and are you I am
on a sweet but I'm still here so
few mostly going out of this
late night bus brought some of
the up all night which looks
like I might be up anyways.
Senator Moores Senator Stewart
is invited you to withdraw your
two best motion let me throw it
against the wall in the scope go
through the motions.
All right we're on a do pass
motion.
Would you take a roll call
please.
Yes.
No.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Lopez no.
Senator Morris yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart no.
Respectfully no.
Senator August no.
Of the seventy three do passed
motion on this bill fails.
Pleasure of the committee.
Senator Duhigg.
Thank you Mr chair I so I have
another amendment the two oh two
number is
two two oh nine one seven point
two.
To.
And.
This ammendment is an attempt to
address those concerns about
plant count that came out of
that tax committee I am to find
a way to do it but it's not
arbitrary
So.
What this ammendment does is.
It removes some of the
amendments put on in tax and as
I go through the amendment I'll
kind of explain how those
removals come into it but one of
the things that removes is is
there were changes made in tax
to the
Cannabis Committee
Representative Mr chair
representative what's the name
of the committee that's created
by your the cannabis regulatory
advisory committee I in tax they
had taken out language that
would offer bid someone who
had an economic interest in I
what a licensed I.
And today from being on that
committee and had also provided
for three spots on the committee
for people who were
current retailers producers or
manufacturers so what part of
amendment one and all of the
moment to do is it restores that
language that would make it so
that someone who has that who's
invested in or has an ownership
interest in a licensed facility
could not be on this committee
and it changes those three spots
that had been created on the
committee and tax to one spot of
someone who has previous
experience as a cannabis
retailer producer or
manufacturer and the reason this
matters we're going to see later
on is because we're gonna task
this committee with with doing
some oversight of and when we
make changes in response to
market changes we want to make
sure that those members of the
committee don't have any
conflicts of interest.
So then in the number four.
I this creates
this is and this was part of.
Part of this was in the tax
committee and it but it's a
little bit changed here this is
creating a mechanism so that if
market market starts changing
and we start having other kind
over production that we saw on
organ or or too little
production and you know we're
not able to fullfill to keep of
medical program stock up or
anything this would allow for
changes to be made
on the given a finding
recommendation from that regular
that cannabis regulatory
advisory committee.
And so they would make a
recommendation and then the
decision the Sir next to be
taken in response to that
imposing a temporary moratorium
on new licensure issuing new
licenses are allowing greater
production I than currently
allowed because because we'll
see on the next page this will
implement of a plant count what
would not be allowed would be
reducing the cap on the plant
count in response to market
conditions and the disk decision
would be made by the
superintendent of our LD with
input from the New Mexico
University of New Mexico bureau
of of business and economic
research and also the director
of the New Mexico department of
agriculture so and if if you
wouldn't mind miss Garcia going
to the next page.
Thank you.
I'm the change number five is
changing language to allow for
those changes that might happen
in response to market conditions
changing.
And then number six is where we
put in the plant out.
It and so what this would do
would require RLD to figure take
a look and figure out what the
median number of plants grown in
recreational of cannabis
programs nationwide is and I
believe it Senator Ivy Soto is
going to offer to amend my
amendment in a way that we also
account for for population us so
that we're setting the plant
count basically at the middle of
the road number.
And.
And that's a that's a
determination that would be made
each year by our LD are based on
what we're seeing around that
the country and we want to do it
median not average because you
know in places where they have
no limit on bank accounts and
places where they have very
restrictive limits that that
that's really going to skew it
so we're really looking for in
the middle of the road approach
and then this also has a delayed
repeal three about three years
out from when that licenses are
gonna start being I distributed
to non microbicides said as so
that those micro businesses have
a good three years to get
established get up and running
before the bigger guys can come
in and and and dominate the
market.
So Mr chair that's.
That's my explanation the
amendment anyone has questions.
Senator Stewart your question.
The so Mister chairman and
Senator Duhigg.
So the repeal.
in twenty twenty five so
essentially you're setting up
this provision for three years
where will look at the market
population so we don't make the
mistake so that other states
have done there's not only
states that have the over
produced their states that under
produced.
So we're trying to look at those
markets and so what we want as
plant counts of for the new
licensees coming in and then
after three years then is there
no plant count.
Mr chair Senator test so under
this after three years the plan
count would be repealed now know
if three years down the line for
some reason it seems like that
would be a a poor approach to
take we could we could always
take that repeal Act
but.
Three year should be in a an
appropriate amount of time to
see to see if this is a good
approach not and and how this is
working now.
Right thank you Mr chairman
thank you Sir do have.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
Senator doing thank you so much
for the work that you've done on
this.
It it it and and I think our
sets step number
that is that is
not susceptible to manipulation
are in the matter budgets it is
administered I think it's
helpful because because it gives
it gives people a certain level
of
predictability in terms of where
things are going off in the
regulatory side and and Mr which
is real quick Senator what did
you want to add something.
You know Mr chair Senator I just
realized there was another part
of this that should be in here
and I don't see it because you
know one of the points that
Senator Pirtle made about folks
getting around the plant counts
I'm just being able to open a
bunch of Elsie's and stack up
licenses.
That was supposed to be
something I addressing that was
supposed to be a part of my
amendment but I am not seeing
that language here so let's just
deal with what we have here at
this point and then well the
discussion continues I will I
will figure finds that language
and an adequate.
At appropriate time because
cause us under paroles is
absolutely right there would be
lots of ways to evade this plant
counts are in the absence of
that.
Okay and and I'm sure that we
can probably get that drafted up
at some point in the four and a
half hours remaining in this
hearing
what we consider this the I do I
do want to however make two
small changes.
Who are amendment number six.
Are the our our the first would
be our.
On the list are from the bottom
of the program for the move my
way up and that is just before
the up here it at the end of the
paragraphs would be to insert a
comma.
Well and our and insert
after the comma adjusted by
population.
And in that way that we were
actually getting a true medium
number as we look at that.
And then the second would be
Would be one that that that with
Representative Trujillo I think
would be self evident at the
home of our LD and that is on
the second line to strike the
work reasonable.
as administrative rules are
rules without the I would not be
asked to.
So that would be the
That would be my man went on
these.
And and Mr chair Senator
I I have no problem with those
members I I will say I believe
that that reasonable language I
took from another part in the
bill that deals with rulemaking
so I think it would be
consistent to leave it in there
because that's that's language
that that is already is in the
bill regarding all make an I
work for consistent taken out of
the of the blacks.
Our.
I would and I'm on the road
making part of it Mr chairman I
would I would be able to
superintend trio.
Characterization.
Thank you Mr chairman Senators
yes I actually in our amendments
in tax business and
transportation we did take out
the word reasonable but we've
noticed that there was a couple
other places where reasonable
was left in and so we do agree
that the word reasonable should
not be in there because there's
really no definition for what's
reasonable a rule is a rule.
That that would be a motion to
amend Center do this proposed
amendment.
Yesterday I see you get to
Senator doing first are doing
what you want about that.
Mr chair that's time I have no
problem with those changes.
Okay Senator.
I guess Mr chairman I don't know
who to ask Miss to that.
What.
What percentage of this
amendment is going to rely on
population because certainly I
think in New Mexico we've at
least got one very large state
to the east of us that money
just be coming into New Mexico
to participate if we ever get to
adult use cannabis so are just
concerned that
You know that perhaps this you
know so so what percentage of
your little formula here would
be based on population.
Certainly madam are of Mr
Chairman and Madam pro tem the
so go the adjusted by population
as you read that would
what modify medium.
So that would be looking at the
median number of cannabis plants
plants produce nationwide
pandemic vigils are entities
licensed to produce recreational
cannabis in states other than
New Mexico during the proceeding
here.
Just to buy population so that
so that way when we're looking
at the median number produced in
California.
Then we just that to the New
Mexico population as well as the
median amount of of of produced
in Vermont adjusted to the New
Mexico population.
Mr chairman that doesn't that
doesn't really answer my
question.
You know what what if state of
forty percent of the bills use
in New Mexico comes from Texas.
You know that your little
formula doesn't really take that
into account.
Correct Mister chairman Senator
Ivey Soto.
I'm so the way that
the way that this is written.
Is that is that this will only
go into facts.
R. is that is that the rules we
promulgated to limits.
where there is a you have to go
up I think to pay to number
four.
That that is that there has to
be a finding and the
recommendation of the cannabis
regulatory advisory committee
that the market equilibrium is
deficient what is the economic
viability of the cannabis
industry or adequate supply of
cannabis so if you don't have
if you don't have that finding
that the and recommendations of
the cannabis regulatory advisory
committee that though of the
deficiency the market a clear
Graham and there's no threat and
economic viability of the
cannabis industry nor is there
any problem of adequate supply
of cannabis this break member
comes into effect now Mr chair
Senator that's not what we let
me Madam iota Senator.
No this this would be this would
be at a cap that is in place and
there would be changes that
could be made if there's
problems with that market Kewa
agree on that the change that
could not be made would be to
lower the cap you could not
lower the cap you could increase
the cap in response to market
will a gram you could change the
number of licenses that are
they're given out either by by
putting a temporary pause on
licenses or by putting out more
of that
but no this cap would be in
place as as as as a matter of
law under this and then and then
there could be changes not to
include reducing the calf in
response to that problems with
market market equilibrium.
Thank you for.
So Mister chairman I have the
point one version of this
amendment I don't know why but
what where in in the amendment
does say that there will be a
cap and where does it say what
that cap will be endorsed this
group going to decide that every
year now okay well and and and
Mr chair Senator to an extent
yes so so this the pip limit so
number six which which should be
the same in your point one
version as it isn't the point
two version
So that's what puts in the cat
is this plant limit section here
and.
By January first of start in
twenty twenty two and then each
year the division will have done
the research to figure out what
that median number address and
with Senator Ivey says amendment
adjusted for population is and
that is the cap so could be
adjusted each year apart from
any any increases due to issues
with market equilibrium in the
meantime.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Senator Ortiz for.
I'm I'm
well it's it's up to the
committee and in terms of my
suggested amendment to doing
some.
Sir do you said it's favorable.
K. would also committee on your
proposed change Senator Ivy Soto
change.
But we make it easy Center do it
can we just a restate your
amendment with center I was so
strange to Mr chair absolutely
and in fact and I found that
other language to avoid people
stacking up licenses we can we
can just stick that into this to
at this point.
Get it all done in one.
let me try and help family keep
track of where we're at because
I don't mention the.
Anybody knows we're at really
except maybe you center at this
point and I'm only do you know
where we're at with which
amendment where and how the
amendments been amended by
Senator Ivey Soto.
S. R. drive okay good all right
of center o'neill on that
amendment.
Give me the.
At some point at some point Mr
chair I'm sure we'll go to
Representative Romero and
Representative Martinez to see
if this is a favorable
amendment.
It comes amendment.
Very good suggestions as well.
Representative on the amendment.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
Senator is.
We we appreciate Senator Duhigg
and and Senator Ivey Soto and
and all of you discussing the
amendment.
I think it's a very well thought
amendment we think it's a very
well thought out amendment and
in the spirit of of of you know
this sausage making process and
in the spirit of of of
respecting and appreciating this
process I think that this
ammendment actually makes our
bill better and and we will take
it as a friendly amendment.
Thank you committee on purposes
of this hearing instead of
referring to something as a
sausage making process Kobe
recorded as a Doobie rolling
process.
We don't we don't use high
Senator we sanitise words we
call it cannabis and we call it
recreation or recreation we're
not rolling anything or
struggling.
Adult adult.
Yes it's all in the words we use
right it's no longer marijuana
is cannabis it's the don't use
and its radar educational adults
use it for variety of purposes
okay we're not using
recreational this year now all
right don't you okay I'm sorry
well that's good because I was
out of tennis or something in.
Playing off.
All right so I'll try to keep it
all straight Senator you'll
forgive me for falling back to
my youth.
We have all kinds of names and
that of the more cannabis.
If nothing was cannabis in the
last couple years so I I I do
fall forgive me.
all right so we're on the
proposed amendment I don't see
any other hands up for
discussion Senator Stewart
I'm sorry one one more thing so
if we put this in place.
This is the so this so this
happens in the beginning.
What is the timeline for this
because you know we I think that
these licenses will have to have
the ability to start growing.
So how does that work with with
this ammendment.
Senator so this would require
that first determination to be
made January first twenty twenty
two licenses for the non Mike
rose the ones who with this
plant cap is going to apply to
those are being issued on July
first twenty thank you so this
is giving you know good seven
months of notice to to folks who
are going to be getting those
license as of what that same cap
is going to be.
Thank you.
And Mr chair before before we go
to a vote on this amendment I if
we could add in that the other
language I.
To prevent this the stacking of
licences.
And we have that I can do it
verbally.
I'm.
You're you're gonna do a lot of
of we're gonna have a very
difficult might with our
committee report and whether
committee staff unless this
really simple Senator and it's
the reason the reason I bring it
up because we're getting
amendment strong with this bill
all the time I really venture to
say nobody really knows where
which bill we're on our of which
amendment were on at any given
time just because it's this bill
is changing minute by minute
but it's really simple Senator
you can try it but the last
thing I want to do is have a bad
committee report coming out
here.
Mr chair this simple and I will
make make sure to to work with
committee staff to make sure
that they get this language I so
it would be on page thirty secs
between lines twenty one and
twenty two I'm I'm gonna state
the amendment person then I'll
explain what it's doing.
Page thirty six between lines
twenty one and twenty two
insert.
I.
For like a sub for.
Then the applicant's.
Or a controlling person in the
applicant's entity.
Is a current licensee.
Or an owner director or officer
of the current licensee and and
and Mr C. I will send you that
language.
But for the members of the
committee this is dealing with a
portion of the bill the
addresses when the division
shall deny an application for an
initial license or renew all.
And so one of the things that
should trigger a denial of a
license is when someone already
has a license or I is is a
controlling or is that you know
it the owner director officer
something of some forty has
license so that people aren't
just stacking up licenses or I'm
not I don't have Katie Duhigg
LLC one Katie Duhigg LLC to
Katie Duhigg LC three and I'm
getting separate license for
each less licenses for each one
of us
would you be so kind as to just
repeat the language of paragraph
four yes.
The applicant or a controlling
person in the applicant's entity
is a current licensee or an
owner director or officer of the
current licensee.
I'm assuming that there's
probably an or.
R. at the end of paragraph three
and we strike the or at the end
of paragraph two.
Yes.
Yes.
And Mister sea I will send send
all that to you.
Senator you want to get in on
this and I've got a whole bunch
questions coming up myself so
okay.
This is my last one on this but
I just want to make sure that
after what Senator told me that
if we pass this bill now the
next few days that it will be a
year and
almost year and a half a year
and four months before we are
selling adult use cannabis.
Right.
Arizona who took three months.
Mr chair Senator I would defer
defer to to superintendent
Trujillo to address that.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
Madam pro tem March first is set
as the date for sales to start
so it's just a tad bit less than
a year today.
SO Mr chairman I thought that
that this ammendment with a
group that's going to look at
all of these parameters had to
set the cap before we would
start in how can you start to
get a license to start growing
if you don't know what the
captain.
You madam chair Mr Chairman
sorry about that madam president
these titles late actually what
we anticipate based upon the way
that this bill is structured is
that as soon as this gets
approved assuming that it gets
voted on and passed by the
Senate the regulation licensing
depart would have to begin an
immediate analysis of what the
market is and we're gonna have
to base that upon a report that
was done by the department of
health back in two thousand and
nineteen and expand that out to
what's happening in other states
and make a determination as to
whether or not there is a market
going to be a market equilibrium
our biggest fear is not that
there's going to be too much but
that there will be too little
and that businesses will crash
and so we'll have to take that
all into consideration when we
begin to start noticing for
rules probably even before the
June eighteenth date that this
goes into a fact and so the the
producers will begin getting
licensed on September for no
later than September first
twenty twenty one so you are
correct the first market
analysis has to be done almost
immediately and if there is
going to be a market count
because we see that the market
may not it may be a challenge
then we will have to put those
rules into place almost
immediately and the the annual
would then began in the January
time frame that we would have to
set that.
But the first one would be
almost immediately.
We're not certain that we need
to put a plant count in right
now we really would have to look
at what the market looks like
and whether or not we think
there's going to be a challenge.
So thank you here tonight and we
miss you thank you and I miss
all of you so.
All right I'll let it go Mr
Chairman.
All right so we're amendment I'm
sure somebody knows and
understands at this point with
amendments on top of amendments
I've never asked the Sanchez do
you support the amendment on top
of the that do make a payment on
top of the Ivy Soto amendment on
top of the do it amendment the
the do the latest amendment
being the one that does not
allow you to staff
Well licenses so that let me
just ask you that question is do
you all support that.
We do Mr chair.
All right so that part of the
amendment is friendly when I
read the bill and I've read it
many times.
Every time it changes I end of
re reading it the my my
recollection is the bill
expressly allows the opposite of
what Senator doing is suggesting
she suggested you can't have
more than one license that my
recollection ability can stack
up as many lives as you want to
get as many questions as you
want and hold on to is that in
the bill.
This this ammendment opposite of
what your bill all right now.
Mr chair members of the
committee I I think that but
Senator Duhigg amendment does I
think it really helps cover I
think a
a loophole that's important to
to to deal with especially if
you're gonna have a plant count
when we originally wrote our
bill we do not have a plant
counts so we weren't really
you know planning for that kind
of local to exit.
You know I think we are going to
the bill in some detail I think
I'll be able to identify for you
that it's not you're not closing
a loophole by this amendment
you're creating a conflict
Senator doing is saying you
can't require multiple licenses
and the names of multiple LLCs
corporations to essentially
corner the market that's her
that's her goal but there's
language in the bill that says
anybody can do exactly that they
can they can acquire multiple
licenses and and and I see the
secretary saying now so so like
I said what will will will will
come to the bill because I I
Representative pressure will go
through in some detail but
anyway we're on we're on at
least an amendment for now and
so the pleasure of the committee
on the amendment we have but I
think I do pass already Senator
amendments ago.
So
what what yeah what I would move
is a to pass on
Amendment zero nine one seven
point three which is actually
already at the roofers are to be
part of the committee report.
Yes there are some people in
this building actually role
that.
Thank you for that that's great
those to let's hope they stay
with us through the night
And keep up with us so we'll do
that I I again I wanna make sure
always that that although I
appreciate there are those who
are watching and keeping up with
the minutes I want to make sure
that our committee staff is up
with that too and I appreciate
Center doing saying that she'll
work with the staff later but
but I hope you all can
understand that's that's
probably not the best way for a
chair to have the meeting to say
well
you know will come work out the
language of the amendment later
with the staff after the meeting
and after we voted on it that's
probably not an ideal way to run
a government so that any that
we're on that form and then the
it whatever
stage that we are at for the
sport opposition motions so is
there any object let me I think
about it within the committee so
I'd like to go last
We begin this session by undoing
decades of our liquor license
law.
And and with a great deal
complexity in a lot of very
disappointed liquor license
holders around the state now.
And I can't help but think that
we're we're doing that on speed
now
we're we're recreating the same
problem but at multiple levels
because let's be honest what
we're doing with this amendment
is we're essentially saying
there's going to be an advisory
group.
Who's gonna assess the market
every year and decide based on
their market analysis how many
plans to allow how many licenses
to issue.
and and so this has the
government effectively engaging
in and control monopoly
and and I'm president and in a
way that I've never seen or
heard of before in in our state
government I don't know about
other states but but for the
state to be deciding they're
going to look at the market and
and by the way unless this is
change in the bill the state
will be one of the buyers of the
of the marijuana right the state
will be by medicinal marijuana
and distributing that the as
part of a program that's set
forth under the bill as well too
so the state will be acquiring
medicinal marijuana and then
distributing that four four it
may be a no cost the some
individuals so you'll have the
the government the state
government buying marijuana
perhaps distributing it to
medicinal patients and and then
the government will be deciding
what the demand is in when
you're controlling the demand
you're also controlling the
price and then and then deciding
how many plants to allow people
to to grow and who they have
licenses and and if there's a
what was the word use of there's
an equilibrium is that the
weather was use you have there's
a market equilibrium another was
the government's going to decide
how much of a shortage how much
of a demand M. and whether the
price is right or not and based
on on achieving some kind of
market equilibrium will decide
whether to allow more plants or
fewer plants to be grown and
more license or if your license
to be issued so so in this
really does seem like a liquor
licence Pueblo said on on
steroids.
Which is ironic that we spent so
much time trying to dismantle
that that level of control
whether government over licenses
but but but I can't region
another conclusion that's what
we doing here then and then and
then the the interesting thing
to do would be I I really do
support your amendment so doing
in one regard because you made a
good catch which is the question
is whether who gets to make
these decisions and the bill
provides for what the regulatory
advisory commission I guess our
committee right the the cannabis
regulatory advisory committee
and the original version of Bill
make sure that the people that
were on that committee who make
these decisions and by and by
the the state on how to do this
that the people that were on
that committee we could not be
people in the industry and then
one of the earlier committees
evidently took that out if I was
OK for people in the industry to
be the ones to advise the state
on on how many plants we should
authorized and who should have
licenses and your your amendment
I think rightfully says now you
shouldn't be industry insiders
were getting to make these kind
of decisions or advised the
state at this level so I I like
that part of your bill it's hard
it's are here ma'am it's hard
for me to figure out what to do
because I I don't think the
people in the industry should be
the ones part of the decision
making process for plant counts
in the and licenses we get some
of how many and and several so I
like that part of your amendment
but then the part of your
amendment that says that that
the amendment will be analyzing
the market deciding what how
many more plan sure how much
make your plans we want to
control the market the state
level that to me is very very
troublesome and and the.
Our reserve use earlier they
were Representative Martinez of
the end of the I can't help but
see this is as a as the state
cartel state run cartel but but.
But but in any event that's that
I'm I'm I'm perplexed by how to
vote on this amendment because I
support part of it part of it I
don't.
members the committee yes Sir
I'm so no I just Mr I've just
I agree with the committee that
you made but for one thing which
is the delayed repeal.
And it's this is only for the
first four years of the program
so as I understood at three
years of the program thank you
so that as I understand it that
this is simply just to get the
program off the ground in in
kind of a balanced way but but
but once for about three years
in the program as I understand
the delayed repeal then there
would be nobody decided on that
count limitation that would that
would be market forces that will
take over at its entirety that.
Thank you Sir Ivey Soto and I I
appreciate the that recognition
you and I also know we routinely
eliminate those delayed repeals
and extent of legislation and
we've done so and and it just
seems to me the part of the
market pressures will be so
great the money we're talking
about here is hundreds of
millions of dollars
the the people who have the
licenses and have the control of
the industry will work very very
hard to to keep that from
happening the and it will be a
great deal of money the
available and and spent to
assure that that that that
doesn't doesn't get repeal and
that the market takes over at
that a free market takes over of
the the those that are they're
able to control the market for
those first three years as
you're describing will will get
very used to the idea of being
able to control that market and
the idea of them letting go and
opening it back up I think will
be a great deal of resistance to
that but anyway that that's the
the motion before us I
appreciate your your
thoughts and this will be a very
interesting experiment for our
state.
So we're on the proposed
amendment is there any objection
to the adoption of the
amendment.
Show me is a no this is Morse.
Yeah show me as a no also
please.
All others and support that
amendment is adopted.
All right I have absolutely no
idea who has the floor at this
point time after all of that but
I assume it's probably Center
doing since you got us started
on the amount the first place.
Do you have more no.
Other members of the committee.
Senator Lopez.
Mr chairman I have an amendment
to propose also this evening.
And that would be.
Two two zero seven nine zero
point three.
And for some reason Mr chairman
I'm missing one of my pages hi.
Okay yes.
The amendment Mr Chairman one
more time is so the two oh two
number is two two zero seven
nine zero point three.
And Mr chairman what this says
as Pollock CF mentioned earlier
in the testimony this is in
regards to inclusion of creating
a cannabis industry equitable
opportunity investment fund.
And also Mr chairman members of
the committee it also includes
language with the amendment on
inclusion of rural communities
that will likely to be impacted
by cannabis production and
agricultural producers from
economically disadvantaged
communities.
And Mr chairman if you'd like I
can walk us through the whole
bill if you'd like to where this
would go.
essentially and Mr chairman this
says is looking just to make
sure this is equitable as miss
Garcia did mention for a lot of
our communities up north
especially those part of the
land grants M. R. second
communities and such also.
And then also if you go back to
on the amendment on page three.
It does have new material as
added that creates the cannabis
industry equitable opportunity
investment fund.
And the fund will be created in
the state treasury the I will
consist of probation or other
money deposited into the fund
income from the fund should be
credited the Economic
Development Department showed
minister of the funded money is
subject to appropriations by the
legislature of course to the
Economic Development Department
and again any unexpended or
unencumbered balance I should
not revert to the general fund.
Mr Chairman again the of.
The industry equitable
opportunity fund is created for
the purpose of developing and
implementing a plan to provide
financial assistance to support
start up businesses.
I'm again Mr president and Mr
chairman members of the
committee I'm looking to assist
are economically disadvantaged
and historic rural communities.
Right Senator do do you have
that for the screen.
Mr chairman I don't but I know
that the of it was submitted to
the committee.
All right the representatives
your position on the amendment.
Mr chair Senator you know we we
we did have a conversation
briefly if you days ago with ms
Garcia.
you know that there there are
parts of the of the amendment
that I think would be okay.
other other parts I think might
be a little bit more
More difficult.
For example I think you know I
think that.
Looking at page.
To.
you know we we we attempt to
create we we attempt to strike a
balance between subject matter
expertise in life experience on
the.
on the on the advisory.
it seems like this is very
specific from a specific
community
you know and we we we went back
and forth with miss Iglesias on
this
yeah one of the suggestions
perhaps you know a a sort of
water rural water expert you
know my it might work.
so that's one issue.
you know I think
I think there are a couple of
issues here that maybe
Representative Romero can can
can address but.
I think this ammendment parts of
it I think or or or find other
point I think are are are hard
especially you know at this late
stage so
here for let's let's hear from
Michael sponsor and then we'll
make that determination.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
chairman as well yeah this is we
I think we agree with the merits
of in particular the rural
equity piece diversity and and
of course encouraging New Mexico
residents to be part of this
industry I think the reservation
is just again in the composition
of the person who sits on the
board specific to just in the
second community your community
did
you know at residency area I
think more.
We would like it water expert
I'm on the board or on that
commission and then I think
there is some trouble
perhaps and and of and
thankfully I've worked with the
as a commission on this be very
artistic very very closely as to
how the state engineer operates
and unfortunately I think some
of those could be really tricky
as to how we would want this
Office of the state engineer
perhaps engage with the cannabis
industry would be very unique to
have to look at one single
industry as compliance with that
specific water right or water
provider rules we don't operate
the office of the state engineer
that way specific to any given
industry so I think that might
be tricky I'm looking at page
three our number fifteen so
those are some of the
reservations I think that we
have as far as the amendment
goes otherwise I think they're
excellent suggestions
and but those are those are some
of the the hang ups that we have
thank you Mr thank you Mr
president I Mr what well a
sting also wants page us agree
at the bottom section forty six
the cannabis industry equitable
opportunity investment fund this
is language that we actually had
in last year's bill and as I
stated at the beginning of the
presentation
there is a lot of feedback that
we received from several of the
committees that we went through
last year including this one
that we were trying to do too
much in one bill so one of the
things that we did with this
bill is to really limit the
number of funds that we were
creating and the earmarking that
we were doing in that previous
bill the current bill only has
the the the two funds the
community reinvestment fund and
the patient's subsidy Fund and
we don't hear back your mark any
money this amendment would bring
in a.
One of the funds that we dropped
off from last year and well I
completely agree with having
that type of fund I think it
really goes against
you know the.
It goes against what many of you
said last year we need to fix
which was to not have all these
funds in part so with that you
know we'll we'll leave it up to
the will of the committee but
but I do think that it's it's
got some good parts to it and
and other parts that I don't
think we.
So that the.
Want to take the answer to
whether this is a favorable or
unfavorable amendment I heard a
little bit yes Ruiloba no not
really so sure so I guess the
sponsors are gonna leave it to
this committee.
So on the proposed amendment
members of the committee please.
Chance of anyone.
Senator Stewart Mr Chairman why
can't we get a representative of
Martinez to tell us which ones
are friendly and which ones are
not.
If you are still.
Yes Mr chair is in.
Stewart I think is as
Representative Romero stated I
mean I think
a seat on the advisory you know
perhaps somebody from a rural
community or or you know rural
water expert
you know that might do the trick
I guess.
looking at page two number nine
just so we're looking at is
specifically.
Correct yes.
Page two number nine okay.
I think the I think the industry
a critical opportunity
investment fund thank.
I don't think you needed thank
you at the the community
reinvestment fund can be
utilized in that way I could be
repetitive so I would say you
probably don't need to keep that
one.
and then there was one that
reserve Meryl was discussing
earlier with regard to the our
office of the state engineer if
you want to restate that these
sure I think the fifteen be is
the one that could be
problematic regarding the
industry specifically as to how
the water right operates and
having to call out the industry
would be the only industry that
would be required to do
something like that so that
would be the only I think
unfriendly piece to this.
Mr chairman if I may ask on page
three of fifteen B. sector when
you're saying.
It's not friendly that that's
correct Mr chair I think it's
the only that's one thing is
it's so specific to a six
certain industries in the office
of the state engineer doesn't
currently provide any specifics
to industry is to
Those rules.
And then Mister chair and and
Senator.
and and and and senator sessions
today.
So in in taxing with with our
expert that Emily Kaltenbach you
know maybe that maybe this makes
it easier for all of us
so number.
These are these are these are
what we would consider friendly.
three.
For.
I.
The eleven.
Twelve.
Thirteen.
Fourteen.
And then going back up to number
eight.
And and thank you for bearing
with us we're we're reading
processing and texting each
other so
Thank you for that.
So I think those and and what
the Representative Romero stated
I think think is doable.
So Mr Chairman.
Sure sure so I I apologize I the
speaker asked me to go over to
his office for a few minutes and
I did that and so we're where
did these amendments come from.
Mr Chairman is these amendments
came in conversation working
with Paula Garcia from yes
secular Association and others
who've been working with her.
And Mr chairman of Senator it's
my understanding that these
amendments were also shown to of
both of the Sanchez.
Yes answers like about half of
them it looks like.
So.
Three four five eight eleven
twelve thirteen fourteen.
Right.
That is correct
Mr chair and and senators and
and we we we these were shared
with us and and we we express
that to ms Garcia very clearly.
And she's been great to work
with either way as well she she
kind of understand where we're
are in in the game now.
And Mr chairman if I may just
ask our state the Sanchez.
so you are not friendly towards
setting the equitable
Opportunity investment fund in
my director that settlement Mr
chair and and and senator I I
think based on what feedback we
got last year that we were
creating true many funds we had
about nine or ten different
funds last year.
And that was one of them we made
the determination as as sponsors
of the bill to.
With the even though the
feedback was to eliminate all of
them in our bill still exists to
a one the the patient's subsidy
Fund and the community
reinvestment fund.
I believe a lot of the things
that the amendment here in
seeking to do through the
through the up to that specific
fund can be accomplished.
Through the community
reinvestment fund obviously this
is more specific but I think we
can still be accomplished
through the rule making process
and through the appropriations
process I think adding another
fund to this bill potentially
opens it up for the other eight
funds that we dropped to come in
and say Hey we want to be put
back in the bill and and I think
that that would fly in the face
of what was suggested to us last
year by by members of this
committee and and the other
committees.
Mr Chairman
Representative Martinez I would
and again if you look on page
four the end of page three Sir
it's it's paragraph be looking
at the and I'm just stating this
for the benefit of the committee
also this equitable opportunity
investment fund is created for
the purpose of developing and
implementing a plan to provide
financial assistance to support
started businesses and
agricultural enterprises.
that are owned by persons from
communities disproportionately
affected by past federal and
state drug policies or from
economically disadvantaged and
historic rural communities.
So are you Mr chairman
Representative are you saying
that this type of language is
also included in one of the
other funds that are included in
this bill.
Mr chair and senator not
specifically but the I think it
would be could operate that way.
Okay it's just a question I have
madam Mr Chairman representative
just to make sure that our
communities again do have access
to the assistance needed so that
they too can be successful
should this bill pass and be
signed they have equal access
to.
Thank you Mr and Mrs with.
Mr chair Senator you know once
he gets in could be to maybe at
some of the language into the
community reinvestment fund so
we're not creating is a third
fund but your maybe include
including some of the language
into the community reinvestment
fund that's that's also a
possibility if if that reassures
a committee
you know in in in in in in a
way.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
what I'm what I in my
conversation with Paula and
knowing some of the concerns
that were raised in our
conversations just making sure
that I'm again we are
addressing.
you know start ups a rural
enterprises to use it it's not
just focused along the middle
Rio Grande court or other areas
for your business enterprise so
if if it maybe Mr chairman if
some of this language could be
added
into that re investment fund I
think that would be it would be
good yeah a good faith effort if
we get rid of this particular
Fund has been proposed in the
amendment I would feel
comfortable with that too.
Mr chairman if I might add in
I I don't I don't mean to
interrupt but if you look on
page seventy eight of the
original bill a line fourteen
paragraph two it has that exact
language Senator that you're
looking at adding and we could
add in to the list additionally
of to supported housing job
placement mental health
treatment except are a there's a
there's a list of things that
there maybe that's where the
economic development could be
added in just a just a
suggestion on quick look.
Okay Mr Chairman
Mr hill you're saying and the
bill I have in front of me is
actually the committee
substitute.
So that is correct get.
Mr Chairman Senator that is
correct on the committee
substitute if you look on page
seventy eight.
Line fourteen it starts with a
paragraph to yes reinvesting in
communities disproportionately
affected by past federal and
state drug policies by
supporting and then it goes into
a list of things that it could
be supporting yes I am thinking
that you could what I think I
hear the Representative saying
is that you could potentially
add in some of the language in
that paragraph.
Okay I think that's what I heard
senator.
Yeah that that's you I
appreciate that because that's
more of a appointed area.
Representative Martinez is that
where you were alluding to.
Without all
Mr chair and and and senator I
think we were talking more about
the community reinvestment fund
so that's page seven seven and I
think that's probably safe I
mean that's probably a good
place to insert it if if if
that's what we wanted to do.
Mr chairman if I may I think the
language that would be looking
with starts would be the
starting at the bottom page for
up three or if you've got a list
there would be to to add one
more that would be provided
financial assistance to support
start up businesses are both
real and prizes related to the
cannabis industry I think that's
the range that you'd want to add
to that place and I'm seeing
Vigil Representative Romero.
The best of.
And because I appreciate that
thank you.
And Senate office if I meant
districts suggestion is that we
do this as a as a two part.
With your permission while
you're while you're up in a
limited in that.
R. A. by May make a motion to
rusted out numbers three four
five eight eleven twelve
thirteen and fourteen.
From our your.
Rafted seven nine zero point
three.
Amendment one could adopt that
then we can do the other insert.
But a little more organized that
way.
I second that motion.
And we want we want to roll
Senator we think of if I Mr
chairman.
All right the state that motion
of Senator Baca says on this
motion chair Baca.
Yes Mr chair thank you for
recognizing me well you know our
I see this motion being added
and and you know we we just
kicked aside in the.
A proposed amendment by Senator
Pirtle earlier and and because
it didn't have some of these
social justice issues located
within at and and you know this
frequently becomes the problem
with the with the equity part of
this you know work this equities
good and not the other equities
good and so now we're adding in
and you equity in this at to
much equity or not enough equity
and so you know this is what
this is for this come becomes
problematic with the bill.
Like this where we have a policy
review on recreational marijuana
and we have social justice mixed
in with it and so now someone
has to decide what's equitable
enough for which to equitable
and I just wanted to point that
out Mr chair so thank you all
yield back.
We're on a motion.
Senator Ivey Soto
as I understand it the bill
Sanchez okay with the amendment
all right.
Yes Sir.
Anyone else the committee.
I know it's been delivered
oversight but I I would noted in
the amendment the emphasis of
this from the attention to rural
communities identifies three.
Our tribal the state kills and
land grants.
The there's there's many parts
of the state that don't
including where I come from the
don't have any of those of no
tribes the state has no land
grants.
Which if I may Mr chair it does
say also other rural historic
communities.
And that doesn't.
You know some of our communities
down in southern New Mexico to.
Right and I appreciate that
centers so I I realize this
product I think anybody trying
to apply the fund or do
intentions the funding can't
help but recognize the the
communities real trees that are
identified by name but you're
right we might fit into the
catch all
I think that I think this that
because part of what Sir Bob was
saying you know what you're
trying get into social justice
issues.
The issue as well what what is
socially just important as
rightfully so very rightfully so
to tribal communities to a state
here communities to Land Grant
Committee is all very important
But there's many parts of the
state that that are also
important that are not that are
not of those things and our
rural.
So let me understand Senator
Lopez the what is that we're
we're the money coming in this
is just gonna be one is
appropriated or requests that
are received this is not being
funded by any of the revenue
that's going to be generated
from sales or fees or anything
like that.
Mr Chairman is.
I'm sorry.
Representative.
I was gonna scan it thank clear
a clear up Mr chairman and
senator the answer is no these
funds are simply created in in
the statute in the bill they
would be funded through the
appropriations process but
there's no you're marking so the
appropriators would have to do
their due diligence and decide
you know how much would be would
be in in each of these funds.
In the center associate for the
frontier start with anything in
it right now.
That.
The start with right now Mr
Chairman all right.
That's all the questions I have
members of the committee were on
amendment to adopt parts of the.
Amendment parts not.
Mr Chairman actually if.
If we could.
All this for just a second I'm
getting some information.
From the compiler is that there
may be some conflicts within the
bill at this point if we were to
adopt those.
We we got to motor we get to set
aside for the second just for a
second and and maybe proceed to
the issue of the of the fund
just to make sure that we're not
creating internal conflicts
within the bills.
Well I appreciate that Sir every
so one thing that I certainly
don't want to do tonight is
making a mess of things.
When that point for a moment I
know the not the hours near
midnight.
I I want to find from the
committee your pleasure does
everyone want to stay here till
one two three or the morning or
you want to come back in the
morning.
I don't know that it makes a
difference to come back in the
mornings are committee report
would be read on the floor until
we go to the floor anyway I
don't know what everyone
schedule looks like in the
morning but you can probably
gather from my question my
preference which would be the
zoom call tonight let the staff
have the night come back in
early but the second that.
All while you're here Mister
Walker hold on hold on please
please please please so I I want
to do this in a very democratic
way this is not for the chair
asserts a role so opaque the
pleasure in a good device of the
committee so Senator Moores
ahead unicenter block after you
and then all here Senator
Stewart.
Senator I second your idea Mr
chair.
Senator Baca all mine was just
appointed that I believe that
would conflict with the I I
think Senator Ivey Soto and he's
here now if it conflicts with
his schedule but.
Please continue.
Present Representative rules
morning Senator but we do that
affects everybody but chairman.
Okay.
All right well it sounds like
we're going to go through the
night.
with that that's the.
These are the committee center
Stewart you want me recognize
also.
Well Mister chairman I'm slowing
down and I feel like we're
getting mired and it's taking us
longer and longer to do these
very minor things and but.
When is it possible to change
rules.
Mr chairman and madam program we
have.
I think.
Eight conferees and all of their
supporters who have changed
their schedules to be present
for.
Well Mr chairman if we cannot
meet in the morning then we have
to have some type of time clock
or something to get through
these amendments we cannot be
talking for two hours on on one
set of amendments it's not going
to work so I don't know how to
do that but you know we could
get a a time keeper and we just
have to get through them quicker
than we're doing or will never
will never come to an agreement
tonight.
I don't I don't chair Senator
strip please always keep in mind
that even for all of us we have
a staff we have it and and they
they don't get to take a break
the way the rest of us do we
some some kind of.
Take him from mine break
fermented to empaneling in the
fail and others on our staff to
be alert to everything we're
doing all through the time so.
Senator Stewart things seem to
be getting slow mired down in
the a little bit lost.
But.
If if if rules is not an option
and and the leadership is so
been pretty clear that this bill
is going to get out of here.
So.
Know what options we have
accepted probably go through the
night I I it will not surprise
me that we'll find ourselves
here two or three in the
morning.
Whether that's the that's the
where we're at yes
Representative.
I don't know how many other
members have amendments or
discussion on the bill.
Mr Chairman.
Good Senator Lopez just ask the
question of the chairman of
rules
if we could
you know of course it goes to
see with the majority floor
leader if you could move the
time from starting back another
couple of hours we could meet
rules and then switch over for
this committee to within that
maybe definitive time and
finished the bill.
Just another another option.
So.
Mister chairman Senator Lopez I
just don't think that will be an
option we just are the slowing
down incredibly on the floor and
we have too much to do today are
we there eight hours six hours
we did three bills so we we are
in huge trouble with our lack of
time so.
Either we try to get through
this bill faster.
I just don't think cluttering up
the day tomorrow is going to
work.
Also Mr chairman in terms of the
pending motion given the
potential for conflicts about
what I'd like to suggest is that
I withdraw this motion right
now.
while there be a conflict check
that is done effectively
resolved.
this evening while we're still
meeting we can proceed with that
knowing that the conflicts have
been resolved if not that
something that could be handled
on the floor
and and and and we can stop if
it's our Lopez has has the has
the language to insert into the
fund that would not create a
conflict we can proceed with
that and there are there is I
know that I have one bank which
there is no conflict that deals
with the independent testing
that is a fairly straightforward
amendment I think needs to be
added might as well.
There Lopez you still have the
floor as your amendment Senator
Ivey Soto modify your amendment
my suggestion passage of certain
paragraphs in excluding other.
ejected so your wish Senator
Lopez as you wish.
Sorry I was on mute.
So if I'm understanding though
from what Senator Ivy Soto has
said is that there are conflicts
within even the proposed
amendment which is just
withdrawn is that correct a
potentially so as well we don't
have then we don't have an
amendment being proposed at this
point.
What I would like to propose Mr
chairman is that if you're going
to proceed with the rest of the
committee I still want to have
and make sure this amendment is
addressed at some point tomorrow
morning.
The the community that I have
asked and as that I would you
know at least proposed to the
committee to make sure that we
have something to to give.
and you've lost three Senator
Lopez did you say tomorrow
morning for some reason well yes
it's morning already.
At.
What we.
Yes I understand your suggestion
and with center I'm so you just
want to pass up your amendment
for now and then come back to it
maybe later.
It sounds to me that's why
Senator Ivy Soto has said there
some potential conflicts of
before we adopted so.
Rolled over me I guess C.
whatever can come up with that
and then proceed I guess with
whatever else you Canadian
businesses thank you.
Yes I am a call that a captain
results that could be read as a
floor amendment cents on the
maybe some consensus on on those
points.
And I appreciate that sorry so
it's gonna be a little tricky
because I expect a private lot
of floor amendments
propose anyway at least I.
You all probably can imagine I
would have a lot of questions
and proposed amendments myself
but I I don't think there's any
way that I can do those tonight
so appointed to those on the
floor
but but in any event center
every so yeah we'll just we'll
see how far we get tonight so
Senator Lopez skipping over her
limit for the for the program
for the moment.
We're back to members of the
committee with whatever you'd
like to talk about Senator Ivey
Soto.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
what I'd like to talk about is
independent testing.
And our and I'm putting on the
screen and I printed up to give
to emulate our page fourteen
line three strike the entire
line.
Remember subsequent lines page
twenty eight line ten answered
before the area that accept of
the division shall not allow a
person that is licensed as any
type of cannabis establishment
other than a cannabis research
laboratory the only directly or
indirectly a licensee of that is
a cannabis testing laboratory.
This is the language that would.
that would provide for the
independent testing aspect of it
and it would yield to our
Thank you if there are any
questions.
Mister chairman Senator we we
support these amendments we
agree with that there's a
conflict that needs to be
addressed.
I would I would also yield to
be up Sanchez the the House
lancers of the bill.
Mr chair Senator this is
friendly.
In their hands up fight Senator
Baca and senator.
All right on the proposed
amendment etcetera Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm still
of formulating my question here
correctly and I would yield to
senator doing and you can come
back to the if that be okay
chair Senator glance at about.
Mr chair Senator I just want to
make sure you know that that
same provision was amended in
the amendment we adopted earlier
so with that then and how it
would read is except as
otherwise provided in this bill
the division shall not limit the
type that type or number of blah
and then here except as language
again.
So if that range okay to you
with that in there I just want
to put in context for everyone.
Since we've amended that part
there this would be the second
amendment to that same
subsection.
Yes.
All right we're on that
amendment could we go back to
the screen again anyone else on
I'm sorry we're gonna go back to
center Baca Sir Baca anyone else
on this matter before we change
the screen that.
Senator Baca you get a chance to
put together your ideas I
certainly did thank you Mr
chairman access looking at the
identical thing the Senator do
ich was there so I I think that
that has addressed
At least my concern so thank
you.
So Senator Ivy Soto I'm we don't
have that option right now to
put this in in the context of
the bill but I'm still trying to
read it to before the pre
accepted Division shall not
allow person is licensed is any
kind of cannabis establishment.
Other than a research
laboratory.
Two owned directly or indirectly
a licensee that is a cannabis
testing laboratory I'm I'm
really missing something there
it doesn't.
You can't you can't own.
Eight cannabis testing
laboratory if your account was
testing laboratory what I'm
missing here but you're missing
the other so with the word other
than if you're it was research
testing laboratory and then.
There I but but but if you're
any other kind of licensee you
cannot own directly or
indirectly all members a
celebratory.
So that was testing laboratory
is a form of licensee of the
bill.
Right.
So the cannabis research lab or
is it is a cannabis research
laboratory different than a
cannabis testing laboratory.
Yes yes.
Okay.
Other members of the committee
anyone else with questions on
this road amendment.
Mr chair second just as one
clarifying question.
Sure.
Thanks for taking out a cannabis
testing laboratory.
On page fourteen is that is that
now a licensee its own lot
separate licensee and of this
bill.
Mister chairman Senator it's
it's always it's it's it's
always a separate licensee it's
been on that list on page
fourteen it's one of the license
types that you could have if
you're the integrated business
okay and now we're saying no you
can't do that if you're
integrated.
Right thank you thank you very
much Mr chair superintendent.
So by the service sector so
what's the end result here does
it right are you able to test
your own product are your your
is there anyone out
independently testing your
product.
The result of this service
without this ammendment you can
you can run your own farm and
also your own testing laboratory
and test your own product and
certify what you do with this
ammendment you cannot.
With with the amendment yes the
product
it would be a kind of us
research laboratory
that would be doing it and the
It would be a cannabis testing
laboratories Senator thank you
thank you are you could but you
could be a cannabis testing
laboratory and a cannabis
research laboratory because
there's no conflict there.
Right you're not growing at that
point that's correct.
So this is the preparation
between the growers of the right
and the and the testers of the
researchers.
Well like the secretaries point
so you said you can be you can
be either research laboratory or
testing laboratory to do the
testing.
What what is that Mr Mr chairman
you with the test cannabis
testing laboratories the want to
do the testing but research
laboratory would be a conflict
if your cannabis testing
laboratory and your cannabis
research laboratory there's no
conflict because you're growing
it's the producers the
manufacturers that there's a
conflict that we don't want to
be also have the ability to be
the cannabis testing laboratory
those producers manufacturers
could in fact be a cannabis
research laboratory because they
wouldn't be testing their own
product it's the cannabis
testing laboratory that would
test our own product.
We want to keep them separate.
All right you are the one else
on this proposed amendment move
adoption of the amendment.
Second.
Senator Baca you back on the
list or is that an old in.
Representative it's a brand new
hand okay running I got I got a
little bit confused there so you
can be a researcher and a
tester.
Mr chair is that correct that
can be the same entity.
Are you Senator up to
Representative trio thank you
Mister chairman Senator they're
actually two separate entities
but it's not a conflict for one
one company or one individual to
be one or both of those things
it is a conflict to be a
producer or manufacturer and be
the tester of your product.
And I know it's really late and
so I'm I'm trying to make it as
easy as possible so what is a
researcher than
Mr chair what is a researcher to
define a researcher verses a
tester how can you even reserves
without being without doing any
testing.
Are they one in the same at that
point.
Mr chair Senator a researcher
might do some research on what
what what can cannabis be used
for medically or.
What what other types of
products might be developed so
researchers like someone who
develops Medicine right we have
research labs that create new
products the research the
product itself but they're not
yes the product to see if it's
good to go to market that's what
the cannabis testing
laboratories would do.
I'm I'm afraid I'm afraid Mr
chair that you've confused me a
little bit more than.
A researcher and researcher at
the tester.
Really could be under the same
license and really the same
entity at that point is that is
that incorrect I thought that
was separate from a grower.
What you said earlier Mr chair
Senator you could have their
each separate licenses.
But but at the point that you're
a testing lab there wouldn't be
a conflict if you wanted to get
another license and also have a
a research business that's
that's not a conflict where to
conflict is if you are a your
license to be a producer which
is the grower or your license to
be a manufacturer and you are
also licensed to be a testing
laboratory not the reserves but
the testing laboratory that's
where the conflict lies.
We just scientific research like
Sandia labs are Los Alamos
they're researching.
I'm just trying to understand
this okay I thought I had it
straight.
But then you said that a
researcher and tester there is
no conflict with that.
Correct.
That's correct Mr chairman
Senator that's correct there's
no conflict because they're not
testing a product that they're
growing but do they have the
same license or do they have
different licenses Mr Mr.
Mr chair Senator those are two
separate license types do they
conflict with each other.
Mr chair Senator they do not.
So we have to other licenses and
a grower and a manufacturer
that's the same license.
Mr chair Senator of a producer
is the term for a growing
faction license would be
separate from the producer
license but you could in fact be
licensed as a producer and ought
to be licensed as a manufacturer
to but there needs to be that
separate independent third party
testing who's checking to make
sure that your products are safe
for the public consumption thank
you for that answer Mr chair so
here's what I'm thinking you
might run into is you run into a
creative attorney somewhere in
corporations or something of
that nature is that you might
set up a company here in the
company there are two separate
entities.
One is manufacturing it did I
say that writer Stacy producing
or producing and manufacturing
correct.
Those.
It licenses Mr chair Senator
those are two separate licenses
okay it's so could you have a
company set up with that would
be producing on the one hand and
then another company that is
actually doing the testing it
seems like.
That would be very hard to of
made at that point.
Mr chair Senator I think that
would be.
The instance where senator do
Hicks amendment would come into
play.
If I I was trying to listen to
that conversation and I didn't
actually see that the wording
but I do think that that's where
that language would come into
play as well as in the instance
of the micro business because
the micro Business can only have
one of each type of license so I
do think that her language would
help protect that against that.
I'm I'm just a bit confused Mr
chair and I'm I'm happy to yield
to senator doing if if she would
like to explain that again I
apologize but hours late and I
I'm trying to get a grip on who
can do what at this point and so
if I'm I'm happy to yield to to
ever can answer the question
honestly.
Mr chair Senator the hour is
late in so
I'll give a great explanation
but but but I I think the
superintendent is right I think
that with that that anti
stacking provision in there
that would disallow it kind of
building up those this
conflicting licenses I think
that what address.
Thank you Mr chair of her line
on either Senator with that
answer right I'm a bit confused
as to as to its still and who
has.
Basically authority to under
this bill to.
To perform certain actions and
where the conflicts exist I I I
see where the complex exit exist
you don't don't get me wrong but
I I can also see how that could
be exploited you know well I I
it's it's it's a.
It gets a little strange that
you know we we have the these
these types of licenses and the
problem is is you start
separating them out to such an
extent that that confusion just
kind of exasperation the way
where where are we what are we
trying to do who can do what and
and you know I think you have a
lot of attorneys on this and and
it's even trouble so to answer
the question for me to even
formulated for for the rest of
my colleagues here so I'll just
a I'm gonna listen some more and
hopefully I'll make some sense
of it thank you.
Mr chairman if I may the the the
crux of what this bill conflict
as the researchers are not
involved in commercial sales.
Because they're not involved in
commercial sales there's not a
question as to the quality of
what is being sold.
Where's the other ones are
involved with regional sales and
that's where we want that the
separation.
Or is this going to be
appropriate this time I would
move adoption of.
of the amendments.
As I wrote up to the moment.
Second.
Many objection.
Okay great Sir Baca.
You can show me objecting just
because I I just really don't
have quite a grip on it there so
I want to hold you up anymore
they're just should be objected
to that.
Very good.
Just this month the bill Sanchez
on that one yeah okay with it
there was a problem out yes.
What else folks.
Moved to pass.
Sure one.
We'll get to bed early.
Anyone else on the bill.
Senator is a.
So so wrong no.
So Mister chairman I am.
I'm quite confused but that's
right.
They'll settle down so I still
don't have any idea about when
retail licenses will be
available are we talking March
of twenty two.
Mr hill.
Mr chairman madam approach and
that is correct March first
twenty twenty two is the date
that are amendment the
amendments in the tax Committee
were added in.
Mr Chairman before we go to a
vote tonight and and I do know
that we have the secretary of
TRD with us I think there was
one tax amendments if we get the
number we can bring it up real
quick.
Secretary Schardin Parker so
there.
Yes Mr chairman and senator I'm
here you have the total number
for the that amendment yes I do
sorry it is two two zero seven
three zero dot four.
Okay so that was sent out to the
committee.
And our if I may Mister chairman
secretary Schardin Clarke would
you explain.
It's a fairly lengthy our our
amendments but would you explain
what the tax amendment is.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Ivey Soto this amendment
include some technical cleanup
that really relates to our L. D.
at the beginning of the
amendment followed by a tax
issues would you like me to
start with the tax issues I
would like to create a proceed
most expeditious manner possible
okay so I'll be skipping a few
of the pages and that maybe
superintendent Trujillo can pick
up so I'm amendment number two
makes a change to the title
basically we're we're replacing
what is currently in the bill
three separate taxes at eight
percent state excise tax four
percent municipal tax four
percent county tax with one
single twelve percent tax and
really what we're trying to get
to here is simplicity in the
taxation and it won't end up
affecting the amount of money
that can be collected.
I'm so we changed the title to
no longer reflect the municipal
and county cannabis excise taxes
because it'll just be one
cannabis excise tax.
And then pages the rest of page
one two three and four are all
related to RLD until you get to
amendment eighteen the bottom of
page for.
I'm here you can see were
striking the word eight and and
and starting in lieu of twelfth
which is I changing the cannabis
excise tax from eight to twelve
percent because now it
incorporates both the state
share plus the community or
county share
we've got to some some minor
clean up to reflect you know
singular Tax instead of parole
now
in striking.
Let's see sections in the
amendment nineteen striking
pages eighty six and eighty
seven and part of eighty nine
that's just striking the former
county and municipal excise
taxes
and in in the place of those the
other substantive part is
amendment twenty four we're now
in lieu of having separate taxes
there's a distribution of the
one single twelve percent
cannabis excise tax so you can
see in paragraph eighty that if
the sale of the cannabis
occurred in a municipality that
thirty three point three three
hundred six percent or four out
of twelve percent will be
distributed to the municipality
in paragraph be the same thing
for counties if it if the sale
occurred in the unincorporated
area of the county of four
twelfths or one third we'll go
to the county
yes.
Harding I appreciate the
technical aspect of this thank.
This question bottom line is
this change requests money under
the tax thank you it does not Mr
chair Senator is the save money
alright we are the administrator
and administrative costs yes
Mister chair and senator TRD is
a former or current I should say
FIR on this bill estimates that
are cost of implementing is over
six million dollars non
recurring this will save us
about two million dollars on
that cost.
And it also will save us
recurring money and not
administering the local option
taxes and such a complex way.
So everybody gets the same
amount of money we save two
million dollars and save money
going forward.
Thank you senator.
Yes.
The option of the amendment.
Is a separately moment to save
money.
Yes it is Senator Mr chairman
okay.
Mr chairman I would I would
second that programs much of.
Are you in this moment.
But
I would I wasn't but I was on
the bill.
But.
So I hear the tax okay so part
of it's going to the
municipality.
Tell me how it separated out
from the original bill again if
you don't mind because it kind
of does matter who gets the
money.
Right so under the bill as it
stands right now.
there is a four percent local
tax and a percent state tax but
the way the bill is written
there's actually three different
taxes there's an eight percent
state tax of four percent
municipal taxes in some
municipalities or four percent
county tax if it's on County.
Instead what this does is makes
it a single twelve percent R.
percent tax on page four of that
four percent would go to
municipality if it's in a
municipality or would go to a
county if it's on a county.
There is being thank you yep.
All right.
For the moment.
lovers are you on on the
amendment.
I believe so I am here.
Senator Lopez.
For you on the cell number oh no
no no it's not another question
thank you.
So to summarize the amendment
for us again sure we have under
the current bill of below four
percent of which four percent as
locals Representative a state
under this economic proper sent
of which four percent of local
eight percent of state by doing
it this way we save two million
dollars up front and with the
state money down the line in the
tax administration.
So I'm still missing something
you're you're you're you're
reducing the tax and at that
saves money now what we're not
just tax taxes the exact amount
but it's a single tax
distributed by TRD much of the
same with the TRD for example
think about a think about G. R.
T. where there distributions in
G. R. T. to different people you
that you pay one tax TRD
distributes that this is the
same sort of a thing instead of
administering three different
taxes their budget for the
single tax with with
distributions I I heard you
saying initially that was taken
from twenty to twelve.
Correct that is correct.
Right on the amendment.
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair sorry to
bother with that so I I think
that okay so so now what I'm
understanding then is that the
tax collection.
Will be from one body rather
than three and that's where
you're deriving the savings from
correct that that is that is
correct yes okay and and and so
my question comes from that and
so so if you have the one body
collecting the tax the
municipalities now and are not
collecting it what what is your
position on that is it I mean
I'm looking at it from the
position of the municipality how
do they feel about a non direct
tax coming from the state rather
than going directly into their
coffers.
No I'm Mr chairman and survive
that's actually how many of the
taxes already work where the
state collects the tax on behalf
of the local government and then
makes the distribution that's
also part of the way that
property taxes work with the
county makes the collects the
tax and then distributed to the
school districts to the federal
districts are up to the the
business counties are to accept
that they would have an apple on
tax and so this is this is
actually how many of the taxes
impact work in New Mexico and
it's it's actually much more
efficient to do it that way.
You Mr chair and Senator Baca if
I could add this is Stephanie
Schardin Clarke I'm sorry I'm
not I'm not allowed to turn my
video on would
the bill isn't actually changing
who collects the tax under the
original bill as well as the
proposed amendment TRD will
collect all the tax the the
sellers will be remitted to us
from the point of sale and we
will this just changes the way
that we need to code the Gentex
system to a much more simple and
efficient coding of the program.
So the municipalities and
counties will still get their
money from us on the same day
they would have otherwise
received at.
With respect secretary and and
also to my colleague Senator
Ivey Soto that is
completely opposite of what she
just stated to me I think so I I
again I have a little bit of
confusion there because it I I
thought I stated that part of
fairly clearly and he answered
in the affirmative and now
you're telling me something
that's completely
opposite of that so I I guess
I'm a little confused again here
I I apologize it the way that I
explained it didn't didn't
bounce back frankly at this hour
that's what what the secretary
said is what I I'm sorry.
It's really all this goes to
just a back office programming
it does not change how it will
flow.
Bob back office for Mr chair so
the back office program.
We'll save two million dollars
is that what you're saying that
is in the up front costs because
of the complexity of the
Genpact's system and what
they're required to do in order
to be able to implement these
yes.
To require hiring more people
why is that Mr chair and senator
or or is it a matter of software
issues what what what is what is
that two million dollars I mean
if it's all going to the same
place and you're separating it
out in a different form I I
guess I'm not grasping exactly
why that's two million dollar
difference and I'm trying not to
stray from the bill here we
selected this bill Mr chair and
senator over another amendment
earlier this is superior so why
why is that a conflict I don't
understand that.
Madam secretary.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
Baca the back office programming
if you will is that taxation
revenues Gentex system that's
the tax system will.
In two.
And basically the merging these
three taxes into one and
ensuring that the
the distributions to the local
governments will just be a
simple flat four out of twelve
or one third of the revenue
collected insurers that the
programming of the entire tax is
much less expensive and the two
million dollars of savings is
off of and original estimate of
over six million so now it's
more like four if this amendment
is is adopted
and it it has it reduces our
contractual expenditure to the
Gentex Bender.
Thank you I think you just kind
of got to where I was going so.
It's really the same operation
but it's a contractual issue
that we can do these two things
in identically the same way as
far as we're concerned but
through a contract if we do it
one certain way it's two million
dollars more expensive than the
weight of that you're proposing
here Mister chair is that my
getting that right so so this
really isn't the issue of
logistics and and the for the
money is channeled through this
is more an issue of occur of a
contract.
And how this company manages
that contract is that right.
Mr chair and senator Baca that's
correct and and this proposed
amendment will allow the
contractor to spend much less
time doing the program and
therefore invoice us much less.
I I I think that is a I I gotta
tell you Mr chair and secretary
and thank you thank you
Secretary for explanation you
cleared it up for me but I gotta
tell you Mr chair and senator of
is that.
That is an odd way.
To clear up a contract issue.
That you can do the identical
amount of work.
And you do it this way or you do
it that way and the price tag to
that is two million dollars.
If that doesn't point out of
problem as to how we're doing
business with some of these
contractors who are processing
basically a computer program.
And pressing buttons as to where
the money goes I I mean if
that's not an expose that that's
really strange and maybe we
should look into that at some
point but it's just on we're
collecting the money it's going
to the same place and somehow if
we don't put this in legislation
it's two million dollars more or
less
thank you I I understand now
thank you.
So Mr Chairman could we vote on
the amendment.
We will certainly can
now that we've got all the
committee discussion looks like
behind this.
Right
is there a projection of the do
passed from the moment.
All.
Show all in support of the
amendment.
Closer Baca were you want to
vote no on the amendment yeah
you can show me a no on that and
it's not a it's not for
creativity or anything of that
nature it's just for the process
I I can't believe that thank you
Mr.
Mr I do very much appreciate
that we have somebody at TRD
who's.
Recognizing what the impact
financially as on how we write
bills and rent to save us money
in the process.
They for the start are you for I
thank you all right.
Any moments yes Sir Lopez in
your member we're going to wait
till tomorrow.
For.
Mr Chairman it's my
understanding that our our
compiler and has been keeping
track of working on it I do not
think we'll have something ready
by the time we had committee so
I'll propose that on the floor.
Okay.
Anyone else on the committee.
Who do passes amended.
Trying to maybe like more
special you might guess there
might be a little more
discussion centers Stewart.
Senator Baca Senator Ivey Soto.
I just thought is a little
presumptuous to say that we
would propose that on the floor
but that that's my comment thank
you Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto.
But yes Sir Mr chairman there is
our one last matter if the if
the we would have the bandwidth
to deal with that.
And that is I am an amendment
there's there's more more than
just one more match rate and so
are.
People want to wake me up they
can here's the thing this bill
contains expungement
proceedings.
And while most of the exposure
of proceedings are automatic not
all of them are and there's an
idiosyncrasy in the lot dealing
with expansion right now where
would you find a special part
session the expungement petition
is not filed under seal.
And so that that kind of defeats
the purpose of expansion.
It's problems are still at the
end but by then my trucks dot
com and a bunch of other people
have already downloaded the
information.
And and so this amendment simply
by state someplace but.
This amendment allows a person
to file and a
the killing with right here is
is that our the petition a
petition shall be filed under
seal or under sit on them.
R. and that would have on some
of the court rules that would
allow that and that you could
then and this is pursuant to the
existing expungement law that we
have.
And the and and that way they
don't have to
that they don't have to file it
and in the same manner
and and so we do have however
some of the accountability
issues in terms of party that
that would like to objective
petition and
and and whatnot and and how that
process would proceed in in the
expungement and so this this
ammendment here much of which is
is cleanup I am going so fast
but anyway it it allows it
allows people to follow the
instruction under seal when they
have to go to court to do so and
I would yield to the
Sanchez in terms of their
position on that.
Thank you Mr Senator Ivy Soto I
think he's a very thoughtful
amendment and and we would take
it as a friendly amendment thank
you.
Right.
Hi discussion.
It is a motion.
There's a second.
There any objection.
Senator Baca you're jetting.
You
sorry just had a quick question
here so question question go
ahead this is an expungement.
If there's a conflict you said
on the expungement statute.
So surviscor when we adopted
expungement statute we are a few
years ago.
Which is that that that is
already law one of the
procedures in the expungement
statue though
is is that it isn't it there's
there's no authority under the
existing law for that expensive
and to be able to be filed under
seal so you X. U. five
expungement.
And and it's not under seal and
and so what happens then is that
is that it actually defeats the
purpose of the expungement
because your sponsors the
underlying case so this doesn't
open up any new.
New expungement but what happens
is that the underlying case gets
expunged under existing law.
But the but the case where
you're filing the expungement
it's not is out in the open and
it basically defeats the purpose
of expunging the the result X..
Some issue Mr chair and senator
is just an issue of this
particular bill or is just just
a problem within the law in
general.
Mr Chairman center Baca it's
it's both because the part of
the social justice issues within
this belt is that is that in
this bill has expungement
provisions and one of the
feedback that we've gotten as
this bill has traveled through
actually is that the
administrative office of the
courts as asked but we find this
clarification in statute.
Thank you Mr Mr chair and
senator and thank you I
appreciate what you're trying to
do Senator here but again we're
looking at.
How many times we were visited
this tonight Mr chair the the
problematic condition of
combining the social justice
part of this bill with the thing
we're trying to do which is the
promotion of recreational use of
marijuana it is problematic
throughout the statute and maybe
this is something that we should
be saying on the bill but now
I'm revisiting it again and over
and over again these two issues
combined are simply like water
and oil they need to be
addressed separately and so I
appreciate you Senator Ivey Soto
you always have really great
descriptions please don't send
me a bill
but I I appreciate the
explanation if you do also and
you went back by the way.
But I appreciate that
explanation but this is what's
so problematic about this and
why earlier we heard another
senator introduced some under an
amendment there really separated
out and us's lawyers on this
committee should be asking
ourselves about this question
because we pride ourselves on
policy here and I've heard that
over and over again this year.
Is this the policy we want to
approach do we want this
intermingling or should be
approached as a separation and
you know I think we ventured
that a few times tonight so I
appreciate your answer and I see
what is trying to do and you're
gonna constructs chair Senator
of many thousands more
amendments to separate the water
and oil again but sure we are so
thank you Mr chair.
The committee.
That Mr chairman I would just
come into this is the last
amendment that I have.
Do you have another member
center the last.
The last one.
Okay Senator.
Can you just tell me where in
the bill you this change will be
page and line I don't have your
amendments you just tell me
where it is in the bill.
It we're actually adding it at
the end of the bill so as to not
create any compilation problems
us for adding in the section
eighty of the bill up we're not
this does not command any
existing staff a provisions
within the bill but this was
identified by the administrative
office of the courts and
something that would be needed
to clarify the proceeding.
And
so that so what is responsive to
that analysis from the AOC.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Ivy Soto can you tell me the
pages where the expungement is
in the bill okay I see the the
the other the the special
provisions that exist already in
the bill yeah yes if I could I
think we will be able to find
out more close up more quickly
you'll to spoken Bach.
Mr chair and senator can you
repeat that.
West where are the expungement
proceed after provisions in the
bill thank you so
if we're looking at the point
five version that they are
sections thirty three and thirty
four.
On page number.
Mr chair sixty seven and sixty
eight.
Sixty nine and beyond.
Mr Chairman do we have another
copy past the point I.
You said if you're looking at
the point five version isn't
this the last version this is
the last person Hey thank you
thank you Mr chairman.
The other discussion.
One of the proposed amendment.
Sure any objections option
amendment.
It does not.
Senator Baca is a no any others
our.
There Morstead amendment is
adopted.
Senator Stewart I saw you up
with the next channel so I
still put my hand down I'm sorry
okay.
We go through everybody.
Few questions sister on page one
one one of.
Maybe maybe maybe get that I'm
glad you guys can still laugh
about that
last year we went through the
bill and a great deal of detail
took several hours hours late
I'm not going to do that what
I'm gonna suggest you is
unfortunately and I'm gonna work
on this right here and the two
months we've been here there are
still some a great many problems
with this bill there are things
in here that are inconsistent
with the law trying to identify
them for you quickly so perhaps
you can work on the bill that we
turn on the floor and maybe
avoid a lot of amendments in
some cases I just don't think
your bill is been very carefully
read.
I'll give an example if you look
on a section three.
C..
I.
Could we get page numbers.
Yeah I wish I could do that
easily for you center the
problem is that I'm working off
the version of the bill with the
amendments in contacts all right
that's.
I'll I'll sign that.
If you go to page fifteen.
For that section three C. five
you see that yes this is a list
of the things that that the.
This promulgate rules we look at
see if that was the not by that
date January one the residential
promulgate rules if you look at
rule number five.
which first of all the the whole
structure of the bills travel
strange sometimes because it
doesn't follow the way we
normally draft statutes with
regard to paragraph numbers and
steps roughly the examples that
in a minute that's what happens
when you do a lot of cutting and
pasting but when we look at that
subparagraph five line eighteen
the division supposed to
promulgate rules providing that
any adult who's twenty one years
older shall be permitted to
purchase at least two grams of
cannabis flowers at least
sixteen grams of cannabis
extract one time I'm sure you
mean the opposite I'm sure you
mean the opposite of what you
have written in your bill
because what it says here is an
adult twenty one should be
permitted to purchase at least
two ounces of cannabis and at
least sixteen grounds at one
time and that means you can
purchase a hundred pounds or
ounces or unlimited amounts I'm
I'm sure you don't mean purchase
at least probably made to say
the maximum and I think I was
for the bill that's probably
what you do say so this is just
one example I'm not going to
spend all my going through the
bill but there are things in the
bill that are clearly just the
opposite of the way they should
be written and and and whether
intended and we just don't have
the time tonight to go through
all of those with you.
the the the bill gets strange
really after that because if you
look at your listing here the
rules that are gonna be
promulgated but you know you go
from paragraph I A. B. C. and
then if you look on the next
page then you go to progress a
progress wanted to within
subparagraphs C. all of the
structures just not the way we
have a structure built you know
we usually structure paragraph
we don't put our trust within
paragraphs like that number then
within another program just none
of this is conventional
statutory drafting and I'll note
that if you look on page sixteen
of interesting here let's see if
you look at subsection see on
line to it says as a commercial
activity the division shall not
limit the number of plants the
licensing may possess COVID are
manufactured this maybe is is
where we met up amended earlier
today to let Mister chairman
Senator Mr chairman that is
amended out in tax business and
transportation okay and that's
what I got a look back at my
other copy with the with the
minutes in context
and if you look at the.
Let me do that for just a second
if you look at.
Me just a second here.
I'm sorry to jump around from
too many different bills
When we get it all just gonna
try to work from the bill itself
if you look on page sixteen
winds.
This is subparagraphs C..
And it looks like this is also
retain sorry we missed you Mr
chairman lines three through six
are eliminated and the number
one is added and it starts with
the consumer shall be and then
it says permit to write it again
here's an example where I think
you what you've written is pride
the opposite of what the bill
really supposed to say which it
says in that paragraph the
consumer should be permitted to
possess at least two ounces of
cannabis flowers and at least
sixteen grams outside of the
consumers private residence so
what that means is you could
have hundred ounces or or tons
of cannabis and extract outside
the home it's the opposite of
what I think you intended what
you're saying here is the
consumer should be permitted to
possess at least two ounces of
extract and so again I I your
bill is saying the opposite my
State Senator laughing so I
think she's reading it the same
way I am your bill reach the
opposite of what I think you
clearly intent so once again I
just don't have the time tonight
to to do this with you and and I
I know you don't want to do that
with me but but I do really
think that the bills not reading
for this and and lots of other
reasons like to go through with
the night we're we're again the
bill just as the opposite of
what it's clearly.
Supposed to be included here if
you're interested in and making
those amendments now though I
think we would be fine to revise
that since they are pretty
simple because you understand
the intent and we understand the
intent we would love to be able
to entertain that now I I I
would I've been hoping really
that we would get a bill to this
committee that was ready to go
and and I I appreciate you being
very nice about that but since
nearly one o'clock in the
committee does not like it when
I do the page one line one which
is what I would do I would I
would start going through this
showing you all the places where
the bill clearly is wrong and
clearly the you know you all can
do this you can do this tonight
tomorrow and work on it harder
then you don't need me to do
that if you're if people reading
this bill carefully they would
realize this written wrong and
you know we can act and just
find out later that then we know
we just we just ignore what the
statute says and say we we knew
that we were really intending
the opposite of what we wrote
but it's just not the way role
came and and the that's just
that's just me
I know I know that I'm seeing is
negative to this issue to this
bill what what I'm really
negative two is just creating
bad law and and I I can give you
other examples of tribal for
them some of them quickly you've
created some commissions but in
some cases you don't give any
idea how many members are on the
commission so we talked earlier
in the night about a very
important commission the
regulatory advisory commission
of this begins on.
I think again I'm working from
two different versions of the
bill this is going to be.
Where section I I can't keep it
straight game hi I'm on my on my
version builds on page twenty
three which is with the
amendments in contacts with this
is where you were this or you
create that that commission.
Which you know so many people on
the commission and and you're
allowing them per diem we never
do that we never created
commission and provide per diem
and never see how many people
are on the commission and this
is a pretty important commission
because as we established
earlier this is the commission
against it by how many plants
and when you go into this
equilibrium that was discussed
earlier and so for the all this
gets decided by this commission
it's a very important commission
but we don't say how many people
are on it and if you and if you
look at subparagraph or just
says you know it's it's says
there's a district attorney and
chief public defender to county
sheriff's within Representative
for just as members appointed by
the director and it's got a
number of people that are listed
under that one of them is from a
community disproportionally
affected by past federal and
state drug policies I would just
ask you we talked about this of
the social part of the program I
I I I don't know.
What that means what is a
community disproportionally
affected by past federal and
state drug policies tell me who
is that.
Is that brown black Hispanic
Mr chair of the firm's about
that thank you but I I we we
appreciate your your comments
very much yes I mean I think
when you look historically at
the the war on drugs to the
people and communities most
impacted by it it's it's usually
people of color I New Mexico
would be Latino native American
African American and obviously a
smaller percent of the
population but also very much
impacted by the war on drugs
historically those to the
communities most impacted.
Right so so you got a list of
people that are on this
commission it says members
appointed by the director and
includes a labor organization
of a communities
disproportionately affected an
Indian nation US expertise in
environmental science got a list
of people but then you get to
the end the last one the casual
just says in anybody with
expertise in relevant areas as
the director of superintendent
deem appropriate that's pretty
much you know that that means
they get to say where they want
on this very important
commission rate is indeed says
anybody with relevant experience
the director of the
superintendent deem appropriate
that could be anything also
that's that's three not really a
very consistent with the way we
normally define who goes on a
commission and and we almost
always have the total number of
people want to commission
particularly what we're
providing but with per diem here
there's no.
There's no limit no definition
and then we create other we
create other commissions which
likewise don't have any numbers
so I'm I'm not accustomed to
that I'm not a customer
community creating commissions
without saying how many people
are on them.
if you look at the there's a
section of your bill that deals
with subpoenas.
Those of the attorneys in the
group would be I think naturally
very concerned about that I am
I've never heard of anybody be
given subpoena authority in this
case you're given the Director
subpoena authority to issue just
says the director legal counsels
vest with power to issue
subpoenas returnable within no
less than five days usually to
get a subpoena as a worry about
a file a lawsuit there has to be
a pending lawsuit there has been
a judge authorizing the subpoena
I can't just go Sabina thank
from anybody and I think this
would be a first I may be wrong
if anybody wants to correctly I
don't know anybody else who has
the authority but we begin with
the director here to go issue
subpoenas on anybody for
anything including here show
that testify to produce all the
persons books or records it's
that's pretty invasive for a lot
of businesses you know for
somebody to show up and say Hey
you gotta give me all your all
your finances or your tax return
so your business records but
we're giving the a director that
kind of authority.
Section four of your bill
establishes a medical cannabis
subsidy program I want to ask
the secretary because I thought
I saw your shop shaking your
head earlier when I said the
bill provides for the department
to buy and distribute more
marijuana for medical cannabis
to qualified patients and
secretary that I I've missed
maybe I miss read your body
language I thought I saw you
shaking your that this bill does
not do that.
Mr Chairman superintendent it of
the it doesn't it sets up a fund
so that the department of health
and that's a fund that would be
connected to the department of
health so that the department of
health could subsidize
individuals who had a financial
need to purchase cannabis so it
would be a subsidized purchase.
Well that may be the intention
but that's not what the bill
says the bill says that by
January one of twenty twenty the
department shall and then it
says establish a medical
cannabis subsidy program through
which the department of health
shall make distributions to
provide medical cannabis or
subsidies to qualified patients
so so I I read that that you're
making distributions to provide
medical cannabis I don't that's
what it says so if you're making
distributions of money so they
can go by other cannabis on and
maybe that's what you're telling
me they're going to do but but
that could also be read to say
that the department shall make
distributions to provide medical
cannabis which is exactly what
rates so that's why I thought
well the department may be the
biggest buyer of the medical
cannabis and you're shaking your
head no but this bill would
authorize them to do that it may
not be the intention
that's economic I don't know
what's what it would reach.
So I'm I'm.
I'm trying not to wear down the
patience of the everyone here
one thing that really puzzling
and troubling I think this is
still in the bill.
This is in section six it says
the division shall not licensing
cannabis retailer unless the
cannabis retail agrees as a
condition of its license to
accept cannabis products on
consignment is that still
renewable.
Mr chairman I believe that was
in addition in the last
amendment and the purpose of
that addition my understanding
all of the sponsors correct me
if I'm wrong but my
understanding is that we want to
make sure that our small micro
businesses and small businesses
arch set out and that if there's
going to be a retail store
they've got to be open to
selling for.
Product of those smaller micro
businesses so yes that is
intended to make sure that the
market is is open for all.
Yeah I don't think that's what
it does it all I think it
enslaves retailers are what it
says is the only known we can
sell retail as it is a campus
alert is to sell the cannabis
products on consignment which
means they're not owned by you
the retailer their own by the
suppliers and so you're just a
front for the says here there on
consignment from the manufacture
the producer so you're not
really a small business owner
unless you consider consignment
I guess a business which I guess
it is but you don't actually
purchase the product and then
sell it out of your store you're
just a front for the manufacture
producer because here you have
it says here you can only get a
license we sell on consignment I
don't know why you would agree
to do that in a bill if you're
really trying to help the small
guy the small got to be able to
buy a product and then sell it
and and set a price and maybe
make a profit in doing so but
here they they they're just a
they're selling for the
manufacture of the the producers
so I I I I can't think of a a
good nice reason that would help
the argument is made this helps
the small guy that needed time
you tell somebody you know you
you're subject to the big guy
you're not helping the little
guy.
You're you're you're to look at
you will only open and you can
only sell what the manufacturer
producer give you they've
they've.
Mr chairman that's not the
intent so I absolutely see your
point of it I believe the intent
of it was that they they have to
at least be willing to accept
consignment I don't think that
they're limited to consignment
but that they have to at least
be willing to accept on
consignment but I I absolutely
hear your part with your point
with all due respect.
Representative your specialist
that's not what this says it all
it's not it's not an option it
says you show that you can't get
a license as a retailer it says
the divisional additional
licensed retailer unless the
retailer agrees as a conditional
license to accept the products
on consignment right so so
you're bureau sure that the big
guys I'm sure the big guys are
in this bill well I'm I'm I'm I
was born yesterday the big guys
wrote this bill and they make
sure that when they get the
retailers the the retailers
under the thumb of the
manufactures and producers
because it says as a condition
they have to accept products on
consignment so you know I.
You all of my frustrations with
all of this I I usually feel
like we're I know I know the
goal here particularly as a as a
Hispanic I know the goal here is
to help Hispanic marginalized
communities.
Representative Martínez I love
your passion I'm just not sure
that this isn't subjugating us
with you know the history that
that many others have been sent
you're getting people over
history with opium with the you
know of some people's whether
it's whisky with others whatever
it may be
We already talked about the
market equilibrium in some of
the other factors
Let's see I was really puzzled
by the section that talks about
of this is section right above
us and and at the end of section
six is a nonprofit corporation
issued a license under this
section shall be converted to a
corporation.
I don't know that means a
nonprofit corporation shall be
converted to a corporation
whether the secretary of state
upon filing of articles of
organization whether nonprofit
corporation that would make any
sense if you have a nonprofit
that's going to be converted to
a corporation you wouldn't do
that upon the filing of the
articles by the nonprofit
corporation those articles would
have already been filed when you
created the nonprofit in the
first place so so that that
section makes any sense to me
that says it should be approved
pursuant to an agreement of
conversion and then in many even
more strangely says upon the
conversion all property whether
converting entity remains in the
newly converted and any and all
obligations of the converting
entity continuous obligations of
the newly converted entity all
all of that is really determined
by the contract between
successor corporations they they
limit their liabilities are the
transfer assets or or not so I
would probably take that out I I
don't know what that would be in
in the bill like this.
The if you look at section eight
unless this is been change.
Subsection B. of section eight
of in my case it begins on page
thirty seven.
says the division shall not
limit of up the number of
licenses of any kind or the
scope of license or the
activities of licensee is
authorized to conduct.
So what I understood earlier is
that the division will limit the
number of licenses maybe I
misunderstand that part but it
but would reserve says the
division shall not limit the
number of licenses of any crime
so what I'm missing here.
Mr chair in senators I believe
this part was actually amended
and Senate tax
Last week when we heard that
committee.
I don't think so not on might
not on my a version that shows
amendments and contacts and look
at the secretary I think for me
the right.
The.
Mr Chairman for some reason and
and I'm having troubles I heard
you state section eight but are
page numbers aren't matching up
because you're looking at the in
context but for some reason I
think that was part of the
amendment that
Senator Duhigg was doing but if
you the pointed out to me I
could probably get closer chair
that might in context version at
section eight subparagraph B.
thank you it's it's page thirty
two in the bill thank you
senator users to report I could
really usual we're in my office
right now.
I'd like to be there cold down
here in the basement.
Which come after the meeting I
assure you all right go ahead Mr
Mr chair yes and that is not in
reference to the that is in
reference to like what what we
what we talked about is
That you can only have a
certain number of licensees
that's those are going to be
decisions that are made by the
local community that's not
something that the department
would.
Restrict we do have the
authority to restrict for micro
businesses because they can only
have one of each.
But was this was this a place
where you were at in language.
For some reason I thought we had
talked about this one.
Yes.
it is superintendent yes I I
think I just added a
I except for the provisions
otherwise here and at the
beginning of that language to
account for the changes that
would be able to be made in
response to market changes right
okay so are so are
Minnesota and may take care of
that but but the language before
the amendment said the division
not limit the number of licenses
and tonight we've evidently
adopted amendment that says
that's exactly what you can do
so at least some of this is
making some sense but you can
understand before we begin the
committee I have languages
Division can't limit licenses
and secretary why you say this
only relates to certain local
governments or certain types of
things that's not within the
context of this section says
anything about there's there's
no contents in there at all that
would support that
interpretation so I was reading
at as I was before our committee
amendments says you can't limit
the number of licenses and I was
a big shot I'd say I want lots
of licenses and I'd say this
legislature said you can't limit
me thanks so you're right Mr
chairman and and and I was just
trying to think really quickly
but but I I do remember that
that was Senator Duhigg.
our conversation we had and that
she fix up this evening okay
good.
We made some good progress
constructive things.
I've already expressed my
concern with subsection need of
section eight I believe which is
the language that that as I
said.
Provides for a conviction for
possession use manufacture
distribution of or an intent to
manufacture distribute or
dispense a controlled controlled
substance is not a substantially
related to qualification
function or duties of a business
seeking a license I just I I
just don't think that that's why
it's and and I realize that if
they aren't the argument made
earlier was the department has
the discretion to still do not
have a license to such an
individual but I I don't I again
in the interest of social
justice I'm not really sure that
that expressly saying but you
can be convicted person with
manufacturing distribution
dispensing of any controlled
substance which would include
some pretty serious drugs that
that shouldn't be a
consideration and granting a
license.
The
The subsection the secretary of
section nine earlier had asked
about the hundred twenty five
thousand dollar fee yes and use
the and you said that was the
total of all.
Charges but if I read it
as it reads in subsection it
says the initial application fee
and the annual renewal fee for a
vertically integrated cannabis
established license single or
single single license shall not
exceed one hundred twenty five
thousand dollars for a license
for both medical and commercial
cannabis so that suggests to me
that you can charge of two
hundred twenty five thousand
dollars without license Mr
Chairman if you'll look at the
amendment that Senator Ivey Soto
just the the committee just
adopted I actually clarified
that in there and when the
secretary was saying like
there's three pages there that's
are all the clean ups it's
because there was more people
than just yourself that we're
having some confusion about that
language and myself being one of
those and so I literally spelled
it out what the cost of each
license was and then when you
read this in context of that
amendment you'll see that it's
no more than a hundred twenty
five thousand because I spelled
out how much each license would
be is that was very confusing to
me too.
You okay well the federal look
forward to talking with you more
it's now well after one o'clock
of there's a lot of things in
here that I just don't know
which surprising but I just have
real concerns about I have a
real concern that you're act
allows a parent to serve
cannabis to a person to a child
in the household of any age are
you shaking your head no but if
you look at section fourteen B.
it says is not a violation the
act when a parent serves
cannabis products to a person
under age twenty one as long as
it's on the real property under
control the parent so that
language would say that I'm a
parent and I can give more one
of my kids at any age as long as
it's in the house I don't think
that's a very good idea
so
I'm jumping around but.
I want free oil.
That.
All right we're on a new path
motion I think.
The right.
Senator Baca is your hand raised
on the do pass motion.
Yes and I'm sorry Mr chair that
you went there and
you know I just want to say
something real quick this is a.
This committee and I'm gonna I'm
gonna tell you that I will I we
we have the amendment on the
floor the other day and I know
it's a little bit off topic and
I know it's late.
where the chair of this
committee.
Explained venue and as often me
in this chair do not agree on
policy very much I'm but my
immediate reaction
was to walk back to my office
and to say goodness I hate when
he's that right.
And you know
we don't agree on policy but I
really am proud of this
committee because when it comes
to law and articulating the
points I think
they're well placed within this
committee and so you know I'm
just gonna leave you with that
you know I I'm not I'm not
hating a lot of the things we're
looking at but those things are
just glaring issues within the
law and and many more that were
covered tonight and I'll just
leave it at that Mr chair thank
you.
Well thank you for making me
feel warm all over Senator Baca
but the it is good to be part of
this committee I'm always very
very proud of all of us were
you're working late our minds
are still sharp we have a great
staff and the the legal
experience to be added the years
up on this committee and that
includes those of you who are
not lawyers.
Because putting you all were
don't have a law degree really
could go passed the bar exam I'm
certain after a lot of years on
this committee so it's a good
feeling Center thank you so
Moores.
Thank you thank you Mr are you
know the I want to echo what was
just about Senator Baca and that
I got a call earlier from Santa
Fe New Mexican yesterday I guess
it was many hours ago for
service hearing ask for comment
about one of our call colleagues
that was complaining about all
for bills getting killed this
committee never getting hurt my
responsibilities reporter was
wall that's the job of this
committee is due diligence and
work things we make sure it's
right off of this committee
doesn't agree on policy but I
have taken pride five years
about this community get things
right it doesn't seem like this
bill was right yes you all know
my history with this issue of my
willingness to work with people
on this issue the seem like they
want to work with me so I my
phone has been silence from the
advocates on this for three
years now Nunes and seem like
they wanted to get it right and
there was agenda is there so I
defended this committee how
despite them by saying that the
we don't always agree on the
policy but we always try to get
it right out of this committee
and it's just this thing is not
right and I've been willing to
work on this issue three years
no one's willing to work with me
so it's very disappointing that
that went down like this this
thing is not ready for prime
time it's let's just say it's
half baked from Mr preservation
Serra just point.
Thank you senator I think I've
got Senator Stewart still the
recognize Senator.
Mr chairman as you were going
through.
Of the bill I'm I'm I finally
realized that there are a lot of
changes to the medical cannabis
program in here and so I guess I
want to ask the Sanchez about.
How how is it that that this
bill to legalize adult use
cannabis have so many changes to
the medical cannabis program.
They were the they were the
areas of the bills that Senator
von case pointed to with issues.
And it's new material tracking
section set.
I don't know I guess what was
the thinking with the changes
for medical cannabis program.
They come from the department.
Thank you Mr chair and and
Senator and and all of the for
to our expert Emily on that
question very briefly
we we are transitioning.
The duties that currently D. O.
H. has over the regulation and
licensing piece up to to the
regulation licensing department
the the patient registry stays
with the O. H. what everything
else transfers out that's where
you're gonna see a lot of
changes
and Emily I don't know if you
want to touch on on some of the
other changes made here.
Mr chair and madam president I
think Representative Martinez
described that correctly that
because workgroup moving the
licensing of peas out of the
department of health in into
regulation and licensing
department there have to be some
changes there are also there's
also language in here that
requires a commercial licensee
for adult use to also provide
medical and so you'll see a lot
of references throughout for
medical cannabis some of those
changes also were to make sure
that medical patients there for
example their possession limits
weren't last that adult use
individual would be also we we
wanted to make sure that we
protected medical cannabis
patients in this bill and so
many of those changes are
insuring on that that they are
still protected on as we
transition into adult use
market.
You know Mr chair what happened
in Arizona.
Is that there's no more using
the medical cannabis program.
I mean it's just naturally
occurring that there's just
fewer and fewer.
People using medical cannabis
program so.
and let me tell you Mr chairman
that a reporter also called me
about this committee and what I
said is that this is the
committee that tries to get
bills right and this is the
committee where you know after
this committee it's it's done
and goes to the floor and that
we have too many bills and that
we have too many bills every
year and there is no way that we
can hear all these bills and
then we get so many from the
house so I also defended this
committee in the work we do
so.
I wanted to tell you that thank
you madam president I really
mean it and all of you there was
a press conference today there
was members of the house members
the Senate they were
disappointed bills and move
Senator Ivey Soto has one of my
bills and never got that it's
very first hearing I told the
reporter I I think we all get
disappointed I get disappointed
and I've got no special
privileges either so we we
learned that this is a big kids
came and and we take our lumps
what I do I do appreciate the
the the good words for this
committee and I hope that the
house members were with us here
tonight understand you know we
we've been criticized of late
that we're we're too hard on
people that we're to a stern
that we table bills that we
don't hear bills and and this is
a really good committee and I
hope you feel that and I I want
to thank both of you to as the
sponsors for coming in here with
a great attitude which was up
you know you didn't come in here
and and we got a lot of Sanchez
come in and you can't touch our
bill that we've had one of those
tonight.
You know you can't touch your
bill it's been worked out
everybody agrees to that and and
and we where we get people from
national compacts and say this
is our national compact every
state's got this
you can't touch it you can't be
smart enough to know better than
everybody else and and this is
just a Representative looked
fabulous review came with the
right attitude which is let us
help you had some great work
from members tonight that it
major bill much better.
I think all of you know that
philosophically I don't believe
New Mexico's ready for this but
I would never be so arrogant to
think that my personal believes
would be a reason that we would
not hear the bill or that I
would hold the bill or that my
vote alone would be enough to
change the will of this
committee or this legislature
that's not my purpose and I hope
my comments and I are understood
that well I don't believe in the
concept yet The New Mexico yet
having marijuana available with
what I believe this would lead
to or having a controlled by
what I think would be the
ultimate controlling group of
people that that my comments for
you our our hopefully intended
to be constructed because I I
don't think you want to build
this is the opposite of what you
wanted to to say and I know what
you want to say but I I think we
would all agree it really should
it really should say what you
want to say not the opposite so
there's much more that we can
talk about but the hours late I
I I would be more than happy to
try and spend more time with you
I know members of this committee
would be as well to their there
are a number of things in the
bill that should be of great
concern to you that Frank there
are many cases just contrary to
law
existing one of you I don't you
want to do that so anyway that's
our line
we're I think on a do pass
motion.
And so we'll take the do passed
motion when I roll call Emily
please.
No.
Senator Duhigg yes.
Senator pass.
Yes.
Senator Wirth.
No.
Senator Pirtle.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Yes.
So that's going to vote no.
It's forty three.
I guess I I should vote yes at
this point.
Yes I I do vote now and really
up well anyway I for you have a
due pass I I agree with the
comments that this is not ready
thank you goodnight thank you
thank you chairman thank you Mr
chairman pre sheet your time
thank you very much for your
time thank you.
Thank you.
