There is and that is what was
analyzed by our analysts Mr
Chairman Senator Ivey Soto I do
not have it I don't see it in my
list of stuff that was sent out
so I don't even have
in my emails and I'm gonna look
into searching through them or
is Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute so when when we had
the secretary of state.
Explaining how she liked what
came out of so I suppose we're
talking about Mr chairman for
clarification the Senate rules
committee substitute for Senate
bill forty eight.
Is that correct no.
I'm I don't have the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitutes
I have no idea what we're
talking about thank you.
So though we may not be ready
for prime time tonight this bill
now I'd like to see the
committee substitute before I
even you know I I need some help
here yup
Chairman it was emailed to us
it's then my email list but I
agree with Senator Lopez and
Senator Stewart I don't have it
in mind okay yeah no I I'm
saying that the packet that we
were given fund does not have it
that's what she's talk right so.
Yes what what I have.
The second one.
I know I've got what I don't
have enough time to Senator
Stewart as what I'm asking for I
would like to be sent to me the
committee substitute so I know
what regarding that I'll email
it to you right now Senator
Lopez please understand your
both talking over each other not
if you're going to the chair I'm
usually not a real stickler for
that but but when it gets to be
a difficult to keep everybody
straight because a challenge so
please
just email that to everyone
again.
Thank you Emily I just was
searching for it and I couldn't
find it thank you.
I am thank you Emily.
All right so let me get back to
understanding couple things one
one was the committee sub
delivered to our committee.
Anybody answer that.
Senator Stewart has announced
for Mr chairman it was emailed
on March fourth at three fifty
eight PM.
Okay.
More than adequate time.
In the committee all right.
The motion to make Mr chairman
it would be in order I'm moving
do not pass on Senate bill eight
and for purposes of discussion a
do pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
rules committee substitute for
Senate bill forty eight but the
two oh two number of four oh
four point two so now we're
talking about.
Right thank.
Well we're not talking about is
the Senate Judiciary Committee
so right and my understanding
Senator was as a sponsor
you favor the motion to adopt
the Senate Judiciary Committee
sub is that right that's right
all right.
Members of the committee let's
take that motion first and we'll
come back to center doing some
motion edition noted it may be
dependent on the outcome of the
first vote so we're on the
adoption of the committee sub as
a motion what's that as the main
motion before yes.
Right is there any further
discussion on on that motion it
actually committee so.
Or is there any objection to
adoption of the committees
I'm saying none Emily you still
with us.
Yes.
All right would you know it all
members of the committee present
to be a voting in favor of
adoption of the Senate Judiciary
Committee said
all right with that sub adopted
we can go back to center to a
clue.
Just told us earlier that her a
motion becomes effective only on
adoption of the committees of
which we've now done so let me
ask you Senator to answer
Senator answer their question to
summarize once again your
proposed amendment.
For so Mr chair Senator Stewart.
What my amendment was so right
now what the sub allows is for
cancellation if someone I votes
in another state or get to
drivers and and I have no
disagreement with that
whatsoever or gets a driver's
license or an ID card in another
state that would require
residency.
I do have a lot of concerns
about that because if I am a
college student who has not
currently change my residency
and I get a driver's license in
the another state where I'm
going to college I am
automatically cancels all my dad
weirdly whenever we would go on
vacation somewhere he would go
get a license he had like eight
license is I don't know why but
what I'd doing that would
automatically cancel his
registration no other state in
the nation automatically cancels
registration just because you've
got a driver's license or an ID
in another state regardless of
whether residencies required for
that are not so that would give
New Mexico the most aggressive
voter registration cancellation
policy in the country and so
what my amendment would do
instead is that what if first of
all it would because you're
right it's it's hard to keep
those rules claim especially if
that mail isn't getting sent
back what so if you get that
million for your daughter you
just throw it away then the
process never starts to start
getting her off the rules
and so what what this would do
instead with id have the
secretary of state create a
program based on best practices
to get the rules cleaned up in a
a uniform non discriminatory way
that would be standard across
the state
and it would deal with whenever
someone has voted somewhere else
then yes there cancel that there
will be a procedure to cancel
them whenever they are confirmed
as passed away yes they are
canceled but when they get just
got a driver's license or an ID
somewhere else then it goes
through the normal kind of
process that it that where we're
mailings go out to try to
identify whether that person is
still in the state or not and
then you know if that then get
sent back they get put on an act
it did stop short of the plow
cancelling the registration.
For an issue where it's not it's
not crystal clear whether it
should be cancelled or not.
I move that to pass on Katie do
hexes Center do fix amendment.
All right the motion on the
amendment will go to discuss
women Senator Ivey Soto on the
proposed amendment thank you
very much and more Inc if you
put them on the back up real
quick on the screen.
Having so I really appreciate
that that second description of
the of the amendment.
Well if you could scroll up
where those strikeouts are way.
That's not the one that's the
wrong amendment.
It should be the one that's two
two oh six six four point one.
So.
just after somebody getting a
driver's license in another
state.
And the and I on I confess
associate with with center west
with someone said what I think
about this a resident of the
state the shutting the
restaurant Mexico but haven't
heard the explanation of the
more having has just think about
it there's a lot of.
Medication on the national voter
registration act and we are
required to go through a process
and that is in our statutes.
In one dashboard just twenty
eight which is referenced in
this the one thing that I would
ask Senator Duhigg is what I'm
and and this is why I wanted to
back up on the screen.
is one eight.
So you have confirmed devoted in
two states during the same
election and really Sir doing if
you'd be willing to accept.
And voted use a language that's
on page one on the bill one
seventeen.
From Bernalillo voted in another
state requiring residents in
that state I do think it's
somebody has voted in an
election prime residents it
doesn't matter if they voted
election at the same time in New
Mexico they have established I
don't wanna be a voter in New
Mexico.
And and so if you do want to
accept that.
Are up slight modification to
your amendment then then
actually I think that amendment
would be in line with the with
the national voter registration
act what you percent of federal
trouble.
but it would also help us
identify people like senator
stronger who are not otherwise
identifiable under current
system.
Mr chair Senator Ivy Soto I I
would be fine with that change.
Okay so so Mister chairman with
with the with the one eight.
Our state income virtual voted
in another state requiring
residents and that states are I
I'd I'd I actually I will tell
you as I thought about it and
and and and the cast we have
called for a couple minutes of
me that you have a few minutes
thank you madam what we have in
the bill although instinctive I
think what potentially run afoul
of federal law and I do think
that one is on the screen right
now district.
So you're gonna have to restate
your amendment to center to
examine which she indicated that
is acceptable to her just so
Emily can keep track of where
you're at so I I know you're up
at seven paragraph one A. but
you're gonna have to give us the
specific words to be struck and
those to be added please right
so I'm and I'm and I'm borrowing
language from page twenty nine
line seventeen of the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
the the Barbara voted.
In another state requiring
residents in that state.
Not really sure what kind of
election very vote then that
wouldn't require residents but
in the last ten from the voted
in another state requiring
residents and that state and
that what under this amendment
as I read it would cancel the
registration right away
immediately on that but I do
think that's for.
Emmeline with this.
No I lost we're Senator Ivey
Soto was but
Our office and get it from him
no no let's do it right.
Senator it's on it's on so on
the amendment there are six X.
four point one.
Where the strikeouts inserts
are.
What we've got here
Representative one eighty.
After the board voted.
J. afterward and sprite to
states during the same election.
You are at and what yes.
And certainly there of.
In another state.
Requiring residents in that
state.
Okay.
Mr okay good.
I I appreciate your willingness
to go see Senator Ivy Soto after
the committee get the amendment
but god knows what element that
way so.
Mr chair.
All right so the Senator doing
you have indicated Senator Ivey
Soto the amendment would be
acceptable to your amendment is
that right that's right Mr chair
I'll go back to Senator Woods
Senator Woods we have a problem
user.
Mr Chairman.
I would like to Ellen white to
look at that and and give me her
idea that's what you point.
Mr chair will wash doing Mastro
the sponsor the member question.
This Morris yeah but let me let
me not get lost here I I don't
know my apologies are just
please come back during for the
question later.
So what's his directed a
question just expert I'd like to
not get lost in the woods here
so thank you.
Yeah.
Senator and members of the
committee I do believe that
that's acceptable.
Mr Chairman accent that
amendment.
Right so you're accepting the
Ivy Soto amendment to the doing
amendment so all right is there
any other discussion senator
Morris you want to be on this
topic yes Mr question Mr chair
my question Senator Woods
probably to the secretary state
or the county for my in New
Mexico when you register your
commute licensure you're
automatically registered my
understanding is some if not
many other states do the exact
same thing.
so I'm I'm if if so that is true
I'm I'm confused about this
process so it's if you come in
from California utilized here
were registered or you should be
counselors help for New York and
bars for so or I'm I'm used to
California's example I don't
know which states to this one
state stopped Mr chair to
address well hold on it that way
the secretary just once Senator
Moores I'm sorry would you
direct the question to the
secretary I are directed to Mr
chair to the either the the
secretary or the county clerk
okay I'm sorry then secretary I
go ahead and I probably read
rather your account Sir because
I think all like grants a better
Secretary Stewart well well
Mister chair and senator at I
would love to hear at it is
whatever add weights at thought
Sir on this as well but I'm
first of all automatic voter
registration whether in New
Mexico or in any other state
does require the affirmative
response of the voter to become
registered in in New Mexico we
require that on the front end of
the process so you have to say
yes I do want to be registered
before you become registered in
other states if you are
automatically registered you are
sent a confirmation on the back
end of that process to say
whether you want to remain
registered or not so there's
always some sort of affirmative
action on the part of the voter
to either become registered or
or not even even through the
quote unquote automatic voter
registration process so again
you know if somebody's moving to
another state and they're
getting an ID and or license and
they're saying either on the
front or the back end that they
do want to be a registered voter
in that state than absolutely
will get that information and
then we'll go through this
process but you know it's not
necessarily just automatic
automatic you're automatically
registered with.
Sort of a Moores center more
hindered the for pointed
questions imported answers hours
late please very pointed same
question to the county clerk.
Yes Sir chairman and members
that's exactly how it happens
automatic is very loose term
when you're dealing with the N.
B. D. and it is not automatic
voter absolutely has the choice
to deny that registration.
Mr chair very pointed question
how many felonies are committed
when you get driver's license
and Richard voted eight
different states.
I retire all our questions.
Mr chairman I would like to
speak to that I would like to
speak to that if you have a CDL
license you cannot have that in
one state do you know why.
You are you but because it was a
common practice with cross
country drivers to have a
license in more than one state
so they can put points on
different license to keep their
insurance that.
So it is illegal under the
federal carriers all to have
more than one see day a license
that I don't know about a
regular practice last maybe you
get a every state anytime you
want but I do know a commercial
driver's license is not that
way.
You don't have the floor were
debating the Ivy Soto amendment
to the doing amendment to the
committee substitute bill Mr Mr
Chairman sleep some.
I can't believe this bill is
been around waiting this long to
be then this.
Behind so all right Sir Morris
you still have the floor Sir
Senator got Mr chair I'm already
asleep so move our.
All right any other committee
members were taking Senator Ivey
Soto this proposed amendment to
center doing some proposed
amendment to the committee
substitute as or any other
discussion on Senator Ivy Soto
is proposed amendment.
Emily you've got that amendment
yes remember what we're doing
and yes all right is there any
objection the adoption of that
amendment.
All right that amendment is
adopted to Center doings
amendment all right we're on
Senator to the amendment.
S. S. you Mr with a motion for
it to pass on that amendment.
Any other committee discussion
on that proposed amendment.
Let's take a roll call please on
centered through his amendment
as amended by Senator Ivey Soto.
No no we read one Mr.
Mr chair we're on the verge of
New.
Mr chair this is Baca.
One one everybody just jump in
and so it is the first well
let's make sure the motion is
before us is clear the motion is
to adopt center do the senators
proposed amendment.
All right Mr chair this week
Baca matter Baca on the
amendment I'm now that it's been
amended I would like the opinion
of the bill sponsor on the
amendment does it remain the
same on friendly or is it now
friendly.
Mr Chairman is not friendly.
That now friendly.
Yes it is yes.
All right what else before they
grow called on the amendment.
Family on the amendment please
roll call.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto that's where.
Senator Lopez yes.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Thank you yes.
Senator this yes that amendments
adopted all right we're on the
committee substitute now as
amended hi I would like to
propose that we have a committee
substitute that incorporates the
amendment into the committee
substitute have a generated in
that fashion I see some heads
nodding.
and so any discussion or
objection to that idea.
I'm saying none all right so we
will generate a new committee
sub that adopts the doing
amendment as incorporated by the
Ivy Soto amendment all right on
the bill
as it would be.
A committee set up for us Senate
judiciary all right center in
the photo yes.
Mr I have I've just two very
small I think of things other
parts of section seven of the
bill which begins on.
And the the operative language
in section seven as action page
twelve this is a section that
all it does is it removes public
regulation commission from that
section that's actually in
another bill that has already
made its way to the house it's
gonna be passing I don't think
we need in this bill will make
the bills three pages for.
There is nothing else in that
section and if we could just
move that I think would be the
make the bill better.
Senator Ivey Soto you're gonna
have to state the motion by
referring to the page the line
numbers of the language proposed
strikes that Emily can make sure
that our committee report
Mr chairman of the strike
section some of the bill and and
the details being page nine line
twenty three rue page well line
seventeen.
This is unnecessary.
Mr chairman I would accept that
amendment.
All right is there any objection
to the document by anybody in
the committee tonight.
That amendment is adopted.
When we your honor.
Mr Chairman one last thing on
page forty three.
Of the proposed that it's up and
Sir what's and I have discussed
this up and that is this deals
with the information that has to
be written by the voters
underneath the privacy flap.
And what what we've used in the
general election and what we're
using the special election is
the favorite from last four
digits of our social security
number.
And the way it's written here is
there's two words level we would
benefit by by removing which is
name and name on the and the
path line twenty and and at the
end of the strike through online
twenty one page page page forty
three.
Forty three line what I am
twenty one.
It would be simply striking the
word name at the end of that
line twenty on page forty three
and the work and.
On one twenty one not the
largest explained the fact right
now the privacy flap when
somebody gets their ballots
under data privacy blowup they
are to.
Fine and what the last four
digits so sourceyour number
their name is preparing to.
This has a space for them to
write the exact same name that
is pre printed that's just got a
call confusion and and and so
and so it's it's a place to
track that and I'll and and
that's it.
Mr Chairman we did talk about
this and like it's private
Senator Ivey Soto said it is
presented on the envelope
there's not much need to have to
sign in again our cars are
present again it requires a
signature so I would accept that
amendment you favor the moment
we'll Sarasota just so I'm
always abundantly clear would
you make the amendment we just
take a moment so that you can
record the committee report
partly page forty three line
twenty strike the word name page
forty three line twenty one
strike to work and.
Emily I got it all right.
Is there any objection the
adoption of what the Sanchez
says is unacceptable amendment.
Saying no objections that
amendment is adopted.
So many more the one last thing
I have to say about this bill Mr
chairman just how much I
appreciate the diligence Senator
Woods has put in to working with
the county clerk's to work with
the secretary of state's and
then collaborative in this
entire process he really has
done yeoman's work and I'm very
much Bridgett.
Thank you thank you anyone else
in the committee.
So I'd like to echo those
remarks but I I hate to be the
the the wet blanket on on any of
those good feelings of gang we
cannot be working like this in
the last week of the session
this bill has been in this
committee for a week I've been
repeatedly assured the bill was
ready to be heard and been urged
to hear the bill and and we're
still the making changes it's
gonna be tough very tough here
in last week to be doing this
with other bills my inclination
is when bills are not ready
we're happy to do this level of
work to roll them over so the
the particular bill like this
well where they were there may
not be an eminent election I
know there's time needed to get
ready for the elections and so
forth but please understand
you're in my position I'm trying
to hear bills passed bills and
and we we can't be doing this
level of work in the committee
at these hours in my opinion so
all right we're gonna do pass
motion on the bill as a mental
ocean by anybody on the
committee.
I'm saying none Emily would you
please note all members of the
committee.
Supporting the new passed motion
center would you have a do pass
motion again my.
Thanks to you and to all who
have worked with the on this
bill thank you Sir I'm I'm I'm
amazed that you want from a
twenty something page bill to a
hundred something page bill but
after tonight I'm not surprised
how that happens to understand
the process here thank you hi to
Committee members do we still
have Senator Hemphill.
It's here.
Senator Hemphill we have not put
on the agenda but we have
previously several times Senate
bill one ninety eight we can.
Get it done quickly we're gonna
try if if my colleagues begin to
break into amendments we may or
may not but Senator Hemphill can
you join us I'm here thank you
Mr chairman would you explain
Senate bill one ninety please
and yes so in ten minutes or
less please thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I am honored to
sponsor an introduced Senate
bill one ninety it will make
changes to the developmental
disabilities planning council
membership and the purpose in
duties and it renames the
developmental disabilities
planning planning council as the
developmental disabilities
council and we do have a
committee substitute I believe
and I have my expert witness
with me today Alice Liu McAulay.
And so this legislation just
helps those with disabilities be
seen as capable people and will
empower on people with
disabilities to be self
advocates to create systemic
change so the purpose of the
update is just to align the
state's DD Act with the federal
statue and adopt the supportive
language and the council
requirements out outlined in the
federal statute so additionally
federal law requires that the
EDD council
instead of a Planning Council in
each state so if
so New Mexico is one of only
three remaining state including
Arizona Nebraska that still has
a Planning Council so the update
will remain the Planning Council
to New Mexico developmental
disabilities council thank you
Mr chairman and if my expert
witness analysts makori is here
there she is yeah stand for
questions from committee moved
to pass so.
In related but the ms McCoy one
minute please to explain the
bill from your perspective one
minute only please.
Yes thank you Mr chair good
evening the primary purpose of
this bill as as Senator Hemphill
said is to align New Mexico's DD
Act the current federal duty
statute it's known as the
developmental disabilities
assistance and bill of rights
act two thousand you'll see
referred to in our in our bill
and to top the council
requirements outlined the
federal statute I'm our DD Act
has not been updated for decades
it's based on an old federal
statute our current DD Act
reflects the time and community
based services for the needy
community had not yet been
developed and primary activities
for planning developing
coordinating we're now moving
toward advocacy capacity
building systemic change and
that's the gist of it Mr chair
thank you very much there is a
do pass motion by Senator
Senator Stewart Morse your
Moores I did the second sure the
second I I often to get the two
confused yeah we're just so
similar.
We're gonna do passed motion is
there any other Canadian
question or debate before we
take a roll call vote Senator
Hemphill you have found the
right magic our unitary
Committee I suspect that was
strategic.
The chairman.
But by the way that was one
thirty or two o'clock in the
morning but.
Thank.
Thank the gentleman here any
objection to anyone on the
Senate Judiciary Committee to a
do not pass on Senate bill one
ninety in a do pass on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for one night is there any
project Mr chair I have this is
Baca.
I I just I'm just opening the
committee substitute and and
looking at it here and if you'll
bear with me of course I just
lost it so I'm just one small
building on on page two.
we have basically a were
frequently we strike in this
committee is a purpose section
section be.
Very good some but I would I
would move to strike section B.
in its entirety more.
Mr Chairman.
On the motion to motion to
strike.
So Mister chairman I think the
purpose section has already been
struck if you notice it's
legislative purpose that struck
authorization they struck eight
that's the purpose all of this
he is authorizes the department
to plan providing coordinate
support and services to persons
with developed that
developmental disabilities this
is legislative operation
authorization not purpose which
is already struck if you can
look on the page you will see
that so I don't think that is
necessary.
Etcetera etcetera Baca you have
a motion to strike subsection B.
Senator Stewart think disagrees
let me go to the sponsor.
First of all of this Senator is
the motion of the proposed
amount of Iran favorable.
I'm gonna.
Asked my expert witness.
Thank you Mr chair Senator I
agree with senator us to where
we have
talk to talk to the analyst and
we did agree to strike
the purpose language but we
wanted to leave the
authorization language and it's
very important that it's in
there I am a little confused so
about the number you maybe I'm
looking at the wrong version
there were two paragraphs
authorization language so I am
now going to pull up this
substitute which.
I may not be looking at the
right one I apologize.
I'm.
What is what is the number of
the committee says to please.
Five nine three point one.
Okay.
Mr chairman I only see one
little paragraph this
authorization.
All the purpose eighty one two
three is all purpose that's all
struck it's only the
authorization paragraph that
slap.
And in the bill I'm looking at
two one nine nine two three
point three which is the one
that was online we have in
section two A. B. C. and D. N.
A. M. B. were purpose language
and see and do where are
authorization which.
Mr chairman that is not the
substitute that was delivered to
us.
And it's it's five nine three
point one that was delivered
that's also what was email.
And I apologize I must have the
wrong version I put I did pull
it off online so.
And objects let me go back to
center Baca center Baca were you
referring to the same version of
the committees when you make
your motion the two two oh five
nine three point one.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm I'm
confirming right now for if you
could bear with me I'm a I'm
pulling up the committee sub
okay and making sure it's the
same one so if you'll just bear
with me for just a moment I'll
have it your short.
We appreciate your concern with
the issue all tell you that
Senator Neville was of began
working brought about a week ago
with our staff.
but because we had the bill in
the committee and and identified
this as did our staff with
others in the bill and I I know
she's been working on the
committee sub but but the
version I have the two two oh
five nine three point one has
all of the purposes.
really struck.
I see that Mr chair I withdraw
my motion.
All right anyone else on the
bill as a as a committee so.
Senator Stewart so Mister
chairman I'm just gonna director
motion says a do not pass the
Senate bill one ninety and a do
pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill one ninety.
Thank you I I was cutting
corners here right.
Right any other discussion
committee members.
Is there any objection to do
past motion members of the
committee present anyone
tonight.
Saying not all members present
will be shown voting in the
affirmative Senator you have a
do pass motion on one ninety.
Thank you for staying up late
with us thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee.
Members of the committee that's
going to include our work for
tonight we will plan to meet
Friday afternoon I will try hard
to not go late Friday evening
because we're gonna have to work
Saturday and perhaps Sunday so
will pace ourselves a little bit
and I'll try and put together a
real reasonable agenda for
Friday evening but please make
plans to be with us for Saturday
afternoon into the early evening
and potentially Sunday afternoon
all right Mr Chairman you and I
need to coordinate times because
the rest of the committee will
be spending the rest of the
weekend and the rules committee
yes means you and I will visit
about that Senator will find a
way to make it work.
Mr chairman I've discovered why
we're all so glum and why is
assumed doesn't work we can't
hear each other laughs when
we're all muted all the time.
So we should start on using at
this time and I'm thinking so
that we can hear each other
laugh when we left things get
easier that's it I don't know
why I'm so awake I'm really in
trouble if I can't come and go
to sleep I'm really like to know
what kind of coffee you had this
evening center and I want to and
and I and I do really appreciate
the sunshine that's all around
you tonight just all about all
about laughter and happiness I'm
glad because I've not felt like
this for at least three days so
thank you Mr chairman never
you're doing keep it up.
Good night everyone will see it
tomorrow night thank you Mr
chairman you.
