And all that and so what we're
doing today is you're here in
the Romanian talked yesterday I
will rise to some five public
comment so the way that I just
want to start going to start off
with Senator some office
presenting his progress on that
thank you all for coming today
thank you so much.
Thank you chairman so our
chairman I believe in we confirm
this everybody who's here today
on this committee was present
yesterday in the rules committee
with the Matt was presented in
there was great discussion and
and a lot of public input so to
avoid repetitive testimony and
presentation.
We're a we're gonna present the
map again but I'm gonna do a
very abbreviated version of it I
think everybody's a digested it
well in the time we've had.
again just as a reminder we had
a
cons by a commission established
for the purpose of redistricting
bay map over the last in a room
and went around the state took a
lot of testimony public input
had a number of resources from
demographer's people specialize
in doing this kind of work they
developed a series of maps and
plans for our consideration.
After that
the number of us begin to work
off of one of those maps and
plans and the substantially
change that to improve a number
of things one is the deviation
from those massive plans that
the map in front of you has a
deviation of listening zero
which is an important goal we
maintain the other goals of
current negotiating compact.
arguably an admittedly arguably
we've maintained This
communities of interest for you
to make any sort of a judicial
scrutiny.
The map does that but from my
perspective a number of
important things namely that it
includes in each of the
districts a significant
population of urban voters and I
speak really significant
population of rural voters and
again this is to address what we
talk about here frequently which
is a division between urban and
rural divisions in the state of
New Mexico and so the the map
accomplishes that well otherwise
Chairman will take the public
input and the stand for
questions.
Thank you thank you senator and
and miss pasta do you have
anything to add phones terribly
sorry.
Hi for try for a for that was on
my list to introduce you to miss
pause again she was with the
yesterday introduced the time
she's with reserves opposing of
course publishes that you've
been with them six years is that
right so she's been researching
point six years of course
reserves of Boeing's probably
within this for decades I think
this work and so she's in on
Norma's resource and I
appreciate her help with me
today thank you Mr.
Thank you.
if I don't know if we'd like to
go through the map one more time
sure okay so
three districts a district to is
a southern New Mexico district
essentially keeps its court in
southern New Mexico takes in
southern Hobbs in Lea County all
of the southern counties comes
up the Rio Grande you know
through Misia up into the south
valley of Albuquerque including
but I'll just let their of
antenna ranch and this huge area
which is pretty unpopulated it's
it's mostly petroglyphs and and
the double yokel airport I also
includes a is let a Pueblo in
district two and then comes up
and takes the southern half of
the page as we heard in the CRC
meetings any would like to be
in two congressional districts.
District one is still officially
in Albuquerque Rio Rancho
district so all of Rio Rancho
and the downtown north valley
east side of Albuquerque is in
district one but also includes
of towns like Bernalillo please
proceeded S. Moriarty Edgewood
goes up into the southern part
of Santa Fe County
including Eldorado court yet us
Rios and then comes down through
Torrance County and takes in the
entirety of Lincoln and the
northern half of Mescalero which
again during this year C.
meetings we heard from that
Mescalero wanted to be in two
different congressional
districts district three again
maintains its northern court and
includes the City of Santa Fe
comes up into the Farmington
area San Juan all of McKinley
County comes down around at down
the eastern part of the state.
to Roswell Texas you know
Roswell hole and parts of hogs
and and again here the northern
part of SUNY
and Mister chair I think that's
a that's quick if I can do that.
Thank you for thank you so so is
there anyone in the audience
that would like to speak it was
not here yesterday I have a list
here right and can we start with
Connery Chino if you want to
come up and Forces microphone
with.
If you if you could use
Which are let's get Conroy and
microphone.
I'm not sure I want to check in
with you are we all know that
you are but who you representing
all right.
In the you're you're speaking
for today you're free very much
Mr chairman members of the
committee on.
And Senator Kernan
My name is Khan which you know
and I am the registered lobbyist
for to publisher New Mexico
hello Act money and tells pueblo
of North.
And I really want to express to
the committee I thank them for
allowing me the opportunity to
speak of comment on Senate bill
one percent before you.
I was in the committee meeting
yesterday and yes Representative
rules and also COVID but
first of all the public back is
in presently CD two and and and
with the new iteration remains
so toss what low
in all the measurements and
progression district three.
My comments this morning Mr
chairman and members the
committee are about CD three
specifically
and the concerns of the Peublo
Representative half and they've
asked me this morning to oppose
the bill.
To oppose the bill on for a
number of reasons
One of more systems from their
close relationship with the
incumbent
question woman's on to us
eight are Fernandez one that
goes back a number of years in
the questions want to converse
And I'm sure most of you have
strong relationships with your
constituents in their respective
districts and some of the that's
the same with their
what the congresswoman and
so that's number one the second
point that as I want to share
with you is a get the concern
about the numbers under this
current iteration.
The number of Americans and CD
three gets reduced from twenty
percent down sixty percent and
the tribal representatives feel
that will have an impact when it
comes to their interest to the
congressional they will have
competing interests
From where they sit on in the
state
with perhaps the southeastern
part of the state
interests are diverse
especially when it comes to
communities of interest concept
the value of the concept of the
tribe's he'll this is a strong
piece of the recommendation
process that they they cherish
and would like to continue to
I could use that to
Make up the configurations and
regulations a very strapped that
are kind of going for the.
so for those reasons Mr chairman
and members of the committee of
the Peublo representative are
are opposed to the bill
and we would ask that you know
the options there been so many
effect iterations floating
around of of not only for the
congressional maps would also
house and Senate but in this
case that the they just can't
support on this matter so for
those reasons uninsured I want
to make sure those comments and
also one X. respect.
Appreciation for the for the
sponsor brings forward but
skills for this time and also
wrote with the tribes and in
some of the department the
present Representative because
the co sponsor.
Is from one of the problems and
that fits that the mineral
Department.
To support so thank you very
much insurance thank you thank
you Connery thanks again for
coming up here and speaking your
your truth okay all right so
next up I have Jesse Winchester.
If you can say who who you're
with and so forth and and please
speak into the microphone I'm
having a little trouble hearing.
Going down over there yeah.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Jim
Winchester with independent
petroleum association New Mexico
first I want to thank the chair
in the sponsor for allowing us
the opportunity just as being
here today I was contacted of
late last night I number of of
members of our association we
represent three hundred plus of
oil and gas independent
operators in the Permian basin
as well as up in the San Juan
basin in just wanted to express
our concerns that there are
obviously distinct regional
differences between philosophies
on oil and gas within the
communities state of Santa Fe in
Albuquerque as opposed to down
in the Permian basin there is
concern is that with the way the
map is strong right now between
what is being proposed for CD
three CD two it's going right to
the heart of the Permian basin
and therefore would be diluting
the voices of the community
members down there were strong
supporters of oil and gas so for
that reason I will stand opposed
to this particular map but I do
think the sponsor and I do think
others for bringing for thanks.
Thank you thank.
Okay
right is there anyone else in
the room that didn't speak
yesterday that would like to
speak you're welcome to have
your time.
Yes please come up.
Three.
My name is Michael for queen.
All.
This is working on.
I am.
Hi I am able to.
Is that.
That's better now.
Can you hear me OK.
My name is Michael server
McQueen I'm a resident of your
happy that I'm here today
speaking on my own behalf and on
behalf of it the.
Of the person or group.
I'm I came here today to oppose
this bill of for two reasons
I'm disappointed in the process
that the Senate is following
with regard to
rational maps.
And I'm a little disappointed in
the back.
Like many New Mexicans I was
very happy.
When we created a citizen
redistricting committee.
I don't suppose redistricting
ever.
nonpartisan.
But thanks seem to have better
results when they have
independent bodies drawing the
maps.
and not people who are
necessarily a state owned by the
exigencies of political self
preservation when they are
voting drawing maps of the
district in which they will run
at the next election.
There are three things.
That I think it's fair to expect
the legislature to do with the
work product of the citizen
redistricting committee.
First ideally you should look at
them and choose one preferably
without alterations.
Second if you find that you
cannot keep your fingers Office
please acknowledge that you over
the citizens of New Mexico.
The same kind of.
Explanation valuation of the map
that the state does the
redistricting committee
provided.
There needs to be the I.
detailed and persuasive
explanation of why the C. R. C.
Max were not good enough.
And we always respect to the
Sanchez I haven't heard that.
And third.
I would like to encourage the
Senate to conducted this
operation of the maps.
In the spirit and within the
spirit and the letter of the
open meetings act.
And I don't understand why the
senator decided to disregard not
one but all three of those
fairly simple principle.
Far from considering the maps of
the State Garcia I haven't even
seen the majority is this
legislation.
I'm not a lawyer Mr chair
members of the committee.
At first glance that seems like.
the simple violation of the
wording of the statute that this
legislature passed not even a
year ago.
When was the last time and
interim committee produced six
bills for consideration in the
Senate refused not only to hear
that but even introduced the.
You know if you can we
appreciate can wrap it up what
we do have time to consider
regards to Matt.
I'm disappointed because as a
member of the Democratic Party I
subscribe to this platform the
Democratic Party which pledges
to fight partisan
gerrymandering.
And I just checked the wording
that place doesn't say will
I did only when Republicans do
it.
And this map scores worse than
any of the CRC maps on virtually
every objective measure of
pardon by thank you very much
thank you for your comments this
bill.
Great for okay so.
On I don't see anyone else dying
to be wrecked okay yes thank
you.
You spoke yesterday right this
is just for people that didn't
speak I'm sorry my bad my bad.
My apologies no no no no please
enough of that I don't
appreciate that.
Thank you.
Good morning share that members
of.
Members of the committee I'm
here on behalf of the people's
Matt peoples have them fading.
And we were can you tell us who
you are my name is the one that
pronounce loudly ADA thank you
everybody.
And we had being part of the
campaign thank you over a
hundred forty eight grassroots
interactions across the state.
We participate conventional you
through the whole CSC process.
Having two hundred eighty three
testimonies on record.
Across the state.
We believe about the CSC
process.
That's why we participate.
we won acknowledge just the
Chavis to provide us
interpretation in the places.
Provide us the space and even
this affects for our members
across the state Senator
Stewart.
I'm part of that process.
We're working families across
the state.
That's what I thought CSE
meeting.
They have to be committed for
over seven hours.
The worksheet.
That's commitment right.
That are working before re
engaging in the call press.
Because we believe.
The mobile it the more I see
should be working for I'm by the
beach.
And this process that we engage.
He came up the people's maps.
The land map but it.
Concept map eight.
Thank you all right David I have
packed all that recommendation.
We acknowledge Senate bill one.
that tackle.
The principles.
Also most of what we're
community express life cell but
the pharmacy the to.
Because they feel Ephraim unity
feed there is with the relatives
in this southern New Mexico.
We these bill also acknowledge
the representation of the
southeast is really asking.
For more than one
Representative.
Advocating for the issues right.
What is the other people's
money.
Right now we want to open these
conversations.
I move forward what what do you
see what these girls will look
like.
As we call in and remain so what
is the matter.
That he impressed when they to
the city there's but at the same
time as the holes.
The people's map that is going
to map H..
We do all know that we are in
that time line we do know that
we have limited access
Representative that we left
Google less for you all to be in
the seats we know that that we
have that hi we you'll in the
whole some young.
But I encourage you to.
In the map phone set eight the
people so much he went on the
whole CSC process because moving
forward on the floor there's
room for change and of course as
the Senate field maybe we'll
root for change but I do believe
that whatever you pass.
To the committee don't really
powerful the principal.
All four.
Over people's back.
Thank you thank you thank you so
much it's very well stated okay
so at this moment I think we're
good we can move on we got a lot
to the tend to this morning
really appreciate you know this
public comment it's really been
important for us as legislators
no speaking for myself just
really helps to hear from from
folks just out there in our
beautiful state so with that I I
will I want to go to senator
Morris
Senator Baca because I believe
we have we have a different
proposal that needs to be
introduced and so forth.
Yes.
Sorry Mr chairman I apologize
I'm a little bit late I was
getting the COVID thing done so.
Anyway I'm just a question I
apologize did you allow folks on
soon to testify say a few words
this morning all don't know
because we we had that very full
meeting yesterday and we're
pressed for time and we have
other other you know business
morning so yes because I know
that there are a few folks who
had not testified yes right
right here so we don't have the
capability of my apologies to
that okay all right I just want
I just needed clarification
thank you I apologize Mr
chairman members.
because you were not here with
us at the time we did recognize
that everybody who's here today
was here yesterday for the
committee purposes in other
words I think everybody but it's
on this committee was in the
rules committee yesterday I'm
looking at you and and I'm
trying to confirm that by your
way for your eyes but I believe
I believe you I believe the the
other members the committee here
so I just encourage the chair of
the center on the to avoid
redundancy to the extent we
could that's kind of what we
were doing in terms of
formatting today okay and Mr
Chairman the only reason why I
ask is there some folks from up
north that I know specifically
that we're not here yesterday
and they were waiting on soon to
have a chance to say a few words
about some of their concerns so
I just was wondering no I
totally understand and our
policies.
Thank you okay so and so Senator
Baca.
Your bill's.
Thank you Mr chair of siderite
if I present from right here yes
okay Mr chair what I have for
you is
of the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill number one and but
essentially what it does is it
it re combines some of the
communities of interest Mr
communicate here a lot of yeah
can you hold on just a second
for us to get the maps passed
out to us so we can do as you do
with that.
Senator the the two oh two
number I can pull it up on the
screen.
Six eight zero.
Thank you.
And the just so thank Mr well
that's been passed out just to
follow up.
On something that several
officials say when I walk back
and.
Is that well well I know we
don't want to be repetitive
public comments
One of the things that Senator
do it reminded me of when I
conferred with her yesterday at
one point was we only do this
once every ten years.
So we should probably allows us
public comment as possible
so that people can wear.
Thank you senator.
Right.
Thank you Mr chair and hope
everybody has their Matt now
what this does is it it includes
some it of some changes that
were.
Re reconfigure portions of the
west side of Albuquerque and
Valencia County to include some
of the precincts invalid to
county to to rejoin
of that portion of of central
Valencia where in the previous
map that was divided by by
the CD one CD to bear here it it
also restores the west side of
Albuquerque to of the greater
Albuquerque area and as as far
as voting concerns it has little
effect on
any any of the issues that were
presented that were of concern
such as Hispanic representation
remains almost identical to to
what it was prior
but what it does is it puts
those portions of Albuquerque
with that with the more similar
interest in the same voting
district as well as as combined
to another portion of land to
County with with their neighbors
down there of the ability County
is a bedroom community of
Albuquerque certainly its own
community of interest and is
completely separated from
Albuquerque bias letter pueblo
of which essentially creates
almost a natural border between
the Mexican metropolitan area
and more rural area of land to
the county.
and that's the that's what I
have for you and with that I'm
happy to take questions on
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute one.
Okay all right thank you so
before we go to the committee
for discussion of public comment
I know this is about this brand
new first time we're seeing this
but
anyone in the audience that
wants to comment on this map
that's been proposed by Senator
Baca.
And if not let's go to go to the
committee
about this from the yeah this
time Senator Sanchez is that a
friendly amendment for not Mr
Chairman is not okay thank you.
So discussion of the actual
bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
thank you Senator Baca for of
bringing this.
Access to look at different
perspectives I am curious as we
look at the Valencia.
County part does this follow I
know that in the in the Senate
maps we had the native American
and consensus plan that went
down Valencia County.
and
wondering does this follow the
same line.
That is that is followed in the
mid American consensus maps on
the on the state Senate.
Districts I when you refer to
line Mr chair do refer to
percentage of percentage of
native American participation
within the district or the
actual boundary line of attack
but the actual boundary line of
a kind of what we have right now
between district twenty nine and
thirty well as you it Mr chair
if there there is some change to
that obviously if we're talking
about actual boundary lines the
the map gets altered and so
therefore does the boundary
about what this does do is it it
it preserves the percentages
that were introduced by the the
Senate Bill what one which was
Senator about this bill but
primarily the goal here was to
keep a larger portion of land to
County intact for voting
purposes since that community is
distinctly different
excuse us did not been
Albuquerque metro which is on
the west side and so this
combines parts of Albuquerque
metro west side and in addition
of actually accomplishes the
task of keeping Valencia County
together as well.
Okay to a larger degree anyway
and then does this make any
changes in the in the hops Ortiz
at early this it does not Mr
chair.
That.
And then as it comes up in the
Albuquerque around some point
Boulevard is that.
Is that a modification from
district one as well do you know
your off hand I would say no of
the.
Okay cool.
I thank you Mr thank you.
Anyone else want to.
With any questions I I can jump
in the front Senator what is the
voter performance of this of
this bill what was this about
this at oh sorry yes.
I think chairman are could have
questions when when you read
recognizes yes please Senator
Baca all occur with the summary
so to start all over so it's in
front of me to be flip about
that and or or come across the
this is the appointed I do
appreciate you putting work into
this it's a it's a complicated
task as I'm sure you learned
along the way
if you could focus on your
particular part of the state for
a moment with me for a the
division line between CD one and
CD two because it comes down
through state is led a.
Los Lunas location was in the
land what what what is there are
you dividing those two districts
along the interstate references
I'm sorry with the magnification
level I can't tell we're drawing
the line.
Between CD one CD two.
What what is the but what we're
using for that boundary is a
road has it highways into rivers
and it's it's the river Mr
chair.
So C. wanted to to a divided by
the Rio Grande them that's
correct.
And so is there part of Los
Lunas on both sides of the river
there is part of legislators on
both sides of the river as well
as Bosque farms okay so this map
would divide the communities of
Los Lunas into two congressional
district is that right
essentially it would combine a
larger portion of Alexia County.
And I appreciate that central to
my question was different my
question was this your proposed
map would take the community of
Los Lunas and divided between
half four productions I happened
part of those lives would be in
CD one and half and part of a of
of of those things would be in
CD two under your proposal is
that right.
Under this proposal yes it would
be divided to a certain degree
but it would incorporate a
larger portion of the community
as a whole as we all know Mr
chair of these communities are
made up of tightly knit smaller
community so no a new example of
this would be obviously no loss
Chavis also mission cypress
gardens looseness busty farms
but also all line within seven
or eight miles of each other Mr
chair so when you talk about a
division yes although there may
be a division within the
municipality however the larger
community is kept more intact by
the most by this proposal.
Thank you Mr Mr Senator and Mr
chairman of we under this
proposed map as I read it also
this would split up the
community of Los Chavez between
CD one and CD two is that right
currently the the map of the the
the status quo map that you
presented and a cult status quo
from obviously from rules not
for how it's important right now
she shows exactly the same thing
that same division in less
Chavis so in that regard Mister
chairman Senator your map is
identical to this map thank you
Mr chairman but but Mister
twenty make sure that the the
the question lance Michael my
questions answered which is your
proposed map would also divide
the community of of Los Chavis
in part in the CD one and part
into city to as of right it
would remain the same as your
map Mr chair so programs.
uncomfortable yes but yes
nonetheless as comfortable as it
is with your.
Structure running
it's probably pretty obvious but
the let me just make it a little
bit of work we do more clear
your proposed map would put part
of the community but when into
CD one part of the committee of
the land and to see the two is
that right identical again to
your map Mr chair and so again
my column yes true center well
yes it's true there is no change
on my part I think is pretty
self evident which is the
criticism at various times on
various maps is we're splitting
a single community in a
congressional mapping into a
different districts and I trust
that you found the same
difficulty that I did in
developing my map and plan which
is it's very difficult to do
this without doing that in times
and in fact this proposed
committee so does exactly the
same venues you pointed out as
as a Senate bill one does which
is does the rights of
communities and included the
including in this case divide
some of the committees that are
closest to you and your home of
the Los Lunas job is in the land
and and I'm simply a Mr chairman
members committees simply
recognizing that I know that's
probably less than ideal for you
Senator I know you probably
wouldn't want to do that two and
I look for the opportunity not
to do that but but nonetheless
even this committee set up does
exactly the same thing that
there was criticism of in the
rules committee with committees
like hops for example there's a
criticism for for part of a
Hobbs being in CD one and and
part of I'm sorry part of it in
a CD two and CD three affinity
so of this gentleman I just
wanted to try and demonstrate
that even under the and I I've
only really begun to look this
up here in a moment chairman
very short order but but even
this map and I'm sure the
Senators good effort thanks is
no the communities and in his
own part of the state and
divides them into two different
congressional districts.
Thank you Mr chair and I just to
respond to that it's certainly
does blah blah what I would
point out again with the with
the the Senate bill one versus
this committee substitute Mr
chair is although it maintains
and maintains mind you it
doesn't divide anything
additional to what the good
senator has presented already
you're really just combines part
of that community to a larger
degree so we're maintaining much
of what you do and I thought
this would be Mr chair a
reasonable compromise honestly
but an improvement over the
original bill just to the fact
that if we're able to grab that
extra portion of the community
at large in Valencia County to
keep them with each other so
while it does not change but
maintain some of the divisions
that the original bill presented
by yourself Mr chair it does in
fact improve upon that by adding
some precincts.
Mr Miller Candace what what last
the question for us and of our
government with regard to the
committee pods which referred to
earlier again there's been some
criticism of Senate bill one
provided the committee Bob's
this does exactly the same thing
is that right.
not in Hobbs.
Mr chairman center preps and
misreading something I'm looking
at these pages are on numbers
does not seem to be but I'm
looking at the enlargement of
the committee of Hobbs.
On this proposed committee
substitute.
And unless I'm in communion more
extra sure yes Mr chair Senator
the if you can look at the
screen so this is the current
substitute and then the Green
Line is SB one so the committee
substitute still splits Hobbs
just in a different place than
SB one.
Yes it does have that likeness
mmhm yes thank you Mr Mr
Chairman center yeah so I've
basically because again I I
understand Senator Kernan others
yesterday you all were present
objection for dividing the
committee pods between two
congressional districts this
does the same thing just in a
different place but it's still
it'll stop with part of how to
the see the two part of housing
to see the three.
Mr chair and senator that's
correct but you know in my
philosophy Mr chair is reducing
the amount of wrongs is actually
an improvement and that's what I
think this substitute does Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative given
all of this is just a once again
illustrate this is not easy to
do and I know in your ideal
world we wouldn't have Hobbs in
one district or the other I know
that would probably be a goal of
yours and it's a little money
and yet this committee
substitute does not accomplish
that.
I'm happy to work with with you
Mr chairman combining hops if
you'd like to do that.
What
I once again be happy to do it
if if there's a way to do it all
right thank you Mr chairman
thank you
other questions from any members
yes Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair and I think
you know to clarify some of the
confusion I think there was an
attempt to make it seem somehow
that this map that we're
considering now is you know on a
map that state senator Bach of
intentionally split up
communities but the reality is
we can count in the if if we put
in a map that in split Hobbs
right indeed those things we
know we're going to go
and so we're just trying to work
in a bipartisan way to make some
little tweaks and improvements I
think is the intent and and and
the communities are split
because this is the map that we
have to work off of and so
instead of doing amendments
which is what you know the the
normal way you do it it's just a
lot easier to do a committee set
up and so we're just working
with what what we got out of
rules and and trying to make
those because that seems to be
like the the horse that's
running around the track so
we're gonna try to work in a
bipartisan way and see if we
can't to unify as many
communities as we can and keep
the deviation as close as
possible so I think you know if
that's consider that's that's
the way I see it is working with
the this is not the map that
that I would obviously put up
I did play with a little bit.
but you know I I know exactly
where it's gonna be filed if if
I brought that one forward so in
instead of waste in the
committee's time we can work
with this what we have in front
of us and make a few tweaks and
and come up with something more
bipartisan thank you thank you
so.
Not I have a question what is
the voter performance not that
that matters at all but
You know if.
That's a joke since it doesn't
matter.
To.
the voter performances almost
identical to its other Hispanic
the Hispanic representation is
almost identical in terms of are
the.
Performance test.
Isn't your thing out is it
Let me let me go all go over
okay so dissonant general ways
okay so the the performance
measure prior to this and see
the one for instance
Paul.
Each year.
Senator and I have those numbers
if they can you promote please.
Thank you miss parks.
Lifesaver.
Thank you read them off well and
getting a month
so in the this of in the sub the
democratic performance district
one is fifty four point four
district two is fifty two point
five a district three is fifty
five point five in the
Republican performance obviously
is the reverse thank you thank
you.
A budget yes one last question.
I'm I'm looking at the map and
and and.
By geography on.
Let's see County is not the best
but none the less
Senator Baca does this does your
sap move you from CD one to see
city to from the two proposed.
Mister Mister chair I know it
keeps me and see to.
So you're at your city to live
in the same prior to as after
this Canadian system to see you
you have a set up to run for
Congress regardless of which I
just like you Mr chair.
the moves are generally sort of
Colorado.
Thank you thank you thank you
all is there a motion honest of
possible amendment we're looking
at fifty disincentive Baca in
the past.
There's a do not pass on Senate
bill wanted to pass on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
one for Senate bill one.
Senator Pirtle second.
Okay well at this point
let us.
The clerk shall call the roll on
the vote.
Yes.
Well because I object to the
move to Colorado.
Yeah.
If.
Yeah.
Now.
Senator.
Not.
Senator.
Okay so the
the cell fails.
So
But back on the bill.
Right yes Senator Moores.
Thank you Mr thank you so
chairman
yes I think when we talk about
the CRC maps you did a very good
job articulated why you did not
like the status quo map I think
you did a good job of that but
you never really explained why
you don't like the other two CRC
bills and and to be Frank I
contact the advocacy for took us
to our seats who who's going to
be introduced news bills I'd be
willing to introduce these bills
and I did hear back from and so
when I got here I found out that
they were being introduced I've
asked them to be drawn I'm
looking for for the opportunity
to have that debate the future
either on the floor and so we
can actually address the CRC
bills to address your concerns
from repent because I think you
think they deserve the respect
of these having that debate and
I said that yesterday why I
might ask Mister chair Mister
chair
that if the the status quo map
this year C. came up wasn't good
enough and you articulate that
world yes Sir in your opinion
why the other two map to see
Garcia came up did not deserve
to be introduced and debated and
that we went this route if you
just maybe go with that Justice
jobs's map first and then the
the people's map why or what the
self described of excel branded
as the people's map which I
think is a misnomer because
whatever we pass is gonna be the
people's map but a few other try
to brand that themselves.
I think chairman miss miss and I
appreciate that last comment
particularly because I was the
comment I made yesterday of
course is that not that I I also
reject labels that are
rhetorical in nature it because
of course in the and what we
pastor will be the people's not
the it may although you've
acknowledged that I guess to
give an explanation for why the
status quo Matt was unacceptable
let me just take a moment word
explain part of why and then
that hopefully will answer your
question but where the other us.
Review of target redistrict
commission maps were we're not
introduced by may you're you're
right in the Senator can
introduce any map they with and
of course barcode just give us
another alternate week we could.
Make ourselves dizzy by the
infinite number of possibilities
that that this process can take
us to and there really are an
infinite number of
possibilities.
The status quo map I think is
worth the the garage and that
the reason that that the I
rejected that relatively quickly
as the status quo map is a
reflection of our failure ten
years ago to come to an
agreement between the house the
Senate and the governor on a
congressional map in the end we
we left here unable to come up
with a congressional map at all.
And and ultimately left up to
the courts to decide I think
that's probably the least
desirous way to do redistricting
and what the because the court
simply look for the existing map
and try to change it and little
blue possible which means it's
going back effectively another
decade the last time there was
re districts so so what we have
here today in our home thirty
years later it is a map is based
on the just an effort to try to
maintain status quo that that of
course assumes that we got it
right twenty years ago thirty
years ago.
With regard to the with regard
the other maps the the honest
answer your question is I hi I
look to those maps
you're you're given labels and I
don't know with properly when
one of them is concept H. I
think is the way I refer to that
one which to me was where IBM
had to be in someplace so I I I
began with the first of all the
goal of being a sponsor of a map
that's the first challenge is to
who wants to do this so I begin
with that and then I took those
of those the proposed maps and
and that's the blue would be
closest to where I would find
out and so really direct to your
question Senator I did I did
make a purposeful effort to
reject any one of them I simply
look for one that I thought
would be closest to where we
want to go.
It's sort of from out.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
think that you know the CRC
process but I would not a
starter with H. myself and
and the the consensus kind of
coming out of C. or C. was
what's been label as the justice
Chavis map pass of the go sixty
one and I've talked to the of
the member one of the members
who voted against it and he
thought it was the the best map
to not should I should say that
that's that that wasn't as words
my politics was and that
but I think that's what the
studio that the came through
with a bipartisan support
Republicans Democrats and
independents and I do think that
we should have a conversation
about that map and I will be
bringing to the fore we have
this conversation so that that
that conversation to be had
because I think the CRC deserve
that respect of the legislative
process that we did deserves our
respect I'm gonna echo what I
said just today this is why we
need an independent
redistricting commission
I'll be introduce that again and
look forward to the sponsors who
sponsored that in the past
joining me in that once again
Senator Ivey Soto was really
helpful and spot right in that
last time we did a
constitutional amendment I think
this just proves why we need a
CRC because those get
to political are political and
this is coming from a
conservative Republican who
agrees with you on that issue
and I think we do approach to
our Republican of the Makhosi to
change the way we do this so
thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Mr thank you thank you
thank you.
I believe we have an amendment
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes thank you very much and and
while the members being passed
out let me just say Senator
Moores I was.
Firstly very hard yesterday that
you gave credit to write a
people into that mention my
name.
on the constitution of I thank
you for that to that.
sorry yesterday we had a little
conversation about subsection
C..
Which is I think the only place
we can do by amendment and up I
substitution.
this is
The language is is actually kind
of boilerplate language that
existed existing law actually
and the existing law provides
that if the board of county
commissions.
Splits a a precinct between two
more congressional districts.
That that that the votes.
Caster that districts shall not
be counted or canvas that seems
to be a little overly harsh and
and punishing the voters for
what they're county
commissioners have done.
and so I worked yesterday with
the Legislative Council I think
our ritual that was just right
subsection C..
but that
eight of
Our our section three of the
bill but subsection a of the
bill apparently is necessary and
also talk about existing law.
So in working with the for with
the Legislative Council what we
came up with for subsection B.
and let me read it since we have
people following along.
In the audience as well as at
home.
it says
the commissioner shall not
create increasing combine
precincts or just the boundaries
of any precinct in such manner
that present lies in more than
one congressional district a
county precinct map determined
not to be in compliance with the
subsection shall be rejected by
the secretary of state and
return to the proper kind of
clerk with a written statement
setting for those instances with
the county prison boundaries do
not comply that that way what we
have here is that if up what
kind of questions were to were
to do that then the secretary of
state would just simply send it
back to them and ask them to
adjust and fix it but it would
not actually disenfranchises
voters up so Mr Chairman that
would be my amendment to this
bill is there a second on the
amendment was seconded by
Senator direct.
Senator serve office do you
consider this a friendly
amendment Mr chairman I
encourage all members to support
this
the issue came up of course with
existing language that
disqualifies.
Both from a split precincts and
and we identified in connection
with this mapping it seems a
little bit out of out of sorts
with what we're doing here but
if it's been on the list is
required to tie in and when we
talked about it yesterday and
rules we had some subsequent
follow up and realize there
could be some real mischief here
where a politician could split
the precinct and thereby
disqualifying with voters from
the split precincts and so we
were very creative you can
decide which represents the
split and decide which will
serve you would be disqualifying
and and of course that's
mischief we would want to.
I'm sure nobody would take
advantage of that but
none the less it's it's it's
there and so the this misconduct
thanks Carmen issue that we
should take care of instruments
so it it's a it's a good fix I
hope everyone will support it.
Discussion on the amendment yes
Senator Moores thank you Mr the
Mr I'm shocked to hear that
politicians would correct some
mischief and dealing with
legislation so that that's news
to me quick question I don't see
our pro term in the room did we
have a committees committee
germane process if something was
germane during this this special
session what we do with the
other times we've come into
session at least I am sure are
pro tem um if you're that
question as you walked in Mr
chairman pro tem did we have a
committees committee process
this time dealing with Germanus
of bills that the that they were
rules remain or not we're on an
amendment but it is the
settlement and has to do madam
pro pro tem about county
commissioners
include persons that did we did
we have a committees committee
Germanus process this time R. Mr
Chairman no we did not because
redistricting maps are.
All germane.
We're we're in the process of
redistricting Mr then program
that would be my concern here is
that this isn't germane because
it doesn't deal with
redistricting or all about money
and if we're going to be here.
Hopefully for about thirty days
we can be there for started to
throw amendments out that are
germane to redistricting and our
call which is currently our task
while we're here we could be
here for awhile longer so if we
start adding things so Mr chair
Senator does this have a message
or anything as a report
communication of the governor's
office on this.
Thank you Mr a German Center
Moritz so this is
actually within the scope of the
bill as it was introduced.
in terms of subsection are for
section three of the bill
that deals with the with the
pressing designations and deals
with the with what happens if
the
of what kind of commission.
Split Representative between
congressional lines that is
already in the bill and all this
does is it says that the folks
that we're not gonna
disenfranchise voters Mr does
that it does not introduce a new
subject into the bill well the.
That that would be more
concerned Mister chair Mister
chair of rules you know the I
would argue that the if this is
your main them voter ID would be
to maybe we could have a floor
amendment and other things so I
think we as a body need to be
careful that as we move through
the session that were folks in a
redistricting how the governor
at the last minute through and
all that are for money so that
we can discuss that star plate
is actually pretty full during
the session I don't think we
really want to be open this up
to a lot of different issues as
we move forward that we we
should of that
gonna have a lot of bills are
good thank god for our so that I
could attach to this bill as it
moves forward to the floor that
would be quite fun and but I
don't think would be would be
celebrated Christmas Eve
together if we did that.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
thank you and one of.
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair is there any
reason just as a sponsor you
changed language for some reason
does more than one congressional
district equal to or more
congressional districts.
That that would be identical
language it is actually
different language I would has
the identical meaning.
If you would like to change it
back to two or more that is fine
no no Mister chair I I was just
curious if there was some intent
in that or what the purpose of
that a change in language was
hello leave it to you the it
means exactly the same thing
thank you Mr okay.
On that let us go to a vote on
proposed amendments
the clerk to call the roll.
Center yes.
Yes.
Representative yes ma'am
Senator.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
The amended bill back on the
bill.
We have a motion yes Senator
Steinborn store over there thank
you Mr chairman I'm moving to
pass on Senate bill one as
amended.
Thank you is there a second
seconded by Senator do it.
Yes.
At the center for.
Just just a comment we don't
want to be
Additive so if you want to
listen to something quite
comically and within the
yesterday's meeting but
Anyway you know something came
to me after our our meeting in
rules and
I was thinking about it last
night in in it's the fact that
you know we say we want to we
need to change.
CD to to make it more
competitive and I think back
just in in my life in.
I guess I've been voting now for
eighteen years it doesn't quite
seem like they've been voting
that long but been voting for
quite awhile and I start
thinking back and I look at the
representation that we've had in
CD two and this perception that
it's it's only a Republican
district or somehow Republican
stronghold.
And we we witnessed Hary teak
former congressman Terry teak
pull off a very strong victory.
In CD two we also witnessed
former congresswoman
small do the same exact thing.
And you know it got me thinking
it it's not.
Party there with regard to CD to
we're we're actually quite open
to
both parties as long as you
align with our values and and
you represent the people.
And I think what the what.
What we really have to
understand is that it's not the
map it's the fact that when
people go to Washington they're
not allowed to vote their
district.
You know we have the the the the
parties there that put their
thumbs on these these poor
representatives and and put them
in a hard spot that says if you
don't vote a certain way even
though goes against your
district you're not gonna get
the money to run for reelection.
And I think that's really the
issue It at head at hand here is
that you know whenever we put
party over people.
You end up with Congress people
that don't stay in office very
long because they don't listen
to the people in people will
replace you if you don't listen
to them and so I think what
we're doing here is we're
creating a map that's going to
send three people to Congress
and ensure that they don't have
to listen to to their
constituents.
you know because we're trying to
solve a problem that is really
created from.
That policy just not allowing
Congress people devote their
districts I think that's
something that's that's been
lost in Washington for quite
some time
And I feel we're losing it here
even in in the state legislature
and I think that's it's it's
something that should concern
everyone especially the public.
That we start to be so partisan
that we will party instead of
our our our constituents we put
party over people.
And I and I really think that's
YCT to teens to go Republican.
You know I think I think
Representative small could have
stayed for a long time if they
would have allowed her to voter
district.
but I think she was put in a
position that she felt like she
had to tow the line because they
find ways to push in and and
pressure you to vote a certain
way.
And it is unfortunate because
You know from her campaign she
she really did seem like some of
those are Representative the
district well.
And so I was disappointed with
that but I think that's the
that's the real issue here today
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you thank you
okay I've just been informed
that technically we're able to
do this soon for public comment
so before we go to the vote
we're gonna do public comment we
don't want to the shut out any
of these forces that are so
important in our process my
apologies as the chair of I was
under the impression that we
didn't have the capability to do
it but I was wrong so
the gentleman that just they
just they just fix the problem
so okay yes all right some we
fix the problem so please bear
with me
We're we're looking at is the
folks who so eloquently
testified yesterday and we're
looking for new new names on
this last.
So despair with us technically
we're just gonna stand in place.
Okay so we're gonna start with
thank you again for your
patience we're gonna start with
politics are C. I..
And up to the to the.
At the most two minutes Hey your
your comments are very important
please.
The knowledge our time
consideration the two minutes.
Thank you Paula Garcia
Representative Pala I know you.
Thank you yes I can hear a lot
of those.
Session.
To the surprise.
Yes.
Occasions.
Process.
It's not just that we're
playing.
Support.
As a professional.
Yes.
Difficult
to have a point.
The presentation of our twice.
It's going to.
Teens.
This.
The purpose of districts but.
The statistics ten times.
I I.
Yes I'm not so.
I Hispanic percentage but it's a
cultural service.
And Senator.
Mexico
This legislative process
especially.
With
of.
This
Changes to this.
District.
Check.
To to
Changed for so long.
Consideration Mr chairman thank
the board now next up more rain
squall run.
You know she she yes I guess she
testified yesterday I would not
next up we have.
Carla with a C. from
Albuquerque.
The sun Tax.
Contact.
New Mexico state.
I appreciate the opportunity
that you have we are open for
public comment will.
We're not able to attend.
Representative Mexico business
coalition.
Organization that focuses on
federal policy and business
environment.
Level Mexicans.
Redistricting process.
for business.
As for the tires
who cares about the integrity of
the election process.
We.
The current.
going to be voting on the.
And for.
Since that that article by some
of the people that are in the
room today that number of
Chester.
Them
have some comments that Schmidt
and.
Raul.
Yes Representative
to.
A map of the.
Thank you for.
Thank you thank you Mr Senator
next we have John block.
We have John blocked on the
line.
Yes very well.
Mr chair.
John.
Our.
Mexicans this is that based on.
Tension.
District the state.
Districts purchased half of that
hybrid does Thomson this is
just.
Extreme partisan.
To help.
Alright which is strange.
Just to check and yes.
Percent.
Representative sure that
possible to construct a wrecked.
The Congress.
It's possible.
Congress first.
That stands.
So suppose this happens on this.
After that.
That the strips
district this.
Attempt to support that can
share of the district.
Can backfire.
And put to.
Congress so this is.
Two
myself but I'm not sure if.
Senate support that as well so I
just want to.
The consideration for.
This bill contains the Senate.
Thank you Mr black next we have
you'll Landa.
We know why.
Okay moving on next we have
Adelante.
Those with minute okay now we
hear you loud and clear now.
I'm hoping that you will hear me
loud and clear I'm very
concerned that I just learned
about this yesterday as most of
the members of the public do I.
Appreciate.
I don't know that was that and
and but I should take it as
that.
That you will listen to the
voices of us here in especially
in New Mexico and throughout New
Mexico about the challenges the
drastic changes that is the one
will bring to CD.
Definitely take over the voice
and representation of our
traditional land based Hispanic
communities of northern New
Mexico.
Representative I.
Population our communities of
interest that I am a
representative of as I'm as they
could commissioner hearing Dixon
execrable please listen to the
voice of the people here we must
count thank you thank you thank
you okay so next we have I don't
want to.
I have.
Stop.
Question.
In spite
of the session.
The question is.
So
the stripping process
Background training this.
Clemente Sanchez.
Comment from.
The state.
Time fashion.
As well as the time.
Speaker.
All.
Comments.
Yes Representative everyone.
I don't think the Senators those
public comments and I would
encourage them to.
Sure.
Is.
I.
Support is assumed I appreciate.
It's coming.
This also some apps at some
point.
So.
To
this point
Should have.
C.
Shannon cursor.
This I personally.
This call was just Chattfield
smacked.
I do not support this.
Caucus concession napa's best.
Senate.
This
per.
And some portion.
Three Democrats.
District was not.
Not.
Sen.
That's thank you thank you so
much thank you.
Of a one a representative from
other Lante I didn't get a whole
new she.
Yeah.
Yes what is your name again
thank you.
This.
The state.
Some.
Current.
Of the progressive caucus.
Mexico thank you Sir thank you I
can get their endorsement
actually.
One of the emphasis on that you
know and and and if there's any
question about the the
bipartisan nature of this thing
and like I said you're you're
getting criticism from those
from the left and criticism from
the right that probably in my
experience means is just right.
Thank you senator so next up we
have Martin leisure.
We can area.
Thank you Representative fixing
the problem being able to have
the public comment here thank
you have a.
The comments on on transparency
the hard this year Santa Fe.
Testified.
Those.
Just maybe this is a very
diverse to.
I have a.
But the Hispanics from from.
Sure the card is the business
to.
The the Senator well and that
thanks for a great mix of the
dentures and what.
Well as well as
destroys.
This for all of the school
district also
not so much sentiment but also
in the Senate.
Have.
Large districts understand are
hard
to Representative.
Is.
This.
District.
From Gallup.
To Roswell.
What the concerns are.
A good
to have Representative
Representative constituents also
the constituencies from patch
to address.
Sure
thank.
That is not been.
Okay.
From the public.
This building so.
Right.
Eight.
Our
latest post.
Thank you Martin now we have
Representative the health.
I believe this last one.
Good morning Mr chair thank you
for the opportunity to speak and
I want to thank sponsored post
drive for bringing this forward.
I only have New Mexicos percent
based on.
The New Mexico secretary
commission come from across.
support of SB one because we
make significant changes to
congressional district.
right with some of our all right
this in the north some of the
southeastern the first part of
the state.
That it
Mr box fire in the future.
all of our brothers to the south
that sometimes that our issues
are not same on on in line a lot
more traditional.
Isn't trying what we have that
in order part of our state and I
don't
on in line with southeastern
part of the state.
Watership to make sure that
south eastern part of the state
it's a good the servers we
therefore watersheds enough.
Just
Opposition here.
Traditional.
It did it but please consider us
up and.
In this loss of trunks.
Equus increase will be
You have.
What's the sixty three we have
an official pass there was a
motion as amended yes.
Thank you and thanks everyone
for your patience and and again
this is just our democracy at
work and we will continue to do
the best we can thank you so
much we can always do better
can't we yes.
Yes that's right thank you thank
you again.
Thanks for the offer.
I'm serious.
The budget director.
Do your best to protect.
Everything was.
I think.
Ma'am.
The.
Yeah.
Ma'am.
Some.
And
We.
The.
And.
There's.
