It's
crystal. Hey, Crystal.
Sure
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Having
voted in the majority on House
Bill 149, I ask for
reconsideration it's for it to
be the next order of business.
So any objection? There being no
objection.
Senate Bill 149, uh,
representative Ferrari.
And others, good to see you back
here again. Um, so that everyone
is clear what is going on here.
This particular bill was voted
out by the committee with some
amendments I think that are
doing but all those uh invert uh
error in the office, we uh had
the committee report go out
without those amendments. So
that's the way the committee
report went out and we want to
correct that number one and not
do that on the floor also, since
that time, uh, Senator Wirth,
and I think maybe what Senator
Do have
Also.
spent a lot of time and energy
looking at additional amendments
and so we're gonna, we're gonna
uh talk about trying to put
those on here as well too and
see if there's support for doing
so. That's why it's the next
sort of business, so
representative, I don't know
that we need to go back to any
of you all, we did, we did
already vote on Senator Doig's
amendments. I don't know what
the procedure is, we've already
approved them by the committee.
I think we just need to get a
different committee report, uh,
reported out. So, is there any
objection to that, to making
sure that the committee report
came out of the committee with
Senator Doe's amendments.
Anyone at all. All right, so
we're gonna correct the
committee report in that regard.
And then Senator Worth you got.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me
just, uh,
Kind of put it in context first
and then I'll move it for
discussion, or I may move for
discussion first. Uh, I move.
Senate.
This proposed amendment
0.232035.1 to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 149 as amended for
discussion.
Yeah, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
So,
Uh, I spent a lot of time
thinking about this after our
last hearing, uh, there was a
representation during the
hearing about my former law
partner and current chief judge
of the first judicial District,
Judge Beeide.
Uh, being part of the working
group, and so I was kind of
looking into
The whole supported
decision-making concept. I found
that there's a, there actually
is a new uniform law on this, so
the courts are definitely moving
in this direction, and I think
the new uniform law is something
we should certainly consider
down the road. It basically went
on guardianship is in front of
the judge, it's going to create
a process whereby the judge can
consider, uh, to do something
that's less restrictive, which
is exactly what you all were
doing. Uh, I then I spoke to, to
Judge Beeide Sunday morning. Uh,
he confirmed that he was.
as part of the working group,
but that had not been on that
for a couple of years and was
not did not reviewed the, the
proposed legislation. I did
review with him some ideas,
which he said, well, that makes
total sense. Uh, he then
confirmed with the Chief
Justice, um, who basically the
two of them came to see me this
morning, and we sat down and
went through some different
things with the Chief Justice
help with craft some proposed
amendments, so that's what these
do. So I think the best thing
for me to do is just go, I want
to make sure you all.
had these, I know what's going
on. I wasn't planning on being
in committee this afternoon. I
was actually going to do these
on the floor, um, you know, as
the floor leader, it's a tricky
thing when you have a bill like
this that I felt still needed
more work, you know, I could
just not hear it, but I didn't
want to do that because this is
important and I know
representative you worked hard
on.
Uh, Mr. McCoy, you've been
working hard on this secretary,
and so let me just walk through
these and then we can get your
comments on them. Uh, number
one, on page 3 line 7 and 8
strike may be in any form. This
is this related relates to the
supported decision-making
agreement itself, and after lots
of discussion, I thought maybe I
even drafting a form to add to
this, but instead, the Chief
Justice, we came up with
Instead of that, it shall be in
a form promulgated by the
Supreme Court, that basically
the Supreme Court will do the
hearing on the form. I think it
is very important to have a
uniform form like we do for the
statutory, uh, uniform statutory
power of attorney and for
uniform healthcare decisions.
There's a form in the statute
books, because again, I realize
you've got a segment of this
community, but for all of us
that practice in this area,
you're gonna have all kinds of
different agreements without the
forum and the Chief Justice
thought that made sense.
Uh-huh. The 2nd Amendment on
page 4 line 3, currently, this
says that each party to support
a decision-making agreement
shall sign the agreement in the
presence of at least 2 witnesses
or a notary public. Uh, this
changes it to two witnesses, it
strikes or and says whose
signature shall be acknowledged
by the notary public. In other
words, you got to bring the two
witnesses to the notary public,
which is how we do, that's the
formality we use with a will
currently, uh, you
bring the two witnesses in to
sign that, uh, on page 4, lines
6 and 7.
Uh
This deals with the issue of
presumption of capacity, and
right now it states that on,
I'll read the sentence on line
5, all decision makers are
presumed to have capacity and to
be capable of managing their
affairs unless otherwise
determined by a court. That
basically means that every time
someone begins to lose capacity,
you're gonna have to go to court
and file a case to to determine
that. That's not what we do
under the Uniform healthcare
powers of attorney, uh, and
typically what you do is you
defer to that person's.
Primary caregiver, not, not
physician, but primary
practitioner. So I just took the
language out of the other.
Uniform laws on on powers of
attorney and so we we strike
unless otherwise determined by a
court and insert in lieu
thereof, until such time as the
decision maker's primary care
practitioner and one other
health professional or a court
determined that the decision
makers unable to make the
decision maker's own decisions.
I think that's consistent and I
think that will save.
folks are huge.
hassle of having to go to court
to do a capacity determination
when really all you need and
what, what I certainly do with
with using the uniform, power of
attorney health care is have
that language, so you get, if
the person, their primary uh
practitioner is determines they
don't have capacity and then you
get one other person as a check,
it's an option. Instead of, you
can still go to court if you
want to. So that's what that
does. On page 4, I'm sorry, page
5 line 4
We just added a couple of
additional, we're going to add a
couple of additional uh
requirements for a supporter,
and I know, I think the chair
wants to talk about some of
these, so we strike the end, and
then we add a new 6 and 7.
Number 6, I think is super
important, the Chief Justice
said, this has got to be in
there. Arizona does this, uh,
basically as a supporter shall
not receive compensation as a
result of the supporters' duties
under supported decision-making
agreement.
He basically said this was the
huge issue with guardianships,
if they're getting paid, you're
gonna need to have reports to
the court, you're gonna need to
have accountings, you create a
whole another need for an
overlay, and so he
said this makes sense. This is
what Arizona did as well. Uh,
and then number 7, stop serving
as a supporter of the supporter
questions the capacity of the
decision maker to continue
making decisions, and we can
talk about that one, but I think
it's when somebody is in that
transition, um, and, and uh, and
obviously the
They have to have capacity to be
able to do this, but if the if
the um supporter begins to see
things changing, then there'll
be a discussion with that
person's uh.
Healthcare team, but you don't
want decisions being made if
that supporter, and again this
came straight from Arizona's
statute passed in 2023.
Uh, in the final two things are
on page 5,
between lines, uh, 10 and 11,
we're adding two additional
things that supporters
prohibited from doing so a new
number 2, which is signing legal
documents on behalf of the
decision maker. I think that's
somewhat implied in making
decisions on behalf, but we want
to make sure they're not signing
legal documents again came right
from Arizona and then 3 binding
the decision maker to make a
legal.
Finding the decision maker to a
legal agreement. So again, just
to make it very clear, this is
not a power of attorney. And so
you don't want that person doing
that, uh, and visiting with the
Chief Justice, um, I think what
he's envisioning and what the
courts will do is when they
promulgate the form, uh, in both
of our uniform power of attorney
section, there's actually a
really good explanation upfront
about what we're doing, that
folks should also consult with a
lawyer if they have questions,
but I think
We can add into that when that
gets promulgated, the big
concern I had, which is making
it clear this is not in lieu of
powers of attorney, and you
really should do all of the
above, and so,
Chief Justice was receptive to
this, and I think it is
consistent certainly with their
work on the task force, and so
that's the reason and I, and
again, I apologize we're doing
this on super I can't believe
I'm drafting, working on bills,
but it, but it's important
enough that I
Got up super early on Sunday to
try and do something and then
the, the judges took it
seriously and wanted to be part
of it. So that's what the Mend
does, Mr. Chair.
Oh
Thank you for your, Mr. Chair
and thank you, um, uh, majority
or leader worse for your efforts
on this, and I will um refer to
um
My experts, Miss McCoy and um
the secretary for comments.
Don't worry. It's gonna be OK I
don't know why she's handing it
to me. Um, Mr. Chair, and, and
Senator, I think, uh, absolutely
agree with these. I think there
are a few places we might ask if
you'd consider, um, for example,
uh, and Alice can speak a little
in more detail, but the language
you pulled directly from the
healthcare decision making Act,
there was some additional
language in there that we think
should be included as well, for
example, um, and then I think
Alice would
speak to a few things as far as
in the context of New Mexico
compared to Arizona, so this,
um, because I'm gonna propose
some amendments to that
amendments as well. Sounds like
you may have amendments that so
it's just, I think the cleanest
way to do this is let's see if
we're gonna adopt the amendment.
I think we will, and then we'll
start trying to maybe tinker
with that a little bit around
the edges, but let's start,
let's start there. So I, I hear
you all getting a qualified
endorsement for the amendments
and um you're both looking at me
like you're deer in the
headlights, but uh
Mr. Chair, may I offer a few
comments. Is this a good
opportunity for that? are you
opposed to amendments, OK.
Um
Uh,
I'd like to make some.
OK, uh, uh, well, again, my
question was whether you
consider the amendments
favorable or unfavorable, and so
I, I think that's generally a
yes or no question, but I think
the question is it possible
tweaks, yeah.
Mr. Chair and uh majority
leader,
we don't accept them fully
unless there are some tweets,
and we'd love to.
OK. And I think we'll be
friendly. All right, well, we'll
consider it then and not support
it uh right now at this time
anyway, how's that? And so, um,
uh, I'll, I'll think probably
the best thing to do is have you
tell us why you don't support
the amendments, and then we'll
go to the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, Mr.
Leader, thank you so much for
all of the thought and time and
work put into this particular
bill, um,
So going through them very
quickly, um,
I did want to point out that it
is a very good idea, agreed that
we should have some kind of
statutory form in place, um,
however, neither in the
power of attorney or the uniform
decision making act are those
forms mandatory, they are model
forms, um, and so we would
propose that they would also be
model forms again promulgated by
the Supreme Court, but model
forms are not mandatory forms,
as this is a less restrictive
intervention than the other two,
and those two do not have
mandatory. Um, the
The second issue on
The uh capacity, there is
additional language in the
uniform healthcare decisions
Making Act, um, under the
capacity.
Um, section and in the capacity
section it states, uh, not only
The PCP and other qualified
healthcare professional, I think
qualified is a very important
word there. It carries a lot of
weight. Um, it's also the same
term qualified healthcare
professional that we use in
guardianship law and the probate
code. Um, additionally, it says
if the lack of capacity is
determined to exist because of
mental illness or developmental
disability, one of the qualified
healthcare professionals shall
be a person who's training and
expertise aid in the assessment
of function.
functional impairments, and we
would also suggest, because this
is support decision making with
uh even with the use of decision
making supports.
And so that that would be um our
proposal for uh this particular
piece of amendments, just in
addition, um, but it, it follows
the spirit of the amendments.
Um, and finally on the last two
pieces, um, one of our, um,
Ambassadors, uh, her name is
Morgan, and um she couldn't be
here today. Um, it was a little
too last minute for her to call
in, but she and her mother, um,
have been practicing to the best
of their ability because she is
her mom, there is that
relationship there, some sort of
supported decision making. And
one of Morgan's biggest concerns
in her life is that um one day
her mom's not gonna be there.
Her mom had shared the exact
same concern and, you know, she
would like to have people
who are trained in how to do
supporting well under this
scheme, and you know who are
actually professionals. And so
in her perfect world one day,
which does not exist today, but
I hope one day will. Um, we
would have a workforce of
supporters rather than um
guardians because these
guardians are making decisions
for people, whereas we want
supporters who know how to
support self-determination to
know how to give people their,
you know, right to make choices,
those.
I want to stay very focused on
the amendment, right? So I
understand there's a lot of
goals, aspirations and plans in
the future, but we're on an
amendment, so could you stay
focused on the amendment,
please? Thank you.
so the, the proposal would be um
language such as just for
consideration, um, you know, a
supporter shall not provide
support for any decision in
which he or she has a direct or
not he or she in which they have
a direct financial interest or
something like that, but that's
just a proposal um for that.
just, just because, and I gave
Morgan's story just in the
background for why, you know,
we're proposing that, um, and
then the rest of the amendments
look good.
Are you suggesting there should
be an additional amendment to
what's in the amendment,
instead of, um, received
compensation, um, the language
would be, does not, does not
provide support for a decision
in which they have direct
financial interest.
Yeah, Mr. Jack, can I just
respond to those. So I'll start
with the latter first and, and
this caused a lot of issue with
the Chief Justice. This is what
got us into all the trouble we
guardianships and quite frankly,
I was part of one of those cases
with Desert State, and it's a
nightmare. My clients lost a ton
of money, uh, and again, we put
all the guard rails in and the
problem is if we're putting
compensation in without any
guard wass, it may be that we
get there with guard rails, but
I just, as we sat down this
morning, it was like, if we
don't have
rails in and there shouldn't be
compensation. So that was the
thinking there. I do think that
the other proposed change to
make sure that it's a qualified,
you know, with the primary care
practitioner, which obviously
will have an understanding of
the individual and one other
qualified health professional,
perhaps with training in
A, that seems fine to me, that
makes sense to me. Um, and or
the court. Remember, you can
always go back to the court, but
I think you're gonna like that,
that's a much better option for
folks. I just don't know what
the exact magic. I just added
after healthcare professional,
comma, with training in
And you had, there was a big
long, I think we should try and
I don't know how exactly we,
what the magic words would be to
kind of keep that clean.
Mr. Chair, uh,
Mr Le training and expertise.
Um
In the assessment of functional
impairment.
I think that's a fine change to
that.
Let's give Emily some specifics
to get to. Do you have this
amendment by any chance?
You have a copy of this
because I think what Senator
Worth is going to be doing is
gonna be amending his
amendments, so you've got to
want that, so it's on, it's in
number 3, on the 3rd, at the end
of the 3rd line after other at
the word qualify.
And then on the 4th line after
health professional after the
comma and with training and
experience.
In the, I can't read my own
writing in the blank of future
impairment, just how how what
were the words, uh, who's
training with training and
expertise in the assessment of
functional impairment.
And
they offer even with the use of
decision making supports.
Distance. I would just leave it
with training and experience in
the
Assessment of functional
impairment,
or a court.
So that I think gets you, make
sure that that, and I, I
appreciate that. We don't want
that, we don't want what I'm
creating to be abused, but I
just think this will give a much
better alternative. So that
makes sense to me, Mr. Chair, I
don't know how you want to do
the amendment to the amendment.
I'm just gonna show this is your
moment. I'm just gonna take your
amendment as, as you're changing
your, your amendment a little
bit, right?
And Emily's got it, right? So
because it's a house bill we're
gonna end up with the amendment
anyway, so.
Track
uh still discussion on that
proposed amendment, anything
else?
Uh, anything else on the
proposed amendment.
Mr. Mr. Leader, um, you didn't
weigh in on whether or not the
form could be um
A model form such as POA or
health healthcare decision
makings Act or whether it must
be mandatory because I think the
languages you propose it now, it
makes it a mandatory form.
Yeah, I mean, the way it's
drafted, and this is what I
discussed with the Chief
Justice.
What's the shall be in a form,
but I hear, I hear what you're
saying. I think the challenge is
I can't, there's no way to come
up with a form. The form is
gonna address, it's a, it's a
little different here. I mean,
let me mention the argument as
to why it should be shout. This
is a little different because I
think what is super important
that this is that we have some
guardrails about the need for
powers of attorney.
And, and kind of the intro.
portion of this.
So that folks are just
understand what they're doing. I
think it's gonna be similar and
I just, you know, without that,
we're gonna be in you're you
could have a problem, so I just,
this is what we put in there. I
think it makes sense.
Others on the question that's
before us right now, we're just
dealing with specifically on the
the notion of the form, just the
form itself
on the nation formermais.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Ferrari, I move
the amendment.
Well, I don't know that
that's where we're at, etc. So
that's got the amendment, he's
modifying the language a little
bit on the moon. We, we're uh
dealing with the first paragraph
of the proposed amendment. And
the question is the form, um,
anywhere else before I, I can
weigh in on that a little bit.
I, I, I'm gonna urge you to, to
adopt the language as it is on
the matter you all heard me for
an hour about that the other
day. The, the reason, the reason
there's a form and statute, as I
told you, is, we almost never
put a form in the statute, but
here you want to have a form
because uh
If everybody has a different
agreement than they're all going
to be subject to interpretation,
you have contract lawsuits,
contract interpretations, and so
on. The reason I work, you can
go get a power of attorney at
the office, Max, I think, or,
you know, online, you can get
online, you don't have to go
there. We all use the form for a
reason, so that we don't have to
litigate what every one of these
different forms looks like,
means and was intended, so I, I,
I don't understand the
hesitation to, um, you know, say
that there's gonna be a form for
doing this, but um,
That that's, again, you heard me
all over this the other night,
so, uh, yeah, I think that you
should adopt it, but I
understand you don't respond. Go
ahead.
I forgot about um one of the
amendments which was the
requirement for a notary and two
witnesses, the Arizona forum
that you uh reference, it's or.
And I think the best practice,
if we do an agreement form at
all is notary or two witnesses
instead of and just because it
makes it even more burdensome,
you know, and if we're following
Arizona in that respect, I think
they have more.
Problem for us right now that
we're mixing up different
issues. We were on the form, now
you're on a different, you're on
paragraph 2, we're on paragraph
1, right, so, um, all right,
let's just kind of take it one
at a time. So anybody wanna
modify, uh, let's we got a
proposed amendment. He's
proposed an alternative
additional language which he's
accepted in paragraph 3, right?
So he's modified a little bit
there.
Um, and I think that's where
we're at on that. Anybody else
have any other
Issues with the amendment and
what I'm going to suggest doing
is we either act on this
amendment or not, and then, as I
said, I, I probably could have a
couple of little tweaks that I'm
gonna propose as well too, but
we're, we're on the amendment as
amended with some additional
language, right?
Other discussion anyone on that?
Right? Uh, is there any
objection to the amendment with
those changes.
Right, see none of that
amendments adopted. Emily, are
we good?
OK, good. All right, Senator
worth yourself for. Anything
else?
Anyone else before I go?
So the concerns I've got still
remaining are what we've done
with uh the 6th paragraph.
Of the proposed amendment, we
may want to think about that,
and I'll probably give you some
specific language to make it
easy, but here's the concern is
if you take the on the amendment
we just adopted.
Page 5, line between lines in
1011, this is a list of
Uh, it says the support is
prohibited from, right? So, so
what we look at uh H5 line 8.
It says a supporters prohibited
from us as making decisions that
we have of a decision maker and
then we just inserted paragraphs
2 and 3, right?
You still with me there?
So with me, see what we did.
OK. So, um, what we've done is
we prohibited, it says a support
is prohibited from and that
would include signing legal team
sign legal documents on behalf
of the decision maker. Here's my
concern, Senor, is that
You and I have, I think in
discussions with Judge Beechive
and Supreme Court Justice
Thompson. The, the best advice I
could ever give a client would
be to have both this and the
power of attorney, and my
concern is if with the language
we've adopted, we're saying the
supporter is prohibited from it,
says my legal documents on
behalf of the decision maker, if
they're also, also under the
power of attorney, this language
would say that power of attorney
is ineffective, uh, for them to
sign the illegal documents. I
think that would create a
conflict.
In other words if they signed
up, if they had a power of
attorney and this document, and
they went and signed a bank
document or a title document or
sold the house or any of those
things. They, they could be
challenged. Somebody could come
back and say, you did not have
the authority, despite having a
power of attorney now, because
this act would have said they
don't have the authority to sign
legal documents on behalf of the
decision maker. Do you see my
concern so and so, and, and, um,
remember the same thing is true
in the 3rd paragraph.
Which is they have a concurrent
power of attorney, this would
say they cannot um they cannot
do something to bind the
decision maker to legal
agreement, but they have a power
of attorney, that's exactly what
they would have the authority to
do. So I think there's an easy
solution, and I'm going to
suggest it, which is on page 5,
on line 8 before, after the
subparagraph being and before
the word A.
I would just insert the words in
the absence of a power of
attorney.
Uh supporters prohibited from
doing these things. That way, if
they have a barber training,
they can do these things, right?
Um, and I think you got to do
this. I really do. So, um, I'm
suggesting an additional
amendment to the amendment,
right?
And I see lots of nodding heads,
so that's, I like when you, I
say things and people nod their
heads. It doesn't, doesn't
happen much this time with the
same sex.
But anyway, on, on that proposed
amendment to the amendment,
Senator Stewart, can you just
repeat that one more time, Mr.
Yes, um, we, we'll be doing is
on page 5, line 8.
After the subparagraph
designation B, we would be
adding the following language
before A, A would become a
lowercase and then before that
day it would say in the absence
of a power of attorney.
writing in that language.
So I would read that in the
absence of a power of attorney,
a supporter is prohibited from
doing certain things.
So they, so they have a power of
attorney, they can, they can and
should be able to sign legal
documents. Right. And have this
agreement and a power of
attorney,
provided it's the right kind of
power of attorney. Well, you
could say a lawful power of
attorney, but it can be a lawful
health care power of attorney,
you don't get to sign legal
documents. So we need to, we
need to, we just need to make
it.
There's, there's two types of
powers. There's, that's the
thing you got to be careful with
that cause someone could have a
health care power of attorney,
you don't want them signing
contracts. OK, so what, what
have we said subject to a power
of attorney.
Maybe you have other language.
I'm, I'm open to, but you see
the issue, and they see the I
think, I think you're on it. I
just, I wanna make sure that
we've got
You know, you, I'm just a
little, yeah, you just got to be
concerned if someone has a
health care power of attorney,
but not a statutory.
Power of attorney, which, again,
they deal with two different
things.
Um
And maybe send doing kinda
share what that uh inapplicable
power of attorney.
The absence of an of an
applicable
arbitrary.
Mr. Chair, I could, um, we weigh
in on that with uh with with the
Alice McCoy.
have a concern or objection
objection.
Mr. Trail's just gonna offer
some language that might help.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Starting with your language
subject to any authority or
powers granted in a power of
attorney is my suggestion.
In front of us though is in the
absence of an applicable to do
it's language, so that's where
we're at right now. That's my
proposed motion is to add that
language. Emily, are you still
with me? All right, um.
Um, and that's the motion before
us right now. Any other
discussion?
Any objection to adopting that
amendment, right, saying none.
Thank you, that's all I had, but
I hope you all can understand it
was a concern from the amendment
too, so, right, so we've got an
amendment with some amendments
to it, um, is there any other
discussion that follow the bill?
We just take a moment before we
close up. I hope, I appreciate
all of you coming back here. I
want to appreciate the
committee, Senator Stewart was
going to make a motion for
reconsideration before we got,
we got started before you
Senator Brantley made it.
I, I want to take responsibility
for the fact that, um, I asked
to bring this back to the
committee for a couple of
reasons. One is we had a
committee report that I wasn't
10 100% on and proud of 1, and
number 2, I thought it was
important to have this
discussion with you all and have
your input into it in this
committee process rather than
doing this on the floor where
you wouldn't be able to weigh in
and offer your feedback and
communication we would have had
center worth trying to put this
amendment on. I would have been
trying to put my amendment on,
we would have been getting
suggestions from you all about
language. We would have been
doing all of this stuff on the
floor of the.
And I just, I want this
committee to be the place where
this work gets done, and when we
get to the floor, we've given it
our best effort and I, I wanted
to avoid exactly what we just
did for the last whatever, half
an hour, an hour on the floor of
the Senate. They're trusting us
to get this right, committee,
and so I appreciate the
committee supporting in the
leadership saying they would let
me do this and I appreciate the
minority and senator share
letting me do this as well too,
so that's why you're back here
when people saw back on the
agenda there was a lot of what
the hell is going on and
There's a reason for this, OK?
So I appreciate that that
consideration here.
We're on the Du pass motion as,
as amended? Is there any
objection?
then you have to pass.
Thank you, appreciate it.
Happy Saint Patrick's Day.
We're going to hear next up
House Bill 340.
Represent Barrola, are you still
here? Yep.
And for the House members or
anyone else here.
Again, reminder of the agenda is
put together in numerical order.
You have Senate bills before
House bills, and then there this
is not the order that we're
going to necessarily always hear
things, and I will let you, is
there anyone here for the
traditional non-traditional
cremation.
All right. All right. Let me let
you know we're not gonna hear
that, uh, tonight. I've already
let uh represent Matthews know
that we're not gonna hear that
this evening. We've only got
till about 6:30 and uh if
there's anyone here for
protection of school library
materials.
Right, I'm sorry, we're not
gonna hear that tonight either,
right? through that window, so
I'm sorry you've been waiting
this long already, but that last
bill took a little longer than I
had anticipated, and these are
still Senate bills, so, uh,
we'll look for another way to
get it done. So we're on House
Bill 340.
Representative, Mr. Baker,
welcome.
Thank you. Thank you committing
my first time here so Mr. She,
it's a pleasure for me to be
here today. Um, how we 340 and
this is two gaps in current law
that hinder solving up in
criminal cases by allowing
judges to order the entry of DNA
into the combined index system
cod. Francispects who died
before being charged with a
felony. It also mandates
automatic DNA entry for
individuals who die in prison.
Or wearing these before July
1997, provided that the DNA was
collected in accordance with
law.
And I'm like my um experts to
introduce themselves to Mr.
Chair.
Chief, which one of you is gonna
do this?
Can you, can you get one of us?
Why don't we do give us baker,
and then we'll hear the chief
support it. What does, what does
the bill do again, Mr. Speaker,
um.
Chance Cervantes the bill, um,
creates a mechanism in the
unusual circumstances um where
someone dies after DNA has been
collected, but before it can be
entered in the coda system
specifically before there's a
equivalent of a preliminary
hearing, um, which is the
trigger under the statute cited
in the bill, um, and then the
second issue is that there are
cold cases that predate uh where
the suspect may be.
have may have been serving time
and state custody.
Prior to 1997 and the mechanism
under the law currently would
require that you wait to enter
their DNA into codus until
they're released. And so the
primary purpose of the bill is
to hope to bring closure for
victims of unsolved crimes
through the entry of DNA and
Codus, um.
And that's the short synopsis,
Chief.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Troy We are chief
to Mexico State Police, um.
We, we do support this bill, uh,
and I, I mean, for all the, all
the reasons that we're, were
stated, I was uh
Got drafted to be an expert, so
I will do my best to answer any
uh law enforcement related
questions that, that come up. I
did oversee cold case for a
while, so I do have
some.
I'm sorry, what was the last
part?
I said I did oversee our cold
case unit at one point, so I'm,
I'm not totally winging it, sir.
I do have a little bit of
expertise, Mr. Chair. All right,
all right, very good. I heard
some chuckling. I was trying to
figure what I missed, so members
of the committee questions.
340 center duty.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So,
One of the things I was confused
about when I was looking at this
was
Well, two things. So the current
statute says it's uh it's only,
it's only analyzed and, and kept
if there was a rest, uh, upon a,
an arrest warrant for a felony.
Blah blah blah blah. Um, so,
So anyone whose sample they
would have already.
Thinking about these folks from
before 1997, they would have
they would have only been cap if
they were for.
For a felony, right? If they had
been charged with a felony.
Is that right?
Um,
Chavante, Senator Doig, it's my
understanding that there's also
the potential for available DNA
in the old cold case files that
could be run through and then
the other scenario that's
imagined here, the classic
example is Lorenzo Montoya, who
was the prime suspect in the
West Side murders.
He's in the course of having
just committed another homicide
is killed. They have his DNA,
they can't enter it, so there
can be circumstances where the,
where's the arrest, a death
before preliminary hearing, and
then um the, the DNA is
collected but currently can't be
entered into codas. I know if
the chief has a better synopsis.
And, and, yeah, and, and I
understand that this really is
getting a
At, at what happened in, in that
situation, which, and I
absolutely understand the desire
for closure on that, um,
It's every time we have laws
that are
we are doing a general law for a
specific situation.
Uh
I think we always just want to
make sure that it will be
generally applicable. I'm, I was
just confused because this is
saying.
This is what applies.
Before in each of these
sentences or circumstances A and
B before the person is charged
with a felony.
Then we're putting this
requirement on them to
automatically enter stuff.
From before 1997.
That I would think would only be
preserved, I mean, under the
sack, the statue in place now
should only be preserved.
If they had been arrested for a
felony.
So I'm, I'm just confused about
this Mister Chair.
Um
And I guess why, other than the
one situation with uh
The guy who
did all these terrible things
with these women who are found
on the West Mesa, um.
I guess what is the reason and
and I see that you are building
in some protection here with how
that
Information would be
Put in CODIS if they hadn't
been, if they're
if they hadn't been in charge of
the felony, but I guess why?
Other than this one situation,
why are we lowering the standard
for the state keeping and
submitting people's DNA from
when there's a might be a felony
involved to
To not, even with this
protective procedure.
Senator, I don't think that
there's a lowering of standards.
I think the contemplation here
is the two scenarios, both the
Lorenzo Montoya situation and
then also those who have been
being held in custody since
before '97, where their data was
properly collected, their DNA
was collected, but currently
it's being held under statute
until their release date.
Rather than being entered in a
coda, so that person could have
committed crimes and been in
state custody since prior to
1997 when the current structure
was put into place, they have
the DNA, they haven't been able
to enter it into codus cause
it's literally being held until
they're released under current
law. This would allow it to be
entered now, which could bring
closure to families at a sooner
time rather than making them
wait until there's a release or
the person dies in custody.
But Mr. Chair, if you've been
being held since beyond 1997,
that would certainly be on a
felony, and under the statutes
as it is now, it could already
be entered cards.
So, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, so my, my
understanding of the bill is
that we are basically trying to
close the loophole of all the
individuals that predated when
it became standardized that
everybody got in. I know that
we, we keep talking uh about the
uh West Side case and, and AB
and APD had, but there's
I don't necessarily know it'd be
a huge number of cases, but
there's multiple cold cases
across the state, um.
That this has the potential to
solve. I mean, I know that that
is the one that we are really
pointing to, and that's the
biggest one.
But there's multiple other
cases, I think that this could
potentially uh close. I mean, I
think at the end of the day, if,
if
Even it's just 1 or 2 old cases
uh that we're able to close
because we close this loophole
and be able to have access to
that data, I think that, you
know, it would be important that
we do that for the families.
Thank you.
That's all happens. Thank you,
Mr. Senator Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Rosent Guadalla. Thank you
for bringing this forward. The,
the, um, some
So I'm reading the act, and it
was a big deal. It was a big
deal at the time to require DNA
samples.
It made sense to me, to me it
was just the modern photograph
of modern.
Um
Uh,
fingerprint and things of that
nature. The um
I'm just reading the current
law. Do you know?
Why we're creating a whole new
Subsection
Instead of amending the the
Amenting natural law, you know,
we're making reference to
29-3-10.
You know why we're not just
amending that section and we're
just writing these new
3 new paragraphs.
Which I
Suppose the
Compilation commission might,
might put them in the
provisional act.
Cervantes, Senator Maestas, um,
that, that was how the, the bill
drafters prepared it as a
standalone. I don't have a good
explanation for why they didn't
go back in and amend it, but it
just seemed like it was tying
off two loose ends and.
Um, this is how we got it. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, gentlemen. The, um,
so just to refresh our memories,
you know, upon arrest.
DNA sample was taken, you know,
with a swab or whatnot.
And uh
And it shall not be analyzed.
And shall be destroyed unless
Uh, the arrest was made on the
arrest warrant of a felony.
If there was probable cause for
the arrest.
That the person but now, in
other words, they're
I'm just asking.
What triggers, Mr. Chairman,
and what, what triggers the
administrative center to send it
into the database.
Under current law.
Cervantes Senator Maestas. It's
my understanding again, and I'm
going off of 29-3-10 is it is
the
It is the either the felony
arrest warrant or in the
circumstance that where we don't
have that, the preliminary
hearing determination of
probable cause, and then it's
automatically entered. This is
just dealing with the
circumstance with the deceased
party after.
Um, where they've been, so
they've died before that can
happen, so they have the DNA in
hand because the arrest has
occurred.
They haven't been able to enter
it because the trip wire for the
um for the automatic entry
didn't get hit because they
didn't get to the preliminary
hearing. In my mind, if I was
drawing like the the number
line, it would be there's an
arrest because you don't, you
know, you can have a felony
arrest without a felony warrant,
you get to the preliminary
hearing where you're asking the
judge to make the finding
probable cause. A person dies.
Right now, they couldn't have
the DNA in this would fix that.
OK.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chairman
and gentlemen. And so when the
law went into effect,
It was not retroactive. In other
words, all those DNA samples
that the government had were not
put into the database, just,
just.
the ones collected since the law
or
Or not, Joseph on the syndro
says, yes, that's my con that's
my understanding of the
rationale for the 1997.
Um, second provision of the
bell.
is to deal with what happened
prior.
OK.
So we want to take all of these
DNA samples of folks who went to
prison.
And, and put them into the
database now as opposed to the
day they get out of prison.
Cheer Cervantes Senator, yes, I
understand, Mr. Chairman, and so
if someone is out of prison,
Uh, then a court order will put
that particular DNA into the
database.
My, I just, I just questioned
why, why they're not put into
the database upon going into
prison, why, why does the state
wait till it gets out and I just
It must have just been uh.
Not contemplated, but anyway,
thank you.
What else in the committee with
questions.
All right, so, um, I'll go last
again. I appreciate, uh,
representing you and the, um,
Mr. Baker in chief to be on
this. Oh, there's been a lot of
attention on efforts to combat
crime, to address crime. This
looks like we're giving law
enforcement another tool to be
able to, as you said, close
cases and not be wasting
resources in terms of personnel
and, and cause when we can close
cases and solve cases with this
tool, so I want to look forward
to supporting it. I think this
is part of our effort to try and
help you all solve cases, those
cases, good idea.
you
Anyone else? All right, is there
any objection to the new pass
motion on House Bill 304 is
amended, see now, you have two
pass.
Welcome to Judiciary.
Oh, I'm sorry,
we get to that place, uh,
Senator Do makes a motion to
to pass,
right, sir?
Oh
Right
I move to pass we didn't have a
motion. Any objection to do
pass, there's none, do pass.
Thank you
I've got, I've got an hour to do
a lot of work, um.
We'll hear next Senate, I'm
sorry, House Bill 296 Sara
Hamlin, are you still here?
The Hale was here though
there was no objection or
opposition to that,
right, Senator Hamblin, we're
gonna hear House Bill 296. I
understand you're here on that.
Matthew's not on 296.
Senator Hamblin, my
understanding is I looked, we
had no registered in opposition.
I'm not aware of any opposition
to this bill, Mr. Hand saying
you've not had any. Is that
accurate?
Yes, Mr. Chair. OK, give us a
brief summary and we'll see if
we can make good progress with
this one. Sure, I'm gonna give
you the summary that I know of,
uh, Mr. Chair and, and, uh,
committee, the House Judiciary
Committee Substitute for
Hospital 296, that makes
amendments to the 1999 Public
Accountancy Act, which updates
license requirements,
certification, qualifications
and reciproc reciprocity
provisions for certified public
accountants in New Mexico. What
this does is this makes this
more accessible while still
keeping the standards.
CPAs, uh, in the state, um, and
it is also trying to address,
uh, a need of, uh, lack of CPAs
in the state, and I can turn it
over to my expert Larry Horan,
uh, who also knows much more
about this bill than I do.
Thank you, Mr. Chairmans
Committee, Larry, registered
lobbyist from New Mexican
Society, the CPAs. We also have
the executive director Jeannette
Contreras here and support we
won't have a say anything about
it, um, senator did a good job
of explaining what it does,
remove some of the barriers as
it relates to education
requirements and also the
testing requirements so that
CPAs can still maintain a high
standard of the professional
profession but then have an
opportunity to become CPAs.
We're starting to see the
pipeline dry up. And so I'll
stand
any questions you might have
specifics on the bill. Thank
you. We have one individual
registered and support Daniel
Trujillo. Are you here?
All right, uh.
scratched to you. I appreciate
his welcome.
desire to be here, members of
the committee.
questions.
All right, there's a motion for
a new pass. I just, I'd like to
add a, a couple of the drill. I,
I'm just curious, you said the
pipeline is drying up. I, I got
to tell you as a businessman, I
hear from business people all
the time who say they can't find
accountants and can't get good
accountants, and I probably add
myself to that list. They're,
they're becoming scarce and hard
to find, um, and I guess one
question I've always got and I
hope you'll get this message
back to him, I'd like to, I'd
love to have somebody
representing the uh profession
here.
So, you know, for us to be
completely changed the
qualifications and reciprocity
and so not to in any way
diminish your role, Mr. Brown is
their lobbyist, but again, when
we have professional groups
coming in here and saying, oh,
I'm sorry,
oh, I'm sorry. OK, you just, OK,
good. Well, just introduce
yourself because you all didn't
sign up and register so
just, just tell us who you are.
Bye-bye.
Just
Hello chair members of the
committee. I'm Jeanette
Contreras, uh, president of the
New Mexico Society of CPAs.
Yeah,
me when
we have an industry your
profession say, hey, we need all
these changes in the way we do
business and OK, go ahead.
Hello everyone. Uh, my name is
Elijah Escula. I am the CPA and
um an audit senior manager for
Pla CPAs and I am the treasurer
of the New Mexican Society of
CPAs.
I, I appreciate you all being
here, you're an important part
of anybody who does business,
very important part, and there
are, you're getting harder and
harder to find. Just out of
curiosity, Mr. Ren, if you don't
mind, what are you, are you all,
is there a shortage of, would
you all agree there's a shortage
of CPAs in the state of New
Mexico? You, you're, you're all
out of your head affirmatively,
of Mexico and across the country
we're seeing this. Yeah, and,
and is the shortage of CPAs in
uh New Mexico because they're
being sued for malpractice by
travelers.
Mr. Chairman, I not, I don't
believe so. Yeah, so sometimes
there are shortages of
For reasons other than lawsuits
and medical malpractice of
travelers. Is that fair to say,
uh, Mr. Horan and Senator?
I will take that, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, so some of us it's pretty
obvious, uh, but sometimes it's
important to make the point that
sometimes professions are short
for a number of reasons other
than travelers and uh so uh it's
good to know that uh we're
having the same problems with
CPAs as we're having with other
professions, including doctors
and other professionals as well
too, if I may, while I was
actually sitting back there, uh,
a CPA who has to be uh
contracted out who lives in
Albuquerque for my tax preparer
in Las Cruces called me. And so
we, we are having shortages all
over, no doubt about it, and so.
Maybe there's other explanations
sometimes. Anyone else?
We're stewart. There's a story,
uh, you know, our sus IS that
complicated, horrible thing we
have to do every year. Um, I
finally hired a CPA.
And I now have no problems. I
don't have to think about it.
She's got access to my bank
accounts and she bounces it to
the dim. I should have done this
many years ago. It's costly
though.
And I'm, I'm, I'm willing to pay
for it. So they are they're
where's their wing though.
Thank you for, and, and you're
right, and we're, we're always
hearing, here people having
difficulties with audits,
getting their audits done,
getting their audits timely
done. The argument's always the
same we can't get into a CPA,
um, and they're not, there's not
enough of them around to do the
work that's required, so we're
happy to help your profession
see more of you here, so thank
you. Uh, we have a Du pass
portion? We do. Is there any
objection to the Du pass motion.
Thank you very much.
You pass.
you see Ms Coop coming in the
room, it's not the trailer's
fault, um.
House Bill 99.
There you go.
Also, my understanding
representative no opposition on
this bill, is that right?
That is correct.
What was the vote in the House?
It was unanimous
that it was unanimous
representative. All right. Uh,
is there anyone registered here
in opposition for this
committee. I do, let me just
take the opportunity, you know,
we have a rule, we require
opposition and registration in
advance as we get to this late
date and as the agenda tends to
a little bit and just for
everybody's notice, we may meet
on Tuesdays. We may meet on
Thursdays in addition to our
regular schedule, um, but as we
get to this place, I'm gonna be
less strict about requiring the
early registration so if I see
somebody in the audience on a
given issue and they didn't get
near in time. I may very well
recognize him if we have the
time. I don't know. Is there
anyone here on House Bill 99?
Right, there's nobody here. Go
ahead, representative, give it
to us, sure.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Hospital 99 just creates a
process by which insurance
companies obtain salvage titles
for total loss vehicles. So
after a vehicle is declared a
total loss in an accident, the
salvage oxen industry takes
possession of that salvage
vehicle from insurance carriers,
but sometimes the carriers are
unable to obtain the car title
from the previous owner after
the insurance claim is paid. So
the state had a process for
doing this several years ago,
but due to a policy change and
MVD.
excited that um enabling
language was needed. So it's
Bill simply creates that
standardized process with the
endorsement of the tax and
revenue Department.
scam anything down?
OK
said no.
That was a no, Mr. Cha. All
right, thank you.
Sara Stewart.
stupid question, Mr. Chairman,
why does the insurance have to
have the title of the
cru nch ed automobile.
They have to take um possession
of the vehicle after the, after
the vehicle has been declared a
total loss to sell it in order
for them to sell it to a
salvage.
A part.
Ma'am, or Mr. Chair, Madam
Protem. OK.
Do a chunk every day, so just
dealing with junk more
efficiently.
Thank you.
House committee members,
questions?
Uh, thank you, Senator Do do to
pass. My understanding is that
the for this bill is that the um
we've been doing these things a
certain way under a procedure
for a very long time and then
now there's proposed change, uh,
or, or to dispense with that
prior proceeding and this would
simply reaffirm the way that it
has been done for many years, is
that right? That is correct,
yes.
I do pass motion. Anyone else?
Questions, comments, Is there
any objection? None. You have to
pass. Thank you very much. Thank
you. We're gonna go next to
House Bill 243, Interstate
Medical Lis come back. Is there
anyone here on the free roaming
horses 284?
Um, I see a number of you here,
so I'm sorry, but I don't think
we're gonna get that done in the
next hour. Um, so you're welcome
to be here I see Representative
McQueen. I'm sorry about that.
Um, I really do think I expect
this next bill to go uh till our
6:30 stop time. We just so you
know, depending on I don't work,
I don't really make a lot time
off the floor and have time to
come back or
um
few things be laid on the floor.
All right. So, um, I'll just
alert all of you that if we get
the chance to come back to
judiciary at a reasonable hour,
we'll come back to 284 uh here
uh tonight. If not, it'll be the
first item I uh when we get to
our next meeting. And again,
that may be as early as tomorrow
just for members if you happen
to meet on Tuesday, but we're
gonna do interstate medical
license compact, and I suspect
we may or may not even be able
to get done with that in the
next hour because I know there
are a number of amendments and
rightfully so, but I know a
number of you all are here from
out of state, right?
Uh, and so I see a lot of heads
nodding and so forth, and so we
wanted to be respectful of your
time here and to have you also
hear some of the concerns that
we generally uh expect to hear
from something like this
compact, so Representative
Matthews.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
the hospital.
243 passed the House
unanimously. Um, it is designed
to
help us have more doctors
available for the citizens of
our state, it makes health care
more accessible in terms of
being able to
access a physician, um, and it
does that through an interstate
compact.
And we have lost 8.5% of our
doctors in the last
About 4 years.
And as a result, um, it is
common.
Um, and not unusual for people
to be told and they need to see
a doctor that they have to wait
6 months.
And sometimes longer, and we
need some help.
One of the ways to get help is
an interstate compact. It's on
average as uh 10 to 12%, I
believe it's a percentage of
additional um physician time uh
when these compacts are passed,
and this one is passed in
How many
443 states.
So we are an outlier on this,
um, it would provide much help
to the people of our state
looking to have the help of a
physician.
And I'd like to.
Have um
Yeah, yes, uh,
Mr. Chair, members of the
Judiciary Committee, I'm Rick
Masters, and I am the
Interstate.
Uh, medical license or compact
commission general counsel, also
uh helped draft the uh model
legislation, and for the past 25
years have been involved in
Uh, Interstate compacts, the
study of the interstate
compacts, riding interstate
compacts, giving testimony
interstate compacts and
litigating on cases involving
interstate compacts also
Of uh written the only legal
legal treatise on interstate
compact law, uh, which, uh, is
published by the American Bar
Association and our editors tell
us that our sales are right up
there with the Amish phone
directory, but uh if you need a
book on compacts, we've got one,
and I'm, I'm here primarily to
answer questions. Uh, we do have
some concerns about an amendment
or two that I understand are
being introduced and uh I assume
that you want to wait until
that.
Comes before us for any comment,
but I wanna uh be uh open and
honest and give you uh answers
to questions that you have.
Thank you, sir, for joining us.
OK.
No one signed up, um, no one
signed up uh via Zoom.
So we'll just go straight to the
committee, uh, Senator Deitt.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So Mr. Chair, we have an example
just the other day, um,
I think a great compact. Uh, it
was very reasonable.
And was open to working with us
and adopting reasonable
amendments that would make the
compact right for New Mexico.
Um, and that is exactly how it
should be.
Uh, so there are things in this
compact that that are not right
for New Mexico. And so I'm gonna
go through and I'm gonna offer
an amendment that will, will
take those out and, and add a
couple words in. Um,
And I am hopeful.
That this compact will be as
reasonable as the other one that
we just passed out of the Senate
a couple of days ago.
Um, because compacts are great,
uh, Conex would do good things,
um, but when often these
compacts are private
organizations, uh,
That want to do things like
They they can make laws in our
states. Um, and that is not
reasonable. Uh, even if other
states have
I have done so.
So, I'm gonna run through.
I think I should just run
through everything, Mr. Chair.
Uh,
First. So first on page 2.
There is a purpose clause.
We do not do purpose clauses
here.
Uh, on page 2, it would be
striking all of Article One.
And renumbering as appropriate.
On page 4, line 2.
There's a reference to a gross
misdemeanor that is not a thing
in New Mexico.
Um, so it would be to strike
gross.
Before Msomy.
Uh, and here in New Mexico, we
have felonies, we have
misdemeanors, and we have petty
misdemeanors. We do not have
anything such a thing as a gross
misdemeanor. On page 5 lines 23
and 24.
It's strikey. So this is
This is the language that says
any rule we make as a compact
has the force of law.
In your state.
So just taking out the language
is comma and has the force of
law and effective statutory law
in a member state. Striking that
language on lines 23 and 24 on
page 5
from what you're doing
So, from the, from the comma on
on line 23.
Through the word state on line
24. Thank you.
Um.
On page 18.
This is saying on and this is uh
subsection J lines 7 through 10,
which is again saying, we'll
make, we'll make things public
records.
And it says that's designated by
the compact also says or by its
rules. Uh, we have a commitment
to transparency here in New
Mexico that I don't think we
should say a commission by its
rules can decide things are not
public records here, when our
laws otherwise have not done so,
so it would be striking lines
945 by 10 its rules.
as page 18. What were the, the
suggestions wanting to, uh, so
page 18 line 9, striking or by
at the end of that line, and
then continue on to line 10
striking its rules, as opposed
to the entire chain. Right,
right. Thank you.
So then, on page 23, we start
getting into the immunity that
the compacts always love to give
themselves.
So it would be striking all of
subsection D on page 23, which
is from line one through 12.
Where the compact is giving
themselves immunity.
Uh
The same.
Also on page 24 striking all of
subsection G.
Which is lines 15 to 25.
And continuing on to the next
page on my 25, lines 1 and 2.
Then staying on page 25, uh, the
subsection C. This is uh where
they're saying.
You think
I apologize. Going back to page
23, also striking subsection E.
So we would basically strike all
of page 20.
I appreciate the assist there
from our analyst.
All at page 23, yeah.
Yeah
Now going back to page 25.
where I started saying so
anytime there's a, anyone wants
to bring a lawsuit, we have to
go to them. We have to go to DC
or wherever their offices are,
uh, to bring suit, so page 25,
line 20.
After Columbia for District of
Columbia, inserting.
Uh
A coma?
State or federal courts of New
Mexico.
Still on page 25. Line striking
in line 25, and then continuing
on through lines 1 through 3 on
26. This violates separation of
powers. This is ordering our
courts to give the commission
deference.
Um,
Yes, so it starts on line 25 of
page 25.
And continuing.
Onto page 26, lines 1 through 3.
This is ordering our courts how
to rule.
is the separation of powers
issue.
On page staying on page 26, uh,
striking all of Article 16.
On page 27.
Line 8.
Again, after Columbia inserting.
state or federal courts of New
Mexico.
And also on that same page, page
27, lines 14 through 17.
constructing everything after
the period on 14.
Through Line 17, which is taking
away the, it's a loser pays
provision.
Uh
is not consistent with
The American rule, and this is
not a situation like with the
Unfair Practices Act, where we
want to encourage, uh, folks to
to represent people. um, so
there's no good reason to have
that loserha language in there.
On page 29.
So there's this language in here
that says like even if we are
terminated from the contract,
they get to keep charging us.
Even beyond, beyond being
terminated.
So page 29, lines 11 through 13.
Striking from the comma on line
11.
Through termination on line 13,
so that that period stays has
moved up to termination.
And, and it's interesting
because throughout this it says,
hey states.
Even if you withdraw, even if we
terminate you, you guys are
still on the hook for all these
charges, but we're not. That's
what that subsection G on page
29 says, um,
We aren't gonna bear any
Any costs. Uh, unless it's
mutually agreed upon.
Uh, with us. And so it's
striking subsection G, which is
lines 14 through 19.
Still on page 29.
Line 22, after Columbia for
District of Columbia again
inserting uh state or federal
courts of New Mexico.
And then against striking the
last sentence, the loser pays
provision, page 29, lines 24 to
25.
On page 31, this says that even
if we have repealed this statute
here in Mexico, even if we as a
body have taken that law off the
books. Uh, it doesn't actually
go into effect for a full year
and until we get written notice
to every other state, uh, if we
have repealed a law in New
Mexico that law should be
repealed. The compact should not
be able to tell us how long we
have to keep something on the
books if we have chosen.
to take it off. So, page 31,
lines like 11 striking
everything.
From the comma on line 11.
Through the word state on line
14.
So at that period moves up
again.
I'm again on page 31, line 25.
Striking, including obligations,
all that language through.
2 on the next page. This is
what's saying, even if you've
withdrawn, we're gonna make you
keep paying.
Even though you're not, uh, so
it's starting on the bottom of
page 31, line 25. Thank you.
Striking
Really everything from the, the
first comma on.
Through the word withdrawal on
line 2, page 32.
Um
Online, on page 32. This is
again saying we, we get to
decide when you're, your laws,
are going into effect or not. So
line 5 and 6, striking or upon
such later date as determined by
the Interstate commission.
And I'm almost done, Mr. Chair.
On page 33.
Striking lines 11 through 22.
That's that subsection A, B, C,
and D.
And then renumbering the
remaining subsection. Actually,
it doesn't even need to be a
subsection, uh, because that
would be the only one left, so
striking E as well.
So that what it says is that in
the event that the compact
exceeds the constitutional
limits imposed on the
legislature of any member state,
such provisions shall be
ineffective, but it doesn't say.
All this other stuff.
That like that
Basically gives the compact,
uh, the compact to have over
what we do here as a state.
I know that was a lot, Mr.
Chair.
So
Yes, so the last one is page 33.
Striking lines 11 through 22.
And then online 23, just
striking that E period.
So we don't need a subsection
designation there.
So I would remove that, Mister
Hare. Thank you, thank you so
much, Senator Do. I appreciate
you taking the time, um, going
over this bill and all the other
compact bills before we go to
committee, before we go to the
sponsor and members of the
committee. So there's um
And you'll, if you don't know
this, so there's the uniform law
commission, which was founded in
like the 1870s or something.
And it's a, it's a group of
lawyers and judges that get
together and create laws that
are meant for the states,
they're not for Congress. And
each state is asked to adopt
these uniform laws.
And we, uh, we had a
commissioner who brought like 3
or 4 uniform laws to us most
every year.
We would change them here and
there, we put them in the lot.
We can change those uniform laws
all day long. The only person it
affects is the lawyer who
Thinks they're the same and and
realizes they're, they're not
quite the same. These are
similar but different my
understanding because these are
contracts.
With other states. So, uh,
So I think the vast majority of
these proposed amendments are
are
Allowable within the contract
framework, some may not be, and
then that becomes a policy
choice of whether, what, what do
we want to do about it.
I'm gonna ask, is this friendly
but more importantly, if you
could maybe go through each one
and say this is friendly, this
is not. If you took notes, but
anyway, a representative, a
gentleman is a friendly man.
Uh, thank you. Thank you, madam
chair. I, I'm sorry, thank you.
Mr. Chair and thank you
Representative Senator. Where am
I?
Um, I'm gonna let uh my expert
respond to that.
Thank you, Senator, uh, we.
We have a large number of
proposed amendments, and I'm
happy to go through them, but
there are several, uh,
especially the last one.
uh, I may need some further
explanation because I don't
fully understand what uh Senator
Duohe.
objectionable about how these
are construed with regard to
other laws, uh, let me also say
that, uh, I certainly echo.
Your point that compacts are not
uniform laws, because as most of
you know, the, uh, primary
attribute of uniform laws is
they're not usually uniform, and
you can pick and choose what
sections of uniform all like the
uniform commercial code that you
want to accept in others that
you can reject, and I understand
that and accept that,
unfortunately, uh, for purposes
of amendments.
Compacts or contractual in
nature, and I'm, I'm sure many
of the other uh witnesses that
have appeared before you have
made that point, but
Uh, we take it seriously because
the contract has to be carried
out and enforced the way it's
written, and there has to be a
meeting of the minds among all
of the states. We have 43 states
and territories that have
enacted this compact.
And so for New Mexico to put
forward a substantial
substantially different.
Amendment, uh, which, uh,
varies, uh, significantly from
the language of the compact, uh,
violates that contract
principle.
Uh, one way that could be
handled if we can't negotiate,
and I certainly want to tell
Senator Duha we're, we're happy
to negotiate on some of this
language, and I think there are,
there are ways that that could
be done. It would still be
acceptable, but anything that
reaches a level of a substantial
deviation from what the model
statute is that all the other
parties to the contract or the
compact have adopted would put
us in a position of either
having to take some sort of vote
as to whether the majority of
the commission felt that uh that
New Mexico's position as an
acted if, if not.
Um, if the amendments were all
adopted and there was uh there
was a substantial deviation
left, uh, we would, we would
have to consider whether that
would put the Mexico in default
simply because they uh enacted
an amendment that may violate
that principle.
And if that were the only
problem, it would be sort of an
us against you thing and we
could
You'll try to resolve it and
then move on. The other problem
though with compacts is that if
you don't enforce them,
The courts may later in some
sort of legal challenge,
determined that you're not a
compact because you haven't
enforced it and the example that
I'll give you is described in my
uh legal treatise called the
multi-state Tax Commission. I
don't know if uh if New Mexico
was a member of that commission,
but there were a number of
states that had joined it, and
over the years, the compact
commission allowed states to
willy-nilly amend it uh to
to change the uniform taxation
sections of the compact for
which were one of the primary
purposes of it. And so when
these compacts were later
challenged, uh, during the
period of 2015 to 2017, uh 4
separate state supreme courts
determined, uh, this isn't
enforceable, and so you don't
have a compact.
So, so that, that puts us in a,
in an extremely awkward position
if we can't negotiate and, and
what I would
tell you is I, I think there are
some language, uh, changes that
Senator Du He has brought up
that that would not violate that
rule of substantial.
Deviation from the compact. Now
it may take us, uh, it'll take
me a while to get through each
of these. I'll be happy to give
you a brief response to each
one, but there may need to be.
some further case citations or
other things that I would expect
Senator Duha as a lawyer to want
to see and I, I, I'm sure I can
support anything that I, I stay
in that regard, but I, I'll
handle this however you would
prefer and go, go through each
of these to the best I I can or
uh handle it some other way.
Thank you, thank you.
Let me have a quick comment and
then I'll go back to you. What I
would like you to say which is
funny, which is not each
provision, because like I said,
I think the vast majority of the
provisions are not substantial.
And if there's 2 or 3 that are,
like, for example,
On page 31.
It's, and I appreciate the
points that are doing. It says,
If we repeal if the state
repeals, if the statute
repealing the compact, but shall
not take effect until one year
after the effective date of that
law
to me, we could bump out the
theoretically we could bump out
the date till December 31st, as
opposed to 90 days after the
session.
Um, to give all the counselors
an opportunity to do whatever
they do.
Like something like that may,
may be a compromise amongst
amongst uh uh amongst folks, but
anyway, I just wanted to make
that point that there's, there's
ways to satisfy, uh,
Uh, both, uh, both concerns. But
real quick, which, which ones in
your mind or or would be
substantive and therefore
categorically unfriendly. Well,
I would say primarily two of the
ones that I heard uh and
understood, uh, one concerning
rulemaking and one concerning
immunity.
Uh, most of the others, I think,
are to some extent semantics,
and I think there are some ways,
once there's an understanding of
what the provision is, uh, what
purpose it's supposed to serve,
uh, I think some of these will
go away, uh.
Tell me, sir, why, why the
immunity, why officers
Uh, what is the policy reason
for that immunity, um,
In the, in the compact language,
the purpose of that is there a
way to compromise on
the purpose of that is to make
sure that those uh state
employees with Board of Medicine
and any others in the state of
Mex of New Mexico or any of the
other member states who are
acting in good faith, uh, we
have uh qualified immunity from
lawsuits unless they are
violating uh the good faith
requirement or acting in a
malicious or intentional.
way to hurt someone. Uh, there
may be a different way of
putting that that would satisfy
the concern, but that, but to
eliminate immunity for uh
anybody that is working as an
agent or employee of the state
of New Mexico would, would be,
first of all, uh, exposing those
people, but I'm, I'm thinking
that would also be the case with
the rest of the commission if
some licensee decides to file
some lawsuit because they
that they're license wasn't
properly handled, so that,
that's one where I think we are,
that will take some
Discussion before I'd be willing
to tell you I could recommend
that that might be considered
material because I think it is
the way it's expressed uh right
now. Uh other uh proposals such
as the one you mentioned about
the year of winding up, uh, I
think that's just a matter of
making sure that there's enough
time if the New Mexico decides
to withdraw from the compact to
allow all of these multi-state
licensees who are holding
license and practicing in
multiple states.
to be properly notified that
they won't be able to do that
anymore if they're state of of
primary life insurance.
in New Mexico and to allow uh
issues like fees that they've
paid to the state for their
license, uh, and expenses that,
uh, uh, may or may not be
incurred that the commission may
owe money back to the state of
New Mexico for uh dues payments
that were made to issue
licenses, so it's gonna take
some amount of time, some
reasonable amount of time for
that to happen. Maybe it's not a
year, and maybe some language to
the effect that the commission
and the state
agree on how long that
withdrawal period is, but yes, I
agree that, that kind of
amendment is uh lends itself
just a negotiation, and I'm
certainly not closing the door
to that. Well, thank you for
that. So I won't hold you to it,
but theoretically we could
change one year after the
effective date to September 1st
or December 31st or whatever,
and that may satisfy both.
Uh, so I hear what you're
saying. And then lastly, what's
the concern with regards to, I
think Article 24 or or which,
which was the second big
concern?
Besides immunity.
Rules that the the rulemaking
provisions are designed to
operate like any administrative
agency that a state would
otherwise create or become a
part of the difference with this
one is every state that is a
member state is part of that
interstate administrative
agency, but the rules concerning
administrative law are to be
followed, and we've got a
substantial amount of language
devoted to that process, uh,
ultra vires.
rules are not permitted and can
be disallowed ultra vire rules
that are beyond the scope of the
statute, we certainly subscribe
to the uh proposition that I
think all administrative lawyers
would agree on that that the
statute is the guardrails for
the rules and that if the rules
are uh in between those guard
rails and don't go beyond what
the statute allows, they're
legitimate, and we're certainly
not claiming to be allowed to
Publish or promulgate rules that
are beyond the scope of the
statute, and if there's more
language that is necessary to
make it, make it clear that's
the intent, uh, I don't see why
that would be a problem. I get
you now. So you're suggesting
the rules, the rules of the
commission would be similar to
the rules of a of a department
within a state agency in terms
of becoming law. Yes, and, and
only for the purpose of
regulating the interstate
licensure aspects of this
compact. We're not trying to
interfere with the way uh
medicine is practiced in New
Mexico or any other member
state. In fact, it's just the
opposite. You have complete
control whether you're in the
compact or not over how
medicine's practiced, what the
practice of medicine is in New
Mexico and how that's enforced
on a disciplinary basis, we're
only concerned about making sure
these licenses are made
available in a proper way and
that they are expedited because
that's what we emphasize that
we, we do this like the TSA
PreCheck lane, we
We can do it quicker even though
you get to the same place that
you would if you used the old
fashioned way to apply for a
license. I think, uh, what's
important is, is, is equal
access to the courts if that
provision struck me as odd that
we'd have to go to DC or
wherever the headquarters is. I
don't think state courts.
would be the proper venue for
these compacts, but
What is that a make or break to,
to have access to New Mexico
District Court federal court
because compacts are creatures
of the Constitution.
Because the compact clause of
the Constitution allows states
to enter into these agreements,
the Supreme Court of the United
States has the last word, so to
say that we, we couldn't go to
uh
Federal court in order to
resolve a dispute that would
have effect on interpreting what
the agreement among states
means, I think that would be
unconstitutional in and of
itself. Again, there may be some
ways to specify. I mean, there's
certain tort suits that might be
subject to state court, uh, uh,
uh, jurisdiction, but we don't
think enforcement or disputes
concerning the compact language,
since they would ultimately be a
creature of the Supreme Court of
the United States.
in terms of the last word, uh,
is, is something that we should
do because of the Constitution
and the fact that these are
creatures of the Constitution
because it allows them to be.
Uh, and, and acted by the
states. OK, so I'll, I'll just
have you, you can think about
the, the federal court here in
New Mexico because I don't know
if you answered that one, but
why don't we go to members of
the committee regarding the
amendment, and we could touch on
the bill itself, but
Members of the committee,
do you want, uh, Senator, do it
please. I'd like to just respond
from what I heard you say, the
the the two main sticking points
were immunity and the rural
language, and so I will note
that we took immunity Act.
And the same rule like out of
the compact, we didn't hear,
just the other night.
Um
immunity is
I don't know if you've been in
Senate Judiciary before, but it
is.
It's probably the top of the
list, one of the first things I
learned, being on Senate
Judiciary was do a word search
and a bill for immunity, and
strike it. Uh, we don't do
immunity here. But the big
difference with the rules,
because it's one thing to say,
to give one of our state
agencies.
Rulemaking authority, and yes,
rules will will have essentially
the the effect of law. It is a
very different thing to give it
to an out of state.
In this situation, private
corporation, is that correct?
Tax-exempt governmental entity
under section 115 of the
Internal Revenue Code is
classified as governmental
because we're created by
statute. If you look at the,
thank you, thank you, um,
regardless, this is an out of
state entity.
That would, that we would then
be giving that roommate like and
so they can have rulemaking,
they can make their rules if
they like. There's language in
here, specifically saying it has
the force of law here, it is
treated by our courts as having
the force of law here. That is
the language that, that I don't
think is appropriate, and it's
not the same as saying, hey,
Department of Health.
You have rulemaking authority.
To
To interpret, to come up with
the, the procedures for how
we're going to implement this.
So I would just, sir, I did not
ask you a question.
So I would just say on, on
those, I think those are the two
big sticking points, Mr. Chair.
I, I'm not sure what.
If there is negotiated language
that exists that would resolve.
Those two.
from me.
Uh, and now the immunity part, I
think I would assume for the
majority of this committee.
OK. Thank you so much for doing.
members of the committee, just
thoughts. We got 20 minutes
before corned beef hash time and
and there's gonna be about 2 or
there's one other compact in
this committee that I'm aware of
because I'm the prime sponsor,
but this is something that we
need to come to an agreement
with, with the compact folks.
Or
decide to make a policy choice
or not, but anyway, members of
the committee.
Senator O'Malley. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Um
And I'm not having legal
background and, but I, I'm
responding, uh, my concern with
this.
Is that, um, and this is a
personal thing. I mean, we have,
I have a friend whose son has a
very, very, very rare form of
cancer.
And the only way that um he
could contact doctors if he was,
well, let's just be honest, it
was part of a compact or he has
to drive to Texas. Um,
And so, I don't know what we
need to do about this, but, um,
that's very difficult on this
family. It's costly, it's
Um, and so I would hope that
there's something we could do
to, and you know, I mean if
there's like absolutely no way,
I guess there is, but
I, I would like us to try to
find a way to help the stem.
Thank you.
Senator
Mr. Chair, we're going through a
lot. First of all, I wanna
appreciate all of you being here
in New Mexico. We welcome you
and we appreciate your interest
in trying to help our state. Um,
we went through a lot of
amendments quickly. I want to
make sure that some of the ones
I was listening from uh a remote
place I wanna make sure they
were covered in the discussion,
but very quickly, um, this is
for the representative but for
others in the room too, when,
when Senator said, well, we
strike the purpose clause, um.
I want you all to understand, we
don't just do these things
knee-jerk reasons. New Mexico
does not have legislative
history, and so when you put in
a purpose clause into a piece of
legislation, our courts when
they conduct a statutory
construction of an ambiguity or
or issue on the statute, they're
gonna look to that purpose
clause and if the purpose clause
limits its application, we're
tying our hands, if you will,
and so we purposefully take out,
purposely take out a
purposescore of findings clause,
because it can be used
to limit the effectiveness of
the application of a statute by
a court later on to the extent
that we're doing anything
inconsistent with that purpose,
and so we give ourselves as much
that was the broadest possible
authority to have our, our
enactments, uh, as effective as
we could possibly make them by a
court. So that's why, that's why
we do that and I see a lot of
your, your colleagues nodding
their heads, so I think they get
it
they I comment just briefly on
sure, of course we, we have had
other requests for legislatures
that have been in the same
thing.
I've never objected. I agree. I
mean, I took legislation in law
school. I've written some
statutes, including a lot of
compacts.
The purpose statement is
generally not uh required and
certainly not necessary, and
that, that, that would have been
one of the first things I would
have agreed with you, so I'm
sorry I didn't start there. Oh,
and, and that's good, and I'm
glad, so I, I wanna start with
places where we all agree
that's, it's a good place to be
in. Uh, however, again, that
leaves me a little puzzled
because
When I joined the conversation,
the, the suggestion was, well,
we can't have New Mexico out
there doing its own thing,
because then it's not a
contractual compact between the
states, but you're also telling
me that you appreciate why we
take this out as a matter of
form. You're all nodding your
heads affirmatively. So you're
telling me you understand why we
do it and you're telling me
other states do this, take it
out, so that suggests to me
that, yeah, there can be some
differences between the states
that the that the compact
members will agree upon. And so
the question is how do we find
that sweet spot, right? How do
we, how do we figure out what
you all will take and what you
won't, and that's hard for us to
do without trying, right?
Without giving a shot, you all
go back and tell us, yeah, we,
we can't live with that. Um,
but, but that's where I
appreciate what you're telling
me is some states already do
this and you'll find that OK.
Um, the, um,
Again, forgive me if you, if you
covered this and doing it, but,
um, I had not only concerns with
immunity, although I'm kind of,
I, I, I'll come to that with
maybe some more detail and I'm
going quickly because of the
time, but um I think what the
way you presented this, you,
you're immune when you exercise
good faith, um,
I might give away my giveaway
secrets of the committee, but
I'll give away a spaceport, um.
We have, we have some clever
little tricks here in the
committee, and one of them is,
when you, when you give immunity
for a reasonable, for anything
that's reasonable, you're not
doing any immunity at all,
right? You're, uh, determining
that you're immune as long as
you exercise reasonable care or
ordinary care, in this case,
good faith. That's a fact
question for a trier of fact.
And so there's, there's immunity
and Senator Do and I and others
probably find that
objectionable, and, and I, I
find it objectionable from the
standpoint of giving immunity,
but on the other hand, I would
want you all to know, we
realize it's me, but it's really
not. It's, it's mostly theater,
right? It looks like a
community, and most people when
they see that language,
When you sign a release or
waiver and you say, oh, I'm
agreeing to waive all my rights.
Well, as long as you act
reasonably, well, you're not
waiving any rights at all,
right? Or you're, you're immune
from negligence as long as you
act reasonably or in good faith.
Well, that's not immunity at
all. Anyway, it looks like a,
sounds like me, reads like
community, but it's not
immunity. So, uh, I, I hope that
that's important and the uh the
other uh considerations Senator
do you tell me, uh, on page 12.
Did you all talk about the
subpoena authority?
Yeah, yeah, I didn't hear it,
and I'm concerned about that. I
mean, if I'm reading that
language on page 12, line 22,
says the subpoena issued by a
member state shall be
enforceable in other member
states, uh, that goes on to a
certain extent, there's some
limitations to the extent both
states agreed and they
participating, we're invading
the, the preview of the courts,
right? Uh, the ability to uh
subpoena, uh, is a court
authority, right? And I, I can
issue a subpoena as a lawyer,
but with limitations and subject
to a court review, and here to
say a subpoena issued by
that could be any other state
that's a compact member, they
issue a subpoena and it's
effective by this language here
in New Mexico. Um, and that
would be probably pretty
problematic. Somebody in
Massachusetts says we're issuing
a subpoena for doctor Smith in
New Mexico, and he's got to show
up or she's got to show up in
Massachusetts, because she's
subjected herself to the
subpoena, so yeah, I would, I
would add that. I'm sorry, go
ahead, Senator, just there was
some additional language added
to 12, part C.
referred to, but so it's
effective, but only to the
extent both states agreed to and
participating in a joint
investigation, so it would give
the two states the authority to
decide between the two of them
whether a subpoena is effective
in another state. You're
invading the judiciary branch,
uh, the subpoena requires really
the the authority of the
judiciary, and if you're an
attorney, I'm an attorney. When
I want to get a subpoena for
somebody in the state, I've got
to go through a process, right?
I've got to open the proceeding
in the other state. I've got to
get a court in that state to
issue the subpoena, a New Mexico
court.
can't issue a subpoena to
somebody in another state. I've
got to go to the other state and
get the authority of the other
states. So here that, that
triggered something for me of
some concern as well too, um,
and I think Senator raised a
number of the other issues too,
I did want to, I did want to
confirm what uh you've already
done for me, which is we can, we
can, uh,
modify this to suit our own
purposes and needs here and to
the point that was made earlier,
the suggestion that we would
ever tie our hands, in other
words, the idea that we would
enter into a compact that says
we could change our law or get
out of this, but if we do so, we
have to give you a year's
notice. Sometimes here in New
Mexico we call ourselves in the
special session, extraordinary
session, we come in and we have
things like an emergency clause
in our laws which make them
effective very quickly, and this
would essentially be, I think
probably questionably
constitutionally tying our
hands. I don't think we could
do.
this Constitutional. I say, hey,
we're gonna, we're gonna pass a
law, but we're gonna let the
commission tell us our laws
can't be effective for a year.
Uh, I think that's probably, uh,
not only an abdication of our
response, it's probably
unconstitutional to say we're
contractually uh signing a
contract to give away our, our
authorities and legislature. I
don't know we could do that. You
want to respond? Uh, yes, uh, I
would agree with you that
Uh, you can't tie your hands,
and it's not the commission and
the commission's interest to do
that. I think it's in both
parties' interests to end the
relationship somebody wants a
divorce, let's get it over with.
This is the this time frames
were primarily to make it sure
that all the operational details
were in place so that the
licensees themselves who are the
people that I think are the most
important ingredient that are
given due process and, and the
time to make adjustments because
their state is withdrawing from
the compact.
And they'll no longer have these
uh multi-state licenses and
those will have to be uh
Dealt with one way or the other
through your license report.
That that
Operation, those operational
details in my view can be
reworded in a way that doesn't
defeat the purpose, uh, which I,
I submit to you is primarily
operational, so that when, when
you leave, you're ending the
relationship for everybody
concerned, including the doctors
who are licensed and who, uh who
may, may or may not owe fees or
may be entitled to refunds, etc.
and, and let me interrupt
because I know the chair's gonna
push me along here, no, no, just
a quick nuance I mean
you.
I think the concern was
initially when it becomes law
initially, we pass it into law.
It's in our books, but yet we're
not a member of the combat till
later. Can you, can you address
that concern?
OK, that there is a period of
time for this to take effect,
and we trust that they'll be an
effective date that you have in
mind when you want to go live,
but we have to get set up with
our data system, we have to make
sure that it's compatible with
what your medical board lose
uses currently, it probably has
a lot of similarities because
other states might have a
problem, but we need to get, uh,
the people here in the state
that are working with the licens
board, uh, as well as the
doctors informed about what the
process is and
make sure everyone's oriented as
to how this is gonna work, so
there, there is a a beginning
stage after you enact this
before it will actually be able
to take effect.
Thank you. Well, we, we don't
have plenty of time, but I, I
think we're gonna probably have
to roll this over to a later to
our next hearing and I with all
of you here, I say I hope you'll
come back, uh, because I, I find
this very fascinating to
discuss, but I'll, I'll just
give you a couple of, uh, Mr.
Chairman, a couple of last
little things that that
triggered my attention. So you
all were talking about the
immunity. I don't know whether
you also saw in that same
section that the that the bill
here would say that there's a,
there's a limit um on the amount
of liability. It says that the
liability for executive director
and employees of the.
commission for the errors acts
and omissions may not exceed the
limits of liability set forth
under the constitutional laws
for the state.
For state officials, employees,
and agents. So that really means
you're, you're in New Mexico,
that would mean you're coming
with our tort Claims Act, right?
Because the, the limits of, of
immunity of immunity and damages
in the state for state
officials, employees and
agencies are our Tort Claims
Act, uh, Mr. Chair, that's
exactly what I was going to say
with result, uh, with regard to
what our intention is there and,
and we, we would, we would
simply like the same rules to
apply to people that work for
the medical licensure process as
state employees in Mexico, yeah,
and, and it's the next sentence
that caused me the pause, which
says the interstate commission,
this is the commission, is
considered the instrumentality
of the state, uh, for the
purpose of these actions. So you
all are essentially a state.
Hent if you will, but because we
have rulemaking power, uh,
that's appropriate and we, we
don't claim to be anything other
than a a governmental agency of
the states that make it up.
Uh, just a couple of last
questions, Mr. Chair, and then I
really do think we're gonna have
to pause to get back, but, uh,
what is the annual budget of the
commission right now? Uh.
I'm trying to
I want, I wanna say,
We're in the million dollar
range, but that's, that's,
that's just a, a guess, I mean,
uh, but, but we're certainly
Were profitable in every state
that is a member of the compact,
uh, is taking in more revenue
rather than losing it, so it's
been successful from that point
of view, and it's the member
states are taking in more
revenue um
well, each state issues a
complete license, like I said,
it's like the pre-Check lane,
you end up in the same place as
you would if you go through the
old fashioned process, we just
do it quicker. State collects a
fee in doing this. Is that what
you're saying? Is that the
revenue to the state? There's a,
there's a processing fee that
the that the commission charge.
s but the state also pay uh the
physician also pays each day in
which the physician wishes to be
licensed, uh, as part of the
process is the position also pay
the commission in trying to have
this license. Yes,
processing fee, OK, and, and how
many employees are, are, are
employed by the commission, uh,
at this point, we've got
approximately 75, no, I'm sorry,
uh 20 employees, uh, that are
working directly with the
commission and
And what are, what are the, what
are the revenues to the
commission over here?
Like I said, I, I, I can get you
an annual report, but uh we're,
we're in 7 figures for sure.
Um, and, and is there, is there
a publication that those
commission published its budget
and they see not, we have an
annual report and we'll, we'll
make that available to you, OK.
I, I would like to see that.
I'll just tell you, I'm, I'm not
suggesting this is the case in,
in your, uh, example, I see some
of these compacts and
commissions, and it looks to me
like a very uh uh uh creative
way of a business venture for,
for some, in other words, you
can create these interstate
combat commissions, and
sometimes they have fees and
costs and so.
Or that, that, uh, I, I want to
know what that is and I'd like
to know where that's going if
we're gonna pay into that. Now,
sometimes I see some of these
compacts where the, the
commission for that particular
compact publishes their own
materials, they require their
own attendance to their own
courses, continuing education,
those kind of things and like I
said, it looks like a pretty
creative way to make a buck, uh,
most of them are not, uh, as
successful in terms of the
revenue, uh, and, and the, the
data system is one of the
primary problems that most
Most compact agencies have
trouble funding, so uh we, we
are thankful that we don't have
that problem, but I, uh, I, I
think you'll find that, that
most of these commissions uh are
aren't wouldn't be very
profitable as business ventures.
And just last question, Mr.
Chair, Article 19, Senator Duke,
did you address the dispute
resolution provisions of the
combat.
The dispute the article I
dispute was like, so, uh, again,
the compact would have what are
uh
Requiring mediation and binding
dispute resolution, um, so that
could be binding mediation, I
guess there's really no such
thing as binding, but probably
binding arbitration, um, and so,
again, that, that caused me some
pause too to to say, hey, all of
our disputes are going to be
resolved by an arbitrator as
opposed to a jury. Some of us
are very committed to allowing
juries of our peers to make
decisions in the I'm part of one
of those individuals who thinks
very highly of juries and
allowing average citizens to
determine things.
And that's uh that's on page 30
of the dispute resolution
provision, so there's a lot in
here. I'm sorry the hour is
short, but I, I hope you all do
appreciate the fact that I did
want to get you into our
schedule because you've traveled
so far and, and we wanted to
make sure you felt we were
hospitable to you in doing so.
Thank you very much. We'll have
to roll this conversation
overpresentative, um, thank you,
thank you so much uh
Mr. Chair, and I'm wondering,
I'm hearing immunity, I'm
hearing rulemaking, and I'm
hearing some other things are
being the really teeny barriers
between the two parties.
I'm wondering if um
Uh, Rick tells me he's here
until tomorrow. We've got some
staff here. If we could go
through
Ourselves go through the the the
portions you pointed out, and um
And report back to see whether
or not we might be closer than
we think we are trying to do
this, you know, quickly, very
quickly off the top of our
heads. Happy to do that. Where
are you all from just real
quickly, where are you from, uh,
right now I'm outside of DC in
Annapolis, Maryland. I'm happy
to come back. I just, I'm gonna
have a problem.
All the same place,
so you all, so you all think
that you know what skiing is, I
imagine in DC, right? But if
you're gonna be here for a few
days, come check out our slopes.
Come, uh,
is it, is this not the first
time you're in New Mexico? Uh,
no, I'm, I'm proud to say I've
been here a number of times, uh,
on several different compacts,
and I'm glad to be back.
Well, we look forward to you
being here and we want to have
more doctors uh available to New
Mexicans and we're, we're gonna
work with you any way we can to
make that happen. All right,
members of the committee, we're
late and overdue on the floor.
Would you all please make those
days. I will let you know
whether it depends on entirely
