Stick credential.
Driving your slices were
originally intended to indicate
that a person has authority to
drive. But over time driver
license has become a primary
document used to identify
people.
In the United States.
Although M V D can issue mobile
driver's license without further
legislation, this bill will
provide guidelines on where they
can be used and accepted. MBD
will develop.
A secure cost free mobile
driver's license for new
Mexicans who wish to have one
Use will be voluntarily. Eight
states currently offer a mobile
driver's license.
And 10. More states are in the
process of developing one
New Mexico needs to keep pace
with the changing technology and
to be ready to offer a mobile
driver's license. Mobile
driver's license will be
displayed on the constituents
phone.
The person accepting the mobile
driver's license will scan the
license and know that it is
valid Credential E.
In the near term, accepting the
mobile driver's license will be
limited to, however, in the
coming years, accepting will
grow. This bill simply provide a
framework for M v D to offer
this type of credentials to be
ready for future technology
changed, Mr Chairman. Thank you,
Senator. We've got nobody on
this registered to speak in
support or opposition.
We'll go right to members of the
committee questions, please
Motions pass debate. Objection
to do past past chairman
members. Thank you, gentlemen.
Here, Senator Hemphill first if
you don't mind taking the out of
order, I think that one will
maybe be as efficient as we just
work.
Unless we've got Cabinet
secretary that has things to do
in better places to be
She she
She around.
Oh, there she is.
Senator Hemphill's Senate Bill
152. Thank you, Mr Chair members
of the committee today we have
Senate Bill 152, and it's just a
quick technical fix requested by
the FBI, and that will allow the
U. C c D and C Y f D to continue
conducting background checks
here to New Mexico's most
vulnerable Children.
And
Um, it places the E C. C D
Department volunteers and
employees in the in the section
requested by the FBI, allowing
us to perform background
clearances for S E C, d. Percy y
f d. It provides definitions for
C Y f D to conduct background
clearances on foster and
adoptive.
Parents, adults residing and
foster or adoptive parents
households, operators,
employees, student interns and
volunteers, juvenile detention
or correction facilities and
treatment facilities.
And Mr Chair. I have an expert
witness. I'll let her we've
received amendment passed out to
the committee's bill. You wanna
explain the amendment?
Two minutes. Yes, thank you, Mr
Chair. The amendment is in
response to a request that the
FBI made that the terms direct
and or indirect be removed from
the definition of operator and
that's on page.
Nine of the original bill.
Um and mine six.
And it only room. It's a direct
In the death itself. Everyone
have the amendment.
On the amendments adopted on the
bill. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
So we've been doing this for a
variety of agencies. I did one
for P e. D a couple of years ago
but was one vetoed last. Um,
Thank you, Mr Chair, Senator
Stewart. Um, we passed one last
year, actually for E. C, c D.
And what happened after we
passed? That one is that
The FBI said they approved most
of it except for the small piece
that we're making, um for the
employees and volunteers of the
actual department. They said
that wasn't appropriately
included. So we've made that
change and then also when they
were reviewing it, they
It brought issues to their
attention regarding
C Y F D s statute and they then
brought up some
Requests for us to amend that
language as well for the wipe.
data continue having their
authority also, so we were
granted a grace period on that
one small section and see why FD
was granted a grace period on
their authority through
September of 2024.
So, Mr Chairman, so the bills
weren't vetoed. No FBI just said
keep trying to fix them.
Just why you're here today.
Correct? All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
You, Mr. Chair, Senator. I'm
just jealous that you guys got
the FBI to respond to you. It
took a while. I've been trying
to get them to respond to me for
the same thing on cannabis.
They're busy in Albuquerque
These days with a P D.
Fair. Um, but Mr Chair when
you're ready for a motion
Just, uh
Um, on the two points. Is this
the language that the overlords
at FBI will allow us to do all
of these bills now and I I
obviously said officially, but
we we see this over and over
again. Can we start using this
language with council service
done with this issue?
Mr Chair. Senator Moore's We
did, um, get an email
confirmation that with this
specific language that they
would approve Roo Ri, both for
E. C, C, D and C Y D fully, um,
In my experience working with
the FBI, the answer to that is
probably not going to have
different language. I believe so
Yes. Moved past. Thank you.
Give anyone else in the
committee. Any questions? Debate
to do pass motion? Is there any
objection?
We did all members present
voting in the primitive, passive
center, souls and for the
benefit everyone here, Senator
neighbor it's built to 37
showing up last on your agenda.
It will not be heard today.
There's still some work being
done.
Bill with some recent court case
decisions that need to be
squared.
With that by an amendment, so
we'll hear senators souls, and
then we'll hear the
Matter with seven doing, Pinos.
Mr Chair. I believe that's
right. You withdrawn as a
sponsor.
And so this the presentations
can be by. I'm not Senator City
yellow. Okay. Alright, senator
Souls on Senate 127. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Uh, Senate Bill 127 is
almost identical to Senate Bill
117 that you heard last year. It
got all the way through. The
governor vetoed it because she
was unhappy that it had
prescribing psychologist listed
under the medical board.
We've got a message from the
governor. It will keep the
prescribing psychologists under
the psychology board. That is
the bulk of what the changes
are. There is another minor
change dealing with. I believe
the prescribing or the, uh,
injectables. Um, but everybody's
on board with this. It's
essentially the same.
Bill as before. Um and the
governor is on board with it. So
we think we've got everything
worked out. I'm happy to
introduce my experts, but they
are not interested in speaking
unless they're needed for their
expert advice. But I have with
me Dr Joe Velasquez, who used to
teach the prescribing psychology
courses at New Mexico State.
Also, doctor does. Oh, and
everyone knows Linda, who is
One of the
Very good lobbyists on lots of
the medical issues with things,
And with that we're ready for
questions. Thank you, Senator.
You don't happen to know the
vote last year on the Senate
floor by Chance. Zero it was
unanimous Vote. Thank you very
much, And I believe it was the
same in the house and unanimous
and, yes, center. Mortars. So
you said it was pocket vetoed?
Yes, she gave you a message.
She gave us a message. This last
point is that it would help if
the governor gave us messages on
pocket veto so we could fix
their concerns. And so there's a
constitutional amendment out
there. I hope we actually
adopted without a move to pass a
motion for do pass any further
discussion. Just say, I think
it's a shame that I thought that
approach right, Wolf.
Thank you, senator doing anyone
else wanna do pass motion? Yep.
Got it. Is there any objection
to do pass motion?
Seeing none. All present voting
the firm. Move, You have to
pass. Thank you.
Members of
Members
00. Don't you worry. Don't you
worry. We'll slow it down for
you here in just a moment, But,
um, we are probably no. I hope
everyone sees the pattern when I
see a bill when they see a bill
that's effectively been passed
by both houses unanimously.
And, uh and vetoed and we don't
know the reason why the only
thing I could think of was put
it back up there again and see
what? See what we got.
Fishing it around.
Uh, I'll take the opportunity
with the progress we've made
today. I do not foresee us
meeting tomorrow at all.
And this committee and or Sunday
So we should just go ahead and
make make a decision to do that.
Now there's nothing to roll
back.
Warning.
Opposition. We've got maybe four
or five in support Proponents do
you have a way that you want to
proceed? Or are you allocating
that time and we were taking 10
minutes of that time? And then
we're asking for 10 minutes for
the alright, Totally. So, your
You want to come back to that
after the opponents or you want
to do that at the front end? Um
uh, well, I thought were
presentation and then the the
opponents could speak, and then
we could have are really with
you. And I used to do you want
to reserve any of your time for
rebuttal. Okay. Thank you. I
understand that.
Yes. Maybe a minute code for the
lawyer. Thank you. You wanted to
reserve sometimes a minute.
If if that, Okay. You've got 20
minutes. My
Thank you, Mr Chair.
In the state of New Mexico.
There are currently three
migrants detention facilities.
It is really crucial to
highlight the harsh and inhumane
conditions faced by migrants
upon arrival at these facilities
from hunger strikes to solitary
confinement and enduring and
they endure psychological abuse,
and we've even seen a suicides.
These individuals who have not
violated any laws find
themselves subjected to cruelty
despite diligently finally,
following established
procedures.
Asylum seekers held alongside
criminal detainees and U. S
marshals in pretrial proceedings
in local jails.
That is only a fraction
Of the problem that we're
seeing.
And it's important to notice
that these individuals have not
violate any laws. They are
seeking refuge from various
forms of persecution and
discrimination, including
religious, racial and sexual
persecution. These asylum
seekers are housed along as I
said Criminal detainees in U. S
marshal. Pretrial detainees.
And why Mr Chair?
Because of money.
And let's explore how much money
In Torrance County, for
instance, for each detainee core
Civic pays 50 cents to the
county.
The facility is so understaffed
that employees have to be
brought in from other states
because they cannot adequately
staff it.
Which leads to many of these
problems. We hear reports of
detainees who have deported
deportation orders or orders of
release being held in additional
time for additional time in the
facility.
I wonder what is the cause of
the needless delay in releasing
them?
The state of New Mexico should
not be complicit with these
disgusting human rights
violations in the name of
profit.
This bill will end the
complicity of the state by
requiring that public bodies not
participate in intergovernmental
service agreements, which shield
the private companies from
standard federal government
scrutiny.
It also requires that the three
facilities who have
intergovernmental service
agreements terminate their
agreements with the federal
government in accordance with
their termination provisions in
their contracts. Termination
provisions give them plenty of
time to release deported. Locate
the approximately 2000 asylum
seekers detained in these
facilities without Mr Chair, I
would like to turn it over to my
expert Sofia Genevieve's
Was a managing attorney for the
asylum detention programs at the
New Mexico Immigrant Law Center,
and she truly has a deep well of
knowledge about these issues.
Thank you, senator. And good
afternoon, Mr Chair members of
the committee. The urgency of SP
145 cannot be overstated as a
lawyer who works and represents
with asylum seekers in each of
our three facilities in New
Mexico. I have been able to
track troubling trends in
systemic abuses in all three
facilities, people repeatedly
and consistently report being
treated worse than animals.
From inner inedible food,
crumbling infrastructure and
mistreatment by guards. These
facilities are patently unsafe
insights of significant client
was sexually assaulted. In one
of these facilities, prison
officials failed to follow Preah
protocols and engaged in victim
blaming and re traumatize My
LGBTQ identifying client.
We see Children under the age of
21 forced into New Mexico is
adult ice facilities and
deprived of the opportunity to
seek special immigrant juvenile
status, something they are
entitled to up until the age of
21 in New Mexico, thanks to the
passage of HB 15 last year, But
despite that law is actively
preventing these Children from
accessing justice and instead
deport them back to danger every
single day.
Men at Cibola recently entered a
pepper spray attack and were
forced to sleep in the chemicals
overnight in their contaminated
dormitories, continuing to
suffer from suffer from burning
and their eyes and throats and
suffering prolonged symptoms up
until now, several months later.
Congressman gave Vasquez visited
Cibola last week, and he spoke
directly with my clients about
the mistreatment they are
enduring there, including acts,
lack of access to clean drinking
water in an adequate food, and
he testified to this harmless
this week in Congress.
In the wake of that visit to
Cibola, the warden of the
facility threatened my clients
who spoke with the congressman
to take away their drinking
water there showers and their
recreation time because the word
in reported to the men that he
nearly got fired because they
talk to the congressman.
And on top of all this men and
women are subject to due process
violations during their asylum
proceedings. We are seeing
victims of torture people with
credible and strong asylum
claims be denied the opportunity
to even file asylum
applications. There was recently
a young man who was deaf who was
unrepresented because he could
not access legal services by the
phone.
And he was surprised of
constitutionally required
accommodations for his
preliminary asylum screening
because he could not
meaningfully participate in
those proceedings. He was
ordered deported.
My organization by chance, ran
into him in the hallway. We
immediately stepped in. We filed
a civil rights, but we know
we're not able to catch and
rectify every single due process
issue that occurs there are only
six nonprofit attorneys in the
state of New Mexico, providing
pro bono representation to
detain migrants population that
can reach 2000 people. We simply
cannot keep up.
All of these conditions have
been verified by multiple
government oversight bodies.
Legal service providers and the
New Mexico congressional
delegation. It is clear that
there are systemic abuses in
these facilities. It is
exceedingly well documented, and
the federal government is
failing to respond to these
abuses.
New Mexico now has the
opportunity to stop its
complicity and these human
rights abuses by passing SB 1 45
7. Other states have passed near
identical legislation, including
Colorado, California,
Washington, Illinois, Maryland,
Oregon in New Jersey, and let me
be clear. SP 145 is
constitutional.
Not a single, I'd say Ban in the
United States has been found
unlawful ideas say bands were
explicitly found to be
constitutional by the seventh
circuit in McHenry County v.
Raul, which held that ice
agreements are purely
discretionary for states to opt
into. They are not required for
states to participate in or else
that would be a serious
infringement upon states'
rights.
In addition, the seventh Circuit
ruled that is within the state's
historic police powers to
regulate the health and safety
of migrants detained in their
jurisdiction. And an I G s a ban
is a permissible use of that
authority.
And despite private prison band
litigation in California and New
Jersey, the I G s a bands in
both of those states are not at
all impacted by those court
rulings and are still in effect.
Finally, the economic impact of
the spill has been wildly
overstated and will be
overstated in opposition's
public comment today, as was
made clear during the Senate
Health and Public Affairs
Committee. The county's continue
to be confused by this bill.
This is not a private prison
ban. This is an I G s a ban and
their public comments and their
analyses reflect that error.
SB 145 requires termination of
three contracts in New Mexico. A
small sliver of the overall
detained population in each of
those counties 150 people in
Cibola.
302 people in torrents and 853
people in Otero.
It does not require closure of
facilities. It does not prevent
the counties from continuing to
detain other types of
populations. Attention is a
small percentage of the
otherwise very large
incarceration apparatus that
exists in New Mexico and I'll
stop there and we'll start the
organized public comment.
Yes. So, yes. Believe you
identified seven individuals to
speak.
Um, they will each be recognized
for a minute unless you wish to
get another time again. If they
exceed that time, they'll be
cutting back on the time of
others. So we have a
Would you give us your name,
please? So I can confirm that Mr
Chair. My name is Ariel Prado.
Real problem.
Yes. Thank you, Mr Chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Ariel Prado. I'm the
director of civic engagement for
innovation. LA Lab, a member of
the Dignity, not Detention
Coalition and the Torrance
County listening project and I'm
speaking in support of this
bill.
When we examine the ways that
immigration prisons inflict
suffering on our communities,
supporters of immigration
prisons shift the focus to the
economic role that these sites
of human suffering play in rural
communities.
In doing so they would have us
believe that rural economic
distress begins when prisons
close
They avoid a harder
conversations about rural
economic development.
That is responsive to the needs
of rural communities.
If we care about rural economic
development, and we should
We should support the
Association of Counties when
they ask for funds for rural
emergency medical services.
Support the local solar access
fund and help rural communities
save on utility costs.
Support jobs training after
school programs investment in
existing community centers and
senior centers and rural
communities.
Do not accept the premise.
That either immigrant
communities must suffer or rural
communities must suffer.
Uh, Rascon. Sure.
Thank you, Mr Chair members of
the committee. My name is Mia
Rascon. I'm a student in Mexico
State University. My father is a
professor emeritus at New Mexico
State University. Alamogordo, My
mother, a full professor at New
Mexico State University,
Alamogordo and recipient of the
Donald C. Roush Award for
teaching excellence out of the
New Mexico State University
branch campuses.
This is all to say that I have
deep ties to my home of a tarot
county. I grew up in a tarot
county where one of the
detention centers is located.
These detention centers are
places that not only bring harm
to the community, but to people
seeking asylum and refuge. My
grandparents were immigrants to
the United States from Mexico
and met in Carlsbad, New Mexico.
I'm grateful every day that they
came to the U. S when they did,
and not during the present day
If they had come during the
present moment they may have
never met as a result of
detention centers and detention
procedures, and I would not be
standing before you.
SB 145 will bring immigrants the
chance they need to make a life
in the United States a life that
is better than what they could
have had before.
My grandparents built a
beautiful life together but were
only able to do so because they
were not forced into isolation
and had the freedom to meet. I
urge you, Mr Chair and members
of the committee to vote Yes. On
SB 145. Thank you for your time.
It's a you know.
Brenda. They get that right?
Yes.
Thank you. Chair members and the
community.
Okay. My name is Italiana Vanda
Few days before Christmas. I
received a call telling me that
my father was in jail after
following the procedures. We
were told that he would be the
released the next day.
All I wanted to do was hug him.
To my surprise. I had it. My
father had been transferred not
released. My father was placed
in the Otero processing center.
The man who is a hero to me was
simply in a number to New
Mexico. He waited there for
eight long months because he
didn't want to be separated from
us.
My father had to sleep on the
floor for months because there
weren't enough beds. I overheard
him say he was glad he finally
got a pair of shoes. After some
time. I could hear him telling
my mother he was afraid he
would he might be mistreated
because of what he saw.
My father's voice changed over
time, becoming sad, concerned
and scared. I knew he wasn't
eating correctly since he told
me he was underway in his bones
were starting to hurt.
After I ate hard months of
waiting for my father's court
date, we discovered he had been
deported. He was being deported,
and I recall him telling him
and all I did was cry, wondering
when I'll see my father again.
My home changed and I was
constantly worried about being
detained and deported, which
influences my mental health. And
guess what? My family has never
been the same ever since. I'm
gonna have to move on.
Thank you.
Next.
Thank you, Mr Chair members of
the committee. Castaneda with
the L U of New Mexico. I'm here
to strongly support SB 145
because it
Very clearly works within New
Mexico's constitutional right to
remove its active participation
in a immigration detention
system that is
Why'd Lee reported to be cruel,
inhumane filled with problems
where people who are coming to
our shores seeking asylum,
safety and shelter are being
mistreated, abused? Talk down to
bed, poorly, poor quality food.
This bill will remove New Mexico
facilitation of this process and
ensure that we are not creating
liabilities or ruining new
Mexico's reputation by being
part in immigration. Detention.
Thank you.
Had Javier Rojo is Nick.
Did you hear?
Yep. He's on the proponents of
your Oh, no.
Reverend, You're next up.
Thank you, Mr Chair. My name is
the Reverend Mike Angell,
director of the Episcopal Church
of ST Michael and all Angels in
Albuquerque. Uh, Mr Chair. I
brought along an email that I
sent to you in November. Myself
and other clergy have been
trying to reach out specifically
to speak with you about the kind
of conditions we've already
heard Detailed. I work at a
church where several of the
people who have been released
from these facilities.
Land for a night or two before
they get sent on to be reunited
with family or sponsors, often
in other states.
And I think it's really
important that we understand
that there's a moral dimension
to what is going on in our
facility is owned by counties
owned by municipalities that the
state has an important role of
oversight with its command in
Scripture from Jesus that, he
says when you visit me in prison
When you visit the least of
these in prison, you visit me
having gone into Torrance County
and having visited with several
of the people who have stayed
there and at other facilities, I
think that we should be out of
this work and I would urge you
to support this legislation. And
Senator if I can leave this
email for you still have a
response, and the invitation
still stands to introduce you to
some of the people that have
been
Directly impacted by their stays
in these places.
The committee. A few moments
I've been to the facility.
Um, I had recognized of your
Rojo as having registered. He
had weather issues, but he's
available remotely have three
other individuals remotely, so
we'll hear first from Mr Rojo.
Mr Rojo, you're recognized for
up to one minute, sir.
Afternoon, chairman and members
of the committee. Thank you for
giving me the opportunity to
speak in support of this bill.
My name is Javier broke when I'm
a senior research and policy
analysts with New Mexico voices
for Children economist by
training, and I've been studying
the impact immigrants have on
your Mexico's economy and fiscal
system for the past four years,
and this impact is
overwhelmingly positive,
according to our research
undocumented New Mexico
residents pay more than 68
million in state and local taxes
every year.
Applicants are also more likely
to start businesses, immigrant
owned businesses in New Mexico
employed over 27,000 New
Mexicans and generate
approximately 4.4 billions in
annual sales. Immigrants also
stimulate the local economy in
New Mexico immigrants account
for 12% of the state's GDP,
which is even higher than their
share of the population. Key
reason for this is that their
share the key reason for the
high share of the economic
output is that immigrants are
concentrated in prime working
age.
And you, can you Mexico while
immigrants make up 9% of the
population, they make up 12% of
the working age population and
correspondent and
correspondingly 12% of the labor
force and conclude and
conclusion regarding regardless
of their status, immigrants
work, pay taxes and create jobs,
all of which strengthen our
local economy.
And state. All immigrants
deserve it between and with
dignity and respect. And for
this For this reason, I urged
the committee to give this
billet doux pass. Thank you.
Thank you. MEREDITH Ross. Macon
is on zoom.
You're recognized for up to one
minute.
Um, Mr Chair members of the
committee. I'm MEREDITH Matron
speaking on behalf of legal
women, voters of New Mexico and
I also serve on the nationally a
women voters immigrations during
committee and we know that
immigrants, migrants have rights
and what's happening is that
we're not giving them the
ability to follow due process
when they're put into these
detention centers, and they're
deported.
Before they're even allowed to
present their cases.
Um, The conditions are terrible
as we've heard, And there have
been, you know, we've seen these
abuses going on for years and
years and years and it's time to
stop.
Allowing these into government
service agreement. Um, contracts
to, uh, exist in New Mexico, So
we urge you to support this bill
and thank the sponsors and all
the the
Hello.
Oh,
Hello? Yes, ma'am. We can hear
you, Miss Bueller. Bluer. Okay.
Thank you. Yes. I'm Francesca.
Bluer. Um I'm a lifelong
resident of New Mexico. Um and
I'm a elementary teacher. I've
had the great honor to visit on
an almost a monthly basis to of
our three detention centers,
Torrance and Cibola.
Visiting the men in these
detention centers is both joyful
and heartbreaking.
Every visit. I'm overwhelmed by
the brilliance that greets me.
We make singers, mechanics,
preachers, chefs, artists,
teachers and engineers.
Stories about their families
about where they live.
About what celebrations I
celebrate or always shared.
What's incredibly heartbreaking
is hearing about their their
dangerous journey, so some of
the reasons they fled many life
threatening situations.
And what is very most disturbing
are the stories about after they
arrived in the detention
centers.
They are shocked at arriving to
a facility with razor wire.
Locked cells.
Prison guards. We regularly hear
about the quality the poor
quality of water rat
infestations, sewage backups,
inedible rotten food.
Black.
Um or no medical or
psychological care. Thank you.
Thank you, Miss Bloom. Thank
you, Miss Bluer. Appreciate
that. We've we've exceeded the
time that I had recognized you
for. We appreciate you appearing
by remote means. We've now heard
20 minutes of support in on the
bill. I told you I was reserving
a minute for you, Senator, So
we'll do that in opposition.
There are three individuals who
registered
Uh, Chief Weisler, your and
Because there are only three of
you will recognize each of the
three up to five minutes, so
there's a corresponding time in
support of and opposition. You
can use all of that or less.
Mr Chair.
Here? Yeah.
Members it members of the
committee. Police doesn't have a
position on this, bill. Um, but
I did want to okay?
How about now? Good.
Uh, we did wanna bring up an
item of concern with the current
format of the bill. Um and I My
apologies wasn't noted on our
for because we did not think
that it had any impact, um, on
the Department of public safety
or state police, But we have a
concern reference to grant
funding that the current wording
of the bill.
My adversely affect we believe
would adversely affect stone
Garden funding, which is a
fairly large federal grant
program for state police and
local agencies, Uh, in four of
the border counties so we just
wanted to, uh, make that note so
that the committee was aware of
that.
Um and I
Believes unattended consequence.
I don't think that's really what
the The goal of the bill is, but
As it as it's currently worded.
We do have concern about that.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Uh, Dave Panto.
Is that right?
County attorney. See below
your recognized her up to five
minutes. Thank you. Mr Fonte's
Thank you. Members of the board.
My name is Dave Potato on the
county attorney for Civil
accounting, New Mexico and I'm
here to express the board's
position with respect to Senate
Bill 145.
despite calls from advocates to
decrease funding for ice
detention.
Congress appropriated $2.9
billion to hold 34,000 people in
eyes.
For each day in fiscal year
2023.
Post legislation would have
absolutely no impact on the
number of detainees housed by
ice in a given year, which seems
to be the objective of the
sponsors.
Rather, this legislation would
only change the location of
detention.
Ultimately this legislation
would make a very costly
statement to the federal
government that New Mexico is
disgusted with the federal
government's treatment of human
beings at the expense of three
New Mexico communities.
Horse Civic is the largest
employer in Cibola County and
has an annual payroll. A $10.8
million behind that number is
the nearly 250 employees who
have Children that attends Ebola
County schools employees who
have spouses that work at our
county offices, hospitals and
our schools.
These employees own and rent
homes in our community. They
shop in our community, their
parents and grandparents that
live in our community. They
formed the fabric of argument.
Prohibition against private
detention contracts believe
these 250 employees and their
families without an income
source.
It would result in the
displacement of countless
families, many of whom have
lived in civil county for
generations.
The result in the fracturing of
family units as former counties
of the sports sports city
facilities scrambled to find
positions elsewhere in the
community and throughout the
state.
It will not reduce the 34,000
people in ice that will be
detained this year. It will not
reduce the $2.9 billion that
Congress has already budgeted to
house. These folks, it would
simply take these positions and
these jobs out of our
communities.
The county would additionally
experienced a substantial
decline in our county property
tax revenue to the tune of
approximately $880,000 a year,
which property taxes serve to
support not just the county but
the village of Milan, the city
of grants this public county
school.
The loss adjustable account
extends beyond lost property
taxes, lost jobs, reduce school
enrollment and the impacts on
the local economy and housing
market.
Ebola County contracts with
course addicted House County
detainees. We understand that
other counties that have been
forced to close the detention
centers have had to transport
their detainees as far as an
hour and a half away away from
their families and the courts,
which transport exposes the
detainees the correctional
officers to risk of harm and the
transport along isolated New
Mexico.
The system is broken and civil
County recognizes that
We would respectfully request
that instead of banning
contracts of private detention
facilities
Um, the state considered
resolution setting forth its
position with respect to the
broken immigration system.
Um, partnering with our federal
legislative delegation in the
president addressed the failures
of our immigration system and
that it worked to develop and
adopt safeguards to ensure the
safe keeping those immigrants
detained by federal courts CITY,
Mexico. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much for staying
within your time. Roy Nichols,
You're recognized in opposition
or Nichols. Afternoon. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair and members
of the committee. Are you able
to come in right now? And you
recognized for up to five
minutes, Mr Nichols.
Thank you.
Time speaking day on behalf of
the terror county terror
counties opposed to SP 145.
Um, I'd like to note that last
summer and, uh, interim
committee hearing I invited
opponents and advocates of this
legislation and any wrestling
like any interested legislators
to tour the Otero County
Processing Center weapon.
To date. No one has taken me up
on that offer, but it remains on
the table of terror county is
committed to the dignified,
passionate treatment of all
individuals that passed through
Tarrant County processing
facility.
I understand that, um, the
concern that you can't make
unscheduled visits. That's not
our policy. It's simply it's
that's the government's policy.
And, uh and it is what it is.
But we do make monthly
inspections ourselves there and
again, anyone to account.
Uh, with us, finally and
briefly, I'd like to state the
likely and known outcomes from
the passage of SB 145.
Individuals will continue to be
detained that attentional
district er exclusively in red
states, where we have no options
of oversight.
I'd like that question to be
presented to the advocates that
can they promised that no
migrant school. Um if this bill
is passed
Ah, don't they just go to Texas?
Ah,
For detention instead of New
Mexico.
Next and unfunded mandate we
placed on local governments and
communities to provide the
resources and needs that are
currently provided the
processing facilities by ice,
such as Philip Medical, shoulder
and clothing.
You can look at cities all
across the nation right now that
are buckling under the influx of
asylum seekers and, uh and how
it is creating a strain. Uh,
those communities ability just
to, um
To meet the needs of this bill
like this was passed in Colorado
last year, when in effect
January 1st and giving birth is
currently overwhelmed by the
needs were 40,000 asylum
seekers.
There will be litigation costs.
certainly, um, due to challenges
from counties and corporations,
we tens of millions of dollars
in economic damage student lost
jobs.
Otero County will default on its
outstanding bond. Approximately
$25 million
Otero County is credit rating
will be harmed.
Will be substantial economic
cost of a terror county. Uh, to
repurpose the facility. That's
money. We don't have
Uh, there will be a loss of an
immigration court facility
currently has five judges,
according to the Congressional
Research Service, 1000 more
judges than needed immediately
have a hope of clearing legs.
Asylum hearing back walls by
2032.
There will be an increase in
illegal labor and criminal
exploitation of thousands of
individuals who are unable to
work for a minimum of 180 days,
but usually longer due to
technical issues and delays in
the processing work
authorization requests.
Bottom line. This legislation
well, it's more losers than
winners, and it does not meet
the intent.
And goal. That's why people are
seeking
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Nichols. Also.
Well within your time. Thank
you. We've heard from all of the
registered opponents. And now
proponents, Senator, I told you
to reserve a minute for you to
rebut.
Um, thank you, Mr Chair. What
happened was two people who were
not on our list kind of got on
which is fine, But so we didn't
get Lauren Collingwood who
registered today. I'd like to
see my minutes to to her. She's
an economist.
Um, I don't have her on the
registered proponents, but you
have that minute. I'll show you
that minute. I
Okay. You have them. You have a
minute to recognize her, Mr. Uh,
Collingwood.
Are you online? Yes. Can you
hear me? Yes. Yes, sir. All
right. Thank you, Um
Alright. My name is Professor
Lauren Collingwood. Uh, I'm
speaking on behalf of myself,
but I do work at the University
of New Mexico. I'm a political
scientist. I study immigration
American politics and I'm
working on a book on private
prisons influence in American
politics. Uh, my report I
examined, uh, the emergence of
privatized immigrant detention
centers, uh or county owned and
operated by a private facility
across the United States.
Over the last 20 or 30 years,
and there appears to be no. At
the time of emergence. There's
no effect on unemployment rates
with with that you would think
that if so many jobs are being
created, Unemployment would have
gone down. There is no evidence
for that, In this particular
case with respect to the Otero
County Processing Center, I
looked at the emergency opening
economic indicators around the
opening of that both monthly
yearly and quarterly.
Uh, there's very little evidence
that at least at the time of the
opening, um new jobs were
created or more jobs came in
either jobs got shifted within
the county and or people are
working outside of the state.
Um, that, uh, that that they're
getting the
The employees in the center
actually working outside of the
state so that people living
inside of Otero County or
probably not getting a lot of
advantage. There. Um
Also median household income of
individual households living in
the census track where the
facility is located, dropped
immediately upon the coming
years, right after the facility
came in, and then didn't recover
until basically the covid
pandemic with a variety of
likely subsidies coming in from
the federal government.
The census track has over 7000
people according to census and a
CS data, Not one of them works
in the facility itself, who
actually live in the census
track. Their home values also
dropped immediately after the
facility came in, and that that
area is 90% Hispanic. Thank you,
Mr Collingwood. Appreciate.
Thank you, sir.
The time has expired for
proponents. Thank you for your
participation, alright members
of the committee O'Neill.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you for bringing this forward.
I'm just curious. What isn't I G
s a band versus what
What's I G s a like what? Versus
what inter government, Uh,
services contract? That's a
contract between the federal
government and the county, and
that contract does not have the
requirements that the federal
government normally has in
contracting with private
parties, including looking at
prior performance.
And so this is not banning
private prisons or doing
anything like that. It's just
stopping these unique little
contracts that are passed
through. So what happens is the
county's involvement Shields
these companies from having the
responsibilities that they would
have under, you know the
scrutiny that they would have,
um if they contracted directly
with the federal government.
All this does is it stops that
shielding?
It's a very narrow act.
Okay. Well, thank you. And well,
I just have to ask. What do you
down this or are we shutting
down these facilities? I would
like to turn that over to my
Expert chair, Senator Thank you
For that This bill is narrow it
only prohibits GSA's or
intergovernmental services
Agreement and other types of
agreements between the federal
government in New Mexico state
public entities nowhere in this
law does it require facilities
to close and in fact, in the
case of Cibola, there's between
100 and 100 and 50 people in ice
custody.
500 people in U. S marshals
custody as of today and then an
additional 100 people in county
custody. It is a small fraction
of the detention population. It
does not require the facilities
to close. Thank you.
You, said O'Neill. Anyone else?
Remember his questions?
Comments anyone at all? We're
gonna get to a boat quickly. I
think it looks like, um
Senator. Sorry about that.
Alright. First of all, I wanna
appreciate everyone from being
here today. We have full
audience for those who can't see
this and I appreciate the
concerns for the immigrant
community, which I share very
much. I wish that I were looking
was looking at a build that
Prohibited future contracting
for these for these things.
Well, you're not in your head. I
know it does that, but it does a
lot more.
It calls for the immediate
termination of contracts.
For the invocation of contract
clauses to immediately it's not
in their heads, so I'm
interpreting your bill
correctly.
I think that's important because
I'm not. Although your statement
was that there is precedent for
courts upholding these bands,
and I would agree that's
probably constitutional think
it's pretty clearly
unconstitutional to impair an
existing contract. Um and and
that's the concern I have is
like, you know, I think the
statement made earlier buying a
lawsuit. There's no doubt about
that, and that may be something
to worth worth having. But
I think there is a
constitutional issue that
remains apart from the band
itself, but rather the
termination of the contract,
which is one concern.
I have toured the facility
before that will. Admittedly,
that was probably three or four
years ago, so I can't really
speak to the current condition
and from the sound of things,
the conditions are pretty
deplorable.
I do appreciate the invitation
of one of the speakers for
think Cibola County. Maybe Otero
County to the facility. We
should probably do that during
the item. We should probably go
have a good look, although I
always find tours of these kind
of facilities of some, uh some
limited value Only because I
know very well that everything
gets dressed up real nicely
before.
You know, Field day. I'm aware
of that, too.
I am.
Yep, the other issues I've had,
and I'm still waiting to be
persuaded one way or the other
on this vote. The concerns I
have for those of you that are
there here as proponents for the
immigrant community again. I
appreciate that very much. I
don't think we can escape the
point made, so I'll reemphasize
it. This is not going to change
any number of people that are
detained. It'll change where
they're detained.
And that's my concern, you know,
pass a word. We see a lot of
this activity. The district I
represent part of Otero County,
but also someone Parkins in
southern New Mexico.
When when they're not
facilities. People are housed in
tents. People are housed
outdoors. People are housed
under overpasses and interstate
bridges, because that's the
shelter that that sometimes
available.
And so I worry a little bit
about that as bad as the
conditions maybe, as they're
described in Otero County that
if we don't have that facility
available, where will they be
detained? And will that And so I
guess that's one question for
you. Senator is there
At least accurate in that that
have if we pass this bill, and
we shut down, these facilities
are not available.
They're simply going to be,
would you? Would you persuade me
that that's wrong? I would like
to turn that over to my expert.
Mr Chair. Thank you for those
comments, and I'd like to take
each of them in part just
quickly on the contract clause.
I will point out that in each of
New Mexico's three I. GSA's
There is termination, language
and each of those agreements for
termination upon either 60 days
notice or 100 and 20 days
notice. Core Civic has
previously not core Civic. I'm
sorry Previously the facilities
have exercised these termination
provisions so
This is something that has
happened in the past and can
happen in the future. We also
have written into the language
itself that if termination isn't
I anticipated in the agreement.
No, there's no termination
language in the agreement, then
the agreements need to be
terminated at the earliest time
possible. So we interrupt you
for a moment. So, um, because it
sounds like you looked
specifically at the contracts
available that we're talking
about for the including the
Otero in the Sea bullet, and
you're saying both of those
contracts have termination
allowances.
That's correct, Mr Chair. Each
of the three GS A is in Section
seven, have termination
language. Otero requires 60 days
notice Torrents and Sybil. I
require 100 and days 120 days
notice and in the absence of
that in the bill itself, we say
that the contract termination
provision needs to be exercised
at the earliest point possible
that isn't the absence won't
apply that language. You will
want to correct that's correct
already have the termination
language, so I appreciate
Putting that in here, but
It's not really relevant to the
questions. I'm asking which
which are the existing contracts
have termination provisions, and
they're pretty quick. Um, is
there are they Are they
terminal at will of the parties
and without consequence without
recourse, that's correct, Mr
Chair, um, so that to the to the
counties and the attorneys
concerns about
Um on impairment or so were
those are things they could have
anticipated when they signed the
contract and allowed
For the termination of the
contract. So so that that
addresses my concern there so
then that you were going to take
my questions in part, which I
appreciate you breaking it down
for me. The second part of my
question was, I'm sure you're
going to get to it is we shut
down these facilities What
becomes of the detainees? Then
where do they go? Thank you, Mr
Chair. I appreciate that
question. So this is a growing
movement of states no longer
wanting to be complicit in the
human rights abuses that are
systemic.
And all I see facilities across
the country.
Yeah, and when, when, in the
case of New Mexico, in
particular, all of the people
who are detained in the state of
New Mexico are recently arrived.
Asylum seekers. Their detention
is completely discretionary
under federal law when it
frequently happens at the
border are people are processed
by customs and border
protection and the vast majority
of US asylum seekers are
released to their families with
instructions to come back to
court at a later date.
But occasionally people are
detained and I frequently in my
work. I see people in the exact
same situation. One will have
been released and one will
happen. Detained and what drives
that decision is the
availability of ice bed space
When there is a bed to fill ice
will fill it so by
Passing SB 145. We are taking
away national ice bed space and
that will likely result in more
asylum seekers being released at
the border and when they're
released when they're not
detained, they have more time to
integrate into the United States
more time to access legal
services and integration
services. So this this does have
a benefit. This is not a matter
of simply transferring to Texas
is what we often hear this
drives down national ice
detention space.
And I, um I understand it's It's
an interesting theory. I don't
know that we can anticipate
exactly how that will happen,
but I'd like to believe that's
true.
The concern. You used Texas as
an example. I think that's the
argument I made here previously
is if we don't do it, New
Mexico Um are they gonna be
detained in Texas as opposed to
New Mexico and candidly that
troubles me more than being
detained in New Mexico candidly
because I think Texas is so anti
immigrant, um, and the governor
of Texas, I think, deplorably
Anti immigrant obstacles on the
border. Razor wires, tanks the
whole bit, deploying their
military, the governor of Texas
has shipped immigrants from
Texas to remote cities in the
country.
So Texas is a very deplorably
unfriendly place for immigrants.
And I wonder whether will
regret. Um, you know, be careful
what you wish for. You know, we
don't house them in. We don't
detain people in New Mexico,
where I think generally were
more welcoming. And with all the
people here today, clearly
Concerned about immigrants and
the conditions they're housed
in.
I'm concerned that we we shut
down the New Mexico facilities
only to send them to states that
are going to welcome these
facilities. Create these beds.
Profit from it, which again? I
don't support
But, um, maybe be much less
friendly, ultimately to the
immigrant community and again,
Texas is a classic example Me
being a neighbor of Texas in in
my district, not not the place
you want to be.
True, Mr. Chair. Thank you for
that concern.
Having worked in nearly 20
facilities across this country,
including Texas, Alabama,
Mississippi, Georgia, Florida,
New York, New Jersey and
Pennsylvania and now also. New.
Mexico. New Mexico has and we
are nationally recognized,
particularly in torrents for
horrific conditions. That's not
something we should be proud of
as a state.
New Mexico is a welcoming state
to immigrants, for the most
part, but our facilities or
anything, but that so when it
comes to comparisons of our
facilities being better, that's
just absolutely not the case. We
have some of the worst in the
country.
Well, that's very disappointing
to learn in here, and that's
probably a different subject for
a different topic. Different
day. But your what's your time?
Music can be worse. Um, it's
worse here than my concerns
about
You and you described states of
Mississippi, Texas.
Um and other states.
Um, as an alternative, That's a
concern. That remains a concern.
The other concern I have, of
course, is that not not only are
some of those states maybe not
As accustomed to our shared
history and our shared cultures
and assured language.
But also we're going to be
moving people further. I believe
in some cases for farther
But also we're going to be
moving people further. I
believe, in some cases for
further farther from their
family support Networks border
closer to Mexico. These are all
these are all just speculation.
We can't really know how this is
going to go, and we shouldn't
pretend to. So, um, I wanted to
express his concerns this. This
has always been a challenging
issue for because I share many
of the things that people
Here share and I'm also not
entirely sure that we won't
Later, Um
Be careful what we wish for.
And, uh and wonder whether
ultimately it was the best
interests of the immigrants were
trying to seek asylum here.
I don't I don't. Those are my
thoughts. Anyone else from the
committee? We're waiting for
emotion, I think, right.
Promotion anywhere there, Stuart
Mr Chairman, I move that do pass
card, please.
Around you. Yes.
In our storage. Yes, Yes, we do.
Pass 5 to 2.
Past committee members. Those
who joined us late we will not
meet tomorrow. We've cleared our
agenda early today. Enjoy the
evening and the weekend. We'll
see you Monday. Thank you for
your work.
