Take some additional time and
given the hour. I think that's
probably more than we should try
to do tonight so str 16
Centerville cosponsor with you,
so I'll let you present it all.
I'm going to try and do this in
30 minutes at the outside, so
let's hope for the best.
There's some there is a motion
for do pass on the rules any
have anybody who registered to
speak?
No, sir. There's nobody
registered to speak Senator
Worth just just Mr Chair. One
clarification. It's a
constitutional amendment. It's
not a bill you represented as a
bill. I'm sorry. That's a
constitution. I just want to
make sure folks understand.
Yes. Thank you for the
clarification. Scr 16 Any other
discussion? We're on a do pass
motion. Is there any objection
to do pass center We're done for
tonight. You don't want to hear
my other bill taking this trip.
Thanks, Walt. Alright,
