This is the sensitive personal
information. Yeah, we were
hoping to get all of you out of
here quickly, we don't have the
sponsors for that bill, so we're
gonna skip them over, um,
Senator Padilla for fostering
connections PGM eligibility,
Senate Bill 6.
Thank you very much, uh,
Chairman, Vice Chairman and
Ranking member Senate Bill 6
essentially is uh a fix that we
need to do to pick up remaining
children, uh, aging out foster
youth that uh we're not made
eligible in the first uh when we
initially launched a fostering
connections and passed it into
law a couple of years ago, um,
uh.
Essentially these are supports
that are provided to these uh
aging out foster youth from 18
to 21, housing, transportation,
health care, help with the
judicial system, um, higher
education, uh, behavioral health
services, help with
understanding credit, etc. When
we passed the bill originally,
we, we left out the folks that
didn't have their cases
completely adjudicated or were
being fostered in another state.
There are about 13 to 15 to 18 a
year. This is a very successful
program. Uh, it's already been
adopted by about 350 aging out
foster youth states that have
done a little bit of this.
are seeing a reduction of
approximately 70% in foster
children, their kids going into
foster care, uh, Mr. Chairman,
so I think it's a very good move
for the the state of New Mexico
funds coming into this program
or out of the title 4 E and
Chafee Act, and that's
essentially what the legislation
is. I know you wanted me to be
brief.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
for that. Um, and I appreciate
you letting us roll you over
previously at our last meeting,
and your uh cooperation. All
right, um, we don't have any
opposition to Senate Bill 6, in
support I have Jason Espinoza or
Marilyn Beck for New Mexico
Child First network and then
Laura Abeta or either one of you
here, I'm looking around the
room quickly. Yes. All right,
come on up, uh, 3 minutes. I
hope it's enough for you.
There's no opposition.
Thank you. Uh.
Senator, my name is Marilyn
Beck. I am the founder and
executive director of New Mexico
Child First Network. We are
dedicated to improving the lives
of children in foster care and
empowering those who serve.
OK. Serve them, um, we strongly
support this bill. Can't say
enough good things about it.
According to the federal
administration ACF for Children
and Families, youth aging out of
foster care experience
considerable challenges. 1 in 4
adults who age out will
experience homelessness by age
19, 1 in 5 will be incarcerated
by age 19, 1 in 3 will be
pregnant at 1 in 3 females will
be pregnant and parenting by the
time, and 1 in 10 will become
parents, yes. Additionally, just
57% of adults who age out of
foster care
being employed at age 21, we
know that 1 in 5 foster youth
will likely attend college and
yet only 1 in 50 will actually
graduate. SB 6 expands
eligibility to youth who are in
CYFD custody but not adjudicated
or are were under a voluntary
placement agreement. In
addition, the bill pushes
forward in time by one year the
dates and statutes that serve as
a cut-off point for the age of
eligibility to maintain
eligibility up to the age of 21.
Thank you. Thank you, Ms. Beck,
uh.
Laura Abeta, are you here?
Was a bait that you're
recognized for up to 2 minutes.
Got it.
Thank you committee and chair.
Uh my name is Laura Mata. I'm
the associate deputy director
with Fostering Connections and
ruy YMD and CYFD um.
Supports this bill. Um, it fills
in the gap, um, to allow all of
our young people to benefit from
the services and supports
through CYFD. This includes, um,
case management services, uh,
financial services and we're in
full support. Thank you. Thank
you, Ms. Abeta. We have nobody
else who's registered in advance
and support again, Senator,
there's no opposition. We'll go
to members of the committee, uh,
committee members.
Questions? Senator Dewey has a
due pass motion. Is there any
other discussion, debate, or
questions from anyone on the
committee.
Maest, Mister Chairman and
Senator Padilla, thank you so
much. Just
If you look at the bottom of
page one.
Uh, subsection A.
Dealing with 19 years of age as
of 2021 and then the top of page
2.
Of section B.
20 years old as of July 1, 2022.
You may want to ask yourself
between now and
To whether we need that or not,
but I'm not gonna deal with it
today, but I I don't believe you
do.
I will take a look at that,
thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Questions?
Is there any objection to the Du
pass motion as presented.
Seeing none, please show all
members of the committee voting
in the affirmative. Senator, you
have a due pass. Thank you for
letting us Thank you members of
the committee, just for the
room's purposes and for the
committee's purposes, really,
when you look at our agenda that
you should have in front of you,
you, you'll see all bills listed
in numerical order, we do that
to try and facilitate our uh
planning and work and preparing
the committee. So we put them in
numerical orders so we can keep
track and and follow them
easily. Now that is not the way
that um I'll typically call for
the bills to be heard, so I'll
do so in, in part, uh,
consideration for the fo
fo lk s that many times a lot of
people are here, and so we'll
try and be considerate of a lot
of people that are here on a
particular bill. I'll also take
into consideration as in this
case that our Duke has people
who have traveled here from out
of state to present a bill, but
that's also a consideration of
the chair, um, and, um, that and
the, oh, hello, Senator Sidil
Lopez. Were you here
before? No.
OK. That's all right. Uh,
Senator Si Lopez, you've got a
number of people who think that
are here, we'll hear next Senate
Bill 30.
6
Right
Senator, you are a trust
familiar with the way that we
So, you, you are familiar, I
trust with the way we do things
here in the committee in terms
of time allocations and in
fairness, so a registered in
support our
246, 8, 10 individuals, you'll
have up to 150 minutes for total
advocacy, you can divide that as
you wish, you can tell me that
you want to use all of those
individuals to present in, in
which case I'm going to rely on
you to cut people off, right, if
somebody's going too long,
realize that um they're gonna
prevent others from ultimately
having anything to say. So, I
trust you know the name of the
people who have registered and
support, you know, who they are.
Um, yes. OK. Um, and just so you
know, I'll just make it easy for
you to have Mary Ellen Garcia,
Sylvia Aola, Jessica Martinez,
Lena Weber, Marshall Martinez,
Cynthia Garcia, Ramon Dorado
Arturo Castillo, Meredith Mackin
and Janet Williams. Um, you have
15 minutes for all those
individuals and for your self
centered and you can reserve any
part that you'd like to reserve
or rebuttal if you wish. Do you
want to do that?
I don't think that there's
necessity to reserve anything
for rebuttal. Thank you. All
right, go ahead.
It's your show. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. This bill does two
things. It creates a new section
in chapter 10 called the
Non-Disclosure of Sensitive
Personal Information Act. This
would create a uniform policy of
how state employees must handle
our personal sensitive
information.
It establishes a list of
categories of sensitive
information not to be disclosed
to outside agencies, as well as
enforcement mechanisms and civil
penalties. It also contains
exceptions to when this
information can be disclosed.
As you know, this, that this
bill passed or as you may
remember, this bill passed in
2021, but was pocket um vetoed
by the governor. We've since
worked out that issue, the
issues with the governor and so
we don't have that problem, but
we're doing something else in
this bill that we didn't do
before, and that is that we're
amending the motor vehicle code
to add safeguards when it comes
to information within the MVD
database and enforcing federal
criminal immigration laws.
Mr. Chair, I do have an
amendment, and I would like to
move the amendment first so that
we're talking on talking about
the amended bill and any anyone
opposed or any questions would
be on the amended bill.
And
May I proceed with the
amendment?
The amendment does two things.
On page 6, 18, we strike federal
immigration laws and insert in
lieu thereof the federal
immigration and Nationality Act,
except felony criminal
provisions of that act.
Upon conversations with many
stakeholders and state agencies,
we determined that federal
immigration laws was too vague,
and so this amendment specifies
which federal immigration laws
under the Immigration and
National Act are included, are
intent is not to curtail law
enforcement's access to MBD data
for the purposes of enforcing
criminal laws or criminal
immigration laws under the INA,
um, and this was a concern that
was raised in Spack, and we went
out of our way to address it. On
page 7
line 11, um, strike federal
immigration law and insert in
lieu thereof the federal
immigration and Nationality Act,
except felony criminal
provisions of that act. Same
exact rationale.
On page 7, line 11, after the
period insert, if the director
of the motor vehicle division of
the Taxation and Revenue
Department determines the
non-governmental entity has used
or disclosed records or
information for the purpose of
enforcing the federal
immigration and Nationality Act,
other than the federal criminal
provisions of that act, the
director shall revoke the
non-governmental entities access
to personal information pursuant
to subsection A of this section.
I was channeling you, Mister
Chair, when you, uh, always say
what are the consequences for
violating the, the statute. Um,
and so there are consequences,
um, this basically provides the
MVD the authority to revoke the
data broker access to New
Mexicans MVD data if they do not
comply with the requirements of
the bill.
And I will just briefly state
that in order for state
government to function properly
and ensure public health and
safety, it needs to collect
information and data from its
citizens.
New Mexicans have a reasonable
expectation this information is
safeguarded and that there are
clear rules on how, when and to
whom they are shared. Some of
this data is sensitive
information that if in the wrong
hands could put vulnerable New
Mexicans in harm's way.
Um, and with that, I mean, if
there are any questions about
how this works, I, I have more
information on how the statute
works. I think now I'll turn it
over to people who support the
I do not, but, but I love the
amendment.
Um, I do have questions of
reading through it.
But if I understand uh paragraph
3 of the amendment, Senator.
The the language uses that under
certain circumstances, the
director may revoke a
non-governmental entity's access
to personal information.
Pursuant to section A. Again, I
understand and agree with the
intent of your bill, but is is
this gonna become essentially an
exception to the inspection of
Public Records Act, and if, if
not, why not?
The accepted the inspection of
public Records Act has a
provision that says or has
otherwise provided by law, and
this is otherwise provided by
law.
There are many uh
There are many exceptions to the
inspection of government records
Act that are not right there in
the
In the
Uh
In the act itself and
Somewhere in this, I have a list
of some of them, but um.
Yes.
It's, it's, it's it's pursuant
to the provision as otherwise
provided by law. And Senator,
the concern I have in part is
that the, the revocation of
authority is by your language
here uh perpetual, right? So
once somebody's violated this
act, the director may revoke
forever the access of
Of any uh governmental.
Non-governmental entity for
access to these records. I'm a
little concerned about the
breadth of that, uh, that
language. Can, can you do
anything to make me feel more
comfortable that you're
somebody, so one administration
comes in, let's say one
administration comes in, they've
got a, a director who doesn't
quite see it the same way
violates the law, but then
they're prohibited for forever
from being able to access that
department or that agency that
may not be as far as we need to
go to achieve your goal. I
thought it was OK because it
gives the director.
depression.
Um
In determining whether a
non-governmental entity has used
or disclosed records, and so
give it at least the way I'm
looking at it, if the director
said, OK, they fixed the
problem, it could be reinstated.
If you feel it's necessary to
say something like, um,
It may be reinstated upon.
The director of seeing that the
problem has been fixed. I'm, I'm
just corrected or something, um,
I, I'm perfectly happy with
that. That was definitely what
we were anticipating would
happen, because it gives uh the
director discretion to determine
whether there's a violation.
And I, and I see the language is
permissive, so it says May and I
can probably live with that, so
that, that's my concerns is
again, every time we're up here
and we've seen this already,
this session, whenever you try
to preclude access to public
records, we naturally, I think
predictably get some pushback,
uh, sometimes very strong push
back and think a lot of us here
are very much
Uh, favoring transparency to the
greatest extent we possibly can
and still serve all of the goals
of government. So I wanna, I
wanna make sure that that that
goal is, I think shared by my
colleagues, number 1 and #2,
that we honor that, but I don't
hear anybody here in opposition
to this bill are concerned that
um that we're gonna have a
problem,
so I'm madam Chair, there's a,
there's a balance between um
Set a privacy.
And transparency, and this bill
tries to strike that balance. I
appreciate that. Thank you. All
right. Anyone else on the
proposed amendment?
objection to the adoption
amendment?
saying, not at all the
amendments adopted. OK, Senator,
back to the bill as amended then
in your time again.
And I'm gonna, I'm gonna credit
you a little bit for the time
that I ask questions on the
amendment, so.
You'll still have 6 minutes
center.
I think it's time to to let, uh,
the supporters speak. OK. And
Senator, again, I'm gonna rely
upon you to cut people off, stop
them if they're going on long.
You may just get one witness out
of the 10, so, uh, go ahead,
Senator, as you wish in what
order you wish.
I think there's someone online,
the first, the first one on our
list is Mary Ellen Garcia, and I
believe she's online,
we have her?
Right.
Miss Garcia, you're recognized
and uh the senator sponsor will
direct your time.
As she wishes, Miss Garcia,
thank you, sir. uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
hope you can all hear me. It's
always a little precarious on
Zoom, but uh chair and members
of the committee, my name is
Mary Ellen Garcia. I'm the CEO
of the New Mexico Coalition
Against Domestic Violence, and
on behalf of the 32 intimate
partner domestic violence
program statewide, as well as,
as well as the support of the
city of Albuquerque, domestic
violence sexual assault
commission, we stand in strong
support of Senate Bill 36.
Domestic violence.
writers serve thousands of
survivors who rely on
confidential support systems to
escape violence and rebuild
their lives, and when systems
use their data without their
informed consent, it could
potentially jeopardize their
safety. Failure to protect
survivor data creates serious
public safety risks by
increasing opportunities for
abusers and those who offend to
locate stock and retaliate
against their victims and
survivors. Distrusted
institution continues to grow
when survivors fear their
private information could be
shared, making them less likely
to report abuse.
Seek medical care or engage in
the criminal justice system. Our
immigrant survivors are
particularly vulnerable for many
reasons, because many fear
seeking help may expose them to
further victimization. Without
strong safeguards for sensitive
personal data, survivors lose
trust in the very systems meant
to protect them, making it
harder to hold abusers
accountable and ensure community
safety, and survivors depend on
these uh state systems such as
public identification, driver's
license, and access to essential
services. This cannot be
another system that fails to
protect public safety and
protecting personal information
is a critical
drivers. Thank you.
Thank you. We have about 9 folks
speaking with only 5 minutes to
go, but we thank you for joining
us.
Mr. Chair
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Jessica
Ynez Martinez, and I'm an
immigration attorney and the
director of policy and coalition
building at the New Mexico
Immigrant Law Center as one of
New Mexico's only organizations
providing legal services to
immigrant communities, in
particular specializing in
serving survivors of crime and
children who have endured
trauma, we support SB 36. The
immigration statuses of
immigrants in New Mexico, many
of whom have lived here for
decades and have citizen
children should remain
confidential. Many families
qualify.
forms of relief that lead to
legal status and may be at risk
of separation before getting the
legal services they need if this
data gets into the wrong hands.
We support safeguards to protect
sensitive information, including
immigration status, LGBTQ
status, status as a crime
victim, and information
regarding traumas and abused
children we serve have endured.
All of this should not be sold
and disclosed. Thank you. Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
I'm Marshall Martinez, the
executive director of Equality
New Mexico, a 31 year old LGBTQ
advocacy organization. LGBTQ
people have been experiencing
increasing danger in this
country, year after year,
whether from a federal
government that's actively
trying to erase our existence or
volatile and harmful people in
our own neighborhoods. So when
queer and trans New Mexicans
give state employees and
agencies information, sensitive
personal information about
ourselves. We deserve to know
that it will be treated as
sacred. LGBTQ New Mexicans
deserve the protections in
Senate Bill 36. Thank you.
When I started Senor Garcia.
Unar migrantess.
A pollamo initia
A pollamo initiatis
they need to be sure that our
information is secure.
So I ask this, this committee to
take action to protect the
information and
gracias.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Cynthia Garcia.
And I am a member of Somos
unpelo Nido, a statewide
grassroots organization present
in 8 counties. We support the
initiative because we need the
assurance that our data is safe.
That's why I asked that the
committee take action to protect
New Mexicans' information and
vote yes on SB 36. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Arturo Castillo
Conservation boatrs New Mexico
stands in strong support of SB
36 because we know that anyone
who lives, plays or works in New
Mexico's land, air, or water,
deserves to have faith that our
state agencies have a
consistent, clear, and narrow
process for how and when they
share a sensitive personal
information about us that could
lead to our harm. This is a
conservation priority because
protecting our environment in
New Mexico is about protecting
the New Mexicans who experience
it and enjoy it on a daily
basis. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main,
and I'm speaking on behalf of
the League of Women Voters of
New Mexico and the American
Association of University Women,
and I agree with all the
comments that have already been
given in support for this
legislation, but just another
angle why everyone should
support this bill is our
information is being sold, and
um having been a victim of um uh
fraud myself, um, my husband and
I being
We do not want our information
sold to anybody, uh, so I, I
urge everybody to look at this
as not an immigrant bill, not a,
you know, any kind of um
political bill, but just a
common sense bill. We do not
want our sensitive information
shared with anyone. Thank you.
Have about one minute.
We buenas starts or even reins
Patricia Prado soy entro
delcentro soy miro delcentropode
We buenas starts or even reins
Patricia Prado soy entro
delcentro soy miro
delcentropogan concede in
Albuquerque.
bus bros moses parapoerla es a
veter says porques and caso.
John residal dart
is Patricia Prado.
Uh, and I am a member of El
Centro Poder Aion an immigrant
rights organization based in
Albuquerque with over 5500
members. Today we are here to
support SB 36 because protecting
our personal information is a
public safety priority,
especially in my case, I moved
my, uh my address 3 months ago,
and I have not notified MBD
because I'm scared they will
share my information. Thank you.
Thank you. Um,
Committee. My name is Denali
Wilson. I am a staff attorney at
the ACLU of New Mexico, echoing
all of the comments prior and
just to add to this, um,
concerns about federal
preemption should not be a
barrier to supporting this bill.
Courts have long recognized that
states have the authority to
regulate how their agencies
handle personal data, as long as
they do not interfere with
federal operations.
In 2022, the Seventh Circuit
upheld a state law limiting
local participation with
immigration enforcement,
reinforcing that states can set
their own policies on data
disclosure. Similarly, in 2018,
the Supreme Court reaffirmed
that the federal government
cannot compel states to enforce
federal priorities. SB 36 aligns
with these principles by
ensuring that state employees
have guidance on data privacy
obligations, helping to maintain
public trust and.
with existing legal standards.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Now, we'll
hear from, uh, we went a little
bit over time, but
No worries. Now we'll hear from
uh opponents of the bill. Does
anyone wish to speak in
opposition of the bill.
Anyone wish to speak in
opposition of the bill.
Members of the committee.
Thank you, Senator Dewi.
I'll move it do pass if we don't
have to debate on the bill.
As amended.
And I'll, I'll second that. We
have a motion for a due pass and
uh.
Second is amended, please call
the roll.
B
So
Yes.
You have a Du pass as amended.
Thank you. Thanks everybody for
attending.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Let's please uh clear the room
orderly.
And we're gonna go to uh
Representative Chandler here.
For Centerville 72.
So worth putting a bill.
Um.
S
Senator Souls here right here.
Oh, right, right, yeah,
wonderful. Thank you.
So, uh, in a moment we'll go to
folks can exit the room.
Thank you.
And if folks, if folks can
please exit the room or or get
settled in, we can start.
If the, if our friends can turn
off their mics, or you don't
have your mics on.
All right, thanks, everyone.
We're going to go to Senate Bill
109. Senator Souls, welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, this
bill was brought to me by the
public uh regulation commission,
uh, after several years now,
it's time we do the cleanup
language to make sure everything
that we've got in statute
matches with what the, the new
processes and things are, uh,
there's a number of pages where
there are some minor strikeouts,
some changes, some things of
that sort, uh, that just really
worked towards clarifying the
types of things. There also are
a couple of places toward the
back where there's some major
strike.
doubts of things that are no
longer under their purview. Uh,
but Mr. Chair, with your
permission, I'd like to have the
chairman of the PRC, Mr.
O'Connell, uh, and talk about
what the bill does, doesn't do,
and very briefly and then we'll
be ready for questions.
Uh welcome, commissioner. We
also have 3 folks speaking in
favor.
So if we can maybe
Do this in about 7 minutes.
Thank you.
Hey, good afternoon, uh, I
introduced, uh, my name is Pat
O'Connell. I'm currently the
chair of the Public regulation
commission, uh, here before you
today with a bill that cleans up
and clarifies the bill that's
kind of our source code, so, uh,
you know, just looking through
the history of it, a lot of the
language hasn't been
Even looked at since 1998, many
things have changed since then,
so happy to be here today and uh
happy to answer any questions
you have. So,
Senator, we are ready, and I
believe Senator Doig has an
amendment that makes a couple of
clarifications as we've read
through the amendment, uh, we
have no opposition to the
amendment either, but yeah,
you're call as to how you would
like to proceed. Thank you.
Before we go to committee,
there's some folks who wish to
speak in favor a Mike D'Antonio,
are you present?
OK
Mike D'Antonio, welcome.
Hey, can you hear me? Yeah.
These we can hear you. OK, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
Mike D'Antonio with XL Energy.
We are at the company that
serves electricity to the
eastern part of New Mexico. Uh,
we stand in full support of this
bill. Uh, we are regulated by
the PRC and any kind of
legislation that helps
streamline their operations,
helps things go more smoothly,
is welcome because we have
several cases before the uh
before the commission and uh
just uh I think this is a good
piece of legislation.
Thank you.
Thank you, sir. Mr. Sherrick,
Roan horse, please come forward.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee,
Sherors with the Public Service
Company in New Mexico, uh, PNM
stands in support of this bill.
It enhances their ability to do
their job. They have an
important job, and we believe
this is good policy. Thank you.
Thank you very much and closing
comments center.
My only comment is I failed to
recognize uh
Toa Cordry, who is chief of
staff for the PRC who is also
here uh for technical support
and expertise. Welcome. Is there
anyone in the audience, uh,
opposed to this bill? Anyone in
the audience wish to speak?
In opposition of Senate Bill
109.
Why don't we go to uh
Senator Doha I move the
amendment for discussion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So we, we
heard this bill in Senate rules
and as we're going through it
there, there were some shells
that were changed to May
throughout the bill. Um,
that should remain shelves. Uh,
they talk about what the, the
Things that that the PRC has to
do, um, and it would really
change their scope to make those
things discretionary rather than
required. So what this bill does
is it changes those shells back
to May.
Um, it says that I, I can walk
through it if members want more
of an explanation than that or
just leave it at that.
11
So one example, so there is the,
the consumer.
The consumer representation
division. That's not the right
name for it.
Consumer relations division. So
it had changed where it says the
consumer relations division,
originally it said shall, and it
listed out everything that they
had to do. They had changed that
to a May.
And so we are putting that back
to a shell. Those are.
We, we want to make clear that
All these services are not
discretionary, that they are
part of the, if I may, I think
that's on page 16, page 16. OK.
Thank you so that everybody's
able to find it and see. Thank
you.
So it changes it there, it
changes it for the, the telecom
division, and it also changes it
where it talks about the
divisions, cause it's the, the
various divisions cause it said
that you may have these various
divisions, but if they're
optional, then you could just
get rid of them completely. And,
uh, all those obligations would
be or not. Thank, thank you,
great catch to rules Committee.
Serni up discussion on the
amendment.
An emotion on the amendments,
and nurse Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Remember to look to your left
occasionally too.
Uh, so, uh, thank you, Senator
Dock for these, but, uh, I'm the
number 10.
On page 17.
A line 13.
Um, I think this was done
specifically so that
Uh
I, I guess I want to hear from
the commissioner or the chief of
staff because I thought this was
a purposeful.
Um, that you've undone the uh
chief of staff and put back in
the commission.
Uh, chairman Senator, yes, that
one of the big cleanups in this
bill is just clarifying how the
agency operates day to day and
so the day to day operations
are, uh,
Led by the chief of staff and so
that the amendment that Senator
Doig has issued, I don't think
disturbs that at all. It just uh
clarifies that it is the
commission's duty to do what's
enumerated under consumer
relations and telecom and, and
frankly, it remains our duty to
do everything that we.
dutifully doing right now, uh,
so it's just kind of more
talking about where is some
flexibility within the agency
and where is it not, and that
was the uh conversation that we
had with the
that
So you don't care about this
anymore.
Because I want what I heard was
that uh the duties with the
chief of staff are not as
clearly delineated as they need
to be and that you had issues
with that, which is why you
brought that cleanup.
So, uh, that all gets undone on
number 10.
Number 11.
Uh
So it's number 10 and number 11.
It's on page 17, like 13, I'm on
page 18 lines 7.
So I, I thought you cared about
that, that you have an issue
with staffing and so you
delineated the chief of staff,
but
You no longer care about it, Mr.
Chair and Senator.
I don't see that as part of the
amendment? Is that what you're
asking about?
on the back side of the
amendment.
Number 9, 1011, and 12, the back
side of your amendment, you
don't have that?
Do I have the wrong amendment,
Mr. Chair, I don't, that's not
the amendment that we have in
front of us. Thank you, it may
have a page 2, but if you look
on page 17.
Page 17, line 13.
And then again on page 18 line
7.
Most of the Senator Stewart's
concerns.
Most of the Senator Stewart's
concerned.
Uh
Senator, Senator do it for a
moment.
So Senator.
So the PRC came with a mockup of
their changes, uh, and we went
through that mockup, and these
were changes that were in.
In the PRC's mockup. Uh, I added
in the Me to shell stuff, but
these were changes in there from
from the commission.
And Mr. Chair, thank you. I do
now have that amendment instead
of
The other amendment, Mr. Chair,
Senator, uh, this was made, we,
we have heard a lot about this
bill and in an attempt to
address some of the concerns of
the various issues regarding the
delineation between the chief of
staff and the commission, this
change, uh, was acceptable to
the commissioners, um, in that.
The chief of staff still has to
go to the commission for
appointment of division
directors. And so whether the
chief of staff or the commission
set the minimum requirements
doesn't change the intent of
the, the bill to delineate.
Who does what?
All right, thank you for that.
Thank you, Senator.
The
It's a pleasure of the committee
on the amendment.
There's a motion to adopt the
amendment. I'll second that. Is
there any opposition?
to the amendment, of course,
we're looking at.
998.1. Any opposition, please
note all those present voting in
the affirmative, and you have a
a second an amended bill again.
Senator do it.
Uh, that's all I have, Mr.
Chair.
Senator, Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just
looking at the um
fiscal report there were
Uh, 2 items, well, there's
actually 2 paragraphs that are
significant issues that were
raised by the New Mexico uh
attorney general. I was
wondering if
You address those issues.
In this
Which, where are you referring
to, please, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator, where you.
It is the fiscal.
Implications under the fiscal
impact report.
OK, and, and what are the
concerns? Oh, there's, it's a
long paragraph that says it
talks about.
Uh, significant issues there,
say, stakeholders and public,
locally referred to the PRC
inclusive of the support staff
commissioner says the commission
unquote.
And it starts to, you know, the
need to distinguish between
those two.
Uh, descriptions and then it
goes on to say that there's
concerns over proposed changes
that would no longer make it
mandatory for hearing examiners
to provide recommended decision.
And so there's a whole paragraph
that comes from the New Mexico
Attorney General's office.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator, when
What this bill does is, as we
said, it, it provides clarity
and alignment throughout the
commission. It doesn't disturb
uh the roles of the hearing
examiners or the other, uh,
Agencies within that, you know,
for example, hearing the
examiner, I, I think this might
just be a misunderstanding that
hearing examiners work is
directed to them when they're
assigned to a case by the
commission, they're not always
uh requested to provide a
recommended decision. So, um,
that's why the, the bill cleans
things up and makes it more
clear how we're doing our work.
Uh, I, I think it's a
misconception in the analysis
that there will always be a
recommended decision if there is
a.
Um, Mr. Chair, OK, so it's my,
OK, so you're, this is
misinterpreted by the Mexico
Attorney General.
Yes, I believe so. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Cha.
Committee members.
we
do pass, Mr. Chairman We're
looking for one. Uh-huh, right,
I move it do pass on Senate Bill
109 as amended.
There's a motion for a do pass
or second that motion signal
discussion, uh.
You wish to discuss Senator. Oh,
seeing our discussion at all. I
don't all those in favor of, if
you're opposed to the amendment,
please, I'm sorry if you're
opposed to the motion, please
raise your hand. Any opposition
to a Du pass motion.
In opposition to a Du pass
motion, please note all those
present voting in the
affirmative and you have a due
pass as amended again. Thank
you. Thank you committee, and I
appreciate you getting us in
early.
Senator Deick, thank you for
being willing to do Senate bill
number 72.
I agree with you, it should be
pretty quick.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, uh, we're always told never
say this is a simple bill, but
this one might actually be a
simple bill. Um, all this does
is it allows uh condominium
associations to send out notices
by email or electronically, uh,
rather than
Paper stamp.
Um, it also allows them to, uh,
the folks who are meeting, uh,
for those associations to meet,
uh, electronically rather than
in person.
And electronically as well.
Thank you, and we're on Senate
72. I don't believe we have
anybody registered in support or
opposition, so we'll go directly
to members of the Committee on
Senate 72.
Question. Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman Senator, do we
acknowledge it's a great idea. I
think it'll hopefully encourage.
Nonprofits to um
Maybe Albuquerque nonprofits
that have folks from all over
the state, uh, doing their
boards and stuff, so and and
support. Thank you. Thank you.
Any other questions?
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Um, so,
Uh, you, you have the, the
ability right for, for notice.
If through electronic means.
Uh just said
can it also include that it must
also, they should receive
something in the mail, something
written.
So,
Mr. Chair, Senator, I think you
can do it by, by electronic
means instead of doing it.
This would give that, that
option.
I, I, I guess I'm just thinking
that there's still some people
that do.
You know,
Want to receive notice by mail.
There's, they're older people
sometimes they don't have the I
don't, maybe there's a way for,
for it to go out both ways. And
Mr. Chair, Senator, if you look
on the top of page 2, the
recipient has to agree to
receive, receive it
electronically in order to do
that, so.
So anyone who does not want to
receive their notice, uh,
electronically just would not,
would not make that. OK, so it
just, it just opens it up. OK.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else? any
members, questions?
Special debate.
It's really quiet over here on
the right. What's going on?
It's a big lunch.
But a pasta or something? What's
going on?
Uh, no committee questions. Is
there a motion for us.
Mr Chairman Auba Dupas.
I think you run a do pass motion
for Senate 72 nonprofit condo
association, remote business. Is
there any objection? Seeing
none, please show all members
present in the affirmative,
Senator Wirth has a due pass.
Let him know you are in good
favor with him, so.
Um,
Let's hear next Senate Bill 91.
Senator Doug, you're gonna be,
you're on a lot of the agenda
today.
Private collection, speeding
camera finds.
And we have an amendment. It's
my understanding, is that right?
So this deals with the automatic
speed tickets.
Uh, really, this really is about
Albuquerque. Um, I think only
Albuquerque and one other place
are are doing this program. I
know, I think that Bernal Leo is
thinking about starting it.
But right now, what happens when
you get one of these tickets is
if you are going 11 miles over
the speed limit, uh, and you and
the camera takes a picture of
it, you get fined $100 if you
are going to be pulled over by
an officer, you would get fined.
I think it's $25 or $30.
So they are not using the same
graduated penalties that are
used, uh, under state law when
when an officer pulls someone
over. Um, they are also.
Sending folks to collections in
order to, uh, to enforce this,
uh, and well right now the bill.
I would say that you can't send
them to collections, this
amendment will take that out.
You can use a third party to do
the collection, uh, under this,
if you would like, but you still
would not be able to report them
to credit agencies or those
unpaid tickets. Uh, and so
doing, I can do a lot of damage
to someone's, uh, credit.
Uh, if you are reporting all of
those tickets to credit
agencies.
So do I have a copy of my bill?
I do not, um, the other thing
that it would that this bill
would do would be to say you
have to follow those graduated
penalties. And right now, if you
have 2, you got 2 tickets for
going 11 miles over the speed
limit, uh, and that's it. The
city of Albuquerque can impound
your car. So then you can't go
to work, and then you can't take
your kid to school. Uh, the
collateral collateral
consequences of that empowerment
just for that purpose, uh,
are, are a lot. And so what this
also says is you would not be
able to impound someone's car
just, just for those unpaid
tickets. If you had other stuff,
other tickets you had gotten
that would justify impoundment
under C's ordinance, you could
still get your car ounded.
Um, but the another change that
this amendment makes is when it
says that you have to stick to
those graduated penalties that
are otherwise in state law, uh,
there's a clarification we put
in that that is still up to the
$100 limit that is imposed by
another state law, um, on
municipalities who are finding
folks for traffic infractions
and.
Senator Wirth had brought this
up when this was heard in tax
and I wanted to make sure it was
very clear. So basically, you
can charge up to $100 that $100
cap that is in state law, um,
but everything under the $100
cap, you would have to follow
the same graduated penalties
that anyone would, would have
to, uh, or would have on them if
they were pulled over by a
person instead of had a picture
taken by a camera.
And so, Mr. Chair, I will move
this amendment that you all
have.
Um
And I'll stop that, oh, I'll
also say, Mr. Chair.
One of the reasons I, I have
heartburn over with the city of
Albuquerque is doing and.
And, and I want to make clear,
nothing in this bill would stop.
This program.
The program being able to use
cameras to catch speeders, uh,
which could still continue. This
does not get rid of the program.
This just says you can't
administer it in a way that.
is out of line with state law
otherwise, uh, or has the
potential to, to do more harm
than good.
Um, but right now the city is
also per their ordinance,
charging when they do send
people to collections, they're
charging them attorney fees,
which already violates other
state law that we have in place.
That says, I municipalities when
you do these tickets, you're
capped at $100 and $100 is it.
You cannot charge any other
costs or fees. So I think this
program is already operating in
violation of state law, and I
would like to see some
appropriate guardrails put on
it, so that it can be a
successful program. We can catch
speeders, we can increase our
safety.
While also doing so in an
appropriate way.
That's it, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, sir. Uh, we don't
have anybody registered in
support, do we do? I'm sorry,
opposition.
Uh, Commander Benito Martinez,
Sergeant James Burton, and
chaplain Bur uh Tegmeyer, I
believe, or these are supporters
of the bill or any.
No.
I don't see him here or is
anybody here? Any of those
individuals? They just listened.
You're opposed, huh?
So
My apologies.
Uh, we do things, we're, we're
pretty tricky over here in
judiciary, right? We take for
supporters and turn you into
opponents, um, is there any sort
of doing, uh, is there anyone
else here in support?
Uh, yes, ma'am, did you
register? I'm sorry I missed
you. Did you register and
support?
You represent somebody?
And what?
OK, we'll recognize your support
for the bill. Thank you. Yeah,
we, we have some uh pretty
strict rules to try and keep me
on the clock and keep our
committee working well, so we
did have uh opposition.
All right. Uh, the three
individuals who I just listed
will recognize each up to 2
minutes. So Commander Martinez.
Um
Sergeant Burton.
And a chaplain.
opposition, oh, well, we've got,
I'm sorry. We have other
individuals who are here.
Uh, Steve Pylon, I believe Pilon
for you maybe if I got that
wrong, Jennifer Turner by Zoom,
Lauren Keith by Zoom, and Tim
Johnson for the municipal
League. So I'm gonna actually
ask all of you to keep it to a
minute, uh, to 1 minute and a
half, given the other list on
the backside here for me. So let
me
Let me start first of all with
those who registered on time
other than Phillip's handwritten
note here, so, uh, Steve, uh, is
it Pylon P Heen, are you here?
Steve, please come on up. Thank
you, Doctor, I think, right?
And we, we have the amendment.
Let's, let's try and before we
get to the folks who are here in
opposition, let's just here, is
there any discussion or debate
on the amendment?
They have uh my OK, there's a
motion of the amendment. I'm
just gonna summarize Senator
Duke my understanding the
amendment does a couple of
things. One is it would still
allow so those of you that are
here in opposition with adoption
of the amendment, the city would
still be able to use third
parties to handle the
collections, so the amendment,
if it was adopted, would do
that, and then yourendment would
also limit the collection of uh
fines and fees to that which is
already existing elsewhere in
state law, is that the
amendment? All right. So, uh, on
the
amendment. Again, if you, if any
of you're going to speak in
opposition, please be aware if
the amendments adopted, please
don't address that issue and
impose it on grounds that we've
already handled. So on the
amendment, anyone here?
Questions. Is there any
objection to the adoption
amendment?
Right, seeing none of the
amendments adopted, uh, then in
opposition. So doctor.
Tell me with your last name. Are
you pronouncing it Pillan or
Pylon? Pilon, thank you, sir.
My name is Steve and I'm, uh,
speaking on behalf of Bi ABQ
501c3 that uh excuse me,
Chairman Cervantes and members
of the committee, um, uh, my
name is Steve Palana, I'm
speaking on behalf of EBQ
501c3 that advocates for
vulnerable road users trying to
make it safe for bicyclists and
pedestrians and um uh back when
I did my training.
at what was called BCMC at the
time, um, so I dating myself is
now the University Hospital. Um,
we, we did a weekly conference
in, in on the trauma service,
uh, called Eminem and it was
about morbidity and mortality,
which is injuries and deaths.
And the vast majority of these
cases that we reviewed were due
to high-speed motor vehicle
crashes.
And um, um, leaving aside the,
the death and suffering that
these crashes caused also
represented a huge expense for
the healthcare system and uh the
university hospitals in
particular.
Um
Automated speed enforcement has
been proven to reduce crashes.
And reduce um speeding and
reduce deaths and injuries, and
I think that uh we should be
doing everything we can to
strengthen the automated speed
enforcement, not weakening it.
Um, um,
The City of Albuquerque has the
premier uh program and um
One of the penalties, uh, when
you get a ticket for speeding by
by the speeding camera, you are
given the option of 4 hours of
community service in, in lieu of
the $100. So anybody who is a
financial situation where they
can't pay the $100 they can do
the 4 hours of service. Thank
you, doctor. I'm gonna have to
cut you off there. That's thank
you very much.
Jennifer Turner, you're on Zoom,
followed by Laura and Keith,
you're also on Zoom. Do we have
Jennifer Turner?
Just turning you recognized for
a minute and a half. OK. Uh,
good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. Can
you hear me? Yes.
Great. My name is Jennifer
Turner and I'm the director of
the City of Albuquerque
Department of Municipal
Development, which oversees the
city's automated speed
enforcement program. I'm here to
oppose SB 91 because of concerns
about how it will negatively
impact our program. Speed is the
number one cause of fatal
crashes. We know from
comprehensive data that humans
are less likely to survive high
speed crashes. High speed
driving increases the frequency
and severity of crashes, not
only for people driving, but
also for pedestrians and
cyclist.
The city's ASC program intends
to change driver behavior and
save lives, focusing on drivers
going more than 10 MPH above the
posted speed that we have 2
cameras located on corridors
where the most people are dying
or being seriously injured in
traffic crashes. In the first
two years of our ASE program, we
saw between a 42% to 89.2%
decrease in drivers exceeding
the posted speed limit by 10+
MPH and up to an 8.3.
mile per hour decrease in
average driver speed. Even a 1
mile per hour speed reduction
can result in a 17% decrease in
fatal crashes.
Uh, people have 90 days to pay
the $100 citation or can
complete up to 4 hours of
community service or request a
payment plan or appeal the
violation. It's only if they
don't that they're violation
goes to collections. A
violations are civil fines.
Turner, your time's expired.
Lauren Keith, please, City of
Albuquerque.
Keith, you're on Zoom also?
Keith.
Yes, can you hear me? Yes,
ma'am. You're recognized for up
to a minute and a half, and I'll
just tell you all since we got
uh two of you from the city of
Albuquerque, the part of the
rule is to try and have you all
coordinate your presentations so
that I don't have to cut off
somebody like Ms. Turner, um,
and that's just for the audience
and the committee's reason,
that's why we have the rules we
do is to try and get folks to
try and put their presentation
together, uh, having, otherwise
we could have 6 people from the
city of Albuquerque and kind of
defeat the whole point, but
anyway, Miss Keith, you have a
minute and a half, man.
Sure, and I understand, um, and
I, I can be brief. Um, when the
city adopted this program, we
really went through extensive
efforts to ensure that it was
fair and equitable, and that
includes the provision that
allows people to do volunteer
work at a rate of $25 an hour
instead of paying the fine and
making it a civil fine, um, and
so we, uh, we certainly, the
city does not um report to
credit reporting agencies and
it's not really concerned about
a restriction that we'd say.
explicitly that we cannot, um,
the city has not attempted to
collect attorneys' fees since
the program has been
implemented, um, but we, and,
and so we do, we are trying to
make it fair and equitable. We
appreciate the committee's
efforts to make it fit to
continue making it fair and
equitable. It has been a highly
successful program, and I think
like Miss Turner, I'm gonna
speak personally. I live right
off of lead, uh, and the change
has been significant and
dramatic in the reduction in
speed on lead avenue
and letting Cole and I really
hope the city can continue to
have a program like this.
Thank you, Ms. Turner. Thank you
for being on time. Uh, signed
in, Mr. Johnson municipally.
And you're recognized for a
minute and a half, Mr.
Johnson of the committee,
Johnson municipal League, uh,
obviously the municipal league
always or never supports
anything that we feel preempts
our cities does,
it interferes with the home rule
and municipalities to enact and
manage.
Their own public safety
programs.
Um
Removing the accountability,
which I know you would probably
argue with me, uh, Mr. Chair,
removing the accountability on
the back end of this, uh, would
lead to officers having to do
this, and we understand what the
accountability of that is when
they don't follow through with
their responsibility, they
eventually would have a warrant
for their arrest on the criminal
side. So civilly, I think this
makes sense. Uh, I don't have to
tell anybody in here law
enforcement is struggling and
recruiting these days, uh, so
knowing that, uh, we're able to
put resources uh in different
places for calls.
for service, murders, things
like that, and allow some
technologies to hopefully slow
down our drivers, which I know
all of you come in from other
places in the state, you see
that that's gotten out of
control, I think, since COVID.
So this is another way for our
agencies to put resources where
they can be better used.
Um
And as uh not as a former state
police chief or or current
municipal League member, uh, as
a resident of Rio Rancho, uh, I
have.
I had my picture taken twice,
uh, and so I do know that this
works and it has changed my
behavior, uh, when I see one of
those vans in Rio Rancho, so
that's her uh.
We oppose this bill on behalf of
the municipal league and as a
citizen. Thank you. Thank you
very much, Commander Martinez.
I'm not gonna
For me
Well, thank you for the
consideration, I just again, I,
I, we appreciate the input from
you law enforcement, everybody
here, thank you for being here,
we appreciate your service very
much. Uh, the, uh, the reason
the rules exist in part as you
probably noticed even in the
presentation Ms. Turner and Ms.
Key for the city of Albuquerque
both, and there was overlap and
duplication of their testimony,
the goal here is to avoid and
get people to coordinate so we
hear things only once, we don't
need to hear the city of
Albuquerque give the same
arguments to multiple people. So
that event, uh, Sergeant Burton.
Thank you Mr.
Chair and for a minute and a
half, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
senators. Um, I'm the fatal
sergeant or the fatal crash
sergeant for the city of
Albuquerque. From my side, I see
the real cost of people's lives
just from speed, I've watched
vehicles be cut in half. I've
watched people be cut in half.
I've watched human beings be
obliterated. I've watched cars
go through buildings. I've
watched traffic get stopped and
put on a standstill. Speed is
the number one factor that
causes this thing, and for me, I
have to talk to the
families and explain to them why
their loved one has died just
because of speed. So I'm in uh
APD is in opposition to this on
the sheer fact that this has
proven to work to reduce speed
and save lives. Thank you. Thank
you very much, sergeant, uh,
chaplain.
He
Meyer, am I pronouncing your
name right?
Yes.
Mr. Chair and senators. My
name's Barbara Tagmeyer. I'm the
head chaplain of the Albuquerque
Police Department chaplain unit
we're all volunteers, as some of
you may not know, we go on uh
calls we're on duty 24/7 and we
go on calls um all unattended
deaths that require our
attention in the city of
Albuquerque, so we go out with
the officers and I'm here just
to remind everyone that it's not
just the person involved in a
crash when there is a uh a
fatality due to speed, but all
the other.
people that are involved in
other vehicles in the same
vehicle of the driver. There are
many, many situations. That's
when a chaplain gets called out
to speak in support the living
who have just had a horrible,
horrible thing happened to them.
So I'm here to speak for those
people. Thank you. Thank you
very much. That concludes, I
believe everyone who we have
signed up in opposition, so
we'll go to members of the
committee, um, and Senator Do,
again, I appreciate all the
input from those that are here
in charge with enforcing.
laws in the city of Albuquerque,
so just if I can go first to
clarify, number one, at least
the way this program is written
right now. It, it's only being
done in the city of Albuquerque,
is that right?
Mr. Chair, my understanding is
it's being done in Albuquerque.
I want to say Ortalis has like 4
cameras, and in the tax
committee the other day, uh, I
think the mayor of Bernalillo
called in and said that they
were looking at it for, for
their municipality as well. And
I heard all of the opponents say
that they think this is an
important thing.
it reduces speeds and and, and
does your bill eliminate this
program in any way? Mr. Ja, no,
they're right. This is an
important program. It does help
eliminate speed. It, it is a
good safety approach. Uh, I'm
not trying to get rid of this
program. I'm just trying to make
sure it is administered
appropriately.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley,
you're looking at me with that
look. I'm getting used to, I'm
getting used to that look.
You're getting used to it. You
don't raise your hand, but you
give me those glares
I apologize if it's the glare. I
didn't mean that.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
So at the last committee meeting
where, when this bill was heard,
uh, um, there was, um,
testimony about it, you know,
being a, uh, basically a real uh
burden on on loaded on moderate
income in particular low
moderate, low income folks that
these could snowball and be
difficult for people to catch
up. But um I can see now that,
you know, people do have the
opportunity to do community
service, $25 an hour, that's
pretty good. You get rid of a
fine, $100 just for 4 hours.
I also brought up a concern
about the rights of cities to
determine, you know, uh, their
laws, um, then Albuquerque is a
home, home rule city, and even
smaller ones that are, aren't
home rules should have that
ability to, if that's local
control to make those kinds of
decisions.
So I proposed an amendment, but
I don't think that, but I don't
think that takes care of it. Um,
how this is administered.
Is part of the program, the way
it is administered. So,
Based on that and the fact that
I believe that the city should
administer a program that's
their own, they've made a
decision on it, um, I cannot
support this bill. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Senator
Dewi.
I see, I appreciate where you
what you want to do with this
bill. I was thinking.
When they first came out and
were discontinued back in the
day, Miss Chairman Senator, that
was, uh, the problem was the
cost. I think it was like 20-300
bucks and then the profit
motive, the, the, the company
that came in and
And contracted what the city was
raking in the profits, you know,
so I, I recall that, and so I'm
thinking back to that and how,
how, how much I dislike that
program. Um, couple of things. I
also recall Mr. Chairman, I am.
I think it was my first year in
the legislature at a.
Like a corny memorial that said,
can we please just take a look
at.
Not arresting people, not
putting bench warrants on people
and arresting them, and spending
the night in jail for for owing
money on traffic fines, we
should.
Maybe take them to collections
and.
And then they get their credit
score dinged.
And now, uh
And now that's a bad thing,
right? It's, it's a heck of a
lot better than getting thrown
in jail, um.
But anyway, I, I know it's a.
The bummer, the scarce resources
in Albuquerque is very real,
very real, um, people are not
getting pulled over as often as
say 1012 years ago.
Um, and so there's a huge
Or rather there's not a big
disincentive to drive.
To speed. People speed,
motorcycles are popping
wheelies, it's kind of crazy
sometimes. My district, as you
know, Mr. Chairman, Senator Doig
is, is the Coors corridor, which
is.
Uh, you know, can be a speedway
at times, um.
And so even though the traffic
The light cameras aren't, I
don't like them personally.
They, they do.
Do a good job with regards to
the um.
The finds
Our traffic fines at the state
level, in my opinion, are way
too low, for like 25 bucks, 10
bucks, and that's because we had
all this court costs assessed.
We have all these court costs,
so you'd get a deferred
sentence, see my clerk, pay the
court costs, and you'd get
tagged 80 $100 120 dollars. So
the fines weren't really the
disincentive, it was the court
costs. Well, now we've.
Thank goodness done away with
court costs. We no longer charge
fees on traffic tickets.
Um, because we pay for those
programs through House Bill 2.
Uh, but, but the, but the, but
the actual fines have remained
the same, they made like $10.25
bucks, some are 50.
I think they're really low. I
think $100 probably reasonable
in today's economy.
Um
But I do, I do see where you're
going with this, but I'm unable
to support it this time, but I
think, ah,
I think um
No, never mind, it's a different
bill, but
With regards to the judges how
to flicked the switch.
They're so used to giving folks
deferred sentences, pay the
court costs, they're still
giving deferred sentences, and
then they're not paying
anything, but that's another
bill for another day. But
anyway, I appreciate you
bringing this forward and
bringing a sense of fairness to
this program, but I think, uh,
I think it's reasonable under
the circumstances, so thank you.
I heard you say you don't
support this, and then I heard
you say you support this, did I,
what did I get wrong here? Oh, I
support the program don't
support the bill. OK. All right.
Thank you. Clearly. All right,
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sometimes the answers on these
seem pretty easy too, and I'm
trying to understand the.
The concerns if
They can't afford the speeding
tickets, then don't speed. I
mean, I think I'm too pretty for
prison, so I don't steal.
I, I think sometimes the answers
are pretty easy, um, I, I
wonder, I, I also wanted to echo
something that I thought I heard
and then Senator O'Malley
mentioned, and the doctor's
comments, he mentioned that in
lieu of paying the fine, there
was available community service
4 hours. I think we've sat in
this committee longer than 4
hours. That doesn't seem like
that that long to
to eliminate any sort of fees
and so I too, I too I'm kind of
a little dumbfounded with this
bill, I think because when we
came in here for this session,
we expressed an interest to
address public safety issues,
and while this may not be one of
the big crime issues we're
tackling Speers certainly create
a public safety concern. And I'm
torn by thinking I have no
business as a, as an elephant
Butte senator commenting on
something that seems like a
local concern, but I am.
were in Albuquerque and I think,
I think that it should be
considered that whatever kind of
efforts or policies we can put
in place to keep people, uh, you
know, to just to simply slow
down, we need to do that. So I
think that this bill may
conflict with our efforts to
just create a safer New Mexico,
safer schools, safer streets in
this case, um, just safer
communities and so I, I too am
not eager to support this bill
right now, thank you.
Thank you. Others, senators.
Questions or comments?
This chair and moved the table
before I take that table motion
against Senator, I know it's
kind of a new committee to you
and usually a tabling motion is
not debatable, so we're not
going to debate the motion, but
I won't take the motion till
we've got a little bit more
debate, I think I have some,
right, that's OK. No, there's no
reason to apologize at all. It's
a proper motion. It's just I
don't use the tabling motion to
cut off debate unless I'm really
tired of you. So, uh, so.
We can't stay
uh, arbitrary and capricious,
yes, um,
I'm sorry, do you have somebody
else?
Yeah, thank you. And again
members too, I don't believe a
second motion to a second is
required on motions in
committee. Um, couple of things.
One is
The troubling thing with this
policy, I think, and I'd like to
see an amendment if it gets
through here, although it looks,
looking like that might be
problematic. I do think that
people are entitled to notice,
uh, when this is going on, so
there should be posted signs,
whatever that may be to say
you're in an area that's
enforced by radar. I'm, I'm go
to lots of studies, lots of
states where this is done. I
think it's, it's, I think it's a
reasonable thing to do.
Mm
Uh, it's the reason why we all
have ways on our vehicles as
well too. The rate weighs the
application. Y'all don't know
what that is, come see me later,
but, um, uh, the, the concern I
have is the consequences for a
violation of speeding, so while
I think it's a good thing to do,
what from your bill, my
understanding is right now, the
existing law allows the city to
impound a vehicle for nonpayment
of a fine, I think that's one of
the concerns I have because I
don't know whether it's happened
to any of you all, but it's
happened to my friends,
particularly as a lawyer, I got
a phone call from somebody,
they're in jail, and
It's like, well, why are you in
jail and it's a Friday night and
they're gonna be in jail for a
long time because you're not a
judge or whatever. And the
reason is because they didn't
know about a citation they got
or a failure to show or whatever
it may be, so then there's a
warrant for them and so forth.
The concern I'd have is that if
you're, if I'm understanding
your bills and right now, the
city of Albuquerque and
essentially if you don't, if you
don't pay a citation and.
I've been known to get some of
these from time to time, it's
usually usually always in
another state, typically, uh,
not New Mexico, everybody just
say no, but especially never in
my district for anybody
listening, uh, but, but when you
get a citation like this, you
know, if you're not paying
attention, you may get something
in the mail and you may not pay
it and then you're gonna go to
collections, uh, so your credit
report is uh implicated, number
one, and then you've got to try
and go clear that up, I guess,
and anybody who's tried to ever
clear up a credit report,
probably knows that's not easy
to do, um.
And you usually have to threaten
to sue them and.
That's what you and I do, right?
Send him a letter. I'm, I'm
gonna sue them for violation of
the fair debt collection
Practices Act, which, and if you
all get this, get a lawyer. Uh,
but, but if you know, if you
don't, then they, then they uh
mess up your credit and or from
the, the, what your bill
suggests to me is they'll report
you to collections and then they
can impound your vehicle, is
that, is that existing authority
that the city of Albuquerque has
now?
Mr. Chair, that, yes, they give
themselves that authority in
their ordinance.
Yeah, and to your knowledge, do
they do that, Mr. Chair, I think
we heard here today that they
are not doing it.
Which, and I'll say, Mr. Chair.
While this bill has, has since
this bill has been introduced,
I've I've heard, but we don't
report anyone to credit
agencies. We don't impound,
we're, we're not doing any of
these things.
Which makes me very curious
about why they keeps thinking
that this bill will kill their
program, because if they're not
doing it, why, why is there that
concern? Um, they also say in
their ordinance, we heard today,
we're not collecting those
attorney fees, their ordinance
says they can in direct
violation of state law.
Um
So, I, Mr. Chair, I'll tell you.
I did not think that this bill
was likely to pass. Uh, what I
was hoping it would do was cause
the city of Albuquerque to look
at what they're doing, and maybe
take things out of their
ordinances that violate state
law, and maybe think about how
they administer their programs
in a way that could potentially,
while they're trying to do
something good, but could also
potentially do harm to the
people of the city of
Albuquerque.
I think there's a lot of
reasonable ways they can adjust
what they're doing to have a
really successful program, uh,
that doesn't violate the law and
doesn't, uh, unduly
cause damage.
So that that is my goal.
Bringing this bill.
A bit of self-reflection,
hopefully by the city.
It's a messaging bill center, I
don't know, I, I, you know,
somebody invoked me earlier in
the committee, and they said,
well, you know, you, you know,
you're getting old when people
start like quoting you and
citing you like, you know, the
Old Testament or something like
that, yeah, yeah, Cervantes
wants a penalty in the bills, or
else he's gonna say it's a
memorial, which I will and we've
already passed more than a few
memorials this session, uh,
bills that don't have any
consequence, but um, yeah, I'm,
I'm just uh curious, I guess I
really have a question as much
for Commander Martinez, I think,
as anyone, although maybe.
surgeon, sergeant. Um, does APD
have a policy right now on
speeding enforcement, in other
words, you know, we've looked
at, I've looked at some of the
APD policies and my general
sense is AP does not enforce a
lot of crimes that we pass up
here, uh, usually what we'd call
misdemeanor or smaller crimes,
but includes, I think some level
of burglary, theft,
prostitution, drug offenses. My
understanding is Albuquerque has
a policy, let's not do anything
about those crimes. It it it is
there a policy with regard to
speed enforcement? In other
words,
You all
You go out there and look for
speeders.
You run radar enforcement?
Mr. Cherry, yes, sir, we do run
speeding operations on a weekly
basis, a daily basis, and within
the traffic division that is our
job.
You just go out there and for
traffic.
This is just a force multiplier
to help us do that is that we
can't be everywhere.
And um
Right now, when these
These cameras are used. Is there
any kind of notice posted is
there notification of a radar
zone or anything like that at
all? Yes, there is a.
He is by radar. OK, thank you.
Thank you. Appreciate it. Yeah,
I think, I still think this is
an important discussion,
important bill for one simple
reason, which is, as I
understand what you're saying,
senators right now when you get
a citation for one of these
camera enforcements, the fine is
greater than we have specified
in here in the legislature for
the offense itself, and I, I
heard uh uh Mr. Johnson for the
municipal League said uh they
don't like it anytime we preempt
the municipal league, that's
what we do up here. This is our
job is to preempt the municipal
municipalities, right?
is to put boundaries and
parameters on what the
municipalities can and can't do
so if we say the fine for
speeding should be X, and the
city says, yeah, but we're gonna
do a different system outside of
the criminal system and do
cameras and impose a civil
penalty and make it more, then
aren't they really running an
end run around our legislative
authority. It seems like it to
me, at least in that regard, and
I guess the other concern I
have, Senator, that you're
addressing, I believe is that if
you get a citation from a police
officer, you have the
opportunity.
need to go to a judge or court
and maybe present a case and in
this process, is there any
remedy at all? If you get a
citation, what's your remedy?
Mr. Chair, so you can say it
wasn't me, if you tell them who
it was, do you go to court, you
do not go to not in Albuquerque,
you go to the hearing officer at
the city clerk's office. Um, I
know folks who have submitted
discovery, saying, show me.
Show me when this was Cali. This
camera was last calibrated. Show
show me the proof that that this
is accurate, uh, and they do not
respond.
To, to the discovery, um, so
there is not the same meaningful
opportunity to contest it as you
would with going to court. But
at least there is some means of
contesting a citation. There is,
there is some means, yeah.
Right, thank you.
All right, thanks for my
questions. Anyone else provoked
by that? Nope, we had a tabling
motion, I think coming over from
my left side, is that you,
Senator O'Malley? Yes. It was
not a glare, that was actually a
smile. Thank you for that. Uh,
there's a tabling motion before
the committee. Is there any
objection to the tabling motion
at this time.
Uh,
Senator Dewey.
I, I'm, I'm, I'm with you,
Senator Duick. So, so, so, uh,
me and Senator Duke in
opposition tabling motion, the
bill is tabled. Thank you,
Senator.
All right, we've got
I think the word got out, uh,
Sir Paul, you've asked to have
your bills rolled over.
We're likely, let me just take a
moment with the committee. So
the House um competency bill and
some crime bills have passed
over this last weekend.
The plan right now is to hear
that bill Wednesday.
So, this coming Wednesday.
Yeah
Um, so somewhat unusual, but
yeah, we'll start hearing the
House bill this early.
And I encourage all of you to
kind of get yourself saddled up
for that task, #1, and number 2,
to recognize that our our agenda
is gonna get pushed back a
little bit with that plan, all
right? So right now, that is the
place for Wednesday. Um, we have
for today.
The, let's see, I've got 3 more
bills after rollover of Senator
Paul's and Senator Munoz's
bills, 119, so we won't hear
119329 or 3:30 today, that
leaves us 3 more bills.
Um, I've left a lot of time
today for
Senate Bill 54 and I'm gonna go
there next because you have
people from out of state, my
understanding, Senator, who
traveled here.
So we want to make sure that we
get that bill heard today. I'm
still looking to give us a hard
stop pretty close to 6 o'clock
uh for everyone here. So,
Senator, I'm hoping that we can
get through your bill in an
hour. That's a lot of time for
one bill, but it's an extensive
bill. So if needed, we'll, we'll
take a Senate Bill 54.
Um, can I just see a show of
hands, who's here on Senate Bill
16?
OK. My apologies because most of
you all here on Senate 16, uh,
we won't probably get started to
you for probably about a
Maybe half an hour, 45 minutes,
but we will get to you, OK? Um.
Senator, Senate 54.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So Mr.
Chair, uh, in 2023.
Um, the state.
A number of folks.
Brought in.
Uh
back up.
So Senate Bill 54 is based on
data-driven policy
recommendations of the New
Mexican Justice Reinvestment
So Senate Bill 54 is based on
data-driven policy
recommendations of the New
Mexican Justice Reinvestments.
In 2023, uh, the governor, the
Chief Justice,
are our pro tem and the speaker,
um, all asked, uh, put together
this working group, and it's
supported by uh a group called
the, the nonpartisan crime and
justice.
Crime and Justice Institute, who
came in and basically.
gathered a ton of data about
what is happening with public
safety in New Mexico did more
than 150 interviews with books,
um, and then helps facilitate
this work group that involves
all sorts of people who mis
Aganovitch gave me the list of
and I promptly lost, um, uh
Captain Kevin Burns from the San
Juan County Sheriff's Office,
uh, the jail administrator from
Diana County.
me, uh, Ben Bauer, uh, county
manager of Luna County District
Attorney Carmac Otway, Always,
uh, judges from the Valencia
County Magistrate Court.
Um, and from the first district
judicial district and the 13th
judicial district, CYFD, Victim
Advocates, um,
Bipartisan, um, members of the
legislature.
Uh, the the attorney office of
the Attorney General, the
Department of Corrections, um,
and state police.
And all of us look together at
the data that was gathered and
came up with various approaches
to public safety.
That we thought would make a
meaningful difference here in
New Mexico and so SB 54 is the
result of that work group, uh.
About 2/3 of the recommendations
of that work group got involved
and included in this bill.
And so I can do a quick section
by section, uh, overview of it.
We also have a committee sub.
Has that been passed out?
I'm gonna do it grab a 0.5 in
front of us. All right, yes, I
will move the committee sub for
the purposes of discussion.
Single objection, please
proceed. All right, so.
Section 1,
gives the Secretary of
Corrections, the power to to
establish stipends and
incentives for trainers, uh, and
provide instruction to county
detention officers. Um, it also
it also makes sure that the
Department of Corrections, uh,
will follow the behavioral
health, uh, regulations that are
set by the HCA, Section 2.
Provides the uh the data will be
held and stored in the central
repository at the Mexico
Sentencing Commission. Uh, this
is like a statewide that crime,
uh, data.
And our data dashboard, uh, and
the Sentencing commission
already does a does other.
Data dashboards. And so this
would add that to it, the actual
data itself would be, uh, put
together by DPS. The sections
34, and 5 deal with incentives
that that we want to give people
to, to fill roles that we need
done. So if you are a licensed,
uh, therapist or a counselor,
you could be.
Um, you would have priority for
for some uh incentives if you
are working at PD's office or
DA's office, you would qualify
for um tuition reimbursement.
And it, uh, and the amount of
tuition tuition reimbursement,
uh, for them is being raised
from about $7000 to about
$12,000.
Section.
6.
Deals with medication assisted
treatment, um, and so this
establishes an implementation
timeline for county detention
facilities, uh, establishes the
incarcerated individuals and
have access to all FDA approved
medications or uh the treatment
of substance use disorder,
expands the scope of the
requirement that facilities
develop procedures for offering
math to include uh county
detention facilities, expands
the statute to include data
collection and.
reporting, uh, to ensure a
continuum of care for folks who
are moving from county to state
facilities and establishes a
procedure for any facilities
that aren't in compliance to
report why they can't be in
compliance to CCJ if maybe they
need more resources, maybe
there's a fix we need to do
here, but we want to know if
it's not working, why it's not
working.
Sections 7 and 8,
amend the uh
These are really about
expanding, um,
Uh, access to telehealth.
So it's, it's expanding the the
definition of health
professional to include a
licensed clinical social worker
or a licensed counselor, uh, and
it also adds that telehealth can
take place at a triage crisis
center or a certified community
behavioral health clinic. Uh,
Section 9.
Provides the, um, the data, the
data to be held in the central
repository from, uh, at the
Sentencing commission, uh,
For the purposes of populating
that crime data dashboard, um,
that requires that, that data to
be held. Sections 10 and 11
require the creation of a
training program for county
detention officers within, uh,
the corrections training
academy, uh, and also defines uh
county detention officer within
the statue.
Section 12.
Is amending language that right
now we refer to people as having
mental impairments, uh, when
what we're really talking about
are behavioral health crises.
And so we are changing that
language and we're also defining
what a behavioral health crisis
is, um, we're also providing for
annual, the annual training that
law enforcement officers get
that is currently 2 hours, uh,
we're making that 4 hours for
dealing with behavioral health
crisis, uh, and, and again,
we're, we're
ensuring that
In crisis, they were changing in
crisis to experiencing
behavioral health crisis so that
we're more inclusive to host
behavior encountered, uh, for
the training curriculum and with
consideration to the expertise
and licensure that would be
required to diagnose mental
illness.
Section 13 and Mr. Chair, if I'm
going too fast and folks.
Want me to slow down, I, I will,
OK. I'll keep going. Section 13,
I creates definitions for in our
criminal procedure statutes for
mental illness, substance use
disorder, treatment, validated
risk and needs assessments and
law enforcement deflection
programs, and that's because
then in section in the following
sections, we then use those
definitions. So section 14
allows law enforcement agencies
to partner with behavioral
health providers to implement a
deflection.
process and requires data
collection and performance
monitoring standards for any
deflection program.
Sections 15 and 16, remove the
requirement that a diversion
candidate has no previous
convictions, uh, because right
now we are
There's some deflection
possible, but we are really,
really narrow and who we are
allowing to to take advantage
of, of that diversion. So we
want to make sure that anyone
who can appropriately do so is
able to and and the DA is have
the discretion, uh, to, to
decide this is someone who this
is really good approach for
versus this is someone who, no,
it absolutely is not. And so
those sections 15 and 16 do
that, they also require the
consideration of additional
factors for.
inclusion in a diversion program
that are beneficial to diversion
candidates and allows for the
creation of specialty court
programs and pre-adjudication
division in those specialty
court programs.
Section 17, uh, requires courts
to impose conditions of
probation that are informed by a
risk needs assessment, and Mr.
Chair, after I finished going
through this, I'm gonna suggest
a couple small amendments to
this sub because we have some
language in section 17, they
arguably would would reduce, um,
judges discretion in in setting
some of those conditions, uh, of
probation that, that really
isn't, isn't the point of that
section.
Section 18 allows for completion
or participation in treatment
court programs to to satisfy
conditions of deferred or
suspended sentences.
Sections 1920, and 21. Do a, do
a number of things. Uh, they
make it so that, uh, someone
with a D a DWI conviction is
eligible for a conditional
discharge if 5 or more years
have passed since that
conviction. Right now, if you
have a DWI, uh, you are, you are
not.
You, you cannot get a
conditional discharge.
One of the things we're trying
to do is is broaden that pool,
so if it's been more than 5
years since your DUI, uh, you
would be able to get
To get that conditional
discharge in that case. And also
these sections also require the
use of validated risk and needs
assessments in pre-sentence
investigation. Um,
And it grants the uh
MCD.
Um
OK, that's what I thought. It
grants the Secretary of
Corrections, um, the authority
to adopt regulations concerning
probation conditions based on
those validated risk assessment
assessments in split sentences.
Sections 22 and 23 amend to add
crime mapping and collaboration
with
CVRCrime victims reparation
Committee, uh, to interrupt and
deter violence, um, to comply
with reporting requirements
outlined by the
uniform crime reporting Act and
uh and extends the grant award
and outcomes reporting to the
year 2030.
Section 24 requires continuing
education on substance use
disorders, mental health
conditions, and co-occurring
disorders for judges and court
personnel.
Sections 25 and 26, uh, really
just to clean up amending mental
disorder to mental health
disorder.
And, uh, and then also
establishing a voluntary
deflection pathway, uh, for law
enforcement to divert people who
are having experiencing a
behavioral health crisis. So if
I'm having a behavioral health
crisis and law enforcement gets
called, they would then have a
pathway to, to get me if, if I
agreed to go to treatment to get
me to that treatment, uh, rather
than arresting me and having me
sit in jail.
Uh, it also authorizes the
transport of of someone
requiring treatment, uh, to a
qualified treatment center in in
lieu of arrest, provides
guidelines for encountering a
person experiencing a behavioral
health crisis by law enforcement
or a qualified mental health
professional and outlines
training programs and guidelines
to encourage voluntary treatment
options, including crisis
centers. Section 27 creates a
non-reverting clinical
supervision fund for clinical
supervisors who
accept justice involved clients.
And section 28 outlines how the
state and counties will
collaborate to establish and
tailor programs to the needs of
the population in each service
area, including in an assessment
of existing barriers for rural
counties and requires that by
June 30th of 2026, the director
shall submit a plan and
associated rules to the to uh
LHHS and LFC. On, on that, on
that note, Senator Doig on page
67.
Section 28. I don't see any.
Amendments, is that new
material?
Section 28, yes, um, did they
not say no, you're right. I do.
I'm, I'm sorry, Senator.
Oh, it's a temporary profession.
That's why.
Oh, good. Thank you, thank you.
So the Mr. Chair, the, the
purpose of of all of this really
is to to work with and
complement the other work that
we are doing around public
safety and behavioral health,
um, and to make sure that these
Uh, very significant investments
that we are making in these
areas, um.
Give us the results that we're
looking for.
That's all, and I have here with
me, uh, Colleen Baganovitch. She
is with the, the nonpartisan,
uh, group that kind of helped
facilitate this work group, uh,
and they, they really weren't.
They weren't
part of the substance of it,
they were just helping us.
They were giving us information
and helping us organize
ourselves so that Mexicans from
inter interdisciplinary and
bipartisan New Mexicans could
come up with the solutions
ourselves.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much.
He was add anything.
And what organization are you
with?
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the Crime and Justice
Institute. Thank you. The, uh,
we have a, someone signed up,
uh, to speak in favor of the
bill, Madam Secretary, do you
wish to address the committee,
please do.
You have a couple of minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Alicia
Tafoya Lucero. I'm the cabinet
secretary for the corrections
department, and I stand here in
support of this bill, but with
some comments on logistics and
implementation. So I just want
to bring to the committee's
attention section 7 and this is
the area that addresses Medicaid
assisted treatment, uh, now I
did already have this
conversation with director Lem
Engle of the Criminal Justice
Institute, we talked about the
details of it. I bring this to
your.
attention primarily because the
bill seems to assume that the
corrections department has
direct oversight of the
detention facilities in the
counties and so as you read
through the section,
logistically there are some
concerns and I'm sure that the
county probably has some
concerns about the correction
secretary, uh, telling them what
to do in certain areas, so, uh,
when I spoke with Mr. Ingle, we
talked a lot about changing the
language just to be really clear
that those entities are not
under the.
view of the New Mexico
Corrections department and uh I
also wanted to talk about some
of the redundancy in that
section due to the fact that
they're already is legislation
regarding the corrections
department, the state
corrections department and
implementation of MAT and so I
will just say that I look
forward to talking with the
senator about those provisions
to make sure that we're helping
uh her realize the vision and
the goal of this bill, and then
just the really uh next section
in minor is in section 19.
where we're talking about the uh
pre uh the pre-sentence report,
there is no appropriation in
there, and we have done some
research and have determined
that first year implementation
would cost about 500,000 and
moving forward approximately
$300,000 per year, uh, so if
those two items are addressed,
we're very much in support of
this, uh, bill we we appreciated
our work with CJI and of course
appreciate the effort of a
Senator Doig. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam
Secretary, and for the folks
listening at home, you
mentioned.
Section 7, but I believe it's
section 6. Yes, so Mr. Chair,
um, and I apologize that the
secretary, I think, did not have
a copy of the sub. We addressed
that in the subsection 6 and we
separated out state facilities
from county facilities. So don't
know exactly and so.
The secretary mentioned section
7, but it's actually section
section 6 in the 0.5 version
starting on page 21.
And the secretary mentioned
section 19, but it's actually
section 2, beginning on page 51,
dealing with presence and police
investigations. So why don't
each of us take 5 sections and
we'll knock it out that way.
Um, members of the committee.
Thank, thank you, Senator Do.
Thank you.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I do have
an amendment. I think we've
already heard testimony right
position. So I'd like to uh move
um and I did speak with the
sponsor but actually we did
meet.
Uh, I don't know if some of you
know Sue Brown, Doctor Brown,
she's a retired pediatrician.
Uh, she's a behavioral health
advocate, long time for
children, individuals and
families.
And so we talked with her and I
know that some of the um
concerns are in the um
The substitute, but there is
one,
one amendment and that is
So I would like to move
amendment.
Number one, I guess, how that
works. Um, do I read the
amendment?
Thank you, and we're looking at
on on the lower left corner, uh,
331.2. There you go. Thank you.
General Mali to explain the
amendment. OK, well, it's just,
uh, there's some, just some
language, um, change there, it
says uh
On page 3, line 22, after
studies, studies unquote insert
and incorporate best practices,
unquote, that would be the
simple amendment.
Do
That's friendly amendment, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. uh, discussion on the
amendment. Seems pretty awesome.
You can't, what's the point of
studying it if you're not gonna.
Incorporate best practices. So
is there any uh, any comments on
the amendment, any objection to
the amendment.
Any objection to the amendment,
seeing none, please note all
those present.
Voting in the affirmative and so
you, the substitute has been
amended.
Senator O'Malley.
Um,
You still have the floor. Oh,
OK, uh, that's it, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I, I'm gonna have a
couple of amendments too. I
don't know if you want to get to
those before discussion.
Yeah
OK, we'll, we'll go back to you,
Senator Duke. All right, so one
of them, let's do that one last.
Um, 2, I'm just gonna do
verbally and then, and then I'll
do that one separately.
Um, so on page 45.
Uh, it would be striking that
whole sub be there.
Uh, from lines 8 through 20.
Uh, because there was a concern
raised that this would would
limit the discretion of judges
when studying, uh.
Setting conditions of of
probation, and I, and it's
really not the point of, of the
changes we're making in this
section, which is about using
this this validated risk
assessment tool. So it would be
to strike, strike lines 8
through 20 on page 45. OK.
And uh
In my document it, it, I would
be striking 7 through 19.
Uh
So, but I think we're talking
about the same thing we're
talking about subparagraph B,
which starts the magistrate.
And ends with the words
probation officer. It, yes, it
is. It makes me a little bit
nervous that we have subs with
different line numbers. I'm not
sure how that happens, you guys
have.
230093.5.
Well, I'm looking at a 0.5
version, huh, I'm not sure.
And that happens, but, but yes.
Yes, you are right. All right.
And so
The proposal is to strike
subgraph B and obviously
renumber.
CD and E and F accordingly.
Yes, any, any everyone clear on
what the proposed amendment is.
Any, uh, discussion on the
amendment.
Then he ops.
And
Re-lettered, yes, exactly. I
misspoke, uh, they'll be to be
if this is struck stricken there
to be re-lettered. Any
opposition to the
To the amendment.
Please note, uh, all those in
favor.
Voting for the amendment.
And so subgraph B is strong.
And so Mr. Chair, this is.
This is a small thing, um.
But I think we, uh, so in this
committee,
We generally take immunity out
of any bills. This is like
there's existing language.
Uh, providing immunity for
folks.
Oh, I'm sorry, page 49.
I'm looking at lines 9 through
11.
This existed language, existing
language in our, in our statute
that it provides immunity for
from civil liability, uh, for
folks who are doing community
service, uh, we always take
immunity out in this, in this,
uh, committee. So just in
keeping with the that convention
of our committee, I would
suggest page 49.
At line 9 after that.
striking everything through and
On page 11, on line 11.
Could, could you state a page in
line one more time, please?
Sure, so it's page 49, line 9,
striking everything after that
on line 9.
Through and on line 11.
So,
so you would, you would end
after the end right after that
service, comma, and so.
So it would say that a person
who performs community service.
So I have it as well, page 49
lines 9 through 11.
Uh
So it would basically read
provided that a person who
performs community service
pursuant, we would be raising a
person all the way to Kama and
and. Right. Everyone on the same
page on that proposed amendment,
discussion on the amendment.
Uh, I'll take that as a motion
to for the amendment. Is there
any, uh, opposition to that
amendment.
In opposition to that amendment,
please note up all those present
voting in the affirmative and so
that, that amendment has been
adopted.
That change has been adopted
brother.
Great. Thank you. So then I have
one more that I actually got
drafted this time. Uh, so that
should be passed out. And, and I
want to make clear that in in
making these amendments, you
know, this was, this was the,
the effort of a work group.
Um, and some of these amendments
I'm offering, including this one
that you guys are getting, that
doesn't come from the, the work
group. Uh, this is coming from
me as an individual. I don't
want, I don't want my fellow
work group members to feel like
Uh, I am, I am misrepresenting
their work in any way. But what
this amendment does that you are
getting is, um,
So when we heard from the
sentencing commission a couple
of weeks ago, looking at their
list of who was on there.
Many of the public members were
actually CYFD people, um, and
it, and, and, and so we didn't
have actual real public members.
Uh, we had a lot of agency
people and, and I don't think
that was, that is the
The purpose of those public
member spots. So what this
amendment would do would make it
so that public members of the
Sentencing commission, uh, can't
be employees of state agencies,
they have to be actual public
members.
And I'll, I'll move that
amendment.
Alrighty, so we have a.
432.2.
On page 7 and page 8.
If you could, uh, provide the
sponsor with a copy. Is there a
everyone has a
We'll kind of slow down here for
a sec.
Everyone, take out your red
pencil.
Give us a moment to
to red ink are substitute.
Members of the committee, any
discussion on the amendment.
So
Any discussion on the or any
opposition to the amendment.
And the opposition to the
amendment.
Please note, uh, all those
present voting in the
affirmative, and so that, that,
that change has been adopted.
Mr. Chair, that's all the
amendments I have.
Thank you. Thank you. And we've
already heard from public
comment, we have a couple folks
on the board, uh Senator
Thornton.
And then Senator Brantley.
Center store, yes.
Uh, teachable moment. We're not
actually amending the bill cause
it's a substitute and it's our
substitutes. It's Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute.
So these amendments will just
get incorporated into the bill.
So when we do the when
substitute, so when we do the
motion, it'll just be I do pass
on the substitute and do not on
the bill. So we're not, we're
not really, we're mending it,
but we're not really amending
it,
know what I mean, excellent
point. So we will be doing a
An additional substitute. That's
why I referred to them as
changes as opposed to amendments
when we.
I guess when we agreed upon
them.
But no excellent point. Thank
you, ma'am.
Corton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. It's a lot
to absorb here, as you might
expect. Um,
And so you've made a lot of
changes as well. I applaud the
work that you guys are are doing
and and trying to do, and I
guess just sort of a basic
question from my perspective is
There's a lot of behavioral
health.
Activities included now into
this in the corrections
activities. And, and so, uh, I
guess my initial question is,
is, are, are we?
Trying to make the uh correction
institutions kind of becoming
our behavioral health centers
now, cause that's what it feels
like when I sort of go through
this bill, so, so help me, help
me explain to me why, I mean,
because there's a lot of
additional training for
corrections officers, there's uh
There's medical assistance.
We're asking them to do, so it
seems like we're, we're adding
more and more responsibility to
law enforcement on
the behavioral health.
And
I'm just wondering if that's the
right way to go.
So Mr. Chair, Senator, our
corrections, our correction
system is already.
Essentially our biggest
behavioral health provider. Um,
and that's not working well. So
what this is aiming to do is to
present, uh, diversion options,
uh, so folks can get that
behavioral healthcare, uh, not
in the corrections setting, uh,
when they need that. Um, so it's
really, it's really looking at
preventing exactly what you just
said and addressing that that
problem that we have, uh, not
adding to it, but there are.
Lots of people who are in
corrections who do have
behavioral health needs. And so,
and as a state and and when it's
the county, when's the county,
uh, we have an obligation to, to
care for them. And so we want to
make sure that it's, that
everyone has the training they
need, and it's real clear how
those needs are cared for, uh,
when they do need to be cared
for. But no, we should, we
should stop this trend of
making, of our corrections
facilities being our primary
behavioral health, uh, providers
because
That's not what they're meant to
do. Um, and, and it's not
working very well, so.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator,
Mr. Chair. I, I agree with that.
I
I think that was my biggest
concern is, is, um,
The other concern is because of
the additional things that
you're adding here, there, there
was no appropriation associated
with this, is there gonna be a
follow on bill to support all
the activities you've outlined
here.
Mr. Chair, Senator, so we really
see it, so all of the, the
investments that we are making
right now, we see those as
that's what's going to, to help
fund this. Um, this was really
intended as a as a policy bill
that is, that complements the,
the, the appropriations that,
that we are doing. Um, but not
as one, but we're not, we're not
including separate
appropriations in here.
This is intended to be rolled
into the overall uh policy crime
package.
Understood.
Um
Let see.
Uh, just a couple of questions
regarding.
The status, I think that's page
24.
Um, I, I guess he line item 9.
You talked about the medication
assistance treatment, um.
Including if the prescription
was provided at release and the
person was connected, my, my
question is, are.
Are not these medication
assisted um activities already
performed at at these uh
facilities currently.
So, Mr. Chair, Senator.
So that, so you, where you're
looking right there on line 9,
that is for, for the state, not,
not county facilities for state
facilities. A couple of years
ago, we passed some legislation,
uh, that said that if you are
already on it, on medication
assisted therapy. Uh, you could
continue it. Um, and I think
It's supposed to go into effect,
I believe, at the end of this
year, that you can also start
medication-assisted treatment
for substance use disorder, uh,
when you're in there. So, there
are, there are some requirements
already in our law around these
programs, um, but this right
here, I think this is talking
about the reporting.
Yes, I'm actually no, this is
dealing with county, county, not
state. Uh, cause if you look at
where it starts on on the bottom
of 23.
So this would be, so what we
want to have happen is, is
eventually we want medication
assisted treatment to be
available both to continue and
to initiate, and in all of our
facilities, whether they're
county or state, um, and so this
is creating reporting
requirements around that. Now,
for counties, it's, it's, it's
harder. Uh, the reason we, we
separated them out is because if
they don't have the funding to
do that, we don't want to put
that an unfunded mandate on
them, so.
We've been really careful on
this bill to make sure that
we're not putting that unfunded
mandate on them and giving them
the opportunity to come to us,
uh, at CCJ in the interim to
say, look, here's why you're,
you're asking us to do these
things. We can't do them, likely
because we, they're unfunded.
Um, here's, here's why, and
here's what we need in order to,
to achieve this policy goal.
Thank you, Senator.
Moving on to page 29, you talked
about uh providing a data
collected and stored in some
sort of data dashboard.
Uh, some central repository, I
guess that's our packed the end
of page 29 and top of page 30,
um,
Does this dashboard already
exist or is this something
they're gonna have to develop.
So, Mr. Chair, Senator, there
are other dashboards that exist,
but this would be creating this
one, this this statewide, uh,
Prime dashboard, um, where DPS
would collect the data, and then
it's the sentencing commission
that makes it available to the
public.
We'll all excuse me, uh, Mr.
Chair, Senator, we'll all
All everyone have to report into
this would be a requirement then
to, to report it to this new
system.
In which case I'm assuming
training will be needed and once
the system is developed.
I believe andpaganovic can
correct me if I'm wrong, but Mr.
Chair, Senator, I believe that
DPS already collects a lot of
this data, uh, from folks, so it
wouldn't the, the obligation is
on DPS, it wouldn't be on the,
the folks under them who are
already providing the
information to DPS, but
thisganovic probably knows more
about that. Uh, thank you,
Senator. Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh, the through
the uniform crime reporting
systems, all of the agencies
that are currently reporting
would still be reporting.
to the Department of Public
Safety, uh, to the Records
Bureau, um, there would have to
be a data sharing agreement with
the New Mexico Sentencing
Commission to be able to uh
share that data with the
sentencing commission and have
it go to the central
repositories, there would be
some agreements that would have
to be shared, then the
Sentencing commission would
facilitate that uh data
dashboard through um I'm I'm
actually hearing from, uh, Mr.
Carver back there, that would
actually be facilitated through
New Mexico Tech, be the ones who
would actually stand up.
systems, um, but yes, there
would need to be um agreements
and lots of um uh they would
have to promulgate rules and how
that would uh lay down and
But, but I think to address, I
think your question was, are,
are the folks who are
On the ground, folks who are
gathering the data, are they
gonna need additional training
in order to do that. And, and I
think the answer is no, because
they already have to, uh, gather
that data under, under other
law.
Thank you, Senator. So that's
good. I, I, I think a central
repository is a great thing. I,
I'm just curious as to whether
or not that's been an issue in
the past, people willing to
share that information, but
you're saying there would be
rules established or some kind
of agreements between
Districts, if you will, to
ensure that all the data is
collected properly, members of
the committee, Senator, yes,
there, there are already rules,
uh, that are required reporting
and um there are, um, yes,
sorry. Yes. Very good. I
appreciate that.
Uh, let's see.
So I think you've answered, I
had a question, but I think
you've already answered that
one.
As you were going through, I was
trying to write notes at the
same time.
Um, I think that may have been
my last, last one.
So we've already talked about
the no appropriation.
And. Oh, I guess the last one
and again, this is maybe just
for my own edification as I'm
learning this process is on page
53.
54, I'm sorry, section F.
You talked about using crime
mapping to utilize crime data to
interrupt and deter violence.
Identifying targeting a person,
group.
In locations where violence is
concentrated, and this is all
under the violence intervision
intervention program.
Maybe I'm naive or maybe I watch
too much FBI TV type stuff, but
I assumed that this was
something that was already done,
uh, by, by most law enforcement
that they kind of do heat maps
to tell where crime is happening
and they can.
Maybe start doing things to
alleviate or mitigate violence
in particular so.
Is this new? OK can cause it,
it's a new section that you've
added, but I'm questioning is
this really
Something that needs to be told
that they have to do this.
Mr. Chair Senator, so I think
this would require coordination.
around the state, around, around
these issues. I think right now
you're right. Albuquerque's
probably doing it for
themselves. Santa Fe is probably
doing something themselves, we
wanted to get, we want to get an
overall, uh, view of what's
happening in our state and
provide that, that coordination
so folks aren't siloing, uh, and
so that's, that's, I think what
this is seeking to to achieve.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Xi. I think that's all I
have. Senator Brown.
You
Mr. Chairman and Senator Dock
for bringing this forward. This
is a very extensive package.
And it, and it's bringing
together a lot of players. It's
a multi-agency approach.
It seems that your bill is
really targeting public safety
programs, and so as I went
through a lot of the agency
analysis.
They're there seems supportive
of it, with the exceptions of um
HCA, which it did not.
They don't seem to want to do
their job. I really kind of dug
into a lot of that too on her
complaints is still what they're
required to do. I do have one
question that was brought up by
um.
The DAs, can you address it? It
says that the bill introduces
increased reliance on the needs
and risk assessment tool,
particularly in the realm of
probation conditions. Why does
that concern keep coming up a
couple of times. What, what is
that?
And Mister Chair editor, I'm not
sure why they're concerned about
it, um, so using this validated
risk assessment tool is a way to
make sure that when you have
someone who is getting ready to
come back into our community.
You're identifying like.
Do they, is there a uh continuum
of care issue. Are they on
medicated assisted treatment.
If, yeah, we need to identify
that so that when they get out,
they continue that treatment.
Uh, do they have other
behavioral health needs. If yes,
then we need to identify that so
that we, so that, uh, as soon as
they're released, they are being
connected with those services.
Um, so that hopefully they, they
don't come right back in.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Does
this, is there an argument, is
that just to say it's increasing
a reliance on that where we're
not able to execute maybe.
Common sense or or look at a
past history or.
Is this changing anything of
what they already currently, how
they currently use the tool at
all?
So that, so, Mr. Chair, Senator,
I think they don't use the tool
at all now, but, but no, it
would not eliminate discretion.
It would, it's, it's just a way
of giving, giving them more
information about this person,
uh, so that they have, there is
a continuity of care once
they're released. But no, common
sense, they could, they can
still do, do whatever they, they
choose to do. This is just a way
for them to get more
information. OK. And this
package kind of addresses a lot,
like we said, of the programs
and not.
necessarily the policies. Can
you speak to just a minute, we
heard that we're gonna have the
crime package over here on on
Wednesday. Can you talk about
maybe how there may be any
conflicts of these coming
together or um on the other
hand, how this compliments the
policy side.
And Mister Chair, Senator, I'll
admit to you, I have not yet
read, uh, that package that's
coming over. If we're hearing it
on Wednesday, I'm probably gonna
be reading it tomorrow, um, but
I, I don't think there is any
conflict. And, and I don't know
if you have read it and you can
speak to that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, with respect to
uh competency AOT, um, you know,
involuntary treatment and uh
alternative pathways into
treatment and the competency
determination process, um, this
package absolutely complements
that package, um, in terms of
just
This package, as you've read and
you talk about programs, uh,
just creating a pathway that
suits the needs and the risk of
different people that are coming
into our justice system. Um, the
competency determination process
does not apply to everybody.
Right now it's applying to a lot
of people that it probably
doesn't maybe need to apply to,
right? So, um, this would create
alternative pathways so that
people can voluntarily enter
treatment if they want to, and
it also gives law enforcement,
um.
The resources that they need so
that they can focus their
attention on more serious risks
to public safety with um the
tools that are in this package.
So they absolutely complement
one another and um go along
pretty well, so. OK, thank you,
Mr. Chairman, and, and senator.
I do like the part in here that
that I read about, it seems that
there's a large um promotion on
the recruitment of public
defenders, district attorneys,
social workers, and so I think
that not only is there a wide
range of mental health benefits
in here, but specifically, um,
it would add resources to other
systems, and I think immediately
of, of the benefit it could
bring CYFD.
But, but I do think that there's
a wide sweeping range of
benefits in here. I'm gonna
support the packages we go
forward, um, and I just
appreciate kind of the balance
of bringing in programs and
policies together.
That create kind of a
A whole, a whole system here to
address our, our public safety
needs. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Brandi.
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Wow.
Uh, I have been meeting with uh
the the um criminal justice
institute a little bit over the
summer.
Um, but I'm just amazed that
you're able to put these changes
into one bill.
Oh
I do have one minor technical
when you, when you delete it.
On page 45, when you delete it 7
through 19. I think you should
also delete.
On page one, lines 23 and 24.
That's what you deleted.
section.
Mr. Chair, Senator, you're
absolutely right.
We would definitely need to.
To fix, um.
23 and 24.
Yes
So, ma'am, uh, Mr. Chairman, I,
I'm just gonna offer that.
Amendment to delete lines 23 and
24 on page 1.
Uh
Thank you for that. I think
we're in agreement with that
change. Thank you.
Uh, so I do, can you talk a
little bit more about
The
Pre-prosecution diversion,
changes that you're suggesting,
I think it's section 15.
pages 40 and 41.
Uh, it, it seems to me that what
you're doing is adding to her
statue, but that you're really
delineating out um
What's the factors for
eligibility for that
pre-prosecution diversion
program, just talk a little bit
more about the study and how,
how this is gonna work.
Yes, Mr. Senator Mr. Chair,
Senator, um, so because, because
we took out.
That language that said, uh, you
can't have any, any prior felony
convictions for violent crime in
order to, to qualify for a
diversion program, uh, and we're
giving that discretion to the
district attorney. We really
wanted to lay out.
What that thought process should
be, so, so now anyone who
So
The case comes before the the
district attorney, they would go
through this analysis of looking
at whether there is a likelihood
that they're going to achieve a
conviction, the nature of the
offense, whether the accused
would benefit from a
pre-prosecution diversion
program, uh, whether available
programs are appropriate for the
needs of the defendant, whether
services of the defendant are
more, uh, for the defendant or
more readily available in the
community and whether the
defendant constitutes a
substantial danger to others,
and then
mitigating or aggravating
circumstances. Um, so the DA
would still have, have their
discretion. Uh, we just want to,
to make sure that that these
are.
These are factors that are
considered in making that
analysis.
So Mr. Chairman, did you, uh,
speak with the DA's, I just, I'm
just so shocked that nobody is
here to stay wait, wait, I have
the issues.
So Mr. Chair, Senator, so yeah,
so this work group had had DAs
on it. I know there were also
meetings with the the district
Attorneys Association outside of
that, but taking this approach
of this multidisciplinary
bipartisan work group really
helped us to, uh, come up with
approaches that were going to be
palatable to everyone. Um, there
were all, all I think the
important voices were there at
the table. Uh, and they were
working out to the extent that
there were disagreements.
We got to work those out in the
context of, of the work group so
that thankfully we're not doing
it here, sitting in committee
with you all.
Well, Mr. Chairman, all, all I
say is that you must have a good
bill cause they're not here uh
hassling us about it. And a lot
of people can hassle us about
this bill. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, members of the
committee, Senator O'Malley,
thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted to go back a little bit
to what Senator Thornton brought
up.
Um, whoop, just spilled coffee
all over the place.
Um
I think I moved enough stuff
around.
Ah
Thank you very much. Uh, it, it
has to do with money
appropriation. So you were
saying that uh that you were um
And somehow this this uh
Because this is going to, we're
talking about training and other
things that, and then the
corrections to mention the fact
that it was going to cost more.
I think she mentioned something
in the range $300,000 to
implement um
And you said that this was going
to somehow get wrapped up in a
crime the appropriation will be
put into that so, Mr. Chair,
Senator, I, I don't have any
plan for for an appropriation
for this I I was assuming that
all these policy approaches
would get wrapped into an
overall policy package. Um, if,
if the body sees fit to to adopt
them, um.
But, but no, we, so we did a lot
of talking with various
agencies. Uh, we did not
necessarily hear, and I, I
wasn't having those
conversations directly, but I,
it was not reported back to me.
All these agencies say we need,
they need a ton of money to do
this stuff, um, sitting, sitting
in here is the first time that
I've heard that. Ah, so.
And these agencies were part of
the work group.
As well. So,
I think I feel like every time
we do something up here, they
say we need lots of money, uh,
well, Mr. Chair, Senator, I
mean, uh, we are talking about
increased training. We're asking
corrections.
You know officers to do more,
um, that requires more training.
So I was just wondering,
You know, if there was a concern
about that, and if you say that
they didn't ask for any money,
well, I guess that's not an
issue.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Just a couple of comments first
just a couple of comments. First
of all, thank you. I mean,
Oh
But let me get the name correct.
Ms. Boganovich, could you tell
us a little bit about CJI?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, uh, yes, we
are a, um, nonpartisan.
Um, sorry, I'm on Eastern Time
and I'm very tired. Um, we are a
nonpartisan, uh, technical
assistance provider, uh, funded
by the Bureau of Justice
Assistance through the Office
Office of Justice Programs, um.
And we are based out of Boston
and we have been, uh, we, we are
talking to one of two technical
assistance providers of the
justice reinvestment initiative,
and we were asked to provide
technical assistance on the JRI
effort uh in New Mexico, um,
last, uh, as Senator Duha said
in the beginning, um, in 2023
that was established, uh, three
branch uh letter from
legislative leaders that um,
Chief Justice and Governor.
And we have
Worked with the um the working
group over the last 16 or 17
months to uh facilitate, which
was really works technical
assistance providers, uh,
subject matter experts and
really just where the
facilitators and they did all
the work as coming from New
Mexico, um, to just.
Work with the data, here all the
information, here the state
examples and uh recommend
policies that were in the best
interest of New Mexico. Um, we
We worked very closely with
them, uh, Senator Duha and the
other members of the um working
group and they developed 19
policy recommendations, um.
Ranging from, you know, law
enforcement from the front end
of uh deflection programs all
the way to reentry in the back
end of the system, um, and most
as Senator Du Hicks said, 2/3 of
those recommendations are
included in SB 54, um, and yeah,
so.
Thank you so much. We're very
grateful for CGI to focus on New
Mexico, it was a chore to get
you here. We need a signed
document from the
From the legislature, from the
governor, from the Supreme Court
uh Chief Justice, and
It took you a while to get here,
but now that you're here,
appreciate you scouring our
statutes and helping us
modernize them because uh.
I do like I wanna commend you if
you grab one of these sections
and it when it was a standalone
bill, it would be a really cool
bill.
But it's kind of a maybe a non
sexy bill that may not have the
momentum, uh, cause I, a lot of
these policy initiatives, I
remember just dying on the vine
uh through the years, um, so
it's just fantastic to see them
all rolled into one.
And if you'll notice we're
amending statutes from 1977,
1981, 1963, 2004.
This is just a tribute to your
to your leadership. A quick
question on, uh, or maybe a
comment on page 34.
Just, um
On the police training of
So police, uh, you know, in
addition to the academy, and
then they get accepted as a
police officer.
They need 40 hours of.
Every 2 years, 40 hours of
training every 2 years of of
in-service training.
And we, we have a mandatory
requirements throughout.
The statutes 2 hours here, 3
hours there, 1 hour here.
So we're proposing to bump it
from 2 hours to 4, they're, um,
in those 40 hours.
I think we're up to like 34
hours or whatever, so, so what
happens is these officers every
2 years or like it's like it's
like.
Groundhog Day, every 2 years,
so, so there'll be a bill.
Hopefully coming forward to
address that and we'll we'll
have that conversation.
Again, but it, uh, a lot of this
stuff because it's been in
statute for so long.
Uh, this, this section has been
in statute since 2011. It is
incorporated.
Uh, into the, into the
foundation of the of the police
curriculum, so just wanted to
make that point.
Remember, uh
German Cervantes. Thank you.
Have we gotten to everybody
So there's a lot of work here,
um, one consideration, I think
for the sponsors I heard Senator
Stewart, I was listening next
door that um we, we're gonna be
talking about a different
substitute, right, so we're
gonna have an essentially a new
version of the substitute
that'll be put together with the
amendments that you've proposed
and had adopted here and then
some others that I think have
been suggested.
Um, I might suggest you just for
consideration, Senator, that
we've, we've done the hearing,
we get to the committee members,
but to wait on the vote for this
till Wednesday, in part because
there there is quite a bit of
language in here that I think
may have some relationship to
the competency issue. So we
talked about harm to self, harm
to others. Some of those terms
are used in your bill, um,
definition of mental illness,
things of that kind. So I'd like
to strongly suggest to you so
that we don't do any harm to the
competency bill and that, that
major effort that we maybe put
those amendments today into.
texts and assure ourselves of
that is it. I see you nodding
your head, you're agreeable to
doing that. Yes. OK. I think
that that's advised to roll the
boat on a little bit and
I also, uh, support, um, Senator
Stewart's comments, I'm really
surprised the DA's aren't here.
Um, even if they support it, you
know, I mean, certainly we're
used to having people come in
when they're opposed bills, we
just saw that successfully done
by the city of Albuquerque on
the traffic your traffic bill,
uh, not to rub salt in the
wound, but, but at the same
time, you know, I'm looking at
the DA's language in here, um,
and so we look at 41, page 41
for a moment.
If I was a DA kind of candidly,
I'd be insulted, uh, not by your
work, not by your bill, but
really, I mean, it's in here so,
uh, in terms of a
pre-prosecution diversion
program, we're putting into the
state statute, the district
attorney shall consider the
following paragraph number one,
where the state has sufficient
evidence to achieve a
conviction. Duh, I mean, uh,
we're telling, we're telling the
DA that they should consider
whether there's evidence to
support a conviction, do we
really have to pass a law to
tell the DA's they should ask
whether you're you're you're.
I wish people could see the
expression on your face, but I,
but I hope you can understand, I
mean, we're making light of it,
but I was a DA be kind of a
little bit offended by this, but
they're not here and that
really, I think tells us the
bigger picture, which is, are
the DA's overworked? Are they
disinterested, are they not
paying attention, what's going
on there? We spent some time
talking about that in the
committee room this morning with
the the justice of the Supreme
Court, you know, where, where
are the DA's and all this, but
to to pass a law that says they
should uh consider whether they
have evidence to support a
charge.
Oh, wow. Um, um, and, and then
the second thing they're
supposed to consider after they
consider where they have
evidence is the second
paragraph, which is there's
supposed to consider the nature
of the offense. No kidding, uh,
you know, um, we should wonder
whether the offense, uh, merits
the evidence. So again, when I
go through all of that, I'm just
sitting there going, um, where
are those guys and women too,
lots of women at DAs as well
too, so, um, I, I appreciate
your willingness to maybe wait
on this a little bit. If you
look at page.
35, just real quick, you've got
a definition of behavioral
health crisis.
This is kind of one of the
things we're talking about when
it comes down to right
competency and harm yourself and
harm to others. You've got a
definition here that a
behavioral health crisis means a
significant disruption of mental
or emotional stability or
functioning resulting in urgent
need for immediate assessment
and treatment, there's the
trick, right, or treatment and
so forth. So I think there's
gonna be some overlap and some
implications, so I appreciate
you giving us all a little bit
more time. the the last comment
I'd like to just touch on real
briefly is uh I saw a cabinet
secretary here, really.
I want to commend you and all
the people that have worked on
this in in the last year, we've
had a lot of focus on public
safety, criminal justice,
special session, a lot of
legislation and bills, a lot of
effort and really almost scant
effort at all to recognize the
fact that the people that we're
putting away sometimes for
increased sentences are an
opportunity for us, um, that,
um, it's an opportunity to
educate to uh rehabilitate to
re-educate, to get people
education, training jobs in all
of.
this discussion of public safety
and so forth. It's been almost
no discussion of that as an
initiative or an agenda, no, no
bills really have risen to the
top, we want to put people away
for more years for any number of
crimes, and we want to get rid
of panhandling and we wanna, we
wanna do all these things, but
almost really very little
attention to the fact that we've
got people with us in our
custody and control for years.
Um, and great opportunity to
educate them and and try and and
bring them back to us, right, is
uh is productive citizens, and
we haven't really
talked very much about that.
We're putting the resources, if,
if that's where the need is, if
there's more recesses so I
really do appreciate you
approaching the problem from
that perspective and commend you
and I think hopefully that'll
get us all to really looking for
greater opportunities there, uh,
to, to really rebuild our
citizens when we have that
opportunity, so thank you for
that.
And my comments. Anyone else?
All right, we're gonna pass on a
vote right now, but we're, we'll
look at this in the context of
coming Bill, you'd indicated you
hadn't yet had a chance to look
carefully at the house bill
coming over, I'm in the same
boat you are in, so let's, let's
look at that in the context of
your building, act on your bill
accordingly. All right?
Thank you, sir.
last up, I believe that we're
gonna hear today's Senate Bill
16.
Thank you.
Good evening, early evening, so
I had uh I had told the
committee I'd try and get him
out of here by 6 at 6, so we'll
see on when, no, maybe not.
Uh, I it's a tease, so we'll get
this for tonight. Um, I'll be
heavy with the gavel in doing
so, I know there's a lot of
people who want to be heard.
We've got a long list of people
that are proponents. I just want
to make sure that you're
familiar with our rules. Uh, you
are, you're nodding your head.
So we've got
Uh
Three people as part of your
presentation and then part of
your uh coordinated support
looks like maybe another 10
people too, so a lot of folks,
I'm gonna, first of all, I'm
gonna offer you 15 minutes to
advocate and tell me whether
you'd like to reserve any part
of that to come back with the
back end for what we call a
rebuttal, um, in any part of
that. Otherwise, it's 15 minutes
for you to control as you wish
and I, I'm counting on you to
let people talk as long as you
want them to talk, realizing
that in the end, 15 minutes is
up and whoever got to speak got
to speak and who didn't.
doesn't. So I've got uh the
Secretary of State, uh, Miss
Oliver and Lindsay Buckman here
um Claudia Reisner, Meredith
Ross Main, uh, Frank Smith, uh,
a tosa Chavez or Joe Little.
Dominic, I'm messing this one
up. Got, got your pen. Mark
Mitchell.
Rema roared, Molly Swank, John
Martinez, Kelly Davis, they're
all signed in and support, so
I'm gonna rely on you to timefe
people as you wish, uh, in terms
of opposition, we have, uh, we
have no organized coordinate
opposition. So, uh, let's get
started.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and there
will be no need to reserve time
for a rebuttal. I am bringing a
bill that this committee has
seen multiple times before, so I
need to recognize the vice chair
Maus and former senator Bill
O'Neill, who carried it in the
last session, as well as the
current co-sponsors, uh, Senator
W from perhaps part of Jon Rubio
and Kate's. This is a bill to
allow voters who have not
designated one of the major
parties to participate in.
in the public primary elections
on primary election day, such a
voter would choose a ballot from
one of the parties holding a
primary.
It is generally referred to as
semi-open in that Republicans
would still vote in Republican
primaries, Democrats and
Democratic primaries,
libertarians, were they to have
one, would vote in theirs.
Um, and Mr. Chair, there is an
amendment, and I don't know if
you want to discuss that now or
Bill first.
Perfect, Mr. Tariff if someone
would move it for discussion.
Mr. Cha, I'll move the.
for discussion purposes on the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. It's
Amendment 800.1 and this
amendment narrows the semi-open
even a little bit further rather
than anyone who is not a member
affiliated with a major party,
this narrows it down to only our
DTS declined to state voters.
Who can participate now in
primary elections by requesting
one of the ballots.
So that is the purpose of the
amendment, that is what all of
the language does, it leads to
that end, the original bill
again.
Indicated that any voter not
affiliated with a major party,
would now be able to participate
in primaries, the amendment
narrows it to any voter not
affiliated with any party, and
if you need more detail, we can
go into it, but that is the
amendment.
And just move it after the
amendment.
On the amendment.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
can you tell me how this is
different from what happened in
rules, which you've.
Struck all of the rules
committee amendments at number
one, so I was just different
from what we did in rules. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you,
Senator in rules we were doing
the amendment to narrow it down
on the fly orally and uh the
drafters noticed there were 4
different places we forgot to
strike a commas, and one place
where we needed to leave in a
sentence and we had
inadvertently taken it out. So
with the support of the chair of
rules.
And her eyes on it as well as
the Secretary of State. We
struck those and then went
through the process of putting
them back in very carefully and
deliberately. We all agreed they
are now correct.
So, Mr. Chairman, these are the
same amendments we didn't rule
just with a few more commas and
words in the right order. Could
have just said that
well, there you go, Mr. Chair,
that's, that's what it is right.
Thank you.
Senator Do you want it on the
amendment too. No, uh, set
figure explained it well, OK,
very good. Anyone else on the
amendment?
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment.
Sing no that remember is
adopted.
Um, and let's see, we're still
on the Senate bill, right? So
This is just an amendment to
Senate Bill 16 at this point.
All right, very good.
Uh, OK, back to the clock, we've
got a number of the supporters
who registered um
Are you ready to go to them or
you we're, we're off the
amendment, so that's taken care
of back to the bill itself. Are
you ready to go to your uh
advocates, Mr. Chair, let's let
them speak. They've been
waiting.
Yeah, I'm counting on you as a
sponsor to control time, all
right?
Uh, good evening, Mr. Chair and
committee members, Maggie Toussa
Oliver, Secretary of State. I
will be brief as I know the
chair likes, um, my, me and my,
my, my staff have been in
support of this bill for many
years. 12, the concern that we
always have is for
participation, participation
begets participation. If we
allow folks to vote in a
primary, they're more more
likely to vote in the general.
3, Mr. Chair, out of 4.
Uh, there are many, uh, primary
elections in the state that
decide the general election.
So we have counties where a
Democrat is always gonna get uh
a free ride in the general or
Republican and not being able to
participate in that primary
election really uh prevents them
from being able to have their
voice and their say, uh, and
then finally, uh, Mr. Chair, in
the last committee, um, we
heard, I'm gonna totally blank
on the 4th point now. So I'm
just gonna stop Mr. Chair, but
thank you so much for allowing
me in my office, and I
and Lindsay Bachmann are
director of Legislative Affairs
will stand for any questions you
may have, uh, technical election
questions. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm here before you
tonight to speak um on behalf of
American Association of
University Women and the
National Organization for Women,
and we strongly support this
bill and glad to see it amended
and I'm uh this is very, very
important that we allow decline
to speak uh excuse me, to
declined to state um voters to
express their
References, otherwise it's a
kind of a rigged game, uh, with
the parties controlling the the
process. It's very cumbersome to
change to go in. I've worked at
the polls and to change your
registration and then have to
change it back to DTS, um, so I
urge you to support this and
thank the sponsors. Thank you.
I didn't, oh, Meredith Main,
sorry.
All right, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, my
name is Brianna Rourke. I'm here
on behalf of UNM College
Democrats, and I'm an
independent voter. I've spent a
lot of time volunteering for
campaigns over the election
seasons, and I find it
frustrating that that's one of
the only ways I can allocate my
support because I cannot support
them at the ballot box. The
majority of my peers like myself
have supported and voted for
both candidates on both sides of
the aisle, and we should be able
to do that in all elections,
including primaries. This bill
would enable enable me to
exercise my taxpayer rights and
empower many.
voters like myself who identify
as an independent. So on behalf
of you, I vote that you vote yes
for Senate Bill 16. Thank you.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Frank
Smith. I'm with the Mexico
Veterans and Military Families
Caucus and New Mexico veterans
for all voters, and I'm here to
urge support of Senate Bill 16,
SB 16 is about fairness right
now nearly 60,000 veterans in
New Mexico, those who are
proudly served under both
Democratic and Republican
commanders in chiefs are being
denied a voice in primary
elections simply because they
are DTS voters.
These veterans help fund our
elections, yet they're shut out
from the most critical stage of
the democratic process.
Nationally, 49% of veterans
identify as DTS or independent.
But our current system excludes
them.
From the primaries, despite the
fact that in many districts, the
primary is the deciding
election.
SP 16 would change that. It
would allow tens of thousands of
DTS voters in New Mexico to
participate in the primary of
their choice without having to
re-register with a party. It is
not a radical bill. 34 other
states already do it.
Veterans served this country
with honor.
Veterans fought for the right to
vote.
It's time we honor their service
by ensuring that they fully
participate in our elections. I
urge you to support SB 16 and
give veterans the support that
they deserve. Thank you. Um,
Chairman and committee, my name
is Joe Little. I'm with Nava,
which is a Native American
advocacy program.
Uh, we support this bill because
uh uh the recent censuses have
the recent numbers from the
census just come out, indicate
that about over 20% of Native
Americans nationally are
registered as independents.
In New Mexico, that is almost
double that number.
Uh, as our independent
register independent voters.
As you know, most of these
voters are going to be in
reservations, small communities
or closed tight communities, if
you will.
On reservation lands where uh
when you, when they don't have
the access to be involved in the
in the primaries, uh, it really
limits those numbers that
they're looking at, they, they
may be voting for people that
they wouldn't have even voted
for normally in the situation,
but have to wait till you come
out with either a Democrat or
Republican to vote for.
So we strongly support this
bill. I think you would have
more involvement by tribes,
tribes, but Native American
individuals engaging in the
voting process.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee.
My name is John Martinez, and I
am here representing
conservation voters in New
Mexico. Uh, the environmental
and conservation community is
here because we have come to
understand that preserving our
democracy is equally as
important as preserving the
environment for future
generations. Um, you've heard
many reasons for why this bill
is great. I won't go over them
again. I'll just add one more.
Uh, we think that this bill is
critical to combating cynicism
and the disconnect from the
political
process that has led us to this
moment when people do not
believe that the system is meant
for them, and they are less
likely to stand up and fight to
preserve it.
Looked to DC and see the
results.
Let's make sure that every New
Mexican voter knows that the
system is for them and that
their participation is eagerly
welcomed. We urge you to pass SB
16. Thank you.
Germans
Terence Cervantes, and members
of the committee. My name is
Kelly Davis, and I'm a lobbyist.
It's a League of Women voters of
New Mexico.
The league stands for.
In strong support for SB 16
based on the following position.
The league supports an
all-inclusive system of voting
that allows all registered
voters to participate in the
primary election so that voters
who are not enrolled in the
primary election so that voters
who are not enrolled in a major
political party may vote on one
ballot per primary without
having to enroll.
In the particular party.
As of December 2024, there were
over 340,000 or 24.4% of
registered voters.
In New Mexico, who were not
affiliated with one of the major
parties.
These approximately 340,000
voters are not eligible to vote
in a primary election.
In New Mexico, 2024 primary
election turnout is 23%.
The greater the participation is
the measure of the strength of a
democracy.
I ask you to give these taxpayer
citizens the right to vote in
New Mexico primary election.
I urge the committee to give a
due pass.
SB 16. Thank you for your time.
Chair members of the committee,
I am Rose Angel Ortiz, deputy
clerk from Santa Fe County, and
I'm here to speak on behalf of
our clerk, Katherine Clark, who
is also in support of this bill
because it's pro-voter it
expands access to the ballot for
more people than that's always
something we'll support. In
addition, it will reduce the
number of 7-day voter
registrations processed during
the voting period, which will
reduce the administrative burden
on the clerks and clerks staff.
I'm also here to speak on behalf
of Clerk and Brady Romero from
Sandoval County, Cindy Fuller,
Travis County, and Anne
Hoagland, Hurry County, who have
some technical considerations,
um, and they hope they consider
these either in the rulemaking
process. Um, and it's related to
accountability, to ensure
accountability by clerks, and
that voters um should require
nonparty voters to choose a
major party ballot to sign an
affidavit.
Also, please consider
accountability that would allow
voters to change party ballots
once a choice has been made, the
Secretary of State has stated
that this is a possibility and
um please consider an extended
effective day only because
automatic voter registration
goes into effect July 1st, um,
and so these are some of the
considerations from
Uh, those 3 clerks. Thank you.
Thank you. I'm sorry, what was
your name again? because I
didn't see you on my list or the
clerks. Rose Angel Santa Fe
County clerk's office. I don't
have you on the list and I don't
have any of the county clerks on
the list for speaking, but I've,
I've gone ahead and recognized
you. So next time we'll pay more
attention. Thank you.
him.
Uh,
good evening. Uh, thank you, uh,
chair and the committee.
Uh, my name is Dominic Gotchman,
and I'm from the public of
James.
You work.
Take my glasses off to read, so
some people use them for
reading, but I have to take mine
off.
As a former governor of the
public of Hamas and Este as
advocate for the indigenous
participation in the electoral
process, I stand before you to
express my unwavering support
for a Senate Bill 16. This
legislation is a pivotal step
toward empowering our Native
American communities and
ensuring our voices resonate
within the democratic framework
of New Mexico.
For decades, Native Americans in
New Mexico face
disenfranchisement with a
significant strides made only
after landmark decisions like
Trujillo versus Garley in 1948,
which recognized our right to
vote.
That was huge.
Senate bill addresses these
challenges by allowing voters
who have not designated a major
political party affiliation.
participate in primary
elections.
This provision is a particularly
beneficial for many Native
American voters who due to
cultural historical reasons,
they choose not to affiliate
with major political parties.
Tend to build 16 fosters and
respects our community's unique
political perspective. Our
ancestors fought tirelessly for
the right we now hold embracing
opportunities like those
presented by Senate Bill 16.
Is a testament to their
sacrifices and commitment to
shaping our future, where voices
are heard, our votes count.
And our communities thrive.
Finally, I urge your
I urge our legislatures to pass
Senate Bill 16.
Let us bridge the gaps.
Of our disenfranchisement, I
move toward more exclusive.
Democracy for all the people of
New Mexico.
Well, thank you.
Thank you, Governor, and, uh,
honoring us with your presence
and most important, do you fish?
I
Uh, fly fish.
Is there a, is there a stone fly
hatch yet this year?
Don't know yet, huh? Let's go,
let's go find out. All right.
Um.
And fish,
uh, Molly Swank on Zoom with
Common Cause. Are you with us?
Miss Swank
Yes, hi. Yes, you're recognized
for up to 2 minutes, ma'am.
Thank you. Um, thank you, chair
and committee members. I'm Molly
Swank and I'm the executive
director for Common Cause New
Mexico.
Our nonpartisan organization was
founded in the 1970s on the
basis of insurance people,
ensuring people's voices are
heard where decisions are being
made.
SB 16 and semi-open primaries
will give voice to hundreds of
thousands of voters who have
been shut out of our state's
primary elections. We're seeing
more and more declined state and
independent independent voters
in each election and common
causes here to ensure they're
able to vote their values and
participate fully in our
electoral processes. Please vote
in support of SB 16 today, so
that all New Mexicans may cast
their votes in our primaries.
Thank you. Thank you, Ms. Swank.
I think we've got through
everybody who registered in
support, uh, we will, there's
nobody asked to speak in
opposition. All right? anyone
here in opposition? No
registered. All right, we'll go
to committee members' questions.
Oh, Senator Stewart, let me
start with you first of all, I
think you identified potential
error in the amendment itself.
Uh, this term and it probably
doesn't matter, but this, you
know, fancy new amendment have
we had to get rid of the rules
and do a brand new one. If
you'll look number 45, do the
same thing.
You've already struck line 6
through the comma on 4, so you
don't need to do it on number 5,
probably doesn't matter,
probably be picked up in E&E
about it's very dead.
I want to be
picky, but you know you got to
get it right.
Um, Senator Stewart, perhaps the
amendment needs to be amended to
simply strike paragraph 5, is
that right?
Right, to strike number 5.
Right.
That's the motion before us, uh,
everybody knew on the committee
kind of sticking along, uh, Sir
Stewart has pretty sharp eyes.
She's been doing this a long
time when houses in a judiciary
and we're counting on everybody.
We've got all these eyes on the
committee and it's a real
privilege to have everybody
doing it, but I hope you're
taking a moment to see what
she's doing and what she's
identified on the proposed
amendment. So paragraph 4
strikes certain language through
um line 6 through the comma, if
you'll see that in paragraph 4,
and then in paragraph 5 it says
strike it.
the comma also on the same line,
so there's a duplication there
and we count on all of you on
the committee to look out for
these things so that Senator
Stewart can run the Senate,
right? uh, instead of looking
for, I think it's important that
we get amendments right. So I, I
took a little offense that the
rules amendment wasn't right. I
bet you there wasn't that
mistake in the rules amendment.
Well.
To, to be fair, Mr. Chair, I
made the rules amendment and I
did get something wrong, so OK,
well, everybody gets to wrong
occasionally.
Here's, here's the great thing
is we have a committee process
for a reason and we catch these
things and we churn out
something we can all be proud
of. So, uh, the proposal is to
amend the amendment to Senate
Bill 16 by striking paragraph 5
from that amendment read
numbering accordingly. Is there
any further discussion on that
proposed amendment amendment.
Seeing none will count on the
sponsors to make sure that's
tracked all the way through and
on our committee report with
Emily, who never misses a beat
here too, so that's awesome, uh,
is there any other discussion
then on the bill as amended.
Many members I've got to guess
there some discussion, right?
Anybody? uh words, sorry. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator Figueroa for
presenting this very well and I
am happy to be a sponsor of
this. Two things I want to just
have you stress. number one,
We already do have a process to
allow DTS voters to vote.
Of the Senator sapien amendment
on the Senate floor, a number of
years back, just describe
That current process and your
take on the effectiveness of
that current process.
Mr. Chair and Senator, thank you
for bringing it up, um, in 2019,
we did create that workaround to
allow folks to do some same day
registration on primary date, go
in, change the registration,
sign up, affiliate with the
party so that they could vote on
that ballot. What that creates
for our clerks is a headache
that turns out to be
unnecessary, and what it creates
for New Mexican voters is still
another obstacle between them.
and voting, um, and
In a conversation with a
veteran, um.
He told me, why do I have to
lie? Why do you make a law that
forces me to tell a lie and say
I am a Democrat when I am not,
just so I can vote. That struck
a chord with me, um, and it's,
it's an unnecessary hurdle
between people and their right
to vote.
Mr. Chair, I appreciate that.
Second thing, uh, does anything
prevent one of the major parties
from conducting their own.
Private
Boats to determine who they'd
like to have as their
candidates.
Mr. Chair and senator, no, it
does not. This pertains only to
public.
Elections that are funded by
taxpayers.
And Mr. Chair, I appreciate
that.
Point and and
Do remember that.
Uh, I think we did have a
democratic Party presidential
primary back in the day.
Back in the day, didn't go great
just that my colleagues are
noting, but that, but that's
certainly an option that's there
as an alternative. So that's why
I have, Mr. Chair. I appreciate
it. Thank you.
Myest under his breath, so that
was awesome. Let me tell you.
Let me tell you at the time I
was state party treasurer and
subject to all kinds of criminal
laws and going to prison when
you sign off and they see the
secretary, she knows what I'm
talking about when you're
signing off at the national
level, and you're playing with
the national politics and
signing off, it's like I pretty
well let's try to kiss my
goodbye go to, go to jail. I
think it was a mess, uh, center
Maestas, you have the floor.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Figueroa and
just, just to piggyback on that,
just the Democrats' luck, we
vote late in the presidential
primary, uh, first week in June.
And we're gonna jump the line
and we voted in early February
and that was the 1 year in 50
years where voting late made the
difference, it was Obama Clinton
in 2008, so.
rolled the dice and then it took
a month to count the votes and I
won't mention.
person's name, but the press
conference should have taken 45
seconds and it took 30 minutes
on CNN uh to announce the vote,
brutal, brutal. But anyway, but
I want to thank you for bringing
this forward. A couple of
questions, um.
One is like philosophically
believe in open primaries.
Have, have strongly supported it
for like the past decade, but
it, but it comes down to the
work, comes down to the work of
the 33 county clerks County is
the busiest, um.
I like the, the part about
alleviating stress on the
clerk's office cause there's not
all these same day changes in
voter restriction. What, what
additional work is placed on the
clerk's this bill passes, in
particular of
Male, male voting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and senator
with respect to male vote, that
is, I'll find the page while the
Secretary of State gives you a
basic answer to that question,
I'm glad you made it worth her
time to wait here.
I'm happy to be here, Mr. Chair
and senator, always, um, in
short, and I give the same
answer as as uh Senator Brantley
and, and some other senators
will remember in Senate rules,
it's a programming change.
Um, the, the big challenge for
us is just going to be to make
sure that voters who are
requesting an absentee ballot
who are not already registered
with a major party, have an
option to check the box for
which ballot they want, um, and
we can make that change, um,
and, and I know it was discussed
that, um, implementation period.
The implementation period it
doesn't really matter, uh,
because we're not gonna have a
primary until next June anyway,
so we have enough time to
implement that programming
change, Mr. Chair and Senator.
Thank. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Fierro.
Secretary Lu Oliver in Kansas,
they um
On the last page of the
committee's analysis in Kansas,
they allow unaffiliated voters
to to vote similar to the way we
do, but they, they keep the
forms for 5 years, is it?
Is it gonna be private
information.
Or would it be public
information, would we, would we
get a list of those.
Independence that grabbed a
democratic ballot or grabbed a
Republican ballot or would that
remain uh?
Uh, undisclosed.
Mr. Chair and senator, that can
absolutely be public
information. All we have to do
is just create rulemaking, uh,
and, and.
Anyway, it would be public
information. Yeah.
Brings back
Uh, my first time voting for
president, Mr. Chairman was in
and out of Washington, where
they had at the time was
referred to as jungle primary,
and I thought it was awesome, I
thought it was the way everyone
voted you got.
Whatever the, the, the office
was you had all the candidates
from all the different parties
and you just voted for one. You
could like jump around. One of
the circuits deemed that
unconstitutional.
Um
But then Washington went to a
top 2 and it became
constitutional again, so they
have like a jungle primary top
2. This would still allow
parties to count their votes
and, and you would have to win
your party's vote, correct?
Yes, Mister Chair.
And last question, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Fierro, what if a
person's from a.
Or two questions. If a person's
from a tiny party.
Are they allowed to grab a a
major party ballot they'd have
to change the registration at
that point.
Mr. Chair and Senator, if they
are from a non-major party if
they are in one of the three
minor parties recognized in New
Mexico, they would not be able
to vote under this amended bill.
They were from a funky party
down the line.
That's not recognized by anybody
except them and their cousin,
they could, OK, I got, I got
you. And then lastly,
and Senator I had someone
registered as a member of the
Meat Party once when I was a
county clerk, which does not
exist. Meat. Well, there was a
split between pork and.
we want to talk about that,
they, um, and then last
question, Mr. Sherman, the um
What is, I know we call them
DTS's, they're not declined to
state, it's not like they're
hiding their, their, their
party, they're unaffiliated.
Under this, what do we call them
in law, does this bill still
call them whatever we call them
now.
What are they called?
Unaffiliated, is that what
you're referring to? Correct, a
person that doesn't choose a
party, are they what in in New
Mexico state law, what are they
referred to as?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, they,
they are both referred to as
unaffiliated or declined to
state depending on whether we're
referring to them in a general
sense or referring to how they
are registered.
Does that answer your question?
Because the registration is
declined to state a party
affiliation.
We may, Mr. Chairman Senator
Firo, we may want to change that
one of these days because they
truly are on the.
Thank you, Mr.
That's a hand.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So
Maybe just a real basic
question, why, why would a major
party support an open primary.
Mr. Chair and senator.
I don't know that they do,
although I believe it is on the
um on one of the platforms, but
it's not about the parties, it's
about the voters. It's about the
folks in New Mexico who want to
vote and who have a
constitutional right to vote,
Mr. Chair, and they do not need
to be forced to join a club in
order to exercise that right.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I would
agree with that.
So, given that we have about
25%, 24, 25% of DTS in the state
of New Mexico.
That seems sufficient enough to
have a DTS candidate.
To have a DTS party.
They could
They're affiliated with their
unaffiliation.
And so could we not as a state,
um,
Have them we go through the same
requirements.
Go through they have to select
their candidates.
They have to go through a
primary for a DTS candidate and
then once they have done that,
that person gets
Moved into the general election
as part as another candidate,
like a third party, but now
they're unaffiliated.
Mr. Chair and senator that would
be in effect forcing them to
form a club, join that club in
order to vote. And again, that
is what this bill attempts to
clarify.
You vote because you have a
right to vote.
Without being forced to join
that club or create a new club.
Well, Mr. Chair, I, I guess I
would disagree with that because
I think parties affiliate for a
reason.
They have particular value sets,
they have a particular, uh, sets
of priorities, and uh people
affiliate accordingly because
they believe in those values and
those priorities.
And to allow
some other group who is
unaffiliated to come in and
choose their candidate for a
general election, I think is, is
actually um
You're, you're actually hurting
the folks who have participated
in the party, maybe worked for
candidates, maybe given funding
and money and donations to that
particular candidate, and then
they have some other group come
in and say I'm not on a, I'm not
affiliated, but I'm going to,
I'm going to decide which of
those candidates your your party
is going to select, I think
that's.
We are actually disempowering
the people who have put their
heart and soul into candidacy.
So, so I, I see it differently.
But, um, but I understand, but I
don't see any problem with
having a DTS candidate.
And having them go through the
same process that the other
major parties go through, and
then having them put it in the
general election, I would, I
would totally support that.
Thank you for that.
Chair.
Thank you, ma'am. Um, Mr. Chair,
person who was singled out as
winning my primary because I
guess.
Um, we have a
Uh, to, I guess, you know, with
my area is definitely uh
performing them, right?
And uh so, yeah, I mean, once
the primary was over, it was
pretty much over, but that
happens in a lot of districts. I
just want to follow up on what
uh Senator Thornton said, I'm
more of a pick a lane kind of
person, right? It's like, you
know, you have a value set, you
know, we have, and I'm a
progressive Democrat and, you
know, I, I believe in certain
things and
I want to further, you know,
Um, obviously, what I believe
in, my ideals and also the folks
I represent, um, already, you
can.
If you want to, you can, you can
vote in a, in a primary, that's
allowed. Maybe takes a little
bit of work, but, you know, it's
possible, and so now we're
supposed to make it easier for
people to do that.
Um
I feel the same way that
We have
Parties for a reason.
And um if someone doesn't want
to be affiliated with that
party, they don't have to be.
And I think it's up to the
parties to.
Make a case for people to join
their party.
Um, and that's what we should be
doing as Democrats, you know,
trying to get folks to join the
party. I mean, if we can't do
that, it doesn't say very much
for our party.
So I, I feel that way about it.
Um, I, and I know that my
predecessor, this was one of his
priorities, and uh.
He supported, you know, I think
a couple of years, he tried to
get this through, and I was very
clear with him when he asked me
about it. I said this is not my
priority, and I told him why.
Um, so I know that disappointed
a few folks, but um
Uh, you know, I think it's
important to be honest about
this, so.
That's all I have to say. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I'd heard this bill
before in rules.
lengthy debate there. I think
the most important point is that
that Senator Wirth echoed. And
that is, it's important to lead
when you're bringing this
forward that we already have
open primaries. And so this
isn't an open primary debate
that is unfortunately seems to
start.
Kind of confusing
Some of our legislators and we
already have open primaries.
What this is is this clarifying
when they go in to vote, it's
kind of reducing a step for the
clerks. Would, would you agree
with that? It's, it's
eliminating the need for a clerk
to, to have a voter register for
a party and then go through the
hassle of registering back to
DTS, correct?
Mr. Chair, correct.
Thank you. It seems like a
pretty simple thing here. I've,
I've said this to follow up a
little bit on what Senator
O'Malley was saying, um,
The Democrats aren't the only
ones having you know, struggling
getting people to register with
their party, it's happening on
our side too, and I think it's a
note and a message to all of us
is a lot of New Mexicans and,
and quite frankly even outside
of New Mexico are gravitating
towards center. They're not
identifying with one or the
other, this two party system.
There's a lot of days I've said
in the legislator, neither do I.
Like there's this mushy middle
where I think a lot of New
Mexicans are finding themselves
now. I really go back to seeing
this bill.
If there's a target to anyone,
it's not one party or the other.
It's radical candidates who are
running in primaries, and what
happens is it leaves New Mexico
with voting for the lesser of
two evils because we've moved
forward the most radical
candidate on both sides, and
we're not, we're not in a
general election getting the
best candidates who don't
reflect the value of a party,
just like I don't, don't reflect
the value of the Republican
Party as a legislator and as a
senator, a represent the.
value of Senate District 35.
My district is encompassed by
Republicans and Democrats and
independents, and I really
support this bill. I supported
open primaries because the more
that we get that aren't
identifying with left or right,
you end up getting legislators
and elected officials at all
levels.
They are carrying a voice that
represents more of the people
and less of the party.
So I will continue to support
this bill and I wish you luck as
it travels along.
Mod to pass.
I might just share, I, I voted
for this again, um, it's
important for me to recognize
you all know, some of you all
know for a very long time. I've
raised three daughters with
Jennifer, uh, public school
kids, but my household as you
might expect is a hotbed of
political discussion it always
has been for all of those years,
and um it's fascinating to
listen to my daughters who are
now in their twenties, the
oldest is now 30, to have the
last 20 years listening to them
and their friends and their
attitude toward politics and
it's the same as Senator
Brantley and others. They, they
have no need or purpose for our
parties and um it's hard for me
at the dinner table um and
sitting around the house trying
to persuade them otherwise, and
it's, I'm, I've got a very
unconvincing argument, um, most
of the time. Um, last session.
Some of you all are new to the
committee, we had it, I thought
it was an exceptionally good
hearing on the uh fake electors,
uh, initiative that took place
at the national level, including
here in New Mexico and the fact
there was a slate of fake
collectors that was sent to DC
at the time of that last
presidential election, really
pleased we saw nothing like that
on this last time around. So in
the 2020 election, all of those
fake voters who were here in New
Mexico evidently left, um, and,
uh, and we had a 2024 election
where there were apparently
No fake uh voters in no election
fraud, and everything went
really well. So I want to
commend those of you that are
the clerks and the secretary of
state for running off all of the
cheaters and liars and everybody
else were around in 2020, uh,
and running a very evidently
clean and, and honest election
in 2024. I'm sure the outcome
had nothing to do with any of
that, um, the, um, I, I do want
to affirm though, cause we've
got you here this, there is a
relationship in my mind to some
of this suggestion that same
when we had
same day registration and all
these efforts to access greater
access of the, the ballot, the
argument is always that people
will cheat and and steal and lie
and do terrible things. And I, I
just, I'm, I've been listening.
I, I made a joke a bit ago, of
course, but, but in this last
election, I didn't hear any
cheating, lying, stealing of
elections, and I'm just looking
at those of you who ran the
election, it was, was there any
even allegation that there was
any cheating, lying, stealing of
ballots in elections this last
time.
Nothing like that, right.
Good to know. Um.
Don't smile at me like that.
I mean this only sincerely.
Anyway, we wanted to pass
motion. Everybody gets the code
up here.
uh, yes, so do pass motion as
amended. Thank you. Any last
discussion, seeing none, you
have a due pass, uh, center.
That was a very.
The worst thing is it came from
Senator Wirth, you know, so I, I
did this to you guys once before
at the beginning, I was really
trying to help you, this is the
first time you're on our
committee, right? First time on
our committee, so you got
through here very easy, and I
just thought I'd make it even
easier for you, but but but
evidently everybody's on their
game today, they, they missed
the comma, but they got the vote
right. So, um.
So, we'll start with the uh
senators to my right, Senator
Paul first, a roll call vote,
please.
And
Yes
They do,
yes.
Hello.
They
Very
A Thornton
Uh
Yes.
Yes.
There
Yes, you have a due pass it.
Nice try, guy. Um, so a couple
of things just real quick. I
appreciate all of you staying a
little bit later than I had
anticipated. Also wanna just
take a moment to thank all of
you on the committee for
allowing me the opportunity to
try and juggle with the agenda
from time to time, move things
around, uh, put time limitations
on the committee, I know there's
been discussion about that
during this session. I really
wanna appreciate the respect you
showed the committee and to me
the chair and let me do some of
that. Again, the goal is to
here, we, we did enormous work
today. If you look at the agenda
today, we heard a lot of.
and I did it because all of you
were working together, um,
across party lines and, and with
us and the staff. So thank you
for that. We'll have a lot of
lifting to do on Wednesday.
We've got the House bill over on
competency. We have a number of
crime bills that we've not heard
on this committee that are
incorporated into that and we
may be taking some of the bills
that we have heard here and
incorporating some of those in
there as well too, so please be
prepared to do a lot of work on
Wednesday and I'll keep the
agenda otherwise pretty light on
what you see on that will look
like a very
