Last year she
on it at the urging of some
orthodontists.
We.
Dental association we met with
the doctor services on on online
is here today and we met with.
And we redraft the bill we
amended further in.
Health care is.
We now reflects were absolutely
parallels the the telehealth for
medicine telehealth.
Bill
makes.
Remotely the legal which is
saying a ring the pandemic and
so this bill in the state now
has as a.
In a way that avoids any is as
we heard in the past.
My expert witness Mr L. our.
Move to table.
Mr chair Senator all parties
joining he appears to be having
technical issues.
Easy Pino Y. C. C. L. part still
trying to connect.
Yes thank.
Mr chairman I wonder what we're
waiting press.
Dental association.
Is on this bill sure do we see
him.
Are you Dr.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino we
My name is Tom scripts my mic
dentist in Albuquerque and the
executive director New Mexico
dental association we're very
appreciative to the work that's
been done on this bill and
Senator Ortiz Pena for his
patients and helping us but
we're which is yes think about
you know what the possibilities
are would tell dentistry
certainly it's been something
we've been using during the
pandemic and we believe that
there are ways that this can
continue to expand and get
greater use and especially you
know caring caring dentistry out
to the rulers in New Mexico so
we're very in favor of the bill
as this and that look forward to
working with that in the future
thank you thank you doctor
the market is to connect.
Good good afternoon Mister
chairman thank you senator is
being L. members of the
committee I apologize for being
late
I just wanted to say thank you
very much for considering this
bill and I want to also take an
opportunity in fact not only.
You know for his continued
support of this legislation but
I really want to thank Dr
scripts well and the dental
association this is been a bill
we worked on now for.
Three years Dr Scrase something
like that and I think we've got
a good consensus in something
that particularly in the time of
COVID will really provide an
opportunity for people
throughout the New Mexico to
have access to dental care thank
you.
Thank you those are all the
persons who identified just to
be recognized in support or
opposition opposition to build
synergies you know so we'll go
to questions from the committee.
Leisure of the committee.
No I am saying that no members
to be recognized all we would do
passed motions on Senate bill
two hundred.
Tele dentistry definition.
Chairman I'll second that thank
you Senator Lopez bill we passed
before a with the motion before
Senator Ortiz been I'm still a
little puzzled that the bill was
vetoed last time around has the
bill changed.
We are as a matter of a
communication it.
The chairman of Mr part way
exactly how we changed.
Sure thank you senator and thank
you Mr chairman it did last time
we included language with
respect to the originating site
there's a fair amount of
controversy with respect to that
the all of that language is been
deleted from this legislation
and we've really focused on just
incorporating the language from
the telehealth act into the
dental practices are so all of
the language that the governor's
veto message out of concern with
has been on the leading it is no
longer part of the legislation.
Thank you Sir parking in the
committee members of questions
we're on a do pass motion.
Is there any objection to the do
pass motion by the members who
were present for the committee.
The one seeing none Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino thank you for your
patience you have a due pass
with all members present voting
in the affirmative thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much Mr
chairman and committee members.
Make that echo of let's see
here.
Senator souls I know you've been
patient we've been rolling your
bill over a little bit we're
going to get you today let me
just do some a couple of the
quick ones of I can Senate bill
one twenty one of Center
Gonzalez I see you trying to
connect server.
Are you able to do so.
Mr chair I don't think we have a
quorum.
Well let's see we did.
Would we lose.
Senator Stewart I believe we
did.
Right give me a minute let's
round up Senator Senator
Gonzales you're present.
Mr Chairman yes I am okay good
all the respected Center souls
and Senator Kernan Senator
Gonzales bill.
I believe.
Kind of whites in our committee
at all to be honest with
Senator.
Okay very well Mr chairman to
Comiskey one second to be able
to.
Well my.
My nose willing give us a moment
to Senator Gonzales were looking
okay for quorum.
For.
Enrollment in the current
the previous is a C. people
connecting and I don't know.
Who those are.
Enrollment growth program units
with our current your members
are.
Recently in response.
Program unit.
Mr Chairman whenever you're
ready slide I'm just trying to
get the.
Senator Stewart.
Senator o'neill.
Were any of the Republicans.
Senator Stewart tells me she's
in finance.
Mr chair Senator on you'll be
getting on any minute.
Thank you very much I'll just
call myself thank you.
For.
Senator Pirtle is here.
The C. Senator Pirtle trying to
connect that would make our
quorum.
Senator Pirtle acknowledges that
please join us.
We'll continue.
Okay Senator Pirtle center
Pirtle executive joined the
committee.
The next matter before the
committee is Senate bill one
twenty one there's not been a
quorum state transportation
bonds.
Senator Gonzales you have the
floor my understanding is I'm
looking for this I don't believe
there's any opposition your
bills but go ahead Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
afternoon and the.
What you're this.
with so Senate bill one twenty
one of this cements the bond
statues to allow New Mexico
department of transportation to
issue the remaining of for
authorized amount of two hundred
and thirty four point six
million in bonding authority the
proceeds of the bonds will fund
projects authorized in twenty
nineteen regular session and the
additional projects but the New
Mexico department of
transportation has developed.
And that includes the state
transportation improvement
program the state it.
Also the department of this have
sufficient projects developed
and ready to move to
construction if there's any
funding available Mr chairman
members so that's all this bill
does is allow that capacity for
bonding.
Thank you Senator Gonzales again
as I said earlier I'm not
entirely sure where this one
came to this committee but we're
happy to have you you identified
for expert witnesses Rick
Padilla Michael Santa Tamera
Hasen Eric Martinez I don't know
I see Mr Martinez on here and
I'm not sure why state any
others Senator is also want to
let me know which of any those
expert you want to recognize
we're just a couple minutes
again there's no opposition Sir
thanks.
Things can only go down health
for you from here okay thank you
Mr chairman the all will have
little secretary Michael send a
wallet.
He can refer to any of the staff
you know from there right thank
you Mr chairman Mike Santa
secretary for DOT and I'll just
make myself available for
questions based on what you just
said so be happy to answer any
questions and I do have staff
here if questions arise but I'll
just leave it at that Mr thank
you and and thank all the staff
for being present before I go to
the committee members I see you
being recognized center pirtle I
know that we also had proponents
prepared to speak
as follows Albert Thomas state
board of directors Jim Garcia
associated contractors of New
Mexico dance so well the
associate contractors of New
Mexico but that's all right a
western Albuquerque land
holdings Alyssa Davis not
identify with any one on my list
Jerry fanning the public and
government government affairs
director we had no a person is
asking to be recognized in
opposition to the bill with that
said members of the committee
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chairman to pass.
The motion for it to pass is
there any other discussion by
anyone on the committee.
Are there being that is there
any objection to do pass motion
for Senate bill one twenty one.
All right committee secretary
and we would go reflect all
members of the committee present
voting in the affirmative
Senator Gonzales you have a do
pass once at one twenty one.
Mr chairman of Mr chairman
members so thank you very much
have a good afternoon thank you.
Senator.
Senator Lopez on Senate one
twenty seven.
Well let me let me do that the
reason I think it take years
next Sir Lopez is I believe we
have a number of people that are
here on this bill is that right.
Senator Lopez.
I also know let's see we have
Senator Kernan Senator Kernan
hearing finance right now is
that right.
No Sir I not.
Okay this is Senate finance
meeting today.
Yes Mr chairman I'm not a member
of Senate finance anymore gosh
you're I'm sorry that's going to
take me forever to get used to
that Senator and you were fix
some other.
Thank you Mr where I'm at I'm on
the wonderful tax committee
which I really am enjoying thank
you very much good will changes
always kind of a lines let's do
the Senator Kernan neck Center
Lopez and are a lot of folks
you're but you're going to be
with me the rest today on the
committee and all of college
eyes to those that are waiting
around with you but if they
don't mind will take Senator
Kernan next.
Thank you Mr chairman I I need
to make sure that money experts
are on a half Kerry are me ho I
don't think Dr Scrase is
available because he's in the
house Judiciary Committee with
they more bill with
representative Ely and then
congressman I don't know what
they have been admitted that I
certainly will need their help
with this bill I know they were
in the waiting room.
Would you want me just go ahead
Senator there there and now well
that's good okay well I'm ready
and I believe Mr chair we do
have and then that
all right and senator of we're
we're opting COVID rules in the
zoom rules for Judiciary set UP
really have fifteen minutes to
do with this bill as you wish to
proponent due to advocate for it
so I see on a list of experts a
number of individuals ms are
made the identified districts my
and also Dr Scrase you can call
on any of them as much time as
you'd like it's one sixteen and
you have fifteen minutes to
support the bill.
Thank you Mr chair in the do you
want to move the amendment first
have it covers your committee
handle that but what I would
prefer that you explain the bill
give us an understanding of the
bill perhaps have your experts
explain the bill and then allow
time for you to move the the
amendment and explain it but it
but I think it's hard to move an
amendment without understanding
the bill It for processing thank
you very much then I'll go right
ahead and I'm introducing Senate
bill one forty it would be next
several changes to the child
support laws in New Mexico the
federal office of child support
enforcement informed HSD that
continued non compliance with
federal rules will jeopardize
HSD stability to obtain federal
funds one hundred and twenty two
million for the temporary
assistance for needy families
families in other words a tenant
program twenty two million for
the child support program we
must modifier statutes in this
session to retain the one
hundred and forty seven million
dollars in federal funding
support it would also revise a
retroactive arrears time frame
it's also referred to as a look
back period from twelve years to
three this change is not
federally mandated or required
but a common best practice for
top performing states it does
not take away authority from the
courts when establishing
workforce in child support
orders and with that I would
like to ask a.
Hearing our may hope to say a
few words about the bill thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Mister chair
members of the committee we have
a Dr David screens are HSD
secretary so at we were double
booked this afternoon but I
believe he's here and can kick
us off this afternoon if that's
okay all right I'm looking for
his face or his name on my
screen I'm not seeing it.
Dr Scrase are you there simply.
Mr chair Senators Dr Scrase is
not in the waiting room.
Miss America me when we saw that
we don't see Dr Scrase in the
way he's having trouble getting
in but I will go ahead and start
sorry about that Mr chair
members of the committee I think
he will be trying to join us
shortly but he's having some
technical difficulties so I'm
thank you for having us here
this afternoon we are this is an
agency bill that we are very
grateful to Senator Kernan for
bringing forth we have a
duplicate bill in the house as
well house bill one ninety I'm
and we did distribute materials
ahead of time to the committee
so manages go over those I hope
you all have those in front of
you and you have and those
materials.
Okay it looks like I'm getting
some knobs there
Okay so in the bill add that we
are proposing is to bring New
Mexico into alignment your
statute with federal regulations
that is the primary purpose of
the bill is to make sure that
New Mexico can continue to
receive a hundred and forty
seven million dollars in federal
funding for the tennis Loughrey
that's our temporary assistance
for needy needy families program
and that is the primary purpose
of the bill however the bill the
change in the law is also
critical because it will
increase money to New Mexico
children I do not HSD projects
that at we will increase
collections through child
support for New Mexico children
by four hundred and twenty
dollars and thirty three cents
per year per case that results
in an average of an overall
increase of thirty point nine
million and collections or two
hundred eighty four dollars per
year per child
as I mentioned to non compliance
with the federal law will result
in a hundred and forty seven
million dollar loss in federal
funding I'm and we have received
a couple of warning letters from
our federal regulators alerting
us to that potential loss in
funding so that we are very
concerned of course about that
at and then you know the law
also change in the law will also
allow us to focus on providing
employment opportunities and job
security for non custodial
parents.
And to increase their
accountability and voluntary
compliance with child support by
improving employment and
training.
The the law changing the law
basically does three things it
requires the consideration of
noncustodial parents ability to
pay when establishing a child
support order today there's an
automatic amputation of income
the bill basically sets forth
some new criteria for wind
income can and can't be imputed
to the noncustodial parent you
can see that on page five of the
bill and then I'm in the revised
guidelines that consider and
economic in child rearing data
specific to New Mexico as
required by federal regulation
I'm the bill also requires the
modification of child support
orders in order to establish
medical support that too is a
federal requirement that's
designed to assure that children
have the medical care they need
and then finally we are
proposing the implementation of
a national best practice that
will change the retroactive
years time frame from twelve
years to three years as a way of
improving collections and with
that I do believe that secretary
Scrase has joined us and I'd
like for him to kind of continue
that discussion by pointing out
that the that that's okay.
Dr Scrase I see here on our call
I am thank you very much can you
hear me now yes we can wonderful
I thank you for having us and
apologize for my technical
difficulties I appreciate the
committee hearing us today and
also we want to recognize your
service to the people in New
Mexico what you're doing so
thank you for that hi in your
materials there's a map of New
Mexico there that.
Is worth looking at the user the
number of child support
customers in our state my County
we have you know everyone knows
HSD for Medicaid in the snap
program of we manage child
support payments for three or
four thousand kids here in New
Mexico and so it's a it's a
program that touches every
county another map I think it's
slide number six you can see the
town of program as well and
how that touches every county
we've shown you what right you
know there's twenty nine
thousand folks in that program
we feel it's very very important
to preserve that Kerry referred
to the federal all letters we
receive that
At after five years since the
federal child support
modernization are asking us to
move more quickly here and
trying to have a program that's
a slide that has a bunch of
orange highlighter in that and
that we were asked for that and
it's very important information
we wanted you to have as well
and then finally if you go back
to the child support
modernization slide with the two
drugs I just want to mention a
little bit of what's behind what
we're doing in child support
both with this bill and in our
agency and so the top friends
got a blue line on it and it
basically on the X. axis is when
a child support judgment is
rendered by the court how far is
that judgment require a
noncustodial parent to go back
to pay and on the Y. axis you
can see how much we collect
reach of those bands so
typically child support orders
are are filed shortly after
divorce there isn't really an
issue there
Sometimes there's arrears
payment of up to a year you can
see our highest level of
collections there one to three
years a significant drop off
half of what it is for one year
then when you get down to six
years and beyond it drops off
very very rapidly and so our
thinking behind the best
practice part of this too sure
the look back period is really
to move people up into the left
on that curve so that they're
able to pay off things you know
it went up noncustodial parent
can't pay it strains the
relationship with the child
agreed to distance between that
parent in the family the
intention of the federal law is
to make sure that didn't happen
the driving force was to make
allow non custodial parents to
continue being important parts
of the family and so that's what
we're trying to push people back
up that curve to the left
secondly we wanted to make is we
believe that up even more
important in legislation reason
the changes in the spelling the
best thing we can do to get more
money to kids in New Mexico is
to help their parents find work
and so this graph which just
looks like two parallel lines
into you stare at it really
closely the blue line is how
we're doing statewide collecting
child support payments in the
orangish red line is how we're
doing in our Rio Rancho pilot
we're we have actually
intensively worked with I can
still pay a parents to get back
to work to find jobs and the
like and you can see the average
payment per child we can't see
it begin take my word for it
it's an eighteen and a half
percent increase in total
payments and so we want to bring
families back together we
actually have to conform to
federal laws and we want to do
the best we can to ensure that
there are courts have the kind
of guidance that they can use
most effectively to up.
Support of parents and their
kids in New Mexico and I think
in the question and answer
period here in just in time to
hear from officers of the court
judges about their experience
and how these are statutes
currently and in the future will
support that and I think with
that I want to turn it over to
all right some are attorneys met
Kerry army not army how are
other accomplished W. we also
journey to lose with us today to
yes our child support director
and one of our experts in Paul
are general counsel who's gonna
walk you all through the
amendment and help us field
questions and bring in officers
of the court and we have an
economist up available as well I
think if I if there questions
there thank you.
This.
Chair Dr grace for a moment
please of Senator Kernan I'm
gonna again ask you to monitor
the presentation the case we've
gone about eleven minutes about
that about three or four minutes
left in the presentation so you
got a number of individuals who
have been asked to identify the
previous recognizes that you
choose and so we get a complete
here in the next few minutes
thank you I thank Mr chairman I
would like to do is have the
expert at discuss the amendment
and then let's just move on and
I think any questions we could
refer to the experts going
forward so if we could have the
amendment explained that that be
would that be appropriate now
that we ideal yes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee the amendment
simply clears up the.
A drafting issue the the the
Legislative Council Service has
with putting.
Multiple definitions into a bill
they'd rather have a by
reference to one specific
definition and the only other
changes that in the drafting
the definition of income that
appears almost at the end of the
bill I think on page ninety
three
needs to be the same as the
definition that appears on page
three of the bill and that was
just a and an oversight my
Legislative Council ourselves in
the draft in the bill that's
what the amendments to.
Senator we had the amendment
appear on the screen very
briefly there it flashed up and
down that was gone we can get
that back on the screen is is is
just one amendment that you
have.
Then I will will put up with the
right one in just a minute okay
Senator I I heard there are
there are maybe two or three
things you're attempting to
address the amendment are they
all put together in one
amendment Mr it's me.
Yes they are Mr Chairman.
It will try to get that on the
screen so we can evaluate the
amendment.
Yeah please I'm gonna be a
little bit before we can do
that.
Mr chair it'll only be just a
moment current.
Mr chair members of the
committee I believe that
amendment is up you guys can see
it yes.
Mr chairman and members the
committee I'll be very brief
about this we have the amendment
on page seventy one I'm sorry
speaking ninety one well where
the definition of gross income
needs to be the same
In the bill
And then we're we're.
C..
We wanted to insert that is a
new subsection.
And then I can't see the rest of
it scrolling down but I know
that we're it taking out on
page.
The.
We're doing some re lettering
and then on on page ninety one
after line and we're striking
out a section that was stricken
from the definition of income in
the very and on page three we
just wanted to have the same
definition of income
and the same definitions
throughout the bill so this is
really just a clean up of
Some things that are current
that we caught after the bill
was drafted.
Very good I'll move adoption
amendment containers questions
on the amendment.
The matter now before the
committee Mr.
yes to this point that Senator
heck yes Senator.
So the.
The amendment that takes out the
language on page ninety one this
wasn't an issue that I had
spoken with Mr me how and Mr to
loose about okay it would take
out the same information
language is being taken out on
page three of this bill which is
the income need not be imputed
to the primary primary custodial
parent actively caring for a
child of the parties is under
the age of six are disabled if
income
and then.
Stuff about childcare.
And.
I'm I'm uncomfortable removing
that language was on page ninety
one L. page three
I I understand and I support
this bill overall I and and I
understand how important this
bill is for for that that
federal funding.
I don't understand why that
language needs to be taken out
in order to to match the federal
rags I was looking at earlier
today and I think that gives an
important safe haven to judges
when when looking at issues with
stay home parents with very
small children and disabled
children and and while I
understand the court would still
have discretion not to impute I
income in those situations I
don't see any benefit to taking
that language out and if I'm a
judge who has been using that
language kind of as a safe haven
to do that in the past it's not
removed I'm probably going to
think it was removed for a
reason
so I it is please explain to me
why that language specifically
would need to be taken out in
order to bring it New Mexico's
child support.
Laws aimed into alignment with
that the federal racks.
Senator Duhigg would you refer
us again to the page in the bill
that you're referring to with
the language instructors.
Yes so if you look at page three
lines three through six.
That's where it's initially
struck in the bill and then on
what this ammendment is doing on
page ninety one is it is
striking the same language on
page one winds ten to thirteen
to make it match that change
that was made on on page three
thank you Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair and also we
will refer to my experts believe
Mr chairman would you respond to
that place.
Yes Senator Kernan
Mr chairman and senator do
hearing the federal regulations
require that we not have an
absolute bar on the imputation
of income what what we've
included consistent with the
federal regulation if you find
on page the start of page four
do is what the federal
government wants us to consider
when choosing income and it's
only when a parent has willfully
failed to obtain or maintain
appropriate a point of
employment and then there's of
the following criteria after
that it doesn't seem logical
that a court would find that a
mother who has a six year older
has a disabled child would be
willfully failing to obtain or
maintain appropriate employment
and there's also an exception in
the criteria that would allow
for a parent's ability to obtain
or maintain employment due to
providing care for disabled
child of the parties so what the
what the federal rigs have done
is is put it into another
section and given actually given
the courts greater discretion in
the US than they had before so.
And and and Mr chair Senator Mr
it's not.
I so I understand that the
federal right so you can't do an
absolute bond imputation.
This language that is being
removed here is not an absolute
bar on imputation I think it's
really just flagging for the
court the in those situations it
need not be imputed that that is
not a bar on imputation and and
I don't see it and and the
language on starting on the
bottom of page for continuing on
page five.
It would seem to me is is
largely aimed at the non
imputation for noncustodial
parents where's this is the only
language that we have that's
really specific to custodial
parents and and a specific
situation with a very young
child or a disabled child and I
don't see a reflection of that.
In the the addition the language
that's being added on on four
and five I don't I just don't
see any harm in leaving that
language and I don't see how
that conflicts with the federal
rags in any way and and I see
potential harm by taking it out
because it I think it gives of
appropriate guidance to the
judiciary one assessing cases
with very young children and
disabled children.
Mister chairman Senator Duhigg I
I understand your point we've
been told by our federal
partners that if we leave that
language and we would be out of
compliance with federal
regulations and that what we put
in do that allows the court to
look at both parents as a parent
who is willfully fail gives them
the gives them that same ability
but in a different section of
the bill.
Mr chair Senator Mister Smyth my
my concern.
Here is that if I am the parent
of a disabled child and and
maybe it is in that child's best
interest for me to be home
caring for them and I am
willfully unemployed because I
am home care for that disabled
child rather than working to to
pay someone else to do so
I think that that is a potential
consequence of of just using the
and not having that other
language in there but I really
want to understand how I
understand you've been told that
you would be out of compliance
with the federal read by keeping
that language in there I don't
understand why that is the case
so I I'd like to understand how
specifically New Mexico would be
out of compliance with the
federal rags it just left in
there.
What we've been Mr Chairman us
Senator Duhigg what we've been
told our federal partners is if
it's included in the definition
of income in the bill that's in
an inappropriate place and it
should be back in I mean we
should have it in do where we
have the the criteria for
determining when income should
be imputed not in the definition
of income that's the reason that
we would be out of compliance
the fed C. R. our section D. as
capturing that concept that's in
the definition of income right
now.
And Mr chair Senator Mr is one
that makes sense to me that
being the case I would like to
offer an amendment to include
that language in in section D.
and and and put it where it
should be
I think we will see New Mexico
will still be.
Lance with the federal rags and
and we will we will preserve
that language that I think I
think many family judges have
have looked at for a long time
and making determinations.
Also I would move for an
amendments to add probably a
subsection.
Three so on page four.
Between the lines twenty and
twenty one.
To add a subsection three.
That says income need not be
imputed to the primary custodial
parent actively caring for a
child of the parties is under
the age of stable if income is
imputed a reasonable childcare
expense may be imputed.
I want to make sure I understand
what you're doing what we're
doing this you're you're talking
about the page.
Including that news what would
be on page I was around.
Right on page five between lines
twenty and twenty one.
All rights ought to figure out
how we were the motion is a
motion in front of us right now
is to adopt the amendment.
And so we do what you're trying
to do Senator is not really well
you are amending the amendment I
guess necessarily.
but you're also doing more than
that you're actually amending
the bill other than we're
outside of the amendment itself
is that right yeah and and Mr
chair if you'd rather we could
because because I think this
amendment could still passed and
then we because I think there's
actually this language that we
see on page I I think it's in
the bill twice so that land that
would my amendment would need to
go to response I think we could
do this ammendment first and
then I can separately do the
amendment that I'm offering so
and and Mr chairman if if Center
doings amendments is if if if
the member that's before us.
And what to do it once did with
involves conforming amendments
within the bill itself I yeah I
I tend to agree with your
instinct we adopt the amendment
forest but then that amendment
is also subject to being amended
once it's adopted us so that we
can be consistent with the Nobel
that's one of the problems of
these complex those but I think
works better that way yeah I I
agree into the center doing I
hope that this clarity so you
have the floor you propose an
amendment what I'm ruling is
that we have a motion already
pending in your motion does not
take a precedence over that so
will act on the the pending
amendment by the sponsor and
then and then we'll come back to
the amendment you're proposing
as it may have changed that
amendment somewhat is that clear
Senator and as thank you Mr so
let's just stay on the amendment
that's proposed by the Sanchez
right now and take care of that
business at hand first etcetera
do you still have the form that.
Mr I have nothing more thank you
all right thank you other
committee members on the
proposed amendment
proposed by Senator Kernan which
I've moved and which has been
seconded etcetera by Senator
Lopez is there any further
questions on the proposed
amendment.
Is there any one of the
committee who would check to the
adoption of the amendment.
Right that amendment is adopted
to Senate one forty eight okay
Senator doing.
Thank you and and Mr chair I'm
trying to find and and and one
of the experts on the bills
might know better than me I had
thought that this language that
we see at the bottom of for
continue and I was in the bill
twice if that's not the case all
stop searching around if it is
it and you all know where it is
and to point me to it I
appreciate that.
Mr Chairman Senator Duhigg that
language appears only once in
the bill
in its current form without the
amendment on page six ninety one
I believe.
All right that's fine and and I
think that amendment on page
ninety one is it was appropriate
because again it was taken out
of that income definition which
makes a lot of sense it
shouldn't be there so then in
that case my amendment would
just be the on page five between
lines twenty and twenty one we
enter subsection C..
And that is state income need
not be imputed to the primary
the primary custodial parent
actively cut caring for child of
the parties who is under the age
of six or disabled period if
income is imputed comma
reasonable childcare expense may
be imputed period.
Senator you describe that I
think I heard you correctly as a
subsection C. let's have three
three okay that's what I thought
think I think.
To make it simple for.
Committees to happen everyone
following on what I understand
you're doing is taking the
language that is proposed to be
struck by this bill on page
three.
Which is shown in struck
language on page three lines one
through six you're taking that
language and moving at.
To page five between lines
twenty twenty one and making
that the new subsection three
that right that's right Mr chair
thanks right so that's that's a
proposed amendment by Senator
doing all second amendment on
the proposed amendment committee
questions.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman so.
I would like to hear from
Senator Kernan said expert if if
this is a better way to do it
and if this seems more
acceptable.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I think he's prepared to answer
that Mr.
Mr Chairman
Senator.
I'm.
I'm kind of struggling because
I'm not sure that the amendment
is necessary with the language
that we put in to do I don't
think it
I think it just adds a.
It's kind of.
Duplicative of section D.
it's all language that was used
in the bill in nineteen ninety
four and we're trying to conform
with the new language the feds
have given us which I believe
gives the court greater
flexibility and if we have judge
Ramirez on the on the line I
believe she's standing by she
might be able to better explain
that it's it may not be a
necessary amendment to this
bill.
Just so Mister chair I am not
sure that she is able to make a
comment at this time but I
prefer to secretary St that is
correct.
I think she just appeared on the
screen and and so on that judge
if you want to add on here and
just let us know if you can make
a comment that greater if you
can apply this discussion to
your experience manage that
would be.
About making policy can.
Senator Stewart would you would
you just restate your question
directed again so we cry keep
this will focus on trying to
keep the questions and the
answers so specific to one
another Senator Stewart plays so
Mister chairman I I am trying to
I'm trying to make the witnesses
clarify as to this new language
Senator Duhigg wants to prevent
they had an objection.
and striking the language before
saying that the federal
government said that if we use
that poll language that our
ability to collect this these
funds might be impacted my
question is of once the language
is put in under do in this other
area does that take away some of
the concerns from the federal
government or not.
Mr Chairman Senator Stewart
right I don't believe it does as
I don't think it takes away some
of the concerns that the Feds
had they had a concern with that
language and how it restricted
the imputation of New Mexico in
their preference was for section
D. which goes on the theory of a
willful
and I just wanna make sure
willful failure to obtain or
maintain appropriate a poll
employment and then criteria
that the courts could use to
determine that that's the
preferred method
Act after how many years since
nineteen ninety four the federal
government would like to courts
to be looking towards including
income.
Thank you Mr it's Mr Stewart.
I was just gonna say Mr chairman
that I thought that the
the issue with that is that it's
part of the definition of income
Senator do heads clearly is not
having it no longer be part of
the definitions in.
Just another issue.
Where do so I don't I just I
still don't understand why.
I would not want it to be more
clearly spelled out like this
and don't we have a judge who's
on line that can maybe add some
to this.
I will defer to the judgment
Lou she's on the line.
Good afternoon this is judge
MERSKI afternoon Mister chairman
Senator Stewart I'm not sure
I have just been joined into the
meeting so I haven't heard the
preceding conversation regarding
imputation of income.
Okay well very helpful perhaps
as Senator Duhigg could explain
to her what she's trying to do
Mr Chairman just a suggestion
Senator Stewart you'll stop the
floor if I may just take a
moment to bring judge repairs up
to where we're at I think and
and let me take a minute this is
a very important issue in my
mind.
our existing law which would be
struck would be changed by this
bill without Center do X.
amendment.
Right now says that that in in
income maybe not need not be
imputed so it's discretionary
for the judge but income need
not be disputed a parent may not
be automatically excluded from
being imputed income under two
circumstances and I want to I
want to be clear it's to
circumstances one is where
they're caring for a disabled
child regardless of the age of
the child is disabled and the
second circumstances a child was
under the age of six.
Right now our existing law says
that the primary custodian of a
parent who is caring for a child
on either one of those two
circumstances may not maybe
may not necessarily have income
imputed to them under those two
circumstances.
This bill would eliminate that
that language.
And the renewable
The court has discretion to
impute income in that languages
and subsection the which begins
on page four.
But it says the court may impute
income I guess some discretion
here but if you look at the
criteria.
Beginning with Representative
one online three at page five
does the following criteria
shall be used so the we're shall
would be construed by the court
is mandatory not permissive so
this is that the correct
criteria the court shall use is
the following lesson that we
have a list of subparagraphs
through age.
None of those criteria related
to a disability of trial and
none of those criteria relate to
the age of a child all of the
related to the the parent the
availability of unemployment the
parent to parent support
administrative parents income
has three different jobs still
the current education parents
agent health history of
convictions and incarceration
the parents ability to maintain
an employee employment the only
criteria and and we're there
shall and it appears to be the
way it's worded it looks like
it's an exclusive and exhaustive
list.
So the the court shall in
determining whether to impute
income the court shall consider
that criteria it eight through
H. and all of them relate to the
parents none of them relate to
the age of the child or
disability which I'll.
And so I hope that explanation
brings the judge repairs up to
where we're at right now and I
think senator do it's making a
very important point which is to
this point time New Mexico has
said that a judge may elect not
to impute income one pay primary
parent dystopian is caring for a
child under six or caring for a
disabled child and without
Center Duke's amendment we'd be
laminated that language in all
remind that non lawyers lawyers
maybe that the lawn New Mexico
holds the judges when they're
construing a statute are and
this is one of my favorite
favorite parts of the law the
law says that judges are to
consider the fact that the
legislature is assumed to know
all of the statutes and all of
the law when it passes the new
statute we're presume to know
all of that loss of the courts
are to assume that when we
changed law we did so.
Is fully and with reason knowing
full well that we know all of
the law at the time we did so.
Right now I I hope you all can
understand my amusement whenever
I read that part of any court
decision that that we're presume
to be so well versed in all of
the aspects of more state law
but but a court would
necessarily take this change and
the elimination of this language
to be a purposeful decision by
this legislature not to impute
income or or to allow a judge to
impute income regardless of a
parent caring for a child under
six or who has a disability and
I see Senator Duhigg nodding her
head so I'm I understand your
concern in my sitting your issue
clearly center Mr chair
absolutely.
So Senator Stewart I hope you
still have the floor center
Stuart I hope that addresses the
question help to and then
perhaps we can go to Senator to
a judge Ameren's with the point.
Senator you saw the floor yes Mr
chairman it use explained that
so much better so now I
understand it so much more and
so my question remains of I
think what Senator Duhigg has
done a reserves that language in
a different place so that it's
not part of the definition of
income so I want her to be
successful but I don't want to
undermine the bill and keep us
from getting federal dollars and
I I'm disorder not clear about
what that answer is.
I don't know if the judges on
still can speak but the one
thing it if I could suggest
Paragraph H. online thirteen of
of page five does deal with the
providing care for disabled
child and perhaps adding either
a section eight I there that
says of the parents ability to
obtain or maintain employment
due to caring for a child under
the age of six would be an
elegant way to add this into the
bill without running afoul of
what the Feds has told us.
Keeping it in that section that
they lied.
But putting that concept in
their.
Yes you Senator Duhigg Senator
Stewart will you you'll from
enrollment Senator doing.
I know I I I relinquish the
floor Mr chairman
Senator doing on that proposed
suggestion.
Mister chair Mister response I I
think I think that would be a
good solution as long as we also
on H. took out of the parties at
the end of age because someone
could be caring for a disabled
child regardless of it whether
it is a child that was had with
that the other party in the in
the suit or not and and they
would still be for dealing with
the same situation so so if we
were to strike out of the party
is on line fifteen of page five
and then after that include that
subsection hi.
That that you just stated are I
think that would be a fine
selection.
Mr chairman Center do he can I
just make a comment on that I
think the reason that of the
parties is in there because.
You the relationship is is
caring for a child that one of
the parents has a child support
obligations for if you take out
of the parties I think that
could mean that they're caring
for any disabled child and it
could be a child of not of the
two parents that are the subject
of the child support so I would
just say it keeping that in
would be good and adding an
online that says the same
language the parents ability to
attain or maintain employment
due to caring for child under
six would be
six years older younger would be
a perfect solution to.
And Mister chair Mister response
at I I would still want to take
out of the parties because then
it would keep it in line with
the language that we have now
which does not specify that the
income only need not be imputed
if it if the primary concern of
parents caring for a child under
six who is disabled after three.
etcetera etcetera doing I see
Senator Ivy Soto shaking as
wagons finger I think I know
what he's gonna say the existing
statutory language right now
does include language of the
party it is specific to that
serves so what the league
leaving that language and would
be keeping it consistent with
the current law I'm not saying I
think that your proposals a bad
idea.
but wait wait till my
opportunity we have us are doing
this and Representative I see
you next up on the list that are
doing Mr chair you're right I I
I miss that there I still have
concerns about if if I'm caring
for for disabled child even if I
have a child with a different
party than the one involved here
I don't know that my
circumstances have changed that
dramatically that we would not
still want to give this
consideration but you're right I
missed that language and and and
the original language thank you
are you ready go to center Ivey
Soto.
Yes Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto
on the proposed amendment yes so
on I think so but I do think
that is the right place to put
it out that's actually direction
I was headed when Mr with my I'm
at the same suggestion the state
within that context and really
What are the it's a it's an odd
way to phrase it but it is
really in terms of amputations
because here's the thing is that
when you talk about
interpretation of income you're
talking about doing something
where the the custodial parent
should not be involved
should be held harmless for.
And and and you're talking about
imputation then that the
noncustodial parents there's a
reason why the noncustodial
parent should take the hits and
so and that's where you do the
imputation in this particular
case and so it's it's not the
noncustodial parents
They're not the laws of that
total parent having had a
disable child with somebody
else.
That's alright that sounds we
are looking at the implication
of income as to a child of the
parties.
And so and I and I see and I see
of a judge Ramirez
I thank you right in on that on
on that issue no I would
appropriately so so I think it's
it's I mean right and so really
it either I think it either
needs to be up we've made even
need to keep of the parties
which would be ported over from
page three
lines formed I and then having
an hi that would be the same
with the same parameters for it
would be of the noncustodial
parents.
Are you clarify that the
custodial parent is taking care
of a disabled child of the
noncustodial parent that's where
you do the that what the
implications relevance to our
are the non imputation that case
is relevant to the noncustodial
parent.
But I think really the the more
equitable way is to use of the
parties.
R. but but really that's what it
gets and and and R. well Mr but
if I could just just yield to
the gentleman merece with deals
with these files all the time
and public god bless you for
dealing with these because you
know one of the things that that
judge Joe to pocket hoping one
day from his trial court days is
the different family law and
criminal law was from a line
that people who did bad things
who acted good when their on
court and family like the people
who do really good things who
Act really mad when they come
before and so and so you have a
respect for the work that you do
all Senator Ivey Soto would you
pose a direct question to judge
rural areas but yes it terms of
all the parties that that that
that actually keeps it relevant
to the to the imputation non
imputation of that.
Chairman Senator Ivey Soto that
is correct.
We need the language of the
parties in there for a reason
and that's exactly the reason we
needed in there.
Of I mean clearly if one of the
parties has a disabled child
from a prior relationship we can
take that into consideration but
that becomes a different
question in a different part of
the statute in terms of
The inherent discretion of the
judge taking considerations to
deviate downward or something
like that but it needs to be the
child support action is between
the mother and are the two
parents of the child at issue
and it has to be it has to be
that way we're gonna have all
kinds litigation.
Service.
That's all
on on this I do have something
else on that sentence but but
but we should dress this issue
for.
All right Senator lets you know
I see anyone else on the
proposed amendment by Senator
Duhigg.
Anyone else restaurant at them
and I between lines fifteen and
sixteen.
Are the parents ability to
maintain employment to do to
providing care for a child under
the age of set of the parties
under the age of six is that
correct.
Mr chair Senator Representative
yes that that would be my my
amended amendment.
To make sure Emily family are
you following along with us at
this point.
Yes I've got it and I can we
Senator Ivey Soto clarify.
Well let's make sure we're all
clear on the committee.
I.
H. I adding a new subsection hi
after what is now subsection
age.
Subsection I would read almost
identical to subsection page.
With the modification.
Senator Ivey Soto explained the
modification to H. that would
make up high.
Certainly
it would be and and and I just
have a quick question of of Mr
up with well as to why we
wouldn't want to.
That we have it in a complex
sentences need to be what we
would want to have the two in
the same sentence on page I.
It's not have a separate I mean
it's fine to do it separately
but it almost works easier if we
do it in the same H. R. I just
this with my there is are
perpendicular to.
I thank you could you could be
right in that in in H. you can
just add.
The language in H. and we would
be we would be fine.
The more elegant way to do it.
Okay.
Mr Chairman but yeah basically
than what we would be doing is
and we would be actually our.
Your providing care.
For a child all of the parties.
Who is under the age of six.
Or disable.
No legislative chair move of the
parties to aftercare.
Right so personal providers are
credit check care for a child of
the parties.
Who is under the age of sex.
For I prefer who is to say.
Really do have that.
Yes.
Okay so and we just so we're
clear we're no longer discussing
adding a subsection on.
Instead we're only modifying
what is presently.
A new language in subsection H..
Okay.
Thank you very good thank you
all right center do you have the
floor it's your amendment do you
want to propose that amendment
as it's been stated.
Yes Mister chair I propose that
the amendment has stated right
other committee discussion on
the proposed amendment Senator
Stewart is that of just.
For a second right any further
discussion on that proposed
amendment.
Jerry objection to the doctor
that amendment.
All right thank you very much
Senator Duhigg installed floor.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Kernan.
You go to page seventy one.
I believe it is a no I'm sorry
page three of the bill.
F. which starts at line I.
This is at a paragraph that
talks about.
Reasons and ensure things that
and ensure can't basically can't
kick a minor child off the off
of coverage for
one of the the prohibited acts
that that you can't get caught
off coverage for that so that
this is taken out here at lines
nine through eleven is that the
minor child is not claimed as a
dependent on the medical support
obligors federal income tax
return.
What page one page eighty three
thank you.
Eighty three and looking
specifically at the struck
language at lines nine triple.
And my understanding from from
talking to Mr Mr to loose ends
are me how is that that language
was taken out because the ACA or
do provides that you can't kick
someone off of the insurance the
money off just because they're
they're not listed on their
parents tax return.
which is great but.
But I wonder what this is in the
ACA having that language in
there would not conflict with
the ACA and the ACA gets change
in the future for some reason
and does not include that
wouldn't we want that protection
left in in in state law because
a lot of divorced parents I know
myself and and my my ex husband
we trade off each year claiming
our son on our tax return and so
if for some reason the ACA was
changing we did not have this in
place our son could potentially
be kicked off his insurance each
year just because of us trading
off claiming and so I don't see
any benefit to getting rid of
that language or any detriment
to keeping that so I would I
would prefers that that language
be capped
so to to that extent to that and
I I can make a motion our we
can't discussion on it and then
make motion or whatever you
prefer Mr chair.
Senator do it because we just
have questions for response of
the sponsor first before yet the
memory try to make it
yes yes I I have I would I'd
like to know that the sponsor
spots.
Well thank you Mr chair and
certainly I'm gonna refer to Mr
rents than on that and just see
it legislative sentiment.
We'll hear from him thank you.
Mr Chairman members of the
committee and senator do hate
that was stricken from from the
bill because of the new
requirements of the ACA and we
don't believe it's necessary in
the bill that's the only reason
that we had a strict.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And I just let me ask our.
It it so it's not necessary
currently because the ACA
language is there is there any
if this language was left and
with that in any way and danger
the federal funding around round
these features.
I believe it would endanger the
federal funding because we need
to be in compliance with the ACA
and if if if we leave this in
here in the ACA changes in some
respect when we have something
that puts us out of compliance
with the ACA as well it's it's
much better to just leave it for
interpretation under the ACA
to leave the seven right now.
Mr Chairman service but but.
So but so currently we would
still be in compliance with the
ACA if that language was
incorrect.
I don't believe that we would
be.
Mr Mr response I'm confused
about that because my
understanding is that that
languages was unnecessary
because this language or do
exist in the ACA so how would we
be out of compliance with the
ACA keeping language that is is
is is merely duplicative CA.
I don't believe that it's it's.
I think what we're using
different terms here it's not
that this languages in the ACA
the requirement to
claim independent on a medical
support obligors federal income
taxes was taken out of the ACA
it's not a requirement it I mean
it's no longer something that
you can do on your taxes because
of the ACA we believe the same
here we're now.
Not in compliance with the ACA.
And then we're out of compliance
with the federal with.
With our federal partners and
their request to.
Remove this from the statute
Senator Ivey Soto I see
recognize your next Senator
doing.
I have a solution for her just
so that she helps although had
meals.
So are thank you Mr chairman as
a senator it seems to me.
That that are a more elegant way
to do this would be helpful
clear way to do this would be on
page seven I'm sorry it's eighty
three okay Page three line
seven.
We insert.
On the last prohibited by
federal law comma.
And then online nine.
After the words that.
We insert Colin.
Make the next raised prior to
the strikeouts paragraph one.
With the somebody called in just
before the strike out.
Make the stricken out language
paragraph two.
With that some I Colin right
after the R. the the the close
bracket.
And then make the rest of the
sentence paragraph three.
So that if amended that way what
it would do is it would say and
instances where my don't minor
child is provided health care
coverage through a medical
support public or unless
prohibited by federal law the
carrier is prohibited from
denying health care coverage of
the minor child on the grounds
that one the minor child is born
out of wedlock to the minor
child to expect that the minor
child is not claimed as a
dependent on the medical support
public orders federal income tax
return for free.
Right that the minor child does
not reside with the medical
support public gore reside in
the insurance carrier service
area.
That actually I think makes it
an easier read in terms of those
and it provides I mean I think I
think center doulas concern is
that while while the current
provision that you're striking
is covered by the ACA the ACA is
still under active litigation
and if that were to go away that
we would want to have a state
law act stop as long as it does
not conflict with federal law.
Correct.
And so I I so I'm sort of doing
I'm not I don't know if that's
your amendment or not right but.
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto thank
you for that for repeatedly
raised in amendments on my
behalf but yes I I I think that
that would address my concerns.
To that amendment as stated by
Senator Ivey Soto.
It'll take those motion for the
amendment.
Emily are you still with us.
Yes.
Okay.
You've got okay that proposed
immense page eighty three
subparagraph have.
Committee questions on that
proposed amendment.
Michael my question is forgive
me Senator give you've already
answered this before but but
explain to me a child can be
denied or or is I guess with
existing language that you would
be preserving not striking
relates to a child being claimed
as a dependent on a federal tax
return and then just tell me are
real careful to carry denying
coverage on that on that basis.
Mr chair of.
Apart from the ACA if I had not
had that language in in place
then yes a carrier could have
potentially I could to child off
of coverage on that basis.
Okay I'm just curious I can't
imagine a carrier just where
their child is dependent of
someone on a on a federal tax
purposes when they're giving
care to a child but I'll take
your word for it all right we're
on that proposed amendment any
other questions on the proposed
amendment to page increase of
Rep Abbas Sir Stuart it's it
seems like we're not asking the
sponsoring her experts but it
sort of seems like Mr it's must
seem like it was okay but is it
friendly.
Thank you Mr chair I think it is
but I'll refer to that Mr
Chairman.
Yes with the provision about
federal law consistent with
federal law it's it's absolutely
important.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for money to be Senator all
right any other committee
questions on the proposed
amendment.
Is there any objection to the
adoption of that amendment.
Committee chairs saying all
committee members present will
be seen as supporting that
amendment.
So are doing I think you still
have the floor.
Thank you Mr chairman this this
is my last point on this bill so
in the changes to the child
support guidelines I.
Which and this is this is
something I I discussed with Mr
Mr solution army how
It's increasing.
The child support amounts for
low income families with with
three or more children.
But for for very low income
families that have less than
three children it's it's
actually decreasing those
amounts
and I find that I find that
troubles and.
And Mr Senator have actually
sent me a really helpful reports
and I'm trying to to find it now
The doctor they have been done
in two thousand eighteen about
revising these guidelines and
one of the things that jumped
out of me in that report was
that it said that of the the
child support orders that that
were gone through by that
commission sixty two percent of
them dealt with only one child
and only I think eleven percent
of them dealt with three
children or more and so I.
If I.
Eight I I I really like the
preferred for some low income
families this is increasing the
amounts but I think that the
vast majority of low income
families that are going to be
impacted by this will be
impacted medic negatively I
decreasing those bonds and and
the decreases are are fairly
small but when you're that low
income the the impact of though
even small decreases is has a
much larger impact on you I just
add to a fifty dollar change for
someone who's not super low
income might not be a big deal
the fifty dollar change in child
support monthly might be a huge
deal for someone who's super low
income so I don't even know what
what the amendment would be to
this because.
It's you know fifteen twenty
pages
of numbers here but.
But I'm I'm having a lot of
heartburn over that and so I
don't know Mr chair sponsor of
if you all could could address
that.
Thank you Mr chairman I think I
will for example to Mr Phillips
unless Dr Scrase or our agency
army that would take it.
Yes Senator thank you Mr chair
committee members and and
senator do heading into it.
The goal is our vision is to
increase reliable child support
for children by setting child
supporters based upon the
nonstop parents earnings income
or other evidence of.
And the you the way I mean the
way our our data shows is you
know the the collection rates
you know somebody could hundred
eighty dollars before only
paying ninety dollars your
training course whether actual
income is to ensure that the
whole entire amount is paid so I
mean this you know it's it's if
if somebody was paying if these
cases were paying a hundred
percent of their obligation then
you have this could be a
negative impact to low income
families but because they're not
paying a hundred percent of
their obligation which is the
vast majority of our cases you
know what I mean.
You know study is you know other
states our own data support that
by making the.
Lower in making sure that the
the entire amount is paid you
know it's it's going to do
several things I mean it's going
to it's going to come out of
underground economy you're gonna
run away from their obligation
you know it's gonna it's gonna
stop you know some of those more
you know punitive enforcement
tools you know that we employ
you know which is also going to
help engage with the child's for
all of you know child's brains
do so that we can help them
you'll find a job and prove
their employability so the
guidelines for to go back up
Matt the honest answer your
question it's it's.
The range of the rate of payment
these of these income levels is
just hello you know it's under
sixty percent.
I see Dr Scrase if you want to
get in the conversation this ask
of Senator realize we've been on
this bill for over an hour we
have six more bills to be I
think your questions important
technical does us ask twenty
questions that can be answered
by one individual and rather
than having everyone in on the
conversation Dr Scrase you're
welcome to join it but but let
me have Senator doing gaps a
direct question to you if you
have one all right better do it.
Thank you Mr chair I what.
I guess and and and I didn't see
in that that report that was
sent I didn't see that the data
that you're talking about Mr to
lose saying that.
It is very low income folks
switched with less than three
children that that wall will
result in info.
overall and so.
A little bit of a contradiction
because we're raising it for the
high for those low income folks
with three or more children and
and not assuming that they will
they will not be compliant
because that's being raised but
but we're saying we we can't
keep it steady for the low
income folks with less than
three children because because
they won't Pat also there's
there's a contradiction there
that but I think we're some and
and and I will yeah I'm gonna
vote for this bill I I think is
a good bill but I would ask that
That we come back and deal with
those guidelines future in a way
that is more equitable and and
that has a more equitable impact
on the vast majority of fans.
We're not becoming a more.
Thank you Mr.
Any further questions thank you
other committee members of the
bill.
Senator Ivey Soto.
I want to go back to.
Our reputation on page one page
for being a rate I.
If I may and
Mr chairman I hope you didn't
just departments all together
but
My concern is the leading at the
beginning of subsection do
actually I hope just Romero's is
still with us as well she may be
helpful in this
Unless you disagree is a by
position but
It it does seem to me though
that that that the way you have
it is it's a binary.
That part is willfully failed to
obtain or maintain a proper
deployment.
And and the issue that we often
deal with and for our people who
are willfully or purposefully
under employed.
And and so I just want to make
sure that.
That under employment is
It's something that is covered
as well and the not seeing
anybody else's faces Mr chairman
of that.
Mr Lewis who
the state would still have the
power on right now and that's
what my question.
All.
Yes this report.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee Senator Ivey Soto I I
don't disagree with you I think
under employment is an important
concept I have in here I just
wonder if maintain appropriate
employment is.
is sufficient I I see your point
so I I really do and and gender
merece is still on the call and
ask her to two way and if she
can.
Mr Chairman
members of the committee my
sense is that the
whatever the term is the court
would I'm.
Be able to take the evidence
that is provided by the parties
and find
and I know I would certainly ask
the appropriate questions of the
parties to find out if they are
sufficiently employed to provide
for the needs of their children
for their child and if they are
we set the amount if there's if
they're not then as a judge if
it was my case I would monitor
that mission valley to make sure
that they are appropriately
employed so that we can have the
most accurate child support
order
That we can which is what CSE
dis goal is in terms of
All of that modernization of the
child support act thank you
judge center I'm so we've got to
make some progress yep so I
think our rate page or light
twenty five just before the
comma.
What is it and so the words or
is willfully underemployed.
That would keep the same willful
standard which I have some
questions about whether we
should have a little standard
but nonetheless that's what you
guys have there and but it would
it would it would make sure than
that that should look at
employment as well as
underemployment.
In keeping that on there and so
I I would I would make that as a
motion and would yield to
Senator Kernan asked whether
that is a from the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator this Madam let me check
with that Mr Chairman just to
make sure that they're okay with
that I.
I thank you.
I think we we have any problem
better defining appropriate
employment in the bill.
Thank you Mr chair I think we're
good with that okay so you.
the service on a proposed
amendment.
You are reset all my time
Senator Ivey Soto
or line twenty five just before
the com um.
Inserts or is willfully under
employed.
Well I make question the use of
the word willful or are the for
the Santa full online twenty
four I do think with regard
unemployment will full is
investors and because because
that one where the court has to
make specific findings.
There was
Well that's the proposed
amendment center drive in this
amendment.
Yes all right.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
amendment Sanchez I would
propose amendments and and with
respect to the sponsor but you
could be willfully
underemployed just just
rejecting work to spend more
time with your child
I have some experience with that
situation where you actually
reject work because you are with
the child I would say that would
be willful and intentional in
fact and but at the same time it
would conflict with the best
interest of the child to to
expose somebody to that where
you're forcing them to actually
attend work in a time where they
prefer to be with the child X. I
think that's a little bit too
much direction of four I think
the judges are smart enough Mr
chair to to be able to recognize
the situation in front of women
I think it doesn't allow quite
enough discretion to to given
that that.
That narrowness within this bill
that's all I have thank you Mr
chair thank you others on the
proposed amendment Mr chairman
if I could just simply point out
that on page five line one the
first word is in may so so if
even if somebody is woefully
underemployed for good reason
Representative is related to the
child.
Then the court has the
discretion not to impute but but
but there have been significant
cases
that have gone to court aware of
where you have a parent who had
a job making well into six
figures and when they get that
child support bill they all the
sudden
choose a change of career.
And and and up in a fairly
modest opposition and and these
things do happen these things
impact to happen.
So I think I think that is
important a provision to
maintain to have in the thank.
Watching in facial expressions
of Jeff rumor is she's
remembering everyone of those
cases Senator Ivey Soto by the
by the questioners by the
expression are fake she
remembers every one of those
cases all right the committee
members on the proposed
amendment page for like twenty
five.
Discussion I proposed amendment.
I will do roll call on that I
hear some opposition to the
amendment the amendment to line
twenty five on page for roll
call please Emily the motion is
to adopt that amend.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes
Representative.
Is yes.
Bill.
Senator Stewart yes.
Thank you yes.
Senator is yes.
Thank you very much and and.
It's gonna vote please center
six two two one excuse thank
you.
Senator Ivey so you'll have the
floor although I I cannot help
but note the irony of that vote
because there's very hard way to
see the amendment that you
propose this to to not be a
little more conservative I think
in terms of a principal and and
responsibility for child support
so you've you've taken the
Republican talking points on
that last one and managed to get
all the Democrats supporting it
and all the Republicans against
it I'm.
I'm gonna tell you it's Friday
afternoon and it must be close
to happy hour I I don't get it
but Senator Ivey Soto it's it's
making all of my service and the
legislature.
but I I do I do very much want
to thank all the work that has
been put into this I know this
is a project that is taken well
over a year to get to and and
and this is just a tremendous
left and and so please please
know that the that the
refinements that that we've been
suggested to the bills are
requirements that that start off
with the with just a tremendous
product in front of us
are from and thank you.
Thank you Sir I was Soto we're
on a do pass motion which I'm
I'm gonna take from Senator a.
Do is.
Wanted to pass as amended the
second from Senator Lopez.
Other discussion on the bill
before you go to a final vote.
All right seeing the chair will
go last I just want to take a
moment to recognize we have new
senators Kerry Hamblen.
Senate Bill there may be others
but I think you're the need
other than of course not in
center doing you all are the new
centers welcome to the Senate
Judiciary Committee you can get
an idea of what to anticipate
but I'll tell you that although
we spent about an hour and a
half and really probably changed
maybe twenty or thirty words in
a very lengthy bill I hope you
did hear that that this
preserves makes New Mexico are
eligible for about a hundred and
forty four million dollars so
that's a significant issue
number one and number two what
we did the committee members did
was modify this bill to do one
important thing with really is
changing a sentence or two which
is to not impute income to a
parent who is at home with their
child under the age of six and
otherwise a trap parent who
would be staying home with a
child under the age of six or at
home with a disabled child under
existing law in New Mexico that
part is not imputed to have
income for purposes of child
support the bill as it came to
this committee would have
allowed a judge to impute that
income and then candidly as a
lawyer I tell you the judge
would probably interpret the
fact that we struck that
language as a directed by the
legislature to impute income in
the cases of those brands and
I'm looking to gentran so we'll
talk about that some other time
but but I think a judge would
say what the legislature did
that on purpose by eliminating
that.
We preserve it so so kudos to
those of the committee who
fought for those two or three
sentences and in fact I believe
reserves the opportunity for a
parent to stay home with a child
under six or parent to stay home
with a disabled child and not
have income unmuted to that
parent for purpose of child
support so good for the
committee and and for those of
you who are watching this for
the first time realizing why
this committee.
Is the bane of all senators.
And and and Dr Scrase and and
the cabinet secretaries in
agencies but but it's good work
and I'm very proud to be the
chair of this committee so we're
on to pass motion Emily will you
call the roll on do
transmission.
Yes.
Yes.
Don't.
Yes ma'am.
Yes yes.
Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Eight two two one eight zero.
Senator.
Thank you Mrs motion.
Thank you.
Mr chair members of this
committee not especially want to
thank you for that the very
detailed work you did I think we
are leading with a better bill
and I'm counting on each and
everyone of you when this hits
the floor I won't have my
experts tuning in and I'll need
your help so thank you very much
I appreciate you all.
About our because you're up of
this a lot of what the has had
a.
I'm sorry center I was I was
muted but Senator thank you have
a we do passes resolutions we we
missed you all those years ago
across the hallway didn't have
the time for us so we'll see
lots more because.
Thank you very much Mr chair
Senator I'm sorry Mr.
Because we recognize for some
reason I have Mister chairman if
I might.
Senator Campos respectfully
requests that his bill be laid
over until our next agenda he is
that pretty heavily focused on
his work in the finance
committee and so he actually
requested his bill be rolled
over Mr Chairman representative
to ninety one members of the
committee we started a little
early today at the good
suggestion of the president of
the Senate pro tem Stewart we
struggle early.
And the goal there was to avoid
having to meet over the weekend
that remains Michael so it's
about two thirty we make some
good progress on our remaining
agenda my plan is trying get
through our our agenda even
despite that roll over Senator
Campos and to hear the remaining
bills and and avoid a meeting on
the weekend.
it is usually my practice to
have committee members.
I heard last in the bill because
they'll be with us throughout
the meeting anyway and and cut
other members loose earlier in
the day that's particularly true
today when I know so if you're
gonna be trying to travel home
although my my request of the
committee is to support me and
hearing the son of one twenty
seven accent Senator Lopez
Senator Lopez the rules my
understanding but I'll confirm
this is that we have with the
number of people who were.
On this particular bill let's
see what I've got here.
Yes Mr chairman you are correct.
We've got a lot of folks in.
Yes hello is here on Wednesday I
don't know whether she's still
with us or not but that's my
answers listeners objection I'm
gonna here said one twenty seven
maxed.
And and think of we know that we
have judge lane we do judge lady
again and judge of the hill yes
to sail they are yes just as we
don't think you know your way
around we're patient with us so
my apologies the other senators
you'll continue with us and
welcome back to those we've been
waiting I don't know whether of
the justice be hill and gentle
lady the last presentation if
you did I would have loved to
have gone to you and get your
input but but I measure would
probably still be another hour
into that bill.
So because I'm sure you have
experience in good suggestions
for us but that's the way things
work over here Senate Judiciary
so Senator one twenty seven it's
to thirty eight we'll hear up to
fifteen minutes of your
presentation you've got a long
list of people that are in
support of this bill I'll leave
it to you to make good use of
your time Senator Lopez thank
you Mr chairman I think we've
allocated our time.
so Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm here in front of
you to present Senate bill one
to seven in title family
representation and advocacy act
essentially Mr chairman this
comes out of the task force that
I was honored to sit on to serve
along with Representative Gail
Chasey and many others in our
community some you will be
hearing from shortly no looking
as to how we can strengthen
Streamlined of ask for look for
accountability and the
representation that is given to
our children and families
otherwise known as what I call
the garden it lives.
so with that Mr chairman members
of the committee I would like to
refer to defer to a first
justice barber of the hill would
like to say a few words.
Thank you Senator Lopez and Mr
chair Senator so the Montez it's
a pleasure to be here this
afternoon to speak on behalf of
Senate bill one twenty seven.
Let me just state that the
quality of legal representation
for children parents and
guardians in child abuse and
neglect cases has declined over
the past decade and the time is
to make fundamental changes to
the structure from which legal
services are provided in these
types of cases to address this
problem the legislature created
the family representation task
force to study the issue and
make recommendations after a
year of study the task force
issued its report setting forth
its recommendation to provide
legal services through an
independent state agencies
similar to that of the law
office of the public defender.
This independent law office
would provide the necessary
structure.
Oversight guidance support as
well as fair compensation to
lawyers hired or contracted with
to perform this important
services to children and
families.
Senate bill one twenty seven and
S. J. R. eleven are the first
step in creating this
independent law office and we
are confident members of the
committee that this change will
result in better outcomes for
children and families in New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you justice Mr chairman
members of the committee judge
Jennifer Delaney from the sixty
additional district.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and that's
Jennifer Delaney in the sixty
day strike I am also the chair
of the New Mexico Supreme Court
family representation commission
I was a foster parent I am an
adoptive parents and I've also
served as an attorney for
parents youth and children
involved in the abuse neglect
system throughout my career as
many as a where children and
young people come into foster
care for variety of reasons that
are related to abuse and neglect
and families become involved in
the children's court
appropriately New Mexico courts
are statutorily required to
provide legal representation to
these children and young people
as well as to their parents
guardians and custodians that
are involved administrative
office of the courts has been
managing the representation of
children and parents since
nineteen ninety three through
its court appointed attorney
program with funds that are
allocated by the New Mexico
legislature to provide
representation the
administrative office of the
courts contracts with over a
hundred internet with any point
in time are engaged in about
fifteen hundred cases statewide
animal approximately twenty four
hundred children and twenty one
hundred parents guardians or
custodians it is unwieldy any
AOC has needed the staff or
other resources to monitor these
contracts to ensure quality
representation this is not a new
problem over the last twenty
years a number of efforts have
been launched to improve
performance what we have made
some gains it is not enough and
we have data to show that it's
not working Senate bill one
twenty seven that's before you
today creates the office of
Family representation advocacy
with a structural model it is
patterned after the look that is
patterned after the law office
the public defender's it
includes an oversight commission
as well as budgetary
independence the practice model
that we hope to include within
the office is an
interdisciplinary legal team
this means that parents and
children will benefit from teams
consisting of lawyers social
workers navigators and peer
mentors New Mexico is way ahead
of the game in this already and
we have this model called the
family advocacy program which
will be adopted into the new
office.
At this time we are asking for
you to issue would you pass the
Senate bill one twenty seven
understanding that it is
imperative that New Mexico
undertake this step to provide
high quality representation to
all children and parents
involved in the system Senate
bill one twenty seven will make
this a reality working
collaboratively with CYFD and
other stakeholders we will
create better long term outcomes
for children and their families
including reduce time in foster
care whether the reunification
guardianship or adoption I'm the
in just one second I would like
that
send this over to Catherine have
will ski and I apologize have us
who is our next expert but I do
know that we have several people
who are still in the waiting
room that also have not been let
including merry and Xining and
Lindsey folks who runs the court
appointed attorney programs at
the administrative office of the
courts.
If you would please.
Hello my name is Katherine
Favell skiing I'm a parent
mentor with the New Mexico
family advocacy program I use my
lived experience to help other
parents in this situation
navigate this the legal system.
In two thousand ten my children
were removed from my custody and
for five years I would fight to
get them back my attorney on the
District Court level five very
hard for me and we knew that I
would not when I District Court
I was given an appellate
attorney who was not
knowledgeable of children's
court law she practiced in
criminal court and was not
knowledgeable about children's
court.
His lack of knowledge.
Was detrimental in my case.
His lack of knowledge was
detrimental and it it.
Because.
Much to my family and I have not
seen my children now in many
years.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Cathrynn
Marian.
Mr chair Senator Lopez I think
if you hover is in the waiting.
She is our.
Senator Lopez thank you.
Okay miss Hubbard Quetta.
I think Mr chair Senator Lopez I
think that she's in the waiting
room okay sure Mr chair Senator
she is in the meeting now.
Thank you December.
Yes.
You would please.
Your turn okay.
However our system should have.
Due to.
It is hard to that was going on
with me but I am here to say
that I am school support Senate
bill one twenty seven because I
was a parent who did not have
support I did not have a social
worker a community health worker
or even a parent advocate to sit
with me and talk to me about
what my rights were about the
same any more spending
understanding and so.
Throughout my case I dropped the
ball a lot because I didn't know
what I was supposed to ask I
didn't understand the question
that were given to me to be able
to relate and answer those
questions but moving forward I
have put forth like my whole
career to be that parent for
those parents who are in that
position now I'm a parent
advocate for New Mexico family
advocacy program and I make sure
that parents at her our role is
not to make sure that you know
we are a full support I would
just go gung ho about getting
the kids back but making sure
that parents understand what's
being told to them making sure
that parents have the rights of
going to education meetings and
medical meetings and just making
sure that they're being heard
I do feel that this this will be
a great support for Paris
because it'll be a one stop shop
they will not have to keep going
all over town to meet their
attorney to meet their social
worker to meet their parent
advocate but they can build one
building and all of that support
that right.
So I'm asking you all.
Committee of the Senate also
support bill one twenty seven
thank you.
Thank you so much is right
cradle in.
Hi Mr chair.
Jennifer I do not have them in
the waiting room are in the
meeting I believe.
And I have one more person Mr
chairman is Pamela Esparza.
Mr chair Senator Lopez they're
paying more now.
Okay.
Mr chair Senator Lopez there and
it looks like they just need to
connect.
Senator Lopez your muted I don't
know you're speaking I see here
is because I'm sorry is needed
thing this is far so if you
would please welcome.
Thank
the committee as part of Senate.
One twenty seven AM a parent in
the system and I think this bill
would have been helpful because
I don't have an adequate
training and I do hope that just
to support this bill thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
that is
my experts as well as some
public comment.
Thank you senator
I note that among the other
individuals who were available
to you today is experiencing put
Annemarie Luna and Rebecca look
again also.
Identify themselves as
proponents of the bill before
hearing today was the best
Gailey of the director instead
of public law school of law we
started back with New Mexico
Family an advocacy program Erica
Sanchez director of policy and
advocacy NMCA and.
Need a day turning blue Senator
law office judge Jim for with
the sex judicial district
Nicoletta.
Hospital Sanchez cocoa New
Mexico family advocacy program
attorney there may be a labor
center for children and the law.
The former justice now retired
of Petra then as my as
finally she's on this call I
don't today but like to say
hello for Annika Montemagno
Pilch with New Mexico cross
Association Cory Griffith New
Mexico family advocacy program
Alyssa Davis NMCA M. youth
advocate and merry and training
New Mexico Family representation
commission thank you all for
being available to us today and
your support on this legislation
I've identified no opposition in
advance in organized opposition
or individuals wishing to speak
in opposition to the bill and
with that that will go to
members of the committee on
Senate one twenty seven members
of the committee.
Senator do.
Thank you.
Sanchez.
Is that that this be.
They would be representing both
both parents and children.
I'm just wondering how.
How complex issues with working.
Portion.
As the director would would deal
with that so I don't know if
that would just be a don't.
Making or if.
The big thing that jumped out.
Okay if I could first Mr
chairman I do believe that the
committee has a committee
substitute did you not receive
that for purposes of our
discussion today.
I wanted to ask that first my
apologies.
Mr chair in the meantime if not
senator Morris to be allowed
back in I think he's in the
waiting room.
Senator I unfortunate I am
looking at Senate bill one
twenty seven not a substitute.
Senator do you have this in.
Mr Mr chair I have.
A the proposed amendments.
Not a substitute.
Mr chair I have a substitute.
I secretary was sent a
substitute so we were sent the
substitute.
And Mr chair I'm actually just
finding it now from the twenty
fourth an email on the twenty
four.
Mr chair Senator Lopez I have a
substitute on screen I don't
know it sorry on.
Let me first let me first
confirm that Senator Lopez so
we're all looking for the same
thing is is that the correct
committee substitute this
proposed.
Yes.
Right so we're going to two one
nine nine one one point one yes
Sir all right.
You can go and take that down
the screen won't try and rated
that way but I encourage members
to look through your email.
And then open.
The correct version of the
substance that opens only to
make a motion the local center
Senator do it in the meantime I
assume you're going to look for
and find the committee stop and
then perhaps pressure questions
to that to that a particular.
Many substance okay.
Yes Mr chair all right through
real quickly if you want to go
to someone else.
Mr Chairman also I think that
there were some some may have
received just the actual
amendment and that was just to
help facilitate the discussion
if there were any specific
questions but on that note I'd
like to make a motion of a do
not pass on Senate bill one
twenty seven for purposes of
discussion a do pass on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill one to seven.
Thank you senator that motions
before the committee.
Do you want to place let's say.
And if you'd like Mr chairman
the amendments that are in the
bill itself for specifically
just looking for technical
clarification that we had after
we left the last committee
so what we're doing is just
making sure that we're using the
correct terminology
such as adding taking out
administrative office of the
courts the AOC which is in the
the first
Bill at one twenty seven and
then we have instituted children
youth and families department
and just a lot of this Mr
chairman is just to make sure
that we follow correctly on for
the language needed that it
tracks correctly with statute.
Russians Mr chairman since you
have the full substitute
affinity now.
Give me a moment to track that
down my cell sure.
We did you just resend that
again I just resent it.
It should be at the top of your
emails.
Thanks Emily.
All right we're on the we're on
that motion I'll keep looking
for sorry.
You think there we go thank
finding things in the mail these
days it's easy for those of you
that are not serving would be in
my college you don't realize the
hundreds if not thousands of
email we get every day including
I'm beginning to learn probably
twenty links to zoom meetings as
we jump around from committee to
committee in the it's becoming a
really interesting challenge but
anyway I've got the I've got the
bill would be as well too so
Senator Lopez you.
Move to do not pass and you pass
in the committee substitute so
as we get ourselves organized
I'll come back to the.
Committee meeting and look for
members who wish to be
recognized so Senator Duhigg on
the committee substitute.
Thank you Mr chair and and so I
get my my question is still the
same because looking at the new
language on page two aligns nine
three fifteen I the this office
would be representing both both
adults and children for for
children and parents who are at
risk of being placed in legal
custody of the children youth
and families department so how
would how would those if there's
a conflict between that the
children and the parents how
would how would that work with
this office.
Mister chairman Senator judge
dealing.
Mister chairman Senator Duhigg
I'm so we do the family
representation commission did
seek out an advisory opinion
from the New Mexico state are
ethics section with regard to
this and they gave us
suggestions in ways in which we
could ensure that conflicts were
properly resolved in in the
representation in with potential
separated management systems for
parents and children this also
will be AT a hybrid office and
so we will be dealing with
employees and with contractors
similar to what you see with the
public the office apparently
defender now and so that is the
other way in which conflicts
will be resolved and the interim
director that this bill
authorizes to be put into place
with one of their tasks is to
specifically spell out how we
will deal with the conflict
issues in accordance with the
advisory opinion that we
received to ensure that at no
time is representation of a
parent or child disrupted
because an unexpected conflict
arose and so those are the
problems that we're going to
resolve prior to appointing an
attorney to anyone.
Mr chair Senator just laying
thank you.
Looking at page seven of the
substance to starting at line
six going line fourteen this is
talking about folks who will not
be appointed to serve on the
commission I was the last one
subsection force as persons who
currently contract with the
receiving funding from the
office for their employees.
I'm just wondering and and and I
don't know that much about how
CYFD work so this might not make
sense but should there be
another subsection that says
essentially says persons who are
currently contracting with CYFD
would would that be an
appropriate additional group of
folks tend to not have on the
commission.
It was current employees of CYFD
and so I don't I don't know if
they they also contract with
that with people apart from
employees and that.
That would that that contractor
should be included as well.
Yes please the lady.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Lopez
Senator Duhigg
the problem with including that
language is in part because you
have attorneys who are doing it
options in being paid by CYFD
for those adoptions but that
doesn't necessarily mean that
they would have a conflict and
sitting on this commission and
helping to advise as to how this
office would move forward and so
I do not think that it is that a
necessary amendment however it
would not be an and friendly
when I.
And and Mr chair Senator slang
if if if you don't think it's
necessary I'll defer to your
your expertise on that.
Looking at section eleven which
starts at the bottom of page
nine
this would allow gifts or grants
or donations or bequests from
any source
And I have a little bit
concerned about the from any
source part of that I I was just
doing a search on one source
trying to see if we have that
similar language anywhere else
in our statutes
and I'm not finding that I'll
but I'm also doing a five minute
search
but I just wonder if.
If it should be the sources of
those those guests are grants or
donations should be limited in a
way to make sure that folks who
have something pending in that
office are not also giving gifts
in a way that that would be
problematic.
And and I'm not even sure what
what that amendment would be
right at this moment I can I can
try to figure that out I'm sure
Senator Ivey Soto will.
Have some us some language but.
That that Mr chair Senator Lopez
I don't know if that would be
friendly or not just as a
contact.
Judge still any Mr chair Senator
do Hey this office only
represents indigent clients
and so while I guess they
potentially could have a
relative or someone who were to
give a gift that what we don't
unemployment is the ability for
this office to get grants to be
gifted.
Same myself if I pass in and had
a large amount of money because
I retire in other than staying
in the judiciary I do something
independent and because I so
strongly believe in this office
I want to leave them a gift when
I passed I really think there's
a lot of child advocates and
family advocates that would be
interested in ensuring the
success and expansion of this
office and so while we we would
not
It would not be unfriendly to
amend it away then which where
somebody's Representative or
media related to somebody who is
represented at that time could
not give a gift we really want
to leave it as broad as
possible.
Mr chair Senator just let me at
that that makes lot of sense
perhaps as you go and other
members of the committee I can
see if I can confidently which
that that would preserve your
intention.
Mr chairman we can't hear your
yes thank you something some do
it will come back to you as you
wish
This.
All of our concerns expressed by
Senator Duhigg although it's
it's a difficult one to know how
to resolve.
Down here in southern New Mexico
well two things one is.
When I got out of law school I
were IBM working for what was
and probably still is New
Mexico's largest law firm and I
started now Kirk and then have
my wish moved down to Los crucis
a smaller office where I was the
only associate there were three
other partners.
At the time here in the third
district the District Court
judge would very audibly assign
local council to represent.
Parents of who's choose children
all were
in custody of the State under of
abuse and neglect proceedings so
we would be assigned those those
cases as part of our our a pro
bono.
Opportunities here in southern
New Mexico and then because we
just we're just a small in a
community that's what we that's
what we did.
The I I brought up the fact that
I was the only associate of of
of firm with three partners in
the office because the partners
made a point of assigning to me
all of their.
Pro bono representation
assignments from the third
district of advising me that it
was a great opportunity for me
to get a lot of early courtroom
experience and and book years
and years of pro bono experience
in advance I feel like for you
for years of this for you just
as real years back I argued that
those of us on this Judiciary
Committee should most certainly
be getting some level of pro
bono a credit for for this
capacity but any of and I I did
a lot of these cases and they
were heartbreaking cases as you
all know I'm not find anyone
here but but but Center do
brings up a good point which is
when you when you've got
different parties who don't have
the economic means to hire a
lawyer you know how you resolve
those conflicts.
Of the of the other example that
I frequently ran into was so the
New Mexico legal services we
have legal services
organizations and oftentimes it
will usually with their work
this way one of the spouses that
would typically be the US but
honestly we come to see me and
say I've got a child custody
case I've got a child support
case that's being brought by
southern New Mexico legal
services on behalf of my spouse
and their providing him or her
with an attorney and I don't
have a way to afford an attorney
so it will you Representative me
and of course it's difficult and
it's difficult to say now and at
the same time you do have an
economic opportunity of of
something available to one and
not to the other so my question
really goes back to his Center
doing which is how how how do we
resolve these conflicts where
let's be honest the the only
source of representation may be
this this agency this commission
this resource and and when you
have a parent against a parent I
guess that's really my question
to have situations where it's a
parent versus a parent my
experience at the time when I do
these cases was a usually a
grandparent that was usually my
experience was it was a
grandparent who was adverse to
their child
and the grandparents would be a
petition the court for custody
of their grand child in arguing
that the parent oftentimes their
child their son or the daughter
had a drug problem or had a
criminal problem and and should
not have custody and one you
know talk about a case where
you're where you're trying to
represent a parent
adverse to there are parents
parents of was the grandparents.
So what we do with those
conflicts the those we were
there how do we how do we create
unnecessary organization like
you're describing here in
Portland and then figure out
who's going to get that
representation that sorry I just
gave you who gets the
representation the grandparent
or the parent.
Mr chair but at the so there's a
lot to unpack in in that
question but I'm gonna and I'm
gonna try to get issue by issue
so we're not dealing with the
average custody case between two
parents or at this time I can
ship guardianship case and which
grandparents without CYFD having
legal custody to skate or even
potentially under the changes
they can ship partnership having
legal custody we are talking
about solely under the
children's code abuse neglect
cases where CYFD has taken a
child or a child is at risk of
coming into foster care and
under that statute both parents
or if it is a guardian or
custodian as defined as to order
as defined by the children's co
op if they are indigent they are
afforded a right to counsel and
so currently all of those
parties receiving attorney
through contracts that the
administrative office has with
the courts part of the problem
is because these contracts are
not near as appealing as we
would like them to be that.
Other than really dedicated
individuals in the field or
individuals that do the minimum
amount of work on these cases to
bring in the contract you you
don't have the level of
expertise in these attorneys
that you need and so that's why
you see cases in which somebody
from your firm was appointed to
represent hearing but really
these are very specialized cases
with technical issues and they
need a lot of training and and a
family I'm sure the families you
Representative the parents you
representative had incredibly
high quality representation but
if I have a civil attorney
doesn't deal with these cases
that it's appointed in
Albuquerque or twenty down here
in the sixth to represent a
parent that parent is not going
to get the kind of
representation that is necessary
to ensure that either the family
stay together or that the rights
are terminated after the it had
every opportunity possible to
work their treatment plans and
so.
So currently the all of those
attorneys who work in these
cases now are contracted with
the administrative office of the
courts the administrative office
of the courts does not have the
staff or the ability to ensure
that those contractors give high
quality representation
throughout the state so the goal
with this office is to transfer
those contracts to the office
but we would have a hybrid model
so someone actually be employees
and some would continue to be
contractors but there would be
quality assurance and staff in
order to help ensure that those
attorneys who still have the
contracts are meeting the level
not just of minimally adequate
attorney which is what a lot of
parents and children are getting
now but of high quality
representation their studies
over the United States that show
that when parents and children
in these types of cases receive
high quality representation at
the time the child stints in
foster care whether that is
being reunified being placed in
a permanent guardianship with
sand grandparent or with that
family with a child being
adopted at the time in foster
care is decreased and we know
that the time the children spent
in foster care is traumatic and
so I'm ultimately the goal is
that once this offices created
and we have some who were
employees some who are
contractors that that that is
the biggest way in which the
conflict will be resolved the
other way is in large centers
such as Albuquerque where we
have the largest number of cases
or potentially in Los crucis you
will have to offices a family
representation one who is
representing one parent one who
is representing the other parent
was separate case management
data so with separate case
management so that an attorney
does not ever access the other
individuals information but on
the way that the law office of
public defender deals with
conflicts now is do you dealing
is having conflict attorneys
throughout the state and
and because we're proposing a
hybrid model that's how it would
be their Kerr.
We are organizations that help
grandparents in those cases like
Pegasus legal service does a
wonderful job of representing
grandparents across the state
but under the children's code
there is no statutory
requirement at this time to
provide those individuals with
the turns thank you thank you
judge I saw a moment ago we were
just trying but I think judge
for a some.
Basically come in there and then
he disappeared from my screen
maybe on a different a different
view but if you so we welcome
you to judge for me all right of
center do it back to you did you
need to recognize again before
we get to a vote.
Thank you Mr chair yeah I.
This is not the smoothest of
language but but I would
suggest.
and amendments that section.
See on page ten.
starting at the end of the line
three.
Of that would read I guess
grants donations or bequests
from a person who has any matter
currently being handled by the
office or from a person within
three degrees of consanguinity
with a person who has any matter
currently being handled by the
office shall not be accepted.
So that would mean so folks who
have something pending or their
their grandparents their aunts
or uncles and nieces or nephews
it as long as something is
currently pending those gifts a
request would not be accepted
while the matter was pending.
So you're proposed amendment
center is to section eleven.
It is Mr chair you're adding
language to the end of what is
now line three in the committee
substance yes.
Would you read the language for
us once again please sure.
Yes common requests comment
donations call or request from a
person who has any matter
currently being handled by the
office on or from a percent
within three degrees of
consanguinity whether a person
who has any matter currently
being handled by the office
comma shall not be accepted.
Mr Chairman that Sittard I think
friendly.
Because the confines that are
discussion just have.
Very good.
Many committee members with
questions on the proposed
amendment.
Thirty objection to the adoption
of that amendment.
There was an objection or
question the question on our for
my education Mr chair Senator
direct what is three degrees of
consanguinity manatee because I
know how to spell it I just
want to say it is a legal term
that I'm supposed to know is
that something that people did
you just affect that or what no
no but I have to Google it Mr
chair Senator o'neill so if you
go to three degrees you would
wrap in someone's character
child someone's great sibling.
Grandparent or grandchild and
also someone's aunt aunt or
uncle or niece or nephew which
and given New Mexico seems it
seems appropriate to go out that
far yes okay well I understand
that now thanks for that
amendment because I do think
it's important that the people
be able to support this fine
work in their wills are dismayed
and donation Conaway so anyway
thank you.
Thank you Sir o'neill other pre
committee members with questions
on the proposed amendment.
Although Mr chairman as the good
Senator Duhigg mentioned in New
Mexico I could go probably five
six.
they want to take that has
included a further out if for
for New Mexico that I'm just
just joking thank you everybody
spelling good.
You.
Any further questions on the
proposed amendment is there any
objection to the adoption of the
amendment.
Seeing the Center direct your
amendment has been adopted to
the committee sub.
we're usually pretty reluctant
to have Committee subs with
amendment school on them.
With the with the committee's
permission Senator Lopez what
I'd like to do is propose we
just have a new committee set up
repairs up to that amendment
thank you and as long as Emily
guided in Emily you're gonna let
me know if you did not but if if
Center Lopez if you would please
work with the council service to
have a new committee steps to
prepared with that amendment all
right no I prefer to do that
myself thank you good yeah and
and same true with any other
amendments that may get proposes
afternoon.
All right center do you still
have the floor.
Mr chair I have to think that
thank you.
Mr chairman if I may and I
apologize but I would also like
to recognize retired justice
that the ninety minutes who is
also joined us today no good I
read I read her name recognized
earlier.
But I hadn't seen her face pop
up the second finder yes here
hello there Justin's.
I just I just want to see what
retirement look like I've I've.
It's been recommended to me most
mostly by my Senate colleagues
they're the ones who want me to
retire I think.
I'm doing well thank you the
retirement is great.
It is very nice to have you join
us today thank you for you.
All right committee members on
on the bills Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Lopez I do have a
question with regard to the
commission itself I couldn't
find anything Mr chair Senator
requiring any kind of geographic
diversity within the commission
in my missing it somewhere or is
it not present.
Mr chairman if I may
justice Vigil would you like to
answer.
I sure I think that would be a
fine criteria to include in the
bill I'm looking for the.
Representation I think it's on
section seven seven Mr chair.
Is that Senator Pirtle is that
the section that you're
referring to.
I believe.
I'm sorry I was looking at my
phone I'm trying to Mr chair
Senator keep up by who who am I
speaking with just as the hell I
think.
Yes just wanted to be we should
be clear with that Mr chair and
senator yes I believe is that
the
section on the regional offices
of CYFD or is that a different
section Mr chair Senator.
Justice.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle members
of the committee I was looking
at section seven in preparing my
response to your question about
whether there's a requirement
that membership on the
commission be a representative
of different geographical areas
of New Mexico my understanding
of your question is that you
would think that that would be a
positive attributes for the.
It Mr chair Senator Pirtle is
that the question and then I
believe that you would then be
inserted if that's the case
under sections seven unless
someone has a better suggestion
Mr chair Senator.
Mister chairman Senator if I
pirtle if I may madam if you go
to page this on page five.
this is for looking at some of
the diversity and I and I
appreciate your question
on on line six it does say of
course for two years two members
appointed by the speaker of the
house of representatives one
from each major political party
one from an urban area of the
state and one from a rural area
and also is the same qualifier
for their pro tem also to make
sure that there's
representation.
So I don't at that address is
your concern.
At this point Mister chairman
Senator Pirtle.
Senator I do appreciate that I
do think however that there
would be a possibility
or.
The membership could be
from one area I know in some
legis at some other.
Bills that have of four missions
we require that no more than so
many B. from one congressional
district or something along
those lines just to ensure that
we're getting Los crucis
regaining you know the northwest
southeast and northeast so that
way all of the issues and and
all of the advocates from
different areas do you have a
state
so that that's my real concern
is that we don't end up with a
board that's that's just
concentrated in in one area of
the state or or or in the larger
urban areas or even the rural
areas outside of the large urban
areas but that the entire state
be involved in this because I
think it is an important issue
in that it's important that we
hear all of the advocates and
and the issues from from
different areas that that those
issues and and say Eddy County
aren't the same in San Juan
County and and vice versa so
that's that's just something
that always grabs my attention
Mister chairman Senator Lopez as
you know we've worked together
on Senate rules and I I bring
this up all the time and you've
you've worked well with me
before and and we work well
together to make sure that we
have as much adversity on these
as possible so I just wanted to
bring that up I think there is
the opportunity for it and I
hope moving forward that the
speaker and the pros president
pro tem um when making their
appointments think of rural
areas as far or as divers were
spread out as possible so we do
have
those points of view on this
commission so I don't think
right now
I want to make a motion to to
change anything but maybe by the
floor Mr chair Senator Lopez we
can work together on on some
language that would even add
some extroverted if the
geographic diversity if you
would be admissible to that you
know that's something that we
could do or just move it as it
is if it's it's something that
you're you're not
Wanting to do Mister chairman
Senator but I don't hold out
anymore here it's just that's
that's where we're I'm currently
at Mr chair Senator.
And Mister chairman Senator
Pirtle I appreciate that and yes
for many rules right here is
that we are on a roll that was
always one of the been ways that
I always wanted to make sure our
boards and commissions were
Representative so thank you and
if I may Mister chairman we
could maybe look at it between
here if this bill does move out
of the committee before it goes
to the floor and see if there is
another there there may be some
areas where we could tweak of
making sure that there's
representation because of Mr
chairman you'll see just above
that in a couple lines further
above if there could be maybe
some some area for the the
justices when they make their
appointments to make sure their
sin divergence across the state
on there I appointments but I
don't want to make something on
the fly and I appreciate that
senator if we can work with
the commission of course justice
Vigil and and judge the lady to.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Lopez and and Justice be
held for for that you need.
Thank you.
Senator Pirtle anyone else in
the committee.
What are committee substitute as
its amended to become a new
committee substitute anyone
else.
I'm also note center Ivey Soto I
don't know if you're still there
looks like you are.
Senator Ivey Soto
Perhaps not.
All right the committee members
we had to do passed motion.
For a do not pass on Senate one
twenty seven to do pass on
committee substitute for Senate
bill one twenty seven and will
just show that to have been
amended in the committee to have
that eight point two version for
a committee substitute that do
pass motion is before the
committee at this time.
Is there any objection to the do
passed motion.
Seeing none.
The members are present in the
affirmative center you have a do
pass motion thank you thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee of thank you justices
and judges we appreciate you all
very much and parents thank you
this is wonderful thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Well for those who are joining
us live in late Center Campos is
asked to roll over is two ninety
one.
We will hear.
you Senator Hemphill on so that
sixty.
Next Senator one Senate sixty.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee it's an
honor to be here today
appreciate having the
opportunity to introduced Senate
bill sixty today which is
enacting the physical therapy
licensure compact I have my co
sponsor with me this morning or
this afternoon have been waiting
for a while but it was still
mourning but afternoon now
senator Kerry Hamblen and I have
some expert witnesses today
Janet Popp physical therapist
from and also the New Mexico
from the New Mexico chapter of
the American kichi Association
colonel Greg Myers director of
the New Mexico military based
planning and support TJ can
count well the compact
administrator Rick masters the
legal counsel and then physical
therapy compact commission and
superintendent Linda Trujillo
and after receiving some
feedback from committee members
we did request to have a
committee some drafted however
there's some language that
doesn't reflect the
recommendations that Senator
Duhigg had offered so.
I can go on and just explain the
the bill or I could be able to
Senator Duhigg to speak to the
community Committee sabb.
Mr Chairman when you Senator
want to tell us about the bill
generally we you have fifteen
minutes to do that and to
present the reason for the
committee so I think the best
idea would be free to perhaps
described the changes in the
committee so one was committee
separate
it was requested yesterday and
then submitted to the committee
members I think this morning.
In the meantime I'll be checking
with the staff to see whether
there's been adequate time to
get an analysis of any changes
in the sub that that really is
the my question for you Senator
is how much the Bill differs and
and I'll just let you know and
this is true percent are sold in
patient with us on Senate sixty
six my understanding is that
we're amendments on sent sixty
six shortly before the committee
began today as well too so when
we got amendments in committee
substitute shortly before a
committee sometimes I put you a
little bit later in the agenda
so that folks get a chance to
pass that around digested and
and the chance to read it.
And then ultimately I try and
assess whether there's been
adequate time for people to
fairly become familiar with what
that that change may be so why
don't you explain your bill to
us all although the clock
beginning now at three twenty
eight in the you'll have up to
fifteen minutes center.
Chairman of the bill and
addresses of the physical
therapy shortage in New Mexico
and it it's going to help
improve public access to
physical therapy services by
allowing physical therapist
providers to voluntarily opt
into a system of the patient
reciprocity so the shortage of
physical therapist has impacted
communities across New Mexico
and I know in our small county
run hospital in Grant County
where money is really tight they
were recently looking for a full
time physical therapist because
traveling therapists are more
expensive they finally found one
but the process for obtaining
this licensure in New Mexico
with so long and there is so
much red tape that that physical
therapist ended up going to
another state where the the
process is more efficient and so
we know that this really affects
our rural communities my son who
was born with a rare genetic
syndrome was diagnosed with
osteosarcoma when he was four
had a left leg amputation and
he's needed physical therapy.
Since he was an infant but it's
gone years without services
because of the shortage of
physical therapist in our state
and I've shared that story not
because it's unique to us but
because I work with families and
children in several schools who
have had the same been impacted
the same way so by not being
part of the compact New Mexico
has been at a competitive
disadvantage to recruit physical
therapist and all of New Mexico
border states are part of the
compact and with that I'd like
to turn it over to my co sponsor
senator Kerry Hamblen thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Craig bill just to go
through and I'm watching our
clock is I have done for twenty
years in my previous occupation
New Mexico is an island in this
era zona Colorado and Texas all
have to contact their twenty six
states in the PED compact no New
Mexico we have a shortage of
five hundred and sixty physical
therapists in the state that
means that twenty percent of New
Mexicans lack access to physical
therapists in Santa Fe Santa Fe
and Santa Fe counties there's a
shortage of ET physical
therapists and Lea and Eddy
County there is a shortage of
sixty one fiscal therapists in
Otero county a shortage of
thirty physical therapist in
Chavez curry to Bach and Lee
counties there's a shortage of
forty seven you get the idea the
only two counties that are in
the plus is Los Alamos with the
seven plus physical therapist
and Bernalillo with twenty three
otherwise all of the rest of our
counties are also facing a
shortage of physical therapist
and so we'd like to note that A.
R. P. New Mexico The New Mexico
physical therapy licensing board
New Mexico Public Health
Association all support to an a
number of other groups support
this on this compact reserves
each state regulatory and
disciplinary authority and so I
do think that it's a a very good
good a bill and and if I can if
I can throw to Janet Popp to go
ahead you can finish off we've
also still got several minutes
but Janet if you don't mind
speaking she's a physical
therapist and a member of the
American physical therapy
association to speak more about
the compact thank you Mr chair.
Hello good afternoon can you
hear me yes yes thank you I'm
I'm I'm actually done a Los
crucis
to celebrate my husband's
birthday we're gonna go hiking
also Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Janet Popp
I'm a physical therapist working
in home health and Albuquerque
area I live in Center o'neill's
district and I want to highlight
that we do have broad support
for this compact the physical
therapy licensing board has
endorsed the ledge the
legislation A. R. P. hasn't door
stood in New Mexico drug
overdose prevention Advisory
Council as well as the New
Mexico Public Health Association
this is not a scope of practice
bill the scope of practice is
determined by the location where
the patient receives care
and I I think that's you all
I'll wait till questions I just
want to highlight a couple of
points thank you.
Thank you Senator Hemphill back
to.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm trying
to see if there's another.
Expert witness here.
Is I'm John Blair available turn
it over to John Blair or.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill John
Blair is not in the waiting
room.
Okay superintendent Linda
Trujillo.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee it's nice to be here
today and have the opportunity
to share with you the
regulations licensing department
is very much in support of this
bill we believe that it reduces
barriers to licensing and not
only does it help those rural
communities but it helps
communities that are along the
border of New Mexico we've seen
a real issue particularly during
the pandemic of the response to
comment in that students are
having to travel outside to
other communities around the
around local state to stay with
family members while their
parents who have jobs that
require them to go into work
have to go to work and they need
to have care during the day
taking ensuring that there's
plenty of support there this for
our children is a high priority
for me the manager of the young
one year olds who have had to
have physical therapy and about
three months after his birth and
it's been incredibly critical
for him so we stand in strong
support of this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman we do have
colonel Greg Myers with us as
well I'd like to turn it over to
my expert witness colonel Greg
Myers thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Hemphill in
the Mr chair members the
committee I'm the director of
New Mexico office of military
base planning and support and in
my position I am also the
director of the military base
Planning Commission recently
they voted unanimous unanimous
leaders in voted in support of a
Senate bill sixty so today I
want to offer a unique
perspective on this legislation
on behalf of the commission we
strongly support this bill
because compacts represent the
strongest form of license
portability and especially
budget the spouses of active
duty members who were uprooted
and moved every two to three
years because of this
instability the unemployment
rate of military spouses is
consistently higher about twenty
five percent of those that are
employed thirty five percent or
underemployed meaning there
outside of their
chosen professions.
Many military spouses give up on
pursuing your career students
alike the bureaucratic process
season administrative burden and
barriers placed on the
individual as they move from
state to state this contact
allows military spouses to gain
employment in their professional
careers with minimal
administrative delay and they
can continue to advance in their
chosen professional careers at
the same time provide that
valuable.
Support to the local community
economy and their communities.
That should also be noted that
this legislation is being
tracked by the department
department of defense as they
look to states and see what
they're doing to improve the
quality of life for military
families this data is also used
in their strategic basing
decisions as well so the twenty
five year veteran I am grateful
to Senator Hemphill for caring
this important legislation and I
am grateful to the committee for
hearing thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman set the
committee said that Senator do
Hank had recommended included a
change and venue in a change in
their qualified immunity taxed
and I'm going to turn it over to
senator do had to speak to those
changes thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Hemphill
yet they're they're actually
they're not big changes to the
bill we have just tried to do in
this up in an effort to I know
Mr chair you like to have things
come out of judiciary is as
cleanly as possible
but that the sub actually was
not drafted correctly it it took
out the wrong language that
we're trying to take out so the
changes so I can offer the offer
this as an amendment to the
original bill instead of of
Center create Hemphill and and
etcetera Hamblen moving that the
committee sob and I can I can do
that now or or later whatever
you prefer Mr chair.
Are you on the Mr chair.
Thank you Sonya.
Well let me check with the
sponsor so were abundantly clear
the what you what you propose
Senator what is not to move the
committee substitute but rather
to go back to the original bill
and to address amendments on
that bill and I'm looking to the
sponsor and seeing head nodding
from Senator Hemphill so so
there is no are you telling us
you do not want to pursue the
committee subsequent work off
the original bill.
Mr chairman that's correct.
Well I would just got really
good at finding the Committee
substance and now go back to the
original version not a problem
at all.
C..
All right senator do do exhibit
young back on Original Bill.
Senate sixty Senator give
amendments.
To propose and and and Emily I I
think you might have that the
typed up version of my moment if
so if you wouldn't mind sharing
your screen.
but it's just that I'm clear
there are already amendments on
this bill out of health and
public affairs that right.
Mr chairman that's correct.
So Senator you're going to be
proposing amendments to the bill
as it has already been amended
in the preceding Committee sept
correct.
That's correct Mr chair.
So these amendments the first
one is on page twelve of
starting at line six this is the
venue provision for
for this bill I and so this
would make a change that would
end up reading except as to
judicial proceedings for the
enforcement of this compact
among other states individuals
may pursue judicial proceedings
related to this compact in any
New Mexico state or federal
court that would otherwise have
competent jurisdiction I and
then the rest of that paragraph
would still be there the
commission may waive venue and
jurisdictional defenses to the
extent it adopts a consensus to
participate in alternative
dispute resolution proceedings
this amendment would simply make
it so that New Mexicans if
there's a need for them to to
see you they could sue here in
New Mexico rather than going to
To wherever the principal office
of the of the commission would
be located which is how it reads
now.
And all I don't know if people
ask questions about that but
before I move on to the next
part or I can just go ahead.
Mr chair what's your preference.
They seem to be.
Just think and so I'd rather
take them one at a time Senator
we can act on them with one
motion with a I think prime
these as we discussed on.
Of the time the first currency
we're still dealing with the
first amendment on page twelve.
Catching up with you.
Fortunately the bill I've got
doesn't have the the the.
Hello the only version doesn't
have line numbers.
It on page twelve it is not
section eighty two okay and I I
know there are some versions
that have my numbers the version
I'm looking at is the marked up
version which has the amendments
from the preceding Committee for
whatever reason I'm not as as I
have line numbers but I think
Just give me a minute to read
through that one.
Okay we're doing there committee
members of questions on the
first paragraph of Senator
proposed amendments.
The one.
Sir Stuart.
So Mister chairman Senator
Duhigg.
So you stripe clients to six
through eight.
But that leaves the rest of that
sentence on line nine.
This the rest of the sentence
add to your number.
Two I don't think so.
And Mr chair Senator Stewart we
are so we speak we do strike the
words principal office of the
commission is located online
nine with this ammendment.
And so what would be left would
be.
The commission online line and
then the secretary that the next
three lines that follow which is
about the commission being able
to wave than you intersectional
defenses if if they're doing
mediation or arbitration or
something like that.
Right I see that now it wasn't
part of your number one it says
awkward way to do it but I see
it now.
Thank you.
Senator good question for you
the second paragraph of your
proposed amendment does that
relate to effectively the same
changes same idea around change
or they distinct.
Mr chair do you mean at number
one and number two in the mess
yes yes no it it's all part of
the same change all right so
let's consider them together.
Other committee members on what
our paragraphs one and two of
the proposed amendment of center
doing is there I'm looking to
see if I can get everybody on
the screen and I can't.
All is there anyone else pipe
pipe up if you're there you go
thank you Senator o'neill that
amendment.
Thank you thank you.
Yes thank you
Mr chair members and sponsor and
US senator during you know I
have to say a big picture.
You know senator Sanchez.
This committee historically is
not exactly been friendly to
compacts.
As one is sponsored by compact
and went down in flames for the
doctors I just I'm I'm
understanding that this is the
this ammendment is key to our
having this committee just
historically I'm not an attorney
so I'm not out into this
particular issue about qualified
immunity but if they're great
amendment
I do I think it's just
understanding that the notion
that you know all compacts are
different I mean the nursing
compact doctors compact noted
passengers to contact but not
the doctors would pass the
athletic trainers compacts so I
do know that that each one is
different and I just really
appreciate this amendment
because it really goes to the
historical reluctance of Senate
Judiciary to go with compacts
that's all I'm gonna say thank
you.
Thank you senator Neal.
Many members of the case Senator
Ivey Soto yes next.
Yes thank you very much Mr
chairman Mr chairman I was just
wondering I'm not sure I'll put
it jurisdiction is the right.
Raced to use here.
Our office will be jurisdiction
are subject matter.
Of course also proposed
protection because level subject
line jurisdictions not.
So you know I think I think
I think I think probably the
subject matter jurisdiction that
were that we're talking about is
is.
Is that is that our court with
we try to put it back about this
budget.
What we're doing Senator Ivy
Soto I'm gonna probably disagree
with you but let's take a look
at it sing Act.
Chairman of that.
Are very much about that.
Decisions about how the
competent jurisdiction is good
if you go the issue here is
going to be I don't think it's
gonna be so much subject matter
jurisdiction as personal
jurisdiction because it's a
personal jurisdiction it would
conclude compelled somebody from
outside the state to be subject
to jurisdiction of the New
Mexico court which seems to be
the purpose of the amendment in
other words the amendment is
that without the amendment the
only way you could the act in
connection with the compact
would be getting hauled into the
court where their principal
offices that work with that do
you know what do you know where
that is Senator Hemphill do know
where their offices around.
Mr chairman I don't know where
their offices are at.
Yeah.
So you know look at some PO box
in Kentucky well that's the
thing is with your with your
left for my luck it would be
Kentucky as opposed to you know
whole wire something but the LFC
without the amendment if you're
in New Mexico and in your
subject to action of this
commission you gotta go to
Kentucky get a lawyer in
Kentucky move yourself to a
hotel there and defend yourself
in Kentucky.
With the amendment you have that
right here in New Mexico and I
think Center the issue is
personal jurisdiction over
another words what is the
jurisdiction of compelling them
to be in New Mexico or come to
New Mexico but I think I think
just saying competent
jurisdictions probably the
broader category right again I
guess what flows really it's
it's point out.
When I I guess remind and I
would yield you on a Mr chairman
on this is would be instead of
the war have would be otherwise
be a court all.
Operators section but but if you
think it's fine without the help
of.
No I like you language thank you
language.
Act that would otherwise be a
court of.
Mr chair Senator I'm fine I'm
fine with that.
That was you Senator doing.
I'm sorry given my screen what
I'm saying I'm not seeing
anybody spaces I'm.
It was it was it was Senator do
heck yes I'm I'm.
Senator we're on your proposed
amendments so you you're
accepting of the proposed change
by Senator Ivey Soto Mr chair
yes I am all right very good
center Ivey Soto anything more
on the proposed amendment and
we're looking right now only
progress one and two of the
proposed amount.
I'm I'm I'm I or the other west.
Committee members at any others
with questions on the proposed
amendment etcetera more that I
am.
Yes Sir to enhance.
I am but they can't hello there
Senator Moores what we do for
you.
channel in my high school law
degree right now and as senator
Neville Neil mentioned that
there was so that nursing
compact there was two
bipartisan.
Owners to that so that compact
to that we were bipartisan out
forty to to and what that vote
but some the question I have is
the some members actually gets
into the actual language of the
compact and money my
understanding of the previous
compacts is that we were told
that they were all think about
that we allowed to actually
change the language of the
compacts long lot join someone
address that if we are to your
amendment compact language in
this thing my understanding is
we are take it or leave it.
Mr chair.
So let me let me turn to center
doing wants to respond to that
but I just think Center Moores
you know it sounds like
everybody's got post traumatic
stress having carry various
compacts in the past yes and I
appreciate that
I'll just tell you that.
That at least from my
perspective we approach compacts
on a case by case basis so
you'll recall that prior
compacts we've seen required New
Mexico to pay into fees New
Mexico to give over authority of
of our state laws interstate
rights in favor about a state
commission some of them went
very very broad and some of them
would have given greater
authority of of outside
commissions within our state and
and you're right center Moores
and Center o'neill and others
many of us have resisted that.
there has also been arguments
made usually by Sanchez who say
my compact must be inviolate and
and cannot be amended and if you
do so it's no longer a compact
and then we heard that argument
by Sanchez before in a way to
kind of push back on amendments
or substitution and I'll just
tell you that lease in the years
I've been here the legislature
has always recognized its
ultimate role to pass the laws
in the state of New Mexico and
and not to have other states or
any other organization dictate
to us to take it or leave it
proposition in your right center
more sometimes when the when the
sponsor or those groups of that
it's take it or leave it we've
often times that will leave it
leave it and so so that's that's
my expressly compacts but
they're doing you want to
respond to that question as well
to.
Mr chair I would just point out
that this this exact same
compact with a changes very
similar to the ones that I'm
making here Dr I believe in
Montana have with no problem and
they they haven't had any
problem with making as strict as
and so being part of the overall
compact thank you for that Mr
chair of of sitter do it can be
are asked the Sanchez the former
representatives.
Probably is not happy to be back
in our committee up to eight
years to explain is a small take
your reader compacts.
Mr chair Senator are I'm going
to.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator for that question we're
definitely our motivation is to
get this compact past and
whatever compromises we need to
make a still being able to be
part of the compact we're we're
happy to do which is why I have
been working with Senator Duhigg
to come up with some compromises
and I'll turn it over to Senator
Hamblen to to speak to that as
well.
Absolutely thank you Mr chair
and senator Morris I we have TJ
can't well who is also able to
speak about the origin we were
talking about jurisdiction TJ do
you mind chiming in about that.
Yes so I am the contact
administrative for the physical
therapy compact mission we have
that review the language or
legal counsel review the
language
and for the venue the that's in
consideration before the
committee right now
it that has been agreed to that
that would be a change it would
be acceptable to the compact as
we said you know it is very
difficult to amend any compact
because it is a contract between
the states and therefore
difficult to have one state have
different language in the other
but this is been reviewed by the
commission legal counsel and
they said that that is that is
appropriate would be acceptable
and for the upcoming discussion
around that the qualified
immunity I believe we have
additional language that would
be instead of striking and tire
paragraph there would be some
additional language that could
be added that I think would be
breathable as well so again that
it is difficult to do but we are
willing and then able to work
with the committee to make sure
that we can get this compact
passed.
Mr chair Senator superintendents
on the amendment still T. J. U.
S. Census as a compact when
states this one of those
compacts that has to be
gradually improved versus wants
one but we don't.
Approval I know it does not A.
B. question Grassley proved it
just needs to be enacted by each
individual state's legislature
we have twenty nine states that
enacted already the commission
is up in operating and so by
passing by enacting this
legislation ultimately New
Mexico would be able to become
part of the compact
automatically so Mister chair
there was never your regional
states that this contacted not
receive Russell Google or the
constitution.
The V. compacts are allowed
under the.
Underneath the umbrella for
compacts you know throughout the
state that similar to other
compacts that are there that the
thunder Compaq Law precedent
that they're allowed to have a
compact just like any of the
other
professional licensure compacts
you simply have to pass it by
state law does not need
congressional approval in order
to are going into enactment.
Thank you Mr thank you senators
thank you super to.
Thank you in the.
The superintendent count well I
personally appreciate you being
was there where where is the
commission's headquarters.
We're headquartered in Alexander
Virginia.
Okay.
Right.
Questions.
Senator shooter he would like to
speak she's just offhand right
and we're still on the amendment
so Senator
Hammond recognizing
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee I just
wanted to say that we we we
actually think the amendment
make the compact better in that
they do protect New Mexico and
that they keep us in the ability
of the jurisdiction that we have
and I did want to say to
Senator Moores that I was
actually looking forward to
seeing this committee today and
especially here.
Now are superintendents we know
that supply so I appreciate
that.
We're still in progress wanted
to Center Dicks proposed
amendments or any other
discussion on those proposed
amendments.
Thanks seeing not is there any
objection to adoption of
paragraphs one and two of the
proposed amendments.
Right to Senate bill sixty are
those moments are shown adopted
by the members present Senator
do ich the remainder of your
amendments.
Thank you Mr chair so the
remainder of the amendments
address there's a currently
qualified immunity provision in
this bill on page twenty.
Starting at line nine so it
would it would remove but the
worst qualified immunity from
that the title of that section
and then remove the entire first
section that that describes
qualified immunity in the bill
and and this was a eight the
exact same change was made to
this compact in Montana when
they passed in two thousand
seventeen and and they've had no
no problems.
With the compact as a result of
that change.
Senator so I understand are used
are you effectively striking
what would be section gene.
the.
You know I.
Mr chair the
That the paper copy I have is
missing page twenty.
Let me.
Find it really quickly.
Mister money is also Mr.
It's not just one issue.
Mr chair it it would not strike
all of section G. from section
G. the title section G. it would
only strike the words qualified
immunity and then it would
strike the first subsection
under G. so G. one.
And then it would remember that
the next two subsections under
G. that that address our defense
and indemnification.
You're on mute Mr chair.
Great questions on that proposed
amendment than this these are
going to be paragraphs
is it three and four and five of
your those members that right
that's correct Mr chair okay
committee questions on that a
proposed amendment Sir Moores
you Mr thank you center I don't
have that H. so so Senator so I
assume you're member just said
we're just we're striking
qualified immunity
from the US
R. J. white.
Mr chair Senator because it
imposes and unreasonably high
standard on folks who are
potentially damage and and
seeking to redress those issues
it beyond the normal standard of
of reasonable care reasonable
care is is the status quo this
wooden at impose a much higher
standard on folks of
intentional or willful or wanton
misconduct that's the kind of
stuff that that usually reserved
for things like punitive damages
but not just for for bringing a
claim in general a reasonable
care is the standard for
bringing claim in general and so
this would restore that for
those purposes so Mr Senator
this is about malpractice suits
against our physical therapists.
The again I wanted language from
me to my face my bills mission
that page open talked about
about practice lawsuits against
this will be our first.
Mr Cochran all of the lawsuits
against the four.
Mr chair Senator yes you're
exactly right this would be
against members of the
commission if if for some reason
something something happens that
for claim to rise against them
okay so this is for so Mr chair
Senator why would they qualify
under.
Thank you so it's not
malpractice it's four four what
the state for our state for
correct.
Thank you thank you Mr thanks.
Thank you senator Morris.
Any other questions on these
proposed amendments Senator
Duhigg is there any objection
the adoption those amendments Mr
chair Senator Baca try to get
your attention.
Not seeing him on my screen but
thank you for pointing out
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair we can
presume operator kind of move up
the committee members if you can
may not be possible you may have
mall up there but if we can move
up on the screen hello helpful
for me thank you Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator a
question about the qualified
immunity may have address do you
address it and some of the other
parts here so so this qualified
immunity and this is one of the
parts Mr chair that was senator
Neil was talking about typically
would come to these compacts in
the removal of the qualified
immunity immunity believe it or
not would be the item that was
not negotiable and would remove
you from the compact so
This would not cause any issue
with that with us being involved
with the compact is it did you
are a state that I didn't hear
you.
Mr chair Senator Baca my
understand especially from the
experience of Montana where they
they did maybe the six same
amendment it has not been an
issue for them is that it would
not be an issue grant either.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir Baca meeting also
Baca.
The other committee members of
questions.
All right that leads it to me
centers let me tell you how this
concerns me.
it's not just all of section G.
which caused me a lot of concern
but you've got a right section
G. with one other section money
but let's just take a look at
what section G. does for a
minute.
Section G. that the Senator
proposes to strikes a program
one.
creates an immunity.
For members of the commission
from lawsuit either individually
or in their official capacity
for any damage loss or injury so
they're immunize their which
means let's say that somebody on
the commission sexually harassed
someone or or committed some
other.
Violation of civil rights so
what they be immune from
lawsuit that should cause us
some concern and then we look at
subparagraph to it says the
commission shall depend any
member in any civil action in
intending to impose liability on
the commission and then the
paragraph three says the
commission shall indemnify every
officer executive and so forth
so again even if an officer
executive recommendation commits
someone awful actor wrongdoing
the commission is going to
indemnify that conduct here and
then and I tell you got to read
this with one other section of
the bill which is if you go back
to page eighteen.
What is my page eighteen it may
not be here as I'm sorry that
would be subparagraph have
three.
In the end this is a this is a
big concern of mine you all were
wondering well how come this
this compact may be getting
easier pass than others well you
gotta dig in a little bit so if
you look at paragraph have three
of the bill money read some
about page eighteen well it may
not number the same as all of
yours it begins it right there
the commission may let me.
Is it do you all find out.
The sensors as the commission
may levy and collect an annual
assessment from each member
state.
let me stop there the commission
gets the tax the state of New
Mexico.
an annual.
It is said or impose fees on
other parties cystic over the
costs of operations and
activities of the commission.
Which would be the
indemnification which would
include indemnification a bit
ago so the so the commission
let's let's take a worst case
scenario that's what lawyers
have a tendency to do an officer
of the commission goes out has
you too many drinks gets into an
auto accident kills somebody.
and now and they did it at a
party Christmas party for the
commission of the person who's
killed by that officer brings a
lawsuit and we've agreed to
indemnify the officer and the
commission and we've also agreed
by this compact to allow the
commission to impose to levy and
collect an annual assessment on
the state of New Mexico.
I don't know where that money
comes from
under this compact but
essentially we're we're green to
a law that would give the
commission that right to assess
us as a state whatever the
commission deems necessary to
cover the cost of their
operations and activities and it
says the total not sufficient to
cover its annual budget as
approved from which there is not
revenue provided whether sources
then it goes on to say this can
be allocated based on a formula
This this is not.
Two on comedies compacts but
usually what we get the cost of
our requests resolve this which
is we are giving this commission
the authority to effectively
collect an annual assessment
from the Santo I have no idea
what that amount is I don't know
with that amount is five
thousand twenty thousand fifty
thousand which can well may be
able to tell me what that is
right now in other states I
don't know
but my concern is giving any
outside commission essentially
an open checkbook.
Of the right to essentially SSS
and anytime any year for any
amount as the commission deems
appropriate so let me ask a it
didn't and I don't mean to get
apart also consider do its
amendment.
But I think that it's important
to kind of consider that
amendment in conjunction with
all of that subparagraphs for
indemnification and qualified
immunity and defense and then
together with some paragraphs
have which gives the commission
of the financing levy and
collection rights against the
state so there's a lot in there
that I throughout you Senator
Hemphill considering Hamblen but
the like a senator Byrd both
first time in Senate Judiciary
so we might as well we might as
well give it to a all
so what Mr chair help me to feel
comfortable that we're not
giving the commission a blank
check against the state of New
Mexico and.
Mr chair in helping a much is
going to cost the state of New
Mexico.
Sure thing Mister chair I think
Mr Cantwell can go ahead and
answer some of your questions
and your concerns sure.
Hi you Mr chairman and members
the committee are
the compact law does grant the
authority for the commission to
levy a fee however I'd note that
that the would have to be
approved by a majority of the
commission members each state
has a delegate on that
commission right now there is
zero fee that's been charged
since the commission's been
existences twenty seventeen the
intent of the commission is to
continue not to charge a
testament on any any state board
the organization is currently
operating under a line of credit
in order to meet all its
operational a budgetary needs
and in the the media future
intends to collect that as we do
one every compact Commission.
Privileges issued we collect the
fee from the individual and that
will be help us become self
sustaining over time and
ultimately I not need to charge
any fee on our you know to any
state that's a member of the
compact so that is the intent
again no fees charged right now
if there was ever to be need to
be a fee in the future that
would be something that would be
voted on by a majority of the
members of the compact to each
state having a delegate as part
of our compact.
Thank you it's good to have you
discount well let me thank you
for being here we could so we
see losses compacts it's usually
pretty rare that we have
somebody in your position
Representative the the
commission that that is is
managing or operating the
commission the for the for the
members who are newer to the to
the Senate in our concern here
is this the this commission is a
private organization it's not a
governmental entity my rate
discount well.
It's a governmental entity
correct we we are meeting
consisting of an independent
that body consisting of the
delegates from each one of the
state's.
So so that this organization is
treated as a governmental
entity.
We have the ability to.
To focus to be able to
legislative rules and policies
for the administration of the
compact long but it is not a
it's not an entity within a
governments cracked is it is
outside of a government
organization but it is that
essentially a independent board
made up of all individual state
delegates.
Yeah that's the way
it usually to these compact
organizations as I say I speak
it is essentially is a private
may be a non profit but none the
less a private organization
which has a budget has offices
has staff has Valerie's and
other expenses and and what I'm
always cautious when they have
the authority to generate the
revenue to cover those expenses
by by unlimited
law imposing a state I
appreciate your time members
count was the state would have
to approve that but it's still
caused me some pause you said
you're currently operating
against a line of credit what is
the balance on that line
creating.
I in the I don't have it on the
top of my head but we have
several hundred thousand dollars
that is been through support of
a partnership with the
federation state boards visible
therapy it is not working to
help get us off the ground if
you will and we intend to play
that line of credit back once we
do receive to have a positive
cash flow right the reason I ask
that question is because we're
getting into a compact again no
disrespect this is the way a lot
of things get started and get
things get started but but we're
joining a compact with an
organization that is already
filed in and that whatever that
amount of money and you
describing it as several hundred
thousand dollars whatever that
is
and and I'm not again being
critical of that is that we need
to do that with with wide dies
of the bill getting into a group
that's that's in that those
money and has the right to is
yes the state on now what I
understand the agency Hemphill
the district can well be saying
is that they intend to.
Resolve that that and and
generate the revenues by fees
imposed on members and I want to
understand is this is this
individual physical therapist is
that the idea behind this nice
everyone not in their heads my
question is if that's true why
have not the keys that have been
imposed on physical therapists
from the twenty some states that
are already part of the COVID
why have those fees not of
created a positive cash flow and
why allow the commission to then
operate in debt.
Mr chairman and members who may
I happy answer that so we are
again slowly growing so we since
twenty seventeen out there's
been ten there was the initial
ten states or part of the
compact into middle twenty
eighteen is when we actually
started issuing compact
privileges and over that period
of time states have joined on or
able to become active in the
compact and so as we build
number states that are actually
issuing compact privileges and
accepting them again realizing
they don't all happen right away
I'm it does take some time for
those bills to be are those laws
to be implemented it's then we
will we are gaining ground and
exponentially growing the number
of individuals that are
participating within the compact
over every year essentially I
can tell you again roughly in
twenty odd nineteen for instance
we had around twelve hundred
compact privileges issued in
twenty and twenty twenty it was
up more than twenty four hundred
compact privilege issue and
again by the end of this year we
intend to be close to five
thousand issued and so we get to
roughly our number to meet our
operational budget around six
thousand compact privileges
which will be well within the
amount of time that we would
have for runaway in terms of the
line of credit that we currently
have existing.
Well again I commend you on your
growth in your success and it
seems like you're you're
managing things well again I
hope the the the committee
understands my concern about
approving a compact that allows
for an annual assessment from
each member state
it is and I understand the
imposition perhaps of fees of
physical therapist to be long to
this compact I'd like to know
what those fees are in when what
physical therapist New Mexico
could expect to be charge as
these fees but but I'm hesitant
to the degree to a compact for
New Mexico as a state agrees to
be obligated so for those of
those charges but back to the
amendment to stay on the on the
matter of the amendment Senator
Hemphill I hope that.
Senator do it when you're
looking at your amendment that's
before us now that will look at
all of really subsection G. I
really have a lot of concerns
with all of that subsection
which goes beyond just the
qualified immunity but also
provides for indemnification in
defense of hope the employees
and board members but I think
I'll go back to committee
members and I've seen a number
of hands it's Senator Ivy Soto
with a hand and whether others
of twenty to recognize words
were really just trying to stay
focused on the memo but I know
I've taken us away from that a
little bit so Senator Ivey Soto
you're the only ten I see I
believe.
I just thank you Mr chairman
actually Mr chairman I I
actually wanted to.
Go to the issue of the fees in
that subsection on our the
paragraph to read with a super
rich.
Well Senator let me come back to
that on that issue because it
lets state the strand stay with
standard due dates proposed
amendment even though I knew
what we're guilty for getting us
way off of that but I hope folks
understand why I thought it was
important to talk about that
amendment in a broader context
so one Center doings amendment
any further discussion.
Your any objection to be
adoption of the remaining part
of center do X. amendment.
Right seeing will show that
amendment has been adopted in
full then to the bill Center
doing you would still have the
floor anything further at this
time.
Mr chair and I'll just mention
the reason I'd only taken out
the qualified immunity portion
of G. was because I saw that in
Montana where they did that they
had left those other questions
and I don't know if they left
those and for a reason
So that's but but nothing more
with that Mr Mr Cantwell the
tell everyone that New Mexico
things that smarter than
Montana.
Of.
Senator Ivey Soto Senator Moores
no I just want to serve what
we're following Montana's lead
I'm sure they have a lot of laws
speaker talked.
Senator Ivey Soto thanks very
much Mr chairman
I would like to propose
something that hopefully Montana
will provide as inspirational
for them that would be on page
nineteen.
line eleven.
Which is the place where it says
the question may loving
collected then assessment.
R. I would propose actions
beginning of that sentence would
serve the words up as a
condition of continued
membership our.
So that our only obligation is
an obligation if you want to
continue to be a member.
Where we language and what's
language center one more time
languages on page nineteen
online alone.
After that you get a sentence
insert as a condition of
continued membership I'm.
Senator is a no win Hamlin's on
the proposed madam.
Mister chairman Senator I
believe that would be a friendly
amendment.
Other committee members with
questions on the proposed
amendment.
There Moores on the amendment
this on the Memons chair Senator
Ivy Soto I am a member of one of
those constitutionally created
compacts interstate commission a
higher education and so would
your amendment The New Mexico to
Hey that we would no longer be
part of this compact immediately
and I would just point out that
inevitably every year I get a
email from someone at the
commission.
State New Mexico as a rate it's
it's a use for the
and
Usually tight fiscal years it's
usually a couple of years ago by
so this would be an automatic
trigger were no more longer part
of the compact to say our the
without the great supervision of
the current superintendent the
bills on time we would all
backstraps my compacts in of a
fiscal year.
Mr chair Senator.
Mr chair Sir Moores yes I want
to thank you.
Center Bach on the proposed
amendment etcetera Baca.
Thank you Mr charges one make
sure looking at the proper
section here so this is a this
is nineteen page nineteen line
eleven subsection three is that
correct a subsection three that
is correct paragraph three
substitution okay thank you.
Senator Baca.
Senator o'neill thank you and I
just honestly Mr chair members.
I don't understand why we just
don't strike the whole thing
Gigi doesn't seem to be that
important to the I mean it's
this is kind of active faith
we're supposed to plug into I
share your concerns chairman
survive this it's like but why
is this even here I mean we're
act you know it's it's it gets
to the fact that like yes I do
love this bill but it's not the
intent of the bill of the
actuality in this actuality in
subsection need really bothers
me so I don't understand why
we're gonna then G. one we just
take it out.
So Senator o'neill let me
recognize you after we've acted
on Senator Ivy Soto is proposed
amendment he's not in need right
now he is in subsection three
but but you heard my position on
need and I would probably
support your proposed amendment
at that time we get to it but to
keep me straight and then
getting myself confused let's
stay with Senator Ivey Soto is
proposed amendment and then
questions on that part of the
bill committee members with
questions on that section.
All right well I actually think
it's a good suggestion it would
it would address my concern.
That I have expressed which is
that we would be giving the
commission the authority to levy
us at any time as a state and
and this would as center Ivey
Soto and Senator Baca point out
really give us the chance to
walk away so if we we we were
impose levies a state we can
just say no we don't play
anymore and of course then we
assess the value of belonging to
the commission as senator Morris
does with this obviously re
paces up dues every couple years
because he believes that it's
important to maintain that
membership but like you said of
course there's plenty group that
I joined and then I dropped when
I don't see the value in
belonging to that in the Senator
Ivey Soto this proposed
amendment gives us that
opportunity of the of the
commission came back at that
we're letting you two hundred
fifty thousand dollars that New
Mexico because we got to make up
but that we're getting the
bank's kapala in our line of
credit and we we want the states
to to pony up we can just say no
thanks goodbye.
Then I think that's that's
probably why it's so I support
the amendment other committee
members would have not we're
ready for about sentiment Sir
Bach on the amendment.
Yes sorry for having to come
back to me here but I just was
looking at something that may
conflict with that and that's on
the on on page twenty seven
article ten of the dispute
resolution process if you go
down to the page twenty online
twenty four
it talks about a default I would
think something like that would
constitute a default if you
decided not to make a payment in
which case it would send a
written notice of the default
and they could kick you out of a
of the of the membership if you
were in the fall but according
to that paragraph it doesn't
mean that you don't have to
still pay it off is the actually
gives gives gives you an
obligation and and then what
legal right of action it looks
like a to to go ahead and
collect any monies they're owed
so you stop paying for year two
years whatever those fees are it
looks like they can they can
terminate your membership but it
looks like the
the the fee would remain intact
and that would.
Then find a cause of action for
them so maybe the the sponsor of
the the bill Sanchez could maybe
explain that.
Mr chair if I if I could I would
like to give.
Colonel Myers an opportunity to
speak because I think there's
some things we're talking about
here in this discussion that he
would be able to clarify as to
what was working in other states
and and I do know that we do
need to keep and section G.
parts of section G. otherwise it
would probably kill the compact
and and remove us from having
this opportunity of our
communities throughout the state
of having access to physical
therapist so I would like to see
Mr Myers would be willing to
speak again if you would come
back hopefully he still round
looks like yes thank you Mr
chair.
Mr Chairman a Senator Hamblen
Right that I I don't have the
expertise to be able to speak to
your specific question I
apologize.
Well I'm I'm if I could along
the lines of Center Bacchus
question I guess I would inquire
the Sanchez or Mr Cantwell
whether or not there are
defaults and our non monetary
in nature as I read that it
sounds like a default could be
the some duty that the state is
required to do that that failed
to.
Would that be the case or or
not.
I'm sorry that's a directed to
Mister Capwell.
Mr chairman members committee
the default would relate to
several different departments
that the state would have to be
under so not not solely a
financial default but
requirements that would relates
specifically to the ability for
the compact to to carry out its
responsibilities that are
several other listed within the
the compact itself as far as
providing for example data
information to the the compact
commission making sure that
there are requirements in place
in order to ensure that the the
licensees and all of those
qualified are eligible to get
the contact center.
That so I based on that I don't
I don't know that there's a
there's a conflict between the
two percent.
I think it's good cash flow Mr
chair
at the direct conflict with the
I. I believe it in my
interpretation of that there
could be a conflict quick
there's feeding the fees to and
then termination is rendered of
the state and now the state has
to pay these fees that could be
passed to that we don't know
what they are yet
and so or you know they have
been levy but they could be
levied I guess my my other I
guess that's related I know we
are I know we're on the
amendment still but the can you
point to somewhere in this
compact for the state has a
termination option a similar to
the the board of the commission
because I I see in here that
they can simply terminate all
right write a letter and
terminate membership of the
state does it does the state
have so of a similar reciprocity
to the commission in here or is
that just a kind of a one sided
proposition.
Mr chair Senator Baca that I
believe would be a question
either Mr can't well or maybe Mr
here might be able to answer.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Senator Baca I am not
sure about that so I apologize
but I'm not prepared to answer
that kind of a legal technical
question but I will just point
out that the PT Act this is an
amendment to the PT Act and the
PT Act has the legislative it's
being extended right now to
Senate bill one forty five but
that is like the six year it's
still twenty seven twenty twenty
seven and twenty twenty eight if
Senate bill one forty five goes
through but this act always on a
schedule to fund that.
And Mr chair members committee I
can point out to article in
article eleven the aircraft C.
I. it does have the opportunity
for any member state may
withdraw from this compact by
enacting stature repealing the
compact there is an opportunity
for the state to withdraw.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for that answer I was I I was
that's kind of what I was
wanting to point out so we would
have to have an off of a
legislative act basically to to
terminate membership within this
compact however the alternative
of that if the if the contact is
if they're if the commission is
done with the member state it's
really just writing a letter of
I I'm nothing more I I
appreciate the answers in the
help understanding.
What was Mr chair Mister here is
is we are wanting to step in
here now okay I say ways your
raise your hand so I'm here
yeah.
We're still on the amendment.
To subsection F. three.
Any other committee members on
that proposed amendments and
rightly so does amendment.
Is there any objections the
adoption of that amendment.
Are you saying then that amount
was adopted Emily I trust you
have that amendment.
Inserting a language at the
beginning of paragraph have
three.
Yes I have a thank you so you
are very good that amendment is
adopted okay back to the a bill
with those amendments adopted
other Canadian questions for
action.
Senator knew what was going to
go to you on your earlier.
Comments was senator Mr chairman
members are I would kick it back
to you testing of this current
much better than I do but you
raise concerns in that
subsection January I can't vote
for this bill with that kind of
uncertainty in this sort of act
face and and so forth so would
you would you speak to that
because you're better with us
honestly you're a lawyer.
Well I I have expressed my
concerns would subsidize section
G. I listen to other committee
members who may try and allay my
concerns I did hear the sponsor
to say that I believe are the
sponsors to say that striking
need in its entirety would be on
on friendly amendment to the
Sanchez and and whether
interpretation may be cause for
rejecting New Mexico's
participation but I'm very
hesitant to have an agreement to
defend any officer in any civil
action for liability.
And as I pointed out earlier
that could include lawsuits
against the executive director
an officer or since your any
employee so so we would be
agreeing to defend and indemnify
of course means that we would
agree to pay any damages any
award against any officer
executive director any employee
of the commission for anything
that they do
me Madam any judgment for any
alleged error error or any
alleged act error or omission
it's of course it's qualify
within the scope of the
appointment of the commission
and duties.
But but I I have some concerns
about that section
go to the Sanchez and make sure
that I understand they're
they're thinking that
eliminating that entirely would
be fatal to the to the bill but
I I am like you Senator o'neill
could not support the bill with
that language still in there I
also could not support the bill
with that language in article
ten and I'll just jump over to
the oversight dispute resolution
I think that was raised by
Senator Baca good good
observations there under
subsection Hey.
I'll note that if you look at
subsection Hey there as well as
other parts of that some same
section couple of things if you
look at subsection.
B..
I'm gonna say look this is this
is article ten.
Section B..
If I may Representative will be
trying to define my question to
you all can just.
But I I know throughout here
there's a prevailing party
recovery of litigation fees
including attorney fees.
Also that's throughout here so
give New Mexico got sued for non
performance it could be liable
for attorney fees I note also in
subsection C. because the
current Forsman said the
commission may initiate legal
action.
in the district US District
Court for the district of
Columbia also DC for the federal
District Court where the
commission has its offices which
we're told is Virginia to
enforce compliance with the
compact.
You for damages and once again
that section has a provision for
attorney's fees so New Mexico
could be hold him to court in
Washington DC or Virginia by the
compact by participating in the
compact in
frankly most states don't want
to get hauled into other states
to to in two lawsuits over
contracts but this would give
the commission that right.
I'll note on paragraphs B..
The Four says a member state
that has been terminated is
responsible for all assessments
and I'm not here all obligations
and liabilities that were
incurred through determination
so that's a concern because even
though we could get ourselves
out of the agreement our
obligations and liabilities up
until that point in time remain
our obligations and liabilities
so of the person who is
responsible for
the civil rights violation of
sexual harassment of the civil
rights action a tort action
personal injury wrongful death
at center of New Mexico could
find itself still liable even
once we got out so I'm I've said
what I for reasons probably
expect clear to all in the
present form I probably would
not support the compact in the.
The concerns that Senator
sponsors of heard about.
Our inversion to compacts
continue for me in any event so
Senator Baca and then Senator
Moores and thank Sen course.
Senator boppers.
Thank you Mr chairman and
I I I a my evaluation of article
ten is just exactly that as you
pointed out I was just going to
point out article twelve as well
it's just as a technical matter
we have a basically that's as
severability clause which really
doesn't need to be in there so
the whole article could pretty
well be stricken which is age
thirty to top of page thirty
three
with that with that Mr chair
less Senator Moores has a more
comment I would move to table.
The tabling motion is not
debatable but I members
reluctant to use a table in
motion to cut off debate from
somebody who's been recognized
before the motion was made
messes that a chilling effect on
the debate so I will go to
Senator Moores and then I'll
come back Senator Baca on a
motion center more.
Mr chair I was just going to
pontificate for what you all
heard me talk about with the
challenges of health care New
Mexico that compacts in school
practice aren't the answer you
all heard it many times I'll be
happy to sit down with Senator
am one the US concealed in the
or the heck out of them all my
sites on well I appreciate what
they're doing here it's not the
solution what really is a only
New Mexico's health care and I
will lost four of senator Baucus
previous motion.
All right we're on a motion by
Senator Baca the tabling motion
the motion is not debatable
Emily on the motion please.
Yes.
Now.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
No.
Thank you yes.
Senator about this yes.
Seventy two the table Senator.
The Senators regrettably the
bill is tabled hi this committee
thank you for good debate
discussion yes chairman and
members of the commission thank
you so much Committee thanks for
the conversation thank you.
Thank you.
All right.
Senator souls on Senate sixty
six even patient thank you.
For that.
Important.
Yes okay.
Thank you I I I reminder to the
committee but the good
suggestions of president pro tem
store we started a little early
today
with the idea of working a
little late today and avoiding a
meeting tomorrow or Sunday so we
try to be nice to give you one
last weekend before we find
ourselves in the final crunch I
think we can get done whether
agenda but we'll see how it goes
US sixty six on our souls.
Thank you Mr chair out we had a
very long discussion on the bill
with the amendment very well
prepared we were asked to go
back into a committee set up
which we did in implementing all
of the pieces that were in
Senator Ivey Soto does amendment
and such for the committee set
up and then also an additional
piece to that was added that we
felt did not change the the
basic intent of this bill and so
we had all of the public input
in the past we have done what
you asked we are here or
whatever wherever you are with
the Senate bill sixty six my co
sponsors Senator Duhigg has been
working closely with Senator Ivy
Soto on the amendment the
addition the amendment and in
getting the committee seven so
with that we are ready to
proceed.
Thank you senator McKim thank
you for your patience I I want
to make sure that I looking at
the right the.
Document and I I did receive an
email.
Our committee staff this
afternoon.
in my my email came in at three
o'clock with the with the
attachment.
I mean this is identified as
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute percent sixty six it
is document two two zero one
three four point three so first
of all in my looking at the most
recent version of of the bill in
this committee.
Mr chair yes you are and it was
originally sent out to the
entire committee I yesterday I
think it was just recessed out
for everyone's convenience today
over a good okay thank you for
clarifying that in the.
So you are there are my
understanding either Senator are
there additional amendments
being proposed to this committee
substance.
Mr chair yes there are two
additions
apart from those that we
discussed when this bill was
that before and this was a an
amendment that Senator Ivy Soto
was going to make that was a
friendly amendment so we went
ahead and wrapped into the saab
just try to keep everything as
as clean as possible one of
those is.
And it very quickly.
It is changing adding a
definition to the definition of
installment loan in the
installment loan act.
I'm doing a search for
installment loan which is a okay
if you go to page twelve of that
committee so
starting at.
We change we're continuing.
And.
Second Canadian style.
Point three version.
What this does that's different
from from what we had discussed
before implement that that
actually really doesn't have an
impact on on this bill that much
one way or the other it it it
includes in the definition of an
installment loan loans are loans
where you have no finance charge
and no for no other fees or
charges of any kind are imposed.
And the other change.
That was made and all if if if
Senator Ivy Soto wants to
explain why the why that was
added and I.
He can he can do so but the
other change that is in this
committee sob that is.
Different from what we've seen
before is on page thirty one.
us section nine and this
actually this strengthens the
bill over all right is out our
credit reporting.
So what does that for
installment loans where we are
is there is interest in our fees
that does work to be reported to
credit reporting.
For the is this other category
of New Orleans is being created
here where where there's no
finance charges no fees or
charges
that is they may they may report
them but then what subsection C.
does there on page thirty one is
a make sure that anyone who is
doing credit reporting you have
to recruit read report both
positive and negative actions
and and our performance by the
bear our our because one one of
the things that that we've we've
been finding is that only
negative performance gets
reported not positive
performance and that makes
rescued credit report for
consumers.
Very good.
And as I understand what you've
told me is Senator those what we
were trying to wanna go is
amendments are actually in the
committee substitute now
already.
Mr chair yes so we're not
looking at additional amendments
to the committee so.
Not at this point Mr chair
helpful.
Go forward so Senator guys a
member of the committee is your
motion to do not pass Senate
bill sixty six but do pass a
motion before this committee to
pass.
Senate Judiciary Committee
passionate percent bill sixty
six that being the thirty four
point three version.
Mr chair yes all right that's
the motion before the committee
and
We'll go to questions of the
committee center souls right at
that we've had more than enough
testimony and expertise on the
bills so looking at the
committee substitute
Comments with regard to the
changes that were made after the
committee so.
And if we don't have that that's
fine I just want to make sure
that we.
We are people up there and if if
they were waiting to talk just
about that one issue.
Senator Ivey Soto are you are
you suggesting that we open this
to public input on those
changes.
Mr Chairman only if if there's
people out there who are trying
to speak and who would limit
themselves only to those
changes.
Senate members spent my habit a
all the probably notice I've
receives some
Positive and some negative
feedback but I've been trying to
require folks to identify in
advance so we have a good sense
of how many people and I can
predict the time and and
allocation of that I I noted the
criticism from the Sierra Club
the other day that I was not
allowing any advocacy from the
public and and I don't believe
that's what we've been doing it
all but but then in any event
that said
Senator Ivey Soto I don't know
how to honor your request
without just taking anybody who
wants to raise their hand from
the public and asked me
recognize and admitted into here
I appreciate we're trying to do.
That's why our I don't I don't
know how to do that other than
anybody who's on on on the on
the call I want to recognize
that I think of I think we'll
probably gather more bye bye
debating it as a committee
unless there's somebody who
wishes to be heard in support
and opposition specifically on
the amendment let me let me try
that first Senator souls.
Two or three minutes to support
the proposed amendments I
assumed you do the committee
substance.
Mr chair yes we see these as
friendly amendments that are not
a problem for the overall bill
okay in my understanding is that
the miss Myers has been working
with us to the promised her I'd
be heard center Ivey Soto center
doing etcetera Ivey Soto on
the so members of the committee
sub is that right.
Mr chair yes are advocates and
look through things and we feel
that these are appropriate for
the bill moving forward right
right good Senator Ivey said
about your point is there is
there anyone who I could have
the zoom operator identified on
this call to recognize to be
heard in opposition to the
proposed amendments.
Mr not that I'm aware of I
didn't know if anybody had that
apply themselves
but if we don't have anybody
identified them on purpose we
live I agree with that but a
discussion on the situation
proceed you know.
Okay through those who are still
on the call to look for those
who I know have been working on
this bill I don't see any names
of anyone.
On on that subject so bug to the
committee members on the motion
before us to adopt the committee
substitute.
Committee members with
questions.
Is there
The motion.
Senator.
I have a question I'm sorry
on the question Senator Stewart
next
Why are we are we adopting it
for discussion purposes despite
final passage to this committee
that's a good question I think
the motion here was to do not
pass and do passed the committee
substitute so I take that as a
do pass motion for the committee
substitute Center Baca.
Thank you Mr chair that's all.
The motion clear to the
committee.
All right Senator Stewart yes to
recognize.
Mr chairman I didn't realize
that we already had the motion.
Anything more sinister no.
Right does a motion in order to
you.
You know kind of depends on when
you do it I mean sometimes we do
those motions so that we can
talk about the bill you know and
sometimes people say oh we
already get the motion so it
doesn't matter then if you think
you have a motion you've got a
motion well the reason I did it
this way is because I didn't see
any opposition from the sponsors
or others you know if if if I
thought there might be a
question debate or opposition to
the substitution that I would
have taken that as a separate
motion the the substitution
itself open that's where if I
thought the sponsor was gonna
resist the motion of Center
doing on to substitute it then I
then I would have taken that as
a separate motion but I I don't
see that happening so I guess
I've taken I've taken this up to
jump ahead and just take a this
is a a motion to do not pass and
and a motion to do pass them on
that.
That's a motion before the
committee now of is there anyone
else we should be recognized on
the two passed motion.
Debate or discussion all right
we're on that motion then Emily
will you take it as a roll call
book please.
We're on a do not pass on the
Senate bill in a do pass on this
committee substitute.
Welcome.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Moores no.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Senator Pirtle.
This yes.
Sixty two.
Well you have a do pass.
Thank you thank you committee
that appreciated I appreciate
the efforts and make this bill
better and fix some of the
language thank you very much
thank you.
We have two bills remaining one
is Senator Maestas molasses I've
not yet seen enjoying the
committee.
Is there some amendments to be
addressed and we can hear about
those from members with those
but we can take Center Purnell
so one fifteen which is on our
agenda before we take the first
house bill of our session
on one fifteen please.
Thank you Mr chairman Balderas
trying to get back on in time to
vote on the last but I didn't
make it but thank you for for
having me or Senate bill one
fifteen
you should have an amendment
that was emailed everybody I
will first explain the bill and
then we can go over that if that
is in order Mr chair I think
that works best yes thank you Mr
chair Senate bill one fifteen
came to me
you might have seen in the news
or remember a story in Clovis
about a child that was supposed
to be dropped off at daycare by
a babysitter for a parent and
the the babysitter for got to
take the the the kiddo to the
daycare left the child in the
car and fortunately it passed
away due to heat stroke
so the parents came to me
with this idea and so we crafted
in the legislation
to require that when a child is
to be schedule drop off that if
they do not arrive within a
certain amount of time and that
there has been an excuse given
by the legal guardian or the
parents that they notify the
legal guardian or parent and so
the idea here is either to
prevent a situation that
happened to that poor child that
passed away from heat stroke or
if a child is a ducted or
something along those lines that
we can get the amber alert out
as fast as possible instead of
having to wait until three or
four PM in the afternoon to find
out that over one of the parents
didn't drop it off at the other
co parent was to pick it up
after school the child after
school or something else didn't
happen so this is it this is to
protect children and then I will
stand for questions and we can
go over the man that Mr chair.
Thank you Sir pirtle.
I did not see anyone
providing notice in advance to
speak in support or opposition
to your bill might director
knowledge on the.
Mr chair members of the
committee that is correct that
we had the mother of the child
the pathway lined up for
Wednesday but couldn't make it
on today and for that I do
apologize.
William the policies are due for
must so thank you for letting us
know that all right you've got
amendments is that right
Senator.
And Mister chair members of the
committee I do was brought to my
attention by the day care folks
by a summit on day cares and and
really explain to me how these
daycares operate and I was very
ignorant on how they operated
and for that I did apologize to
them I assumed it was much like
school that
these kiddos would be dropped
off at say eight o'clock and
picked up at three o'clock every
day but that is not how it works
at the are scheduled for the the
parents needs and so the
difficulty was knowing the
schedule and the day cares
trying to navigate through that
and the liability that they
would be put through so the
language was
Worked on that the parent or
legal guardian would have to
notify a week in advance what
their schedule is going to be so
that the daycare knows when they
will need to notify the parent
if the child does not show up so
that they have some notice to
create a schedule and have that
in place so that they can do
what this legislation is going
to require them to do.
And we have that amendment
etcetera you said that was sent
out already.
And and Mr chair members if I
believe it was sent out
yesterday evening or this
morning and should be in your
email I.
There was the number again
please Emily.
It is two two zero two four
three point one.
Thank you.
Senator Pirtle you've explained
the amendment number the
committee I presume you're
moving the adoption of the
amendment to your bill Senate
one fifteen Mr chair at some of.
Right.
Committee members of questions
on the proposed amendment.
Senator Stewart.
Mr chairman I'm having
difficulty finding it do we have
the can we put it on the screen.
Mr chair Senator Stewart one
please.
While we're waiting for that we
get that so to replace.
Two two zero two four three
point one.
It was emailed to you about
eight o'clock this morning how
to help navigate through our
email inboxes it does help to
know what time.
Thank you.
But Senator Stewart is now on
the screen if.
Thank you.
All right well the amendment
questions of the committee on
the proposed amendment.
Anyone on the amendment.
Sir Stuart I can't tell whether
that's with his dad and wave
no no Mr chairman it's a it's a
I do want to make a comment I
just.
I I I understand the the reason
for this but I just don't think
that you can require currents to
do this and I think that it's
too for the parents that we have
for many of the parents that we
have I think.
They they may not know on Monday
what they're doing on Friday.
I'm so I don't I don't really
think this this helps the bill
at all.
Thank you Sir starts at all.
For now Senator Moores and then
Senator Duhigg.
join my good friend for
Albuquerque on this one.
Number one taking of certain
dates are all insurers coaches
from so.
To her mother and so we just
come up with a weekly schedule
so I'm not sure how this would
actually work Senator portal
from
what we're both parents work
what was my situation or single
parents all of the stops.
The two so I I'm not seeing how
this could actually work in the
real world some well that center
thank you Sir.
And Mister chair I was just
asking is that the same thing.
The committee members with
questions were on the amendment
Senator Baca.
On the bill.
Let's take the amendment first
of all and anyone on the
amendment.
All right let me weigh in
Senator Pirtle you know you you
had somebody come do it just
suffered a tragedy and I'm sorry
to hear that now and I
appreciate you being there for
that person wait what what
unfortunately too many of us
have been in those in those
circumstances years ago I
defended the Deming school
district in response to a
lawsuit the sad case were a
young woman left campus it was
an open open campus they're at
Deming and it was a school who
was an alternative school I
guess the way they describe it
at the time of that was intended
to provide education services to
high school age students who
have had difficulty with
attendance at other schools and
had been for the sensually shown
the door by any number of other
schools because of their
inability to to attend class
regularly.
This young woman on an open
campus with the school that was
given that one other all
alternative left school in the
middle of the day I got into a
car
Tragically a dirt road in Deming
of rolled the car and was
killed.
She sued the Deming school
districts the mother of the the
young woman sued the school
district argue and that the
school district should have
alerted the mother that the
daughter had left campus because
the school would take attendance
much not not to on like what
you're proposing here that would
take attendance a couple of
times a day the mother took the
position that if the school had
noted the daughter's absence our
earlier notify the mother the
mother would have been able to
prevent the daughter daughter's
death she would have gone to
find her daughter and the
daughter would not have died
tragic story and unfortunately
in my own family my own
experience you know when when
families face those tragedies
they look for explanations
the end and reasons for why
those tragedies happen and often
times look for somebody to hold
responsible for them so I'm
sorry that the reason that
brings you to this bill I I I
would have a great deal of
difficulty supported the bill
even with the amendment because
I think the the task is
impossible
they put an impossible burden on
a daycare school acquitted
impossible we're not a public
school and your amendment I
think makes it even more
difficult to expect the parent
to come give a schedule to the
school on a weekly basis review
twenty four hours at a time and
then expect the school to be
able to gather all of that
information for a high school
what might be a hundreds of
students keep all of that
straight on that note you know
what what when or how that
schedule was was capped by the
school the other other challenge
I see happening here is that's
maybe not talked about in this
bill is the common experience
that the my colleague s'mores
describes what we're you have
two individuals were no longer
living together maybe no longer
married together but are raising
a child together and you get
into these situations who's
picking up the child on one
given day and who's not and and
oftentimes parents are able to
work very quick.
Operative Lynsay I can't make it
today can you make it today and
the other spouse insurance they
work it out that way this this
could make all of those things
the goal challenging so those
are just my general comments I I
I don't know how to act on your
proposed amendment the matter at
hand because I don't think it
will resolve my ultimate
concerns with the bill but those
are my thoughts with the the
build and again
I'm sorry the circumstances that
brought this constituent to you
with this with this proposal
some other members of the
committee.
Senator o'neill.
I respectfully move to table.
There is a motion to table.
Emily we give us a roll call on
the non debatable motion wait
are we tabling the amendment are
we tabling the bill it's part we
on the amendment it's a very
very good very good question
center storage center o'neill
would you restate your motion
more clearly please.
Roving to table the bill.
The table motion table.
You always draw my motion on the
amendment.
All right thank you Sir pro you
guys are help up and keep it all
cleaned up.
Though the amendment is
withdrawn we're on the main
motion center o'neill has moved
to table the bill Emily on a
roll call please.
Thank you.
Yes.
Yes.
This yes.
Our yes.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Senator about this yes.
Seventy two Senator plan was
tabled.
So you're.
We tabled your bill the last
matter before the committee
today.
This is not our first house bill
house bill two fifty five I
believe I saw Senator my S. this
yes see in there it's five
o'clock.
My intention is to be reasonable
with the committee about how
they we work this evening.
We may have a difference of
opinion about what that means to
be reasonable but but the this
is a a bill that's drawn some
attention I thought we could get
the the sponsor to present the
bill to take a public input I'll
tell you that I have on this
bill
Senator my eyes because I don't
show anyone you identified as an
expert.
On the bill.
Anybody with you.
You're gonna do this solo I
believe unless you'll correctly
which you'll have fifteen
minutes to present the bill I
don't know I see Mr vitals
suiting up there I don't know
that's a that's to work with you
or not but you'll have fifteen
minutes Senator I'm sorry
Representative Maestas some
sorry about that to present the
advocacy for your bill then
we'll turn the opponents for.
Ten minutes for organized
opposition I don't know whether
there is an organized opposition
or not I have a list of
opponents that is probably about
forty.
Thirty or forty opponents.
We can either allow for an
organized opposition and and ten
minutes for will just recognize
everybody on that list as far as
we can do and give each one of
them amended it is far as we can
on that list in this.
Yes if I may there should be one
on that list is his name is Neal
Rowe if we would allow him part
of it ten minutes I would
appreciate that.
Thanks we don't see a mill road
on the list.
I'm not aware of any organized
opposition to the bill.
And so I will I will just read I
will read at this time the
opponents to the bill.
Their names and I will I will
take them in the order in which
they.
Notify the committee they wish
to speak in opposition and will.
As many of them as we can in ten
minutes but all right all of
their names and then they will
begin the day hearing with the
chair Maestas and and your
fifteen minutes so the opponents
are and and I'm I'm this much
for the zoom operator and for
those on the call so you can
prepare yourself to be
recognized and you can
Representative realized by the
first kind of or so we probably
have the opportunity to speak so
and we're Michael for Bible for
William.
On state route Michael E. Martin
package Joseph shops within on
the Alameda Marci Dickerson the
gains parts more real students
have been weighing on your
checking our job cafe John
Thompson the distributors Hey
you.
Restaurant let her call with
individual license hold within
the individualized folder
Charlotte or expanding
restaurants on a way to stand
with the skillet Watkins with
can companies restore Department
ALTSO pizzeria
with the Mexican petroleum
marketers our Chavez with
responsible liquor license
coalition movement Bach Mexico
petroleum marketers John this
variety realty company PJ to
Trujillo strategies three sixty.
J. brought more questions.
Alarm coming straight from.
Respond all right by
you need more.
I was
born.
All right the other County Board
service market we're not on page
one since.
Mark.
Mexico package liquor
Association there are a lot of
Heidi's restaurant.
On Monday I was on.
Jane was from here
we can also ciation Walmart are
you still.
Jason Espinoza co chair at each
hotel and resorts world capital
markets LLC Karen.
Hillcrest restaurant of the
individuals who.
But identified themselves in
opposition to the bill get we'll
hear from those as we can that
happens obligated for
opposition.
So Representative Maestas you
have fifteen minutes in support.
The advocacy service.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
honorable members great to see
everybody this is house bill of
two hundred fifty five with me
here Mr chairman in in the in
the well of your committee is up
co sponsors are Senate sponsor
of Daniel levy Soto a co sponsor
of day Hochman Vigil will be
here momentarily
and was not with this is either
a house Sanchez arguing cannabis
on the other side.
Of Representative Martinez
representative Rod Montoya and
Representative and on this so
it's great and then we have our
our director of alcohol beverage
control who's here for any
questions and to explain
Amendment that we're proposing
here in a few Mr Chairman is the
culmination of tremendous work
this is a major major
legislation to the liquor
control act to help and save our
restaurant industry that will
bolster our tourism industry at
and really help our hospitality
industry.
Are we we we can dominate food
services in this country tourism
in this country if we simply had
more restaurants more
entertainment centers and more
fun things to do we up the the
the history of licensing in this
state.
is is very complicated and very
difficult but every other state
has managed to undo their
licensing schemes that involved
after after prohibition in
nineteen thirty three and open
up their economy responsibly and
reasonably and so we think we
have that that reasonable
proposal that will maintain the
market value of the vast
majority of the a license
holders and that will open up
our restaurants and tourism
industry and get our economy
rolling again so briefly
Briefly it does this bill does
five things the prime it does
alcohol delivery which we now
must do join the modern world
and not and not do alcohol
delivery under very strict
guidelines you have to order
food from those restaurants
doing I'll call delivery have to
order food you can only get up
to seven or fifty milliliters of
wine is expected beer or or New
Mexico growler it also allows
package to deliver as well
secondly it up modifies the beer
and wine license and this is the
key the key component to the
bill as it relates to the
opposition it modifies the
current beer and wine license to
allow those restaurateurs to to
a purchase restaurant be license
which would be bear or wine and
spirits until ten o'clock at
night we still have the same are
very strict require guidelines
of restaurants sixty percent
food but they have to close at
ten and they they only have a
three drink maximum of spiritus
drinks
it also has tax deductions for
current a license holders to a
thousand dollars of five hundred
thousand dollars over four years
it waves
Senate Bill to wage a liquor
license fees for this year this
bill waves the crisis fees for
five years ten years and those
in the local license holders of
their fees are waived for life
and they could pass it on to
their posterity
so there's more into this bill
but let me just say that it's a
win win for everyone the package
liquor industry wins the most
the package guys there's no new
package liquor in this bill so
they maintain their market share
within their local communities
it adds delivery and they get a
two hundred thousand dollar tax
deduction and they get their
fees weight of the package
liquor industry despite being
closed for a couple months back
in the spring increase their
sales by forty percent in the
year twenty twenty and this bill
helps them that much.
More the restaurant industry
those folks who have beer and
wine can go for a go for a
restaurant be they when new
entrepreneurs when because they
can now open up a restaurant
that includes spirits and
compete with the without a state
restaurant corporations let me
just talk about those in our
local license holders Mr
chairman that currently use it
for a restaurant.
Those folks when as well
arguably the most and this is
the the committee that's the
most the most has the most
anxiety if I own a restaurant I
use a full dispensary license
for my restaurant and I close at
ten it's as if I'm getting a
brand new three hundred fifty
thousand dollar in a local
license how is that because I
can purchase a restaurant be
license my restaurant remains
the same and then I have another
local license that I could
utilize or lease or transfer or
sell nothing in this bill
affects people's ability to.
Sell transfer or lease their
liquor licenses we are not
issuing any brand new liquor
licenses that market remains the
same we're merely modifying the
beer and wine license to add
spirits
forty nine states have done this
it's time to do this we we're
here to answer any questions but
before that let me turn over the
the co sponsors Representative
Hochman Vigil and we'll hear
from Senate sponsor Ivey Soto
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and thank you to
my co sponsor representative my
**** into the other co sponsors
of this bill I'm sure Mr
chairman that the Representative
Maestas your messages told you
about all of the incredibly
exciting things we aim to do
what this bill which is been
forty years and coming
were especially I'm especially
excited to champion the alcohol
delivery and restaurant be
licensing service hello we have
worked very hard to bring
together stakeholders members of
the public and many legislators
you have several decades of
experience and knowledge of
regards to this issue which is
been one of the most daunting I
think for the New Mexico
legislature legislature to to
tackle and so I with that I will
I'll turn it back to you Mr
chair my office to talk to
turned over to the other
sponsors of the bill.
Thank you and along with the I
house Sanchez we're proud to
have our Senate sponsor who's
worked on this bill all summer
and fall and and as a policy
wonk us extraordinaire US Senate
sponsor of Daniel A. Ivey Soto
welcome thank you very much
Representative Maestas and
members of the Judiciary
Committee I just of things that
context as we as we get into
this bill and that is a two
things one is a what I'm sure
Maestas said about about a
prohibition era laws
right now in New Mexico.
Our liquor laws our morality
based loss they're not simply
regulatory laws.
They should be regulatory laws.
The other thing is is that New
Mexico has
eight I'm not healthy
relationship with alcohol.
I want to just put that out
there.
There's a reason why New Mexico
has an unhealthy relationship
with alcohol if you look at
those states where where they're
they they don't have as much
domestic violence that honest
and as many of our child propped
out of trouble for problems they
don't have as many D. W. eyes
where the where the streets are
safer.
Those are all places where the
majority of sales are in
restaurants actually are outside
the home.
In New Mexico about eighty
percent of the are sales of
alcohol are package sales.
These are people who are
drinking at home.
If you look at places where they
have a healthy relations with
alcohol it's the inverse it's
places where over sixty percent
of the alcohol sales are
actually sales that take place
on purpose.
And and and local places where
where people have a have a
healthy relationship with
alcohol the what New Mexico is
that.
What what things you might might
my classic example of the of the
the problem with and the effects
of a prohibition era laws on on
alcohol and liquor licenses is
the state of Arkansas.
Arkansas interestingly the
number one owner statewide.
liquor licenses I'm just like
last is the Southern Baptist
Convention markets.
Now you might wonder why is
that.
Well the reason that is is
because they like New Mexico
I've had a system of only so
many Pro County of the only so
many for this population and the
Baptist church throughout the
forties fifties and sixties and
and and that some of the
seventy.
Went on a campaign of buying as
many liquor licenses as
possible.
Five people the opportunity to
be able to drink alcohol in a
restaurant good part people the
ability to engage in social
alcohol consumption.
That's why they are the largest
owner of liquor licenses because
they don't do regulatory
license.
What we're working towards in
this bill is to go to a
regulatory system.
As opposed to morality bassist
what we're working towards in
this bill is.
My driver's license.
If I'm not if I decide not to
drive anymore I don't get to
lease this out to somebody else.
Yes license came from the state
of New Mexico.
If I don't use this it goes back
to the state of New Mexico or
just simply sits with me but but
but it's not mine to partner
with elsewhere.
That is how licenses should be
from the state of New Mexico my
bar license is the same licensed
bar in this case of the lawyer
all my teachers license when it
was act was the same way.
Hello for license should also be
the same.
And so this bring this
modernizes our liquor license
laws for the state of New Mexico
and in the end honestly my
biggest frustration about this
bill is that this bill doesn't
go far enough.
What I would have liked and
where we are ultimately headed
towards and that and the and the
co sponsors in the house decided
we needed to take a few steps to
get there.
It's frankly just simply
repealed the entirely control
act I don't drive a modern
liquor control act that would
have been about a six as long as
the as the fact that we have
here today.
One of the things that does make
this an easier process to do is
that we until just a couple
years ago a year and a half ago
we have two counties that were
still dry counts.
They have their lecterns they're
no longer dry comes.
And so and so as a result we are
not stepping on any local
control issues through this
bill.
But we are going to regulatory
process on liquor licenses and
we're moving to a a place where
New Mexico can have.
A healthy relationship with
alcohol so that it encourages
tourism encourages economic
development and encourages
people needing together and but
as we hopefully get to not
comment times.
And and and that and that the
the relationship with alcohol is
no longer a detrimental
relationship within the state of
New Mexico thank.
Thank you Mr chairman us Senator
Ivey Soto a couple more minutes
if I may I think about two
minutes.
I'll call has a social cost as a
social cost higher than than
most commodities so we have a
very conservative two percent
tax on the placed on the
consumer directly on the
consumer so will not affect the
the commerce of of alcoholic
beverages but a two percent tax
on the consumer there's a
according to FIR there's a
slight increase in the tax and
Rev.
With the tax revenue department
the department of public safety
special investigations unit to
that regulates alcohol delivery
and also to pay back for the
time for that the tax breaks
that we offer
the liquor license holders in
this bill so we think it's
modest I just want to think that
I want to get too much you Mr
chairman but Senator Griggs
was been fighting this fight for
years and we're taking some
language from Senate Bill to
sixty four and Senate bill three
twenty Senator souls introduced
Senate bill one thirty six and
has been fighting this fight.
Our leader worst and I Center
grades introduced Senate bill
six which was then introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil and
Representative guy goes on the
house side in his house bill
eight.
Representative Scott introduce
house bill one sixty four and of
course we have sent a bill to
that waves liquor fees and we
culminated the best and
brightest of those ideas in the
house bill two fifty five
and we think we have an
excellent bill to move our state
forward responsibly without
diminishing the market value of
the current license holders but
being cognisant of the fact that
that that that that that those
up the market value for the
inner locals may fluctuate and
we can revisit this in
subsequent years but as a centre
Ivey Soto mentioned in nineteen
eighty one though there's a
period of economic adjustment I
don't know how long you're going
to be there's nothing in the
bill that that denies people the
opportunity to sell lease or
transfer the license but we'll
we'll monitor that over the
summer and because we you know
we want to make these folks
whole if they're if their
commodity license.
Lowers and value it simply
against the law to give to give
license holders a tax credit
pursuant to the the nineteen
eighty one court case so with
that of Mr chairman honorable
members were here to answer any
and all questions thank you very
much.
Thank you senator.
US representative Representative
Maestas Representative.
Are they open let's see all
right we've got as I said we
have a long list you were at
fifteen minutes Representative
thank you for that we'll go to
ten minutes of opposition again
I don't understand there to be a
self identified a spokesperson
or any organized opposition to
the bill so we'll simply go
through the list and will
recognize all of the following
individuals for one minute
pursue all
see I am trying to figure out.
More zoom operator how many of
these individuals may actually
be on the call.
We have a couple right now I was
elected in the.
They're they're only there only
to now there's there's quite a
few all right well let's let's
look let me try to take them in
the when the order that I read
the murder let's see how we do
do we have Edward Michael or
William Cohen segro.
Yes yes.
Okay.
Is.
Behind behind Mr conseguir O. I
have Joseph ships.
Mr Chairman trust matter of
organization having worked with
our zoom Meister I think because
he has a long list of the people
that are there.
It and and and and and we're not
in the same room it may work for
him simply judges just admit the
next person that he has an
opposition.
So that we can just take that
maybe we can just acting as we
as we are on your list as we go
down they may not be in this.
Or that you have on your list
and that's and that's probably
true.
I just wanted to try and have
ours you moderator anticipated
the next bigger but if you can
do that without using my list
that works fine
I have a list here sorry and and
I have led in the first two
people on the list to our
president and I will continue to
do that in that fashion okay
very good so of the building my.
Mr Chairman just for efficiency
sake process and a lot of people
listening there's about a twenty
seventh second lag between the
webcast online and those of them
wins when people are let into
the zoom it is very helpful and
and people will mute the webcast
of that moment and turn on the
volume of the zoom once you're
once you're zoom OP activates
it'll save us from asking people
five or six times please
proceed.
Thank you for this service again
I'm just gonna read those names
because the folks on the call
may not have them but we'll
probably get through at least
the first ten individuals so
this will be Mr Michael Mr
consent wrote Mr ships ms
Dickerson is so made for a.
Is keen Mr Thompson and that may
be as far as we get Mr Michael
you're recognized for one minute
Sir.
I'm the first person on the list
is Mr constructs Roadrunner.
Right now it's because we're
gonna you're recognized for one
minute Sir okay.
Chair Senators I'm speaking on
behalf of my family was only her
license the last several days as
part of a larger service
businesses are already thank you
for getting all the opportunity
express our concerns I'm on the
opposition side urging that you
propose household to fifty five
those allowing all liveries but
it has to do much more than that
well I'll hold for this crucial
in the state it should be done
carefully known only as
Jane and possibly life changing
all those in this part of this
bill we're not opposed to the
structures for all the years we
are direct opposition these two
classes of licenses we have
specialized instruction working
for that the proponents of the
bill say is a new restaurants in
the state running and restaurant
industry experience and most
restaurants within the special
license only see four percent of
the revenue comes better sales
allowing restaurants open Indian
assistance in the gross receipts
tax yes much more often than
that we're.
Thank you Mr ships Mr conserver
thank you Mr Shapps next please
thank you I'm sorry I have to
cut folks offer that's only
we're gonna get here as many
people as possible Mr ships are
you on the call.
Mr chair the next person who is
in the call right now is Martin
you a which is the next on the
list with present.
I'm sorry which which one is.
Martin you it I'm not sure the
president it's the next when
you're showing the.
The next one Mr chair the next
one was present in the June
meeting.
Poor waiting room.
I'm not even seeing that
individual on my list.
Yes hi.
Okay I got it all right.
Do you an Pacific Rim restaurant
one minute Sir please.
Hello thank you chair at thank
you committee my name is Martin
the hi Representative restaurant
Hobbs Mexico and we stand in
opposition to this bill more so
because the timing than anything
else we recognize that
Look reform is needed and we do
not have any issue with that
but.
It is been a sizeable investment
for my family and for many other
people and in similar positions
and we are we have barely just
opened up our dining room here
in the county so the timing of
this is
is fraught to say the least I
don't want to to take up too
much more time but I do know
that for instance the Mr Chris
has expedited is two to.
Both keep us whole and to
exercise the imagination of of
what is possible and in
reference to these the cities
but licensing to keep thank you
thank you Dave yeah thank you Mr
you thank you next.
Really.
I have John Thompson up next Mr
Chairman met Mr chairman members
of the committee good evening
without benefit of the knowing
the amendments I'm going to
withhold my comment and I
appreciate the committee's time
thank you.
Thank you Mr Thompson.
Next on our list please Glanford
help Mr chair.
Mr call your recognized for one
minute Sir.
For California meeting Mr chair
but is not speaking I recommend
we go to.
Charlotte Moore.
Miss more you're recognized for
one minute.
Charlotte more.
You in my next one please.
Mr chair we have Todd walking G.
joining the meeting.
What can.
Yes.
Mister Walker recognized for one
minute Sir.
It just connected right now.
What is going to place.
Thank you for hearing my
comments in opposition to house
bill two fifty five AM Todd
Watkins present in companies we
own operate Kikwit travel center
rustic cafe in Alamogordo employ
thirty five your constituents
that business this bill
originally pertained alcohol
delivery however without
adequate analytical rigor is
expanded to include actions
they're ready immediately to
value a businesses asset and
property value.
Our last is cost next SO three
hundred thousand we purchased
the business Alamogordo.
If if passed this bill would be
value our business overnight
many of the more than one
thousand four hundred license
holders our equity their
businesses secure financing for
there's businesses operations
and growth.
In a time when businesses have
already suffered significant
losses due to COVID government
mandated shutdowns if passed as
it stands this bill would be an
additional blow to businesses
struggling to recover stand
business and keep your
constituents employed in
providing services to the people
the great state of New Mexico
please vote no on this bill that
is expanded outside its original
intent thank you for hearing my
comments and concerns I yield
thank you thank you Mr Watkins
next.
Mr chair we have Chris Gordon
next.
Mr garden present.
Yes I am sure you're ready to go
for one minute Sir please thank
you.
Thank you chairman thank you for
your time
I am in opposition of this bill
for several reasons
The.
Compensation that's being
proposed for current license
holders would be two hundred
thousand dollar tax deduction
it's been brought forward by
three different GPAs in previous
committee meeting the true
dollar impact of this is about
sixteen thousand dollars.
which is a far cry from the
typical three hundred to three
hundred fifty thousand dollars
that the I'll be.
Thank you so this is currently
paid into it we're not opposed
to the reform but we we really
just want to make sure that this
thing gets done right.
That there is the objective the
need for what we're trying to do
for economic stimulus at the
same time that we're not the
value in the current.
License holders that have
battled and use the licenses to
borrows collateral to get during
the pandemic
the timing of this is just it's
really difficult for us it's
just that we delay we for things
down make sure get input only
from an economic standpoint but
also from so from a social
responsible standpoint thank.
Thank you Mr chairman Mister
Hennessy you're recognized for
one of your with us
Sure Hennessey.
But you have next so Mister
chair we have a real and Baca
next.
Right Mr backing up your last
the speaker in opposition to
your recognize for up to one
minute.
Mr Baca.
Can you hear me.
Yes Sir okay I'm sorry.
Mr chairman members committee
thank you very much for allowing
me to speak.
This is a subject that I have
been.
Battling now for over twenty two
years liquor license reform is
coming to New Mexico in one way
or the other I know a.
What I.
Really want stresses the people
that have invested their
livelihood in this is that that.
K. F. forty years involved in
New need to know what's going to
happen I don't know what the
amendments going to do and so
refrain from saying anything
more other than please take care
of New Mexicans thank you.
Thank you Mr Baca all right for
a little bit more than ten
minutes of opposition.
Hi to the committee members it
seems as though there are a
number of individuals who have
had questions about the
amendments.
Perhaps our committee discussion
should begin there to discuss
any changes to the bill of
lading.
I assume that that questions
probably address best to Mr
chair Senator Ivy Soto is that
right yes our our
Mr chairman I do know that
Senator Moores has
At least one amendment to a
presents.
With that.
Also Mr Chairman said I was of
the of Representative Hochman
Vigil and myself have been a
member that we thought we'd ask
the committee to consider at the
request of the liquor director
it's one nine four point one one
nine four point one Mr we'll get
to that after after we do of a
couple of the sentiments thank
you.
Thank you Mr I'm not sure how to
share my screen Mr chair was
first on our present course
before you begin can I get an
understanding of what other
amendments we have when the
committee sent more should have
won amendments that right I have
one that might be broken into
two but we'll discuss that okay
other other committee members
with us Senate members with
proposed amendments.
Re but none of them have been
completed yet as of yet I'm
still waiting patiently for the.
All right.
And then
and then Senator Representative
Maestas you said that you and
Representative day hoping the
hill have an amendment as well
to the right correct Mr chairman
with us to create the committee
to consider all right okay so
Center for you have the floor on
your amendment thank you.
Thank you I'm not sure how to
share the screen zoom I
certainly give it to me and I'm
able then to show what I'm I've
so we'll be able to show
this maybe I should to the
Senators Mars I I believe I have
your
Your amendment up if you can
check you also have permission
to share share your screen.
Not at this last year my screen
that one down Mr
Roberts and if you give me the
ability to share my screen other
we help okay.
And I can't I can only see my
screen at this point Mr chair so
it should say new document three
dot R. T. F. I just myself on my
screen how do you see them
structure we do that's what we
have on our screen and let's so
let's all try to remember to not
talk over one another and
ideally trying with the chair
when you can to avoid us talking
over one another so s'mores you
still have the floor Sir thank
you thank you Mr chair the the
sponsor of my good friend
Representative Maestas mention
two bills that we have dealt
with in the past when was
Senator Griggs there are the
first one was Senator souls Bill
which created the nine of us for
in the rules committee earlier
that tells with New Mexico
spirits I think there's a lot of
support some of the on this
issue with the of the the
distinction between those who
would rest of us considerable
some stand and and licenses in
those in the economic
development that we're trying to
obtain through the so these two
amendments actually try to Chris
differential treatment of twenty
student members and promote
economic rural development so
the first one has to do with New
Mexico's distilled spirits Mr
chair the second one has
actually do with promises of
historical facilities so much of
you want to address the
separately or would you at the
same time.
Let's take them separately they
seem to be distinct okay so the
first one is on page twenty five
one seventeen after liquors what
insert produced and bottled by
or for a craft store pursuant to
section sixty dash six eight
that six point one that is the
actual New Mexico craft
distillery statute so with this
amendment looks to do is for
these restaurants are who are
actually opening up
these bars to be able to
actually limited to New Mexico
to stories and you are part of
our conversation and rules Mr
chair we had a good debate about
Senator souls Bill the economic
development that that would
create and the industry that
that would help promote in New
Mexico so I worked with senator
souls on this language this
proposal to try to up to
actually promote not only the
restaurant and economic
developments but also promote
New Mexico local industry.
Senator Moores thank you
Committee questions on this
proposed amendment that Mr
chairman I'll just if I may this
is a permanent.
I'm sorry Senator Ivey Soto this
is what it is a friendly
amendments from.
Other members of the committee
questions on the proposed
amendment.
Thank you for hands.
The screen a broader screening
one of questions on the
amendment.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman so
So with this this would limit.
This this would limit so tell me
what this does as far as what it
limits
these of require these
restaurants.
I don't I don't understand what
you mean by this
Mr chair of medical time of your
call Senator souls Bill we've
heard rules about a week and a
half two weeks ago it would
limit so this is taken from back
to its its Senator souls idea so
I'm not I'm not taking ownership
of this this would limit what
the cell to distilled spirits
better additional in New Mexico
so the distinction would be that
those with the full liquor
license as we know them we still
bill solar you know the brand
names like Jack and coke or
great news and things like that
whereas the the that these
restaurants to be able to well
only so distilled spirits that
are additional in New Mexico are
prompting.
Helping the local business read
the stories and expanding that
industry so what what we did
with the Michael Russo number
your number years ago.
So Mister chairman Senator
Moores and this is for these new
the licenses so your your
amendment would say that if
you're one of these restaurants
getting these new B. licenses
you have to sell serve or allow
only a beer wine and spirits the
slickers that are produced and
bottled in New Mexico Mr
chairman pro tem correct okay
thank you.
Committee members of questions.
Then Senator Ivey Soto you said
this is a friendly amendment I'm
gonna just check with the how
Sanchez I probably won't need to
do that repeatedly but I just
wanna make sure us
Representative Maestas.
One hundred center Ivey Soto
expresses a friendly amendment I
simply speaking for you as well
Sir is that right.
Yes he is we're we're a we're in
this together it's up.
It's a policy choice I don't
know how tourists will act if
they don't have get their
favorite drink but we do want to
create some space between the
restaurant bees in the in our
locals
because of the anxiety in the
community and this will help
local craft distilleries about
but I think we should try to
revisit the section in the in
the coming years.
The other committee members with
questions with you.
Anyone else percent.
So I want to understand this
Senator Ivey Soto Representative
Maestas no Representative day
hoping all of we have a long let
anyone of you all decide but I
guess right now I'm just going
to Senator Ivy Soto since he's a
Senate member of so I understand
this ammendment if for a B.
license that would be issued to
say a small say Mexican food
restaurant here in Los crucis
the if somebody orders a
Margarita in that establishment
the two kilo would have to be
something that was distilled and
produced in New Mexico by New
Mexico distillers my correct
about that.
Mr yes.
Right and of do you know how
many tequila distiller's there
are in New Mexico and what
quality they produce.
Mr Mr chairman I don't have that
information what's right now the
part of economic development
when you're when you're creating
a small license a small part but
license is to also then
encourage the small producer New
Mexico and so and so these are
the anticipation is that these
will grow together I do agree
completely with Representative
masters this is there's a policy
that as we as we come back and
continue to perfect we may want
some point revisit this but what
it does do though is that is
that it gives an opportunity for
us to showcase the New Mexico
distillers and allows them to
Allows our our local industry to
be able to grow at the same time
and and at this point I do know
that we have at least three
different agave spirits
distillers instead New Mexico
they have a fair amount of
capacity and there is the
ability to to have them more of
them based upon these lessons.
Thank you Sir appreciate that
you know I don't want to have to
go through every form of spirits
because I guess I would have to
ask the same question with
regard to vodka and gin
and every other state and I
appreciate what you're trying to
do Senator Moores and you know I
it this sounds like a if you
build it they will come
argument for may which is a you
know what will of what will give
these licenses out and and then
folks will have to find a way to
buy the product here in New
Mexico and then inevitably with
that leads to is that came
around how do came around your
requirement because of the
question as well I'm I'm I'm
looking for the amended language
again but the and put back on I
could see that so many.
Yes the analogy I give everybody
is this this is going to be a
secret from everybody on the
call nobody will repeat this
please but you know that the
notion that you're hatch Chile
is hatched grown chilly for many
years was an inside joke because
of course what would happen is
the chili would be grown in
Mexico and then the comments and
stopping hatch for a few minutes
well to get lunch fill up with
gas so the Chile had been
approved hatch or from hatch
but or had seen hatch but you
know the question was then
it was so in in your amendments
are more Census liquors produced
and bottled by aircraft
additional issues going to
what's produced mean and bottled
by of course of.
And I'm not sure model is
spelled correctly is it that's
what a bottle to spell Senator
Mimi Stewart is it right yes
look to me but okay good I'm
not.
Authority but the question here
will be what is produce meat and
brought by so you might you
might bring in my tequila from
Mexico and I put it in a
different model
maybe I've been I put it in the
of a barrel for a day or two or
or add a little bit here and
there some like that it what is
it mean to be produced that
that's going to be the fight
you're gonna have is and what is
what does it mean to be produced
and bottled so that would meet
this requirement and and
everybody will get around this
bye bye okay crook we honest
with you so I appreciate you
trying to do I don't think it's
gonna be very effective to be
honest with you
because if these licenses are
going to be.
Issued with the volume we're
talking about a lot of lot of
businesses are going to need
lots of vodka gin tequila and
they're gonna need it the
Senators these licenses are
available in question would then
be what is the capacity and it's
nice to think that.
New Mexico businesses will
spring up to produce and bottle
Jen I don't know whether they'll
make it gender
like tank gray or I don't know
but make a tequila like you know
you well you all know this
there's there's all forms of
tequilas is all ages of tequilas
to Q. as our age for many years
of it's going to be produced in
New Mexico and we're starting
and now it's not gonna be a very
long as the agent about a week.
For it's going to be put into
your Margarita I guess you a
number of problems with your
proposed amendment Senator
Moores those are my concerns and
and I also really think this
will just become out of clever a
little provision that that
sophisticated.
Is this is we'll get around
quite easily the additional
bring in the alcohol bill Tinker
with a little bit.
Our New Mexico than the old Qala
New Mexico produced and bottled
so I repair would be happy to
hear the opponents tell me that
this is not going to happen the
way I see it happen Mr chairman
if I may just real quick a
couple things the first this up
The New Mexico has over twenty
distilleries right now
that makes that and they and
they
have the full range of Baca gem
run at Jim rom Bourbon whiskey
vermouth etcetera do you your
example take right actually
proves the point of why this is
so important is that is that
when people walk into an
establishment of there are
certain national or global
brands that we all know.
And so someone walks in and they
just simply order by habit
they've ordered these these
national or global brands
meanwhile we have actually some
amazing our distilleries in New
Mexico and and and so this is
this is where we give them an
opportunity to shine the second
thing is well I understand your
concern about whether people are
getting came this the thing is
you have to take a look at this
very specific type of these have
to be done pursuant to section
sixty that spectator six point
one.
Sections that that they don't
support one is the craft
distillers license and the craft
distillers lies a distortions
requires R. I. has it has a
variety of of requirements in
terms of how they do their
business what they do and the
way that that they do their
the the the the way that the the
the spirits are manufactured or
or produced and the and so and
so consequently
but while while I understand the
concern that you have actually
that is not allowed for someone
who has a craft distillers
license for them to effectively
a repackaged or rebrand somebody
else's and so these are this is
actually up some very talented
people who do
spirits in New Mexico.
All right thank you senator and
so a look at that set statutes
to that's tightened up but I'm
still left with some pretty big
ambiguities that haven't been
answered yet which is capacity.
Well you told me that there are
a twenty distilleries in New
Mexico you know we could have
eighty we could have a hundred
that doesn't in any that really
addresses the capacity
that that that really is the
issue is what it what what will
the demand be involving and what
what what is the existing
capacity and I appreciate the
earlier answer which is will
will create more capacity to
meet that demand which is a good
thought.
But at the same time it seems
that if you if you don't have
that capacity now or frankly the
capacity is with all due respect
Senator to be inferior you know
if if again if you're starting
to make tequila tomorrow's a
tequila company is it going to
be the same thing as on the echo
and you know twenty fifty year
old tequila
it doesn't seem like to me
that's possible.
if you're making of Scotch or
whiskey or Bourbon and you know
how do you H. that the twelve
years and fifteen years this
this enjoy when you're having
this started now so I think
there's good there's you have to
participate in argument that
there will be an argument made
with all due respect to New
Mexico businesses and our
desires that that the liquor
products will not.
be satisfactory to those who
want want something that maybe
is aged or or no commodity but
those are just my thoughts I
would be it should very
treatment center Ivey Soto if
you could look into let me know
what the capacity is right now
and then I don't know if
anybody's done any projection of
what the demand will be
and and Sir Thomas I will let
you know that that that just
right here in Santa Fe for
example Santa Fe spirits is
already sold in seven different
states
of the past that that a lot of
our distillery seven melting up
based upon some of the economic
and economic development laws
that we've been passing based on
some of the incentives that
we've been doing for local
distilleries has in fact
developed a very capacity that
you're talking about and
remember these are new license
though self candidates on day
one of this bill satisfied a
hundred percent of of the
Of the of the B. licenses yes
because none of them exist yet.
As they exist historically what
these licenses would have been
only be on one what we're doing
is we're giving people an option
beyond just justice but be
online.
I'm doing it in M. A. R. a way
that that that are a promotes
New Mexico in the process and
what people are going to find
for example with Santa Fe
spirits with with the of a
troubled my experience with with
with other fair separatist New
Mexico people gonna find all my
goodness.
Actually this is not an inferior
product.
I was actually in many cases are
in terms of of the of the brands
that people now out there the
sky's the the R. because of lack
of the a variety of different
ones they're gonna find that
actually of these are these are
superior.
All right very good center
anyone else in the committee for
the issue well enough.
All right because I anticipate
there might be some mixed
reaction or on senator Morris
amendment proposal to page
twenty five point seventeen
Emily would you please call the
roll on what I'm referring to as
amendment number one.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes that.
No.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator serve on this no.
Good as I did to him please are
right that amendments adopted
yes.
All right next amendment
etcetera Moores thank you Mr
chairman thank you maybe the
second amendment on there should
be on your screens now is also
attempts to recreate that the
the distinction between the two
licenses that we're talking
about and on page twenty six
mine thirteen after earlier in
insert a licensed premise shall
not have countersued you know
more than I Cathrynn unless a
license promises house in a
building that is included the
National Weather Service or
places so this is the designed
to do for my use of brand names
it would prevent the state
applebees or something from not
going out approach signals those
licensed of like they currently
have on having large bars this
would be for smaller it's to
smaller bars you know limit
their bills are spaced I and
then of course will team up was
the economic development in
rural communities the examples
used for state like the line the
hotel.
In in Miami up here for the I
can't remember the name of the
most present that historical
talent Colfax County up during
plate that
opened up to us insensitive
store place menu that economic
development of those rural
communities would allow them to
have a little bit larger
facilities limit those are bars
that are being opened up to just
I appropriations our state's.
It that amendment back up again
there senator Wirth please it is
showing on mine so.
We want.
We lost it on RCS let me try
again the shares.
Is a back Mr chair.
Yes it is.
Mr Chairman just such you know
on the first lines on that I
that should be the M. instead of
that's.
Right respect senator Morris was
typing quickly I was thank you
very much.
And that Mr Chairman this is an
this is language that comes are
from another Senate bill two
thirty Mr.
Senator Griggs is our language
for disability at exactly and
and Senator Griggs I had a
conversation about this and
including this in this
conference a bill and it is a
family member.
Thank you.
Committee members a question
Senator Stewart and I see on
this one I saw him.
Actually Mr chairman it was on
the last one but
What do you what do you do with
the and at the and are you are
you taking out the and.
I am open to you know my respect
for your your skills in this
area so let me know what you
want to do but approach up the
and the and is appropriate at
the end of that line.
Online.
Is that it goes into that six
and the members.
Okay well then you you you need
a different punctuation on
places.
What would you recommend what do
you what is the experts say.
That's right the up this right
here it.
There's already cycle there.
Correct chair remember to.
I think so.
I
mean it's so you're you're
trying to capture the whole in
there at the end of earlier.
You still need that Colin and
and then what going into six
correct I think you need to call
on at the end of places before
the
quotation marks correct if I may
madam chair Mister chairman
Senator put them we need up
online thirteen strike and.
And then insert those words and
then after places semi colon
and.
Right.
Exactly.
I learned that on house
judiciary from somebody.
Thank you for sending her over
to us is that correct then
program yes.
Now although don't say struck
could say stride strike.
We will then it struck
everything in that we want.
Without Mr chairman with respect
actually I think he had a
correct because he was starting
with a comma.
We go after the work earlier and
then with the quotes at the end
of places without the period
that the semi colon would have
picked up automatically.
That's what originally at.
Know what.
Senator Stewart I think you
still have the floor
you know it's just very hard to
read this to go back to the.
Getting tired so I I want us to
fix it but
I'm not willing to do the work.
Mr.
Racing and I mean I think what
what Representative Maestas says
right a look at it now if you
want to go on to other people so
it's six one half dozen of the
other Mr chairman I believe yeah
and somehow corporate correct
though at the very beginning.
Think of the strike and.
So that would be after earlier.
Inserts.
We'll.
Right yes the regional version
so after.
That I
space and then take the space
out from earlier.
Okay center more that's your
amendment as I sit on the screen
of my right that is a member
number two as you see kind.
The committee members with
questions and comments.
I'm not saying I'm very Senator
very small screen so that
missing somebody's hand Senator
has sent a right Senator Pirtle
thank you separately.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'm
curious at the end of this
At the end of this ammendment it
would be appropriate to include
maybe in in not the some MRA
language that's metropolitan
redevelopment area
sometimes there's not historic
buildings but it's an area that
municipalities have that have a
story buildings in but they're
trying to build up that area and
so these require special
ordinances that cities have to
pass and things like that I
don't know if that language
should be appropriate now or or
want to do later but I think you
could simply just at the
national register of historic
places for within the
metropolitan redevelopment area.
Her three dash sixty eight dash
one to three dash sixty eight
dash forty five.
Reporter what was what was that
Right at sixty.
Yes according to the New Mexico
mainstreet dot org website Mr
chair Senator Ivy Soto it's.
Three dash sixty eight dash one
two three dash sixty eight dash
forty five.
Almost going.
At the end of that were the case
us and if I may Mister chairman
if that were the case and all
you have to do is just simply
reference of the metropolitan
redevelopment.
And the the compilers would
automatically pick up the the
reference I would say Mr chair
Senator or within a metropolitan
redevelopment area.
I would consider that family.
Yes.
One one more time stated
concisely police force R.
Pirtle.
Or within a metropolitan
redevelopment area.
Correct on the spring Senator.
Funds.
I believe it is thank you Mr
chair Senator Moores and if we
want to add the specific.
Reference just so it's clear
metropolitan redevelopment area
pursuant to.
Section.
The collision that sixty eight
Representative that's the reason
we.
R. right.
Dash.
Sixty eight.
Go together that dash.
For.
Okay.
So.
Okay you Senator okay.
Yep.
For three that sixty eight that
for J..
jet okay.
Not a lot going on in the
process and a capital.
Center more still on the
amendment you consider to be
friendly amendment I do other
discussion or debate center
Stewart thank you Mr chairman
so.
You know I think this this
ammendment needs to have a phone
number we are trying to put it
into I but I has nothing to do
with this counter seating idea
and the historic places I think
it would be much better to.
Instead of cobbling this in with
I making it a six and then re
numbering the six to a seven.
Because the I it doesn't have
anything to do with I.
Also we turn it into a run on
sentence by just putting a Colin
for.
So that's my friendly amendment
to your amendment.
Suisun members of all the
lawyers so.
Mr I think actually the way that
we would resolve it here would
be simply afterwards or is
repeat in a building.
And you just thought after or
within a.
In the in a building no after
the war with them.
Okay.
Yeah but then not but on the
other side of the with them in a
building so that then that way
that way you create the that's a
parallel in a building that was
included in the national
register of historical places or
within a building that is with
them.
A metropolitan redevelopment
area pursuant to section three
dot sixty eight at for that
I'd I I mean I do hear what
you're saying.
Out of being a.
long since.
Well it's not actually actually
know what what what Senator
Stewart is raising actually is a
is a bigger issue which is which
is and engine actually correct
about this which is that that
there should be a number of sex
so what that could be of on page
twenty six between lines
thirteen and fourteen.
Strike the word and on line
thirteen right.
We'll get a second yes between
lines that was a project in the
center Morris.
Starbird you guys as soon yeah
out after early.
I'm sorry broker Senator okay
after.
Sure six.
Right right.
Six right yeah that's the point
that.
Fortunately we have
professionals will get this
right when they actually dropped
it off so take out and then
remember.
And then this this time you do
have to put in.
After the J. you have to put out
some my colon and.
Okay I'm really enjoying
watching somebody else do this.
And then be for all of this you
need to put our Senator Stewart
was indicating on page twenty
six line thirteen right the word
and if not I'll go up what one
more to the line.
Yeah.
At this point is.
Twenty six line thirteen strike
M..
I didn't realize what she was
talking about originally but but
so Senator Stewart is one
hundred percent correct about
this.
So Mister chairman I think I
still have the floor and I'm
just going to complain a little
bit about what we're doing you
know these amendment should have
been a better form I agree and
and re doing and re writing this
down to the striking me and at
six fifteen is a it is something
that you said we were not going
to do I'm just going to complain
a little bit I'll shut up now.
This Senator you're right the
committee will stand in recess
thank you.
Coming next week.
Sure
Should we vote on amendments I
guess not I don't know I'm I'm
proposed the could the
committees recessed thank you
for our six.
Sure sure thank you thank you
Mr.
Thank you.
