drink.
Ready.
Ready, Mr. T.
Oh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman
and members, so.
With um Senate Bill 213 and I'll
just be upfront with the
committee. This is the 3rd time
around, and also a committee has
seen this before.
And what it does is, um, this
amends the state motor Vehicle
Code requires vehicle drivers to
yield to the right of way to a
transit bus.
With the exception of a
passenger van.
When an illuminated field sign
is displayed in the rear of the
bus and the bus is merging into
traffic lane.
From a designated bus stop.
built to 13 crates a new traffic
offense for failure to yield to
a transit bus and defines a new
term relative to the new Office
of Senate Bill 213 provides that
a person who fails to yield.
A transit bus is guilty of $25
penalty assessment, Mr. Ming.
So, uh, um.
Mr. Chairman and members so this
is a volunteer, it's not
mandatory, but uh mostly was uh
brought to the attention by uh
the transit the transportation
system in Albuquerque.
And so what this would do is
Ready to merge in a certain
light that um they would attach
to the rear of the bus would
light up.
And warned the vehicles behind
that the bus is merging. I, I
feel that it's a very safety uh
feature to it.
to the system and um anything
that we can do to prevent any
kind of um
Accidents or
Anything to vehicles or to
pedestrians, so.
I feel that it would be good and
um with that, Mr. Chairman, I
would stand for any questions.
been on this one for a couple of
years. What's happened to it in
the past? The, the last time it
was in the governor's office and
she didn't act on it. OK.
All right, so it's it's been
through this committee in the
same form, yes, exactly. OK,
good. Uh, we don't have anyone
registered in support or
opposition to the bill, so I'll
go to members of the committee.
Anyone?
Hello?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, tell us
what, what's
What's different, isn't that a
uh a penalty now.
And, and, and if not, why not?
It's, it can, can the officer
cite somebody now for, for not
yielding.
This is absolutely necessary
too.
To create a uh
Traffic violation
because this would be new.
And they do have to have that
light in place installed.
So.
Not having that, it would
probably be as any other kind of
uh violation on the traffic.
Thank you. And even though this,
uh, Mr. Chairman was a
What we call pocket there was no
message. Have you got any
indication from the executive to
any concerns.
Mr. Chairman and send my not had
no message of why it was not
acted on.
And Mr. Chairman, is this the
same uh exact.
Version of a bill that was on
the governor's desk.
Yes. Thank, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
All right, motions is what I
was.
Hoping for anybody with the
motion?
Anyone at all?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move
what you pass.
How we further discussions
saying none. Is there any
objection to the DuP pass
seeing none, so would you pass
back to point.
ency center so
you back there?
Let me just, let's see what we
got here real quick.
This
Uh, give me just a second here.
Sarah Hamlin.
Have you had opposition years at
all?
Yes, you have, OK. I'm, I'm
expecting some of that too.
Right, right now, my expectation
is perhaps hearing your bill but
not voting on it today, just so
you know, OK? My understanding
is there's still some work on
that too, but that's gonna,
that's gonna take some time, uh,
so so.
Let's go back to souls then, OK,
Center souls, send it 53.
Chara, are you ready?
Thank you. Uh, this is a bill
dealing with prescribing
psychologists. Uh, they provide
an important part of the
behavioral health care that we
have in the state of New Mexico.
Uh, we have over the last couple
of years been working and the
prescribing psychologists are
now able to supervise their own,
which had been a concern in the
past that they were not able to
do that, uh, which caused some
access to care and some other
kinds of problems. This is just
updating the
definition, portion of
independently licensed
prescribing clinicians to
include the prescribing
psychologists.
To be able to continue to do
that in the very last paragraph
is where it talks about
supervising clinician. This just
updates the definitions for what
they have already been doing the
last couple of years.
I have with me, Linda Siegel is
kind of a technical expert. Uh,
we might have somebody online at
their other technical questions,
but I think it's mostly a very
quick update on the definition.
Thank you, Senator. We don't
have anybody registered in
support of opposition, so we'll
go to members of the committee.
Senator doing in the Senator
Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I, I talked to some nurses
about this, but I have uh a
prescribing psychologist, uh, in
my district who, who has
concerns about this. Uh, so my
understanding from, from him is
that with uh what we passed in
2024, it said that prescribing
psychologists could be, could be
supervisors for the two-year
conditional period only that's
under the statute.
What this bill would do would be
to add prescribing psychologists
to both the 80-year, or I'm
sorry, 80 hour medical practicum
and the 400 hour.
Pharmacotherapy practicum, um,
the 80 hour medically supervised
practice has always focused on
the physical evaluation and
management of of medically ill
patients, so that prescribing
psychologists could be alert to
the interaction between physical
ailments and the psychotropics
they might prescribe. Since that
bill that we passed in 2024,
prescribing psychologists are
legally allowed to manage side
effects from their prescribing.
Uh, but can't manage primary
medical conditions.
A fully licensed prescribing
psychologist, uh, just, just
might not have the necessary
training and experience to teach
the skills that are needed for
for proper physical examinations
and management of medically ill,
uh, individuals. Um, and so,
I think this is, I
I think this, what I'm hearing
from, from Senator Souls is, is
this is a clean up what I'm
hearing from my constituent is
that this actually
This is not just a clean up that
it would change who is able to
supervise for these more
For these longer, more intense,
um, practicums that prescribed
to psychologists would, would
need to go through.
Um, and that someone who has had
4 years of experience as, as a
prescribing psychologists might
not be the appropriate person to
give that supervision, because
of this focus on, on really
being able to, to assess the,
the medical issues, uh, not just
Not just the issues brought up
around the cycle.
Pharmaceuticals that they are
prescribing.
Thesis.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
so, um, do you have a
What's your response to that
opinion that, cause I see it as
a cleanup. I, I look at
paragraph C.
On page 24.
And then page 4, line 15.
This doesn't make those folks
automatically a supervising
clinician.
Uh, because they're not, it just
cleans up a definition of
another.
Definition of clinician. So
could you explain that to me?
Mr. Chair and and Senator
Maestus, I think you understand
it correctly. The other things
are outside of what this
particular is doing as to
whether they think people ought
to be prescribing psychologists
or how much training or other
type of things. This is just
clean up language of that
independently licensed
prescribing clinician definition
to include the prescribing
psychologists when they were
added in the legislation a
couple of years ago.
Mr. Chair, Senator Maesters, and
the whole
In the rest of the statute,
there is a requirement that any
prescribing psychologist must
collaborate with the primary
care physician because they
don't do history and physicals.
They're all about prescribing
medication and making sure with
the primary care provider that
this is not going to interact
with any other medication that
the primary care provider might
be prescribing. So they have a
close relationship with those,
and they have net.
It's never been envisioned for
primary for prescribing
psychologists to address the
physical, other than the
responses of the body to the
psychotropic that they may be
prescribing, they can um
prescribe the drugs to
counteract that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Inside of doing a segment. Thank
you. And so, so we have to look
at, so all we have here in this
bill before us is the definition
section of the bill. Then you
have to, to look in the rest of
the statues to see where those
definitions are used.
So this definitely would change
who could, who would be
supervising for that 400 practic
400 hour practicum and 80 hour
practica. Um, I mean, that, uh,
it definitely would make that
difference. So it, it is not
just a clean up that would
maintain current practice since
2024. It, it would change the
supervising folks. And yes, if
they can, if
So if you are a prescribing
psychologist, you, you have not
gone through medical school.
You have not had the training
on, on the physical body that
That other folks have. And so if
you now have the authority to
treat those physical side
effects that can be caused by
the psychotropics that you are
prescribing. You should have
training by someone who has gone
through.
That physical trait like who is?
Has gone to medicals or or or as
a nurse practitioner or, or
someone who has had this kind of
training in the, in the physical
medicine that
That we, because that they're
the ones who are teaching the
prescribing psychologists, how
to deal with those physical
things. If they themselves have
not had that training, how are
they going to teach it to the
other folks.
That's almost your care.
OK, I was just wondering how
this, how this relates to the um
Uh, the act.
Um
19.
That's the medical.
I can't even pronounce that
mushroom sauce and mushrooms.
Mr. Chair and Senator, they're
entirely separate areas. They
have nothing to do with each
other.
It says that there's, there's
related bill that's related to
this.
In some way.
Because you mentioned, it's
mentioned in the
And.
Um
I are
OK, well, maybe I'm
OK. OK.
Thank you.
Anyone
doing.
Did you have motion or did you
want to be recognized you?
couldn't.
Mr. Chad is just gonna answer
Senator O'Malley's question, but
so, so to the extent that
If this psilocy of bill were to
passed and, and right now
medical providers not defined
under here. But so, presumably a
prescribing psychologist could
be a medical provider who could
prescribe psilocybin under this.
Um, so that would be, I think
the, the overlap there would be
that, that if, if they have the
authority to do that. Um, I
think again, we would still want
people trained in physical
medicine, being part of their
training overall, but I don't
think that's specific source.
and I, that's just, it's
general. Mr. Chair, if I'd like
to answer a question, I don't
think that pertains to this
bill, that bill might, this bill
might pertain to that bill type
of thing.
Very good. Anyone else in the
committee? I'll go, we just,
just one question I'm looking at
the bill that was signed last
year and
I mean we didn't put this in
that bill, and I'm just curious,
it feels like we're
This is the next step, and what
was the thinking, why didn't we
do this as part of the bill last
year. Mr. Chair and and Senator,
it should have been in last
year's bill, and afterwards,
they're like, oops, we forgot to
put it in the definitions
portion.
OK. Thank you. You said with?
So it gives me a chance to
Pontificate for a minute. I know
that comes as a shock to
everybody. Um, one of the
interesting things that when I
thought about our legislative
process lately is that I think
most members these days come
with bills and the expectation
that the bill should pass and
the burden is on the rest of us
to find reasons why the bill
should not pass. Does that make
any sense? In other words, what
is the, as lawyers we look at
the burden of proof. Who has the
burden and it seems to me that
more and more time I'm here, the
expectation is the burden of
proof is on, on finding.
reason not to support a bill,
um, and I approached it the
opposite. I, I still approach it
from the standpoint of persuade
me that Bill has has needed, and
I start with the idea that, you
know, that it's not needed and,
and then I, I look for that, uh,
that burden, so that's a little
bit off the specifics of your
bill, but I'm sitting here
going, OK, we works right, we
just passed this.
I'm looking for, you don't get
the scope of practice issues, we
get a room full of people on one
side or the other, and
I was talking to one of her uh
colleagues, I guess who who she
knows and you've got somebody
center um as an expert on your
side, but not seeing any outcry
or outpouring or or great burden
here that we're not meeting, so,
I mean, Klein when I get to the
scope of practice bills to be
pretty hesitant because again,
the first rule of medicine right
is do no harm, so I'm sitting
here, I'm thinking, OK.
I want to do no harm and I don't
have room of psychologists or
anybody else who wants say other
I'm suggesting, ma'am, maybe the
burden here is not yet been met
that this is needed, just, yeah,
so that's gonna explain where
I'm going to vote on this, but
uh we've been to everybody else,
we're waiting on a motion from
anybody at all.
We just have
Senator Stewart's got a do pass
motion.
I moved to table.
That'll take the precedent the
table motion. That's what the
motion will be on we'll do by a
roll call. Please tell me.
Senator.
And I do, yes.
O'Malley.
And,
Ben Stewart.
not
voting on motion.
I, I made a motion to table.
We're on table motion.
OK.
Senor
Yes,
all right, so we'll take your
emotion then Senator Stewart, on
a do pass motion. Next up.
Let's do that again one more
time. I roll,
yes.
There.
General.
Send her apo.
Senator Stewart.
The.
better word.
No, when you have a pass. It's
our souls.
Thank you and I appreciate again
getting me in nice and early.
Thank you committee. You bet.
Thank you.
Give me just a quick minute
more, Senator Hamlin. We'll go
to you next. We had a a runover
from our Senate Bill 14214, I'm
sorry, Tim Brantley, my
understanding is there's a new
committee sub.
Did we, when did we get that?
Yeah
Good. You want to present it?
OK
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, committee said before
you for 2:14 replaces the fee
caps with specific fees.
That would then go before the
board of regents.
2025 and 2030 to further clarify
the difference between what you
saw the day before yesterday in
the sub in front of you. I will
let Secretary of Agricultural
Jeff Whitty.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. So the
committee said before you does
exactly what Senator Brantley
said it replaces the fee caps
with specific fees. We reinstate
the soil conditioner definition
and authorities within the
Fertilizer Act and removes other
duplication of uh penalties and
it removes the fourth-degree
penalty option.
The, uh, one of the points I
wanted to bring up with the
committee that was asked the
other night about the authority
of the border regions under
761-2, um, within our Department
of Agriculture statutes. It
gives the powers and authority
of the border regions.
So in addition to all the other
powers granted to the board,
they, they are uh granted the
authority to administer and
enforce all laws of the state
over which the border regions
and its agents have been granted
jurisdiction and authority
adopted and filed in accordance
with the State Rules Act.
Uh, regulations and then we can
go through all of them, but at
the end of it, uh, section O
says do all other things
necessary as permitted by
statute to carry out its duties.
We'll stand for questions.
Gone through this in the public
input, and we were on this as
committee action last time
around, so I'll go to members of
the committee. Questions or
comments.
So, and Mr. Chen, yes, you're
absolutely right. I, I was not
aware of
7612. I think the regions would.
would have authority to do that.
I still wonder, Mr. Chair, if
that's a good idea. Uh, we, we
confirmed Rico Gonzalez is the
regent.
to NMSU and I, and I think he's
going to be a great regent.
I don't know that it's
appropriate, but.
The El Paso Electric guy is
responsible for setting, for
designing a system of
administrative penalties for the
New Mexico Department of
Agriculture to use. Um
So I, so you're absolutely
right. The, the authority is
there.
I, I still don't think, I still
don't think it's good policy for
us to
To exercise. Let them exercise
that authority in in this
context, Mr. Chair. And, and I
apologize, Senator Brantly, you
had left this on my desk this
morning. I had to go through the
sub, and I did not have time to
get to it to see if the, the
other concerns I had raised, uh,
were drugs, um, so I.
I, I apologize for that. That's
all, Mr. Chan. Thank you.
Senator Brantley, can I just
follow up before we maybe get
somebody else, the, the last
statement or comments by Senator
Deig and then I think she's
reaffirming what you said, but
help me to slow that down just a
moment. The border regions
currently have the authority
that is in the first section of
this bill, and those we're not
adding any new authority to the
Puerta Regents. Thank you.
There is no authority that
that that already uh is in
statute, that is who is the
governing board of New Mexico
Department of Ag.
And also let me, uh, Mr.
Chairman, is the, the
provides the oversight for the
Secretary of Ag. He's the only
secretary that is not a directly
appointed by the governor. He is
appointed by the Board of
Regents under New Mexico State
University.
OK.
I handle the language.
That's 7612.
And track that through, OK.
Um, you've answered my question,
I guess, too, so other committee
members for questions.
stewart and Senator Thorn.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
Secretary Woody I
I was told that you had answers
to my questions that I asked the
last time that
That you didn't have answers for
the pesticidetrol Act, uh,
begins on page.
As the entire pesticide Control
Act in here or just parts that
you're
Cha charts on page 3, and I
asked about 3 fights and you
know nicotinoids, and if you've
done anything about that that's
happening. Maybe it's in the bee
act. If you could point to me.
So Mr. Chair, Senator Stewart,
the Pest side Act is, goes from
page 3 to 16. It is not the
entire pesticide. It's just that
those parts of the act that we
are updating and this bill was
meant to be an update of, of the
penalties, the fee structure,
and the definitions and that
we're using.
The, the issues you asked me
about the other night, uh, the
neonic neonics, as I call them,
um, they were not part of this
bill because that's a major
policy bill, and we did not
include major policy in this
draft.
OK, so, uh, can I ask you on
page 7.
Uh, lines 18 through 21.
I don't really understand what
all those numbers are.
So, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Stewart, those numbers are
referencing the EPA codes, um,
they are extensive. I, I asked,
and I've got Brad Lewis here as
my technical expert on the
pesticide program. Um, how, how
many pages that would have
encompassed have we not
referenced those numbers, those,
um,
Mr. Lewis, you might come up
here just to, to make sure I, I
clarify what I need to clarify,
but they, they, they
Define, uh,
OK, here we go. That's the page.
Yeah
OK.
I'm gonna, Mr. Chairman, I'm
gonna ask Brad Lewis to answer
that question.
Mm
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
members, Senator, nice to see
you.
Uh, they do reference the code
of federal regulations. They are
part of our requirement from EPA
that we have to state these
requirements in our state
operating plan for pesticides,
uh, it's tied to our grants from
EPA and part of our agreement.
And I'll be happy to go over
some of the
high altitude type things that
are for each of those
categories.
If you'd like.
Uh
No, you don't have to do that,
but Mr. Chairman, it's just, it
just seems odd to me that
there's no reference to the EPA
there, that it's just basically
a list of numbers. It just says
that code of federal regulation
at the end is that good enough?
Is that how you refer to the EPA
standards around pesticides.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
senator, yes, I think, and the
requirements of EPA and our
state plan that is the wordy for
those requirements.
All right. I'm all right. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll,
I, I haven't gotten the news at
all today, so I'm gonna look at
it a little bit more, but I
appreciate the answers.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Senator, uh,
There is a lot in this bill.
There are a lot of changes going
on in this bill. Uh, you have
pesticide control Act that
you've changed the plant
Protection Act, the BE Act, the
Fertilizer Act, and so on.
Even pecan buyers that, what's
the rationale behind going
through this entire
All of these different, uh,
acts including all of the
Simpsons whatnot. So what's the
rationale behind this? Why, why
are you doing this now?
So, Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton,
we have been working on several
of these for the past several
years. Um, due to circumstances
and approvals and one thing
after another. This is the year
we were asked to bring all of
our updates to the legislature.
Um, as we were putting them
together, uh, the, the
discussion was is to have uh a
major cleanup bill for the, for
the legislature, uh, at some
point, so we were asked to stack
all of ours into one big bill.
Now, there's a lot of pages here
and some of it's clean up that
the legislative council service
likes to do, and some of it's
our clean up, the, the changing
the definitions, the updating
the fee caps, our fee caps have
not changed since the 70s. And
so we're a little behind.
We were able to operate the
department, um.
Basically using the growth in
the products and in which the
fees are assessed, but those
days are behind us.
Um, so that's why it ended up to
be a big the size of the bill it
is, um,
And, and, and this was the
request by the executive to put
it together and then look at uh
how we'd handle it down the
road.
Thank you for that. Uh, so, so
what you're saying is it's just
get 50 year old language in here
basically, and it was time to
update the statutes, which makes
total sense to me. Um.
Uh, yeah, we're just going to
the substitute now, so I'm still
digging through it to see if
there's anything else. I didn't
have a chance to look at it
prior to, prior to today. So,
but I appreciate that. I think,
uh,
We have 50 year old statues,
there's probably a lot of things
that needed to be cleaned up. So
I applaud you all for the effort
you put into this.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. So I'm
curious.
So
The department's budget is
funded how?
Mr. Chairman, Senator Wirth, so
my budget comes through the
border regions of New Mexico
State University, so I'm a line
item appropriation within the
board. We are a constitutional
agency, uh, we are not
considered an RPSP. We are above
that line in the budget.
So I'm just
Explain that a little more
there's a lot going on in what
you just said, and I don't
completely get it, Mr. Mr.
Chairman Senator, so, so if you
look at House Bill 2, there will
be a line item for New Mexico
State University. It'll have,
it'll have general fund, other
state funds, federal funds,
total funds.
Um
We get one line item
appropriation from the, the
legislature. Our other state
funds are fee funds, uh, that we
receive through these fees that
we collect. It's about roughly
1/3 of our budget, um, we
collect those fees, we have the
ability to then use those fees
they are what what I call
restricted funds.
Restricted funds can only be
used for the programs of which
the fees are collected.
And then, uh, in some cases we
supplement the programs with
general fund revenue when the
fees run a little bit short and
uh um.
And then our, our federal funds
come in, and then we have the
land of enchantment Legacy Fund,
which is a new fund that, that
is part of the other state funds
that we've received.
just bring this up because
again, the whole fee issue has
been concerning to me.
Again.
So I'm looking at page 24 and
basically all these new fees are
gonna help you.
are gonna go positive with the
Mexico State University and be
expanded to administer and
enforce the act. So,
Do you have a sense how much are
we talking about an increase in
terms of
With a new fee structure, what,
what kind of new money will this
bring in to the department. So,
Mr. Chairman, and, and the way
we've structured this bill is,
they will not go into effect
until October 1st.
We did that to give us a little
time to change our, our
regulations so that we could
reflect whatever comes out of
the, of the legislature. Um,
there's a potential for about um
if everything is hits and
nothing changes, probably a
little over a million dollars in
in new fees.
Uh, yeah.
And Mr. Chairman, what, what
we've run into is that um our
employee structure is not part
of state personnel office. We
are part of New Mexico State
University. So the advances that
the state personnel offices made
with state employees, we have
not been a participant in that.
And by, uh, when I every year I,
I look at, I compare my
employees with uh the state
employees where they would be at
if they were on the state side.
We are at this point in time,
$2.6 million behind, uh, where
the state is.
And so this is what the LFC has
told us is that you need to come
back and fix your fee structure
to pay for those employees that
are part of the fee, uh.
programs.
Mr. Chair, and I appreciate you
saying that, and again,
I just have heartburn when we,
when we're in a situation like
we're in, putting you in a
position where you've got to use
these, and we should be giving
that to you in general funds.
Frankly, I, I guess, some of
these are new fees and some have
been around forever and not been
raised, but I, I just have
really been having
Trouble with that. We just send
her around and I just carried a
bill. We talked about it on the
floor. She loved two parts of it
and didn't like one part. I
liked two parts and didn't like
another part, the part I didn't
like was the whole fee increase
because we're, again, we're
changing the mission of
Game at fish, and we're creating
a whole bunch of new things and
yet we're gonna put it all on
the backs of hunters and anglers
to fund.
And so I just have some
heartburn about that. I
appreciate the 4th degree
felonies are out. That's just.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator Wirth,
I, I, I do as well. Um, when we
are attorneys at the university
said we should keep it in for
discussion. I've never felt
comfortable about that. Um, I
was hoping this committee would
give me some light, or shine
some light on that your comments
the other night were the
trigger, and, and I just said,
we need that gun. We have other,
there's other ways we can take
care of that if we need to.
Mr. Chan, what so on page 25,
section 20, there's a new
$5000. There was a new
administrative penalty not to
exceed $5000 for each violation
of plant Protection Act.
On page 25, that's one of them.
There's a number of new
penalties in here, so we walked,
and then it says penalties shall
be assessed as provided in
Section 761-6. I was trying to
look that up, but I didn't have
time. So walk me through what
that is. Sure, Mr. Chair, and,
and Senator, what we did in this
bill is we standardized the
penalty matrix over across the
entire department, so all 10 of
these statutes that we're
changing are going to have a
uniform penalty system. 76-1 is
the very first part of this
bill.
Um, that's the part that gives
you the board of Regency
authority to, to approve a
penalty system that we would, as
a department, take to the
public.
And have hearings to set up a
penalty metric system based on
differing degrees of, of, uh,
violation.
And then that way the public,
the regulated entities,
consumers have an opportunity to
comment before we take it to the
regions for final approval. So
that is setting up a uniform
system right now, it's all over
the place when we we had some
cases they were $25 fines from
the 40s and 50s. They were $50
fines or they may be a petty
misdemeanor, they may be a
misdemeanor. So all that is gone
with this new proposal.
And so am I reading that right
and just walk me through what
would be a, a violation of the
plant Protection Act and give me
an example where, I mean, this
says for each violation, is
there a situation where you go
out, and you find 10 violations
in one shot, what would that
look like?
Chair, Senator, I'm gonna ask
Mr. Lewis to come back up here.
He oversees that program, and he
can he
He'll give you an exact
OK.
I'm old.
about a chair.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
senators, so, so.
Let me step back on some of this
and it may help. So in our, in
our discussions in developing
these penalty matrix, they will
be uh statutespecific.
Uh,
and within those, I think the
umbrella direction, those
matrixes will be, will be
divided up into minor, moderate,
and serious offenses within
those things. So I can give you
an examples within those uh
programs that I administer for,
so a minor basically is
unintentional or operating
without a license, uh, in any of
these statutes on there, so
somebody operates a business.
starts up, didn't know they had
a license, we go in and let them
know they need to have a
license, go through a uh through
an agreement with them and so
forth to get licensed on it, so
that would just be a warning, so
there's no, no, uh, financial
punitive action taken against
that, that individual. Moderate,
then we start elevating a little
bit. I think uh keywords here is
that we start looking for low
levels of potential, uh, harm to
the environment, to a person.
And you're knowingly doing these
type of things. So let's look at
uh pesticides as an example. So
a licensed pesticide applicator
decides to save some money and
use a product that is not
labeled for the use that he's uh
applying it for or the site he's
applying it for, uh, and if we
catch them, we know that it's
knowingly, you should know
better. He's doing something
that has potential to be an
issue, one way.
or another and our fine
structure would be up to $1000.
Now they continue to do that,
then that becomes repeated in
fractions, uh, to a certain
extent, or we go in and we see
that he is not keeping his
records properly for his
applications, that would be
another infraction up to $1000.
So yes, you could have repeated
fractions from one visit or for
those type of things. Uh, if we
step it up another block.
We look at Sirius, so Sirius
would be up to $5000 per
infraction on those type of
things, and, and I think a good
example for Sirius, uh.
And we've had this happen in the
pesticide group. Aerial
applicator comes in, uh, applies
to a chili field.
Uh, pesticide drifts to the
neighboring field and a bunch of
workers get uh contaminated with
drift from a pesticide. Uh, he's
spraying above the limits of
what the label says, the
weather, the wind, etc. uh, that
becomes a serious violation in
our eyes. So we're looking at
5000 for that type of violation.
And Mr. Chan, so in the criminal
penalty is a misdemeanor, or how
does that line up with, we've
got a civil penalty and then
we've got criminal penalties. We
took out the 4th degree
felonies.
So I'm, I'm just curious in a
situation like that, but, and
I'm trying to line this up
because uh a a misdemeanor in
New Mexico is $1000 fine. 1/4
degree felony is a $5000 fine.
We're saying we're taking out
the 4th degree felonies, but
we're leaving in the $5000 fine.
And so I'm just trying to line
up.
Kind of how this works and, and
in a situation of it's been
You know, Senator Cervantes used
the example of his farm on the
water bill that I've been
working through where exactly
that situation, Chile was
washed, and the, and the
pesticide or whatever went went
into the and there was a there
was a whole federal process for
that. So I'm just trying to see
what the comparison is.
And again, having just carried
this bill that deals with
overlaps.
trying to make sure that we've
got something that's in the same
range as.
What's in those water permit
violations, similar situation.
So just, so what's the
intersection between the
criminal
The criminal
Penalty and how it gets diverted
that direction and then someone
has done something intentional,
and I think now we're saying
they're not gonna get charged
with a 4th degree felony error,
they're not gonna get referred
it's gonna be a misdemeanor.
But there could be a $5000 fine
if I'm understanding that
correctly, uh.
Mr. Chairman and committee
members, Senator,
um, I almost have to bow to you
all for, for legal. I'll tell
you my understanding is that by
removing the felony offense of
it, we've removed the uh the
incarceration portion of it.
Uh, I don't know if that's, I
think that's true. So again for
you can be incarcerated for up
to a year with a misdemeanor.
So the felony is is 18 months
and it comes with a whole
string, I think San Cervantes,
if we ever passed the collateral
consequences bill, you've tried
the uniform. Did we get it done
finally? Yeah, just the concern
about 4th degree felonies as the
collateral consequences that
come with those.
Yeah, Mr.
Chairman and, and Senator.
These are administrative
penalties, not civil, uh,
criminal, um.
And, and, and I can tell you
that the way I've operated the
department for
For as long as I've been there,
uh, we are a compliance
assistance group. We are not in
the
We, we want people to be
protecting the environment, we
train them and we work with them
to make sure that doesn't
happen. Penalties don't happen.
So this isn't like an everyday
thing that that we get into. But
these are administrative, these
are intended to be
administrative penalties to get
their attention if needed.
So just, I'm sorry to take up
time like this. I, I just
haven't, I'm looking at this for
the first time as well. So just
wearing the bill, I mean, I'm
seeing on page 67, there's a
crimp ability to file a criminal
complaint and magistrate court,
um, just give me where, where
were the 4th degree felonies and
where are the misdemeanors that
are left.
page 2, Senator Brantley says.
Yes.
Yeah, the, the only
Mr. Chairman, Senator, where the
only place that we uh had the
4th or the, the felony was in
the 76-1 at the beginning. The
all the other penalties in all
the statutes refer back that you
can find, you can have an
administrative penalty up to
$5000 in accordance with 76
deaths injustice.
So there's no criminal penalty
anymore in the bill.
Our intention was to take those
out because really it just
didn't work.
OK. Just give me one second. I
saw something I asked for that.
So just walk me through on page
67, I saw something that this is
the powers of the departments.
66, it's section 61. It used to
be police powers, right of
entry, so you are asking, it
used to be that you could arrest
by formal warrant.
Now you can seize without a
warrant for use as evidence.
Incorrect or unsealed apparatus,
so walk me through what that,
what's going, going on there.
Why, why do we need to get rid
of the warrant requirement and
allow you to seize without a
warrant.
So, so, Mr. Chairman Senator
Wirth, this is in our weights
and Measures Act, um, so,
Oftentimes our inspectors may
come across a scale that has
been intentionally, uh, a lot of
our scales these days are
electronic.
And they may have been uh
intentionally
Programmed to
Be true at certain intervals,
but not true in the intermediate
intervals.
Uh, maybe the best way I can
describe that is, is, um,
Um
Yeah, we, we've run into
petroleum.
Yeah
Station, gas station pumps that
the uh uh pumps, we, we
calibrate on a 5 gallon.
Interval.
The pumps were calibrated to be
exactly accurate at 5 gallons,
but maybe at 3.5 gallons, they
were only producing
2.7 gallons, and then they catch
up because they knew what our
standard of operation was. So if
we run into a situation where a
scale is intentional and it's in
the marketplace. That's what
that allows us to do is to seize
that or to put it off sale out
of service.
And so Mr. chair right now
you've got to go to court and
get a warrant to do that.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Wirth,
there are times when that is the
case.
OK. I'll, I'll continue to
listen just like Senator
Thornton said, there's a lot in
here and having carried one of
these bills, I'm carrying one
right now. I walked into a
committee was 75 pages of
complex water law and it went
through this committee.
Uh, I get that, and so, I just
think it.
You know, putting it all
together.
Makes sense in one way, it makes
it harder in another way, so I
really appreciate what you're
trying to do here. I couldn't
agree more. Thank you.
I may have missed this, Mr.
Chairman, but it does seem as
though, so this is a combination
of pesticide controller, plant
Protection Act, BF fertilizer A,
pecan buyers Act, feed Act, egg
grading Act, weights and
Measures Act and petroleum Act.
So I guess my question is, it
seems as though each of these
acts has their own fee
structure.
And it seems as though what
you're trying to do is then use
those fees just for that
specific act.
So, I'm just curious.
You know, you've been doing
this. This is, this is standard
practice. You're just increasing
these fees and cleaning up old
language.
So, so how much money are you
getting for each of these acts.
We're talking 123456789, 10 that
are in this bill.
Mr.
Chairman, uh, Senator Stewart, I
don't have that number off the
top of my head, but I can get it
for you. What, what, what we
have calculated and estimated
that this bill in its current
form would raise our fees
in the first full year of
operation, about a little over a
million dollars.
Off of and, and right now our
overall budget is about 28, 28.5
million, um,
About a third of our budget, uh,
maybe less on that because we've
got a lot of federal fees that
are federal funds that are
running through our program
right now, but typically about
1/3 of our budget is fee-based.
And the rest of the general fun
festivals.
Well, so Mr. Chairman, that
doesn't make sense if your
budget is 28 million and you say
a third of it is fee-based, but
you only are raising a million
dollars for all of these 10
acts.
I mean, it said a million
additionally from what you've
been raising. Is that what you
mean,
it'd be a million dollars
additional dollars. OK, so about
a third of 28 plus a million
more is what you're aiming for.
That's correct.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just, can you walk us through on
page 78, what's being repealed
here. There's a whole string of
statues. Yes, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Wirth, um, we are
cleaning up some things that we
just don't need anymore. So, uh,
the first one that's listed is
the uh it's a uh under the
standard weights and Measures
Act 5717-16, that is enacted,
it's hindering or obstructing
officers. So if somebody were to
uh impede our inspectors from at
the
in the petroleum or in the
weights and measured world from
doing their job, we, this, that
statute would have given us the
ability to file something on
them. Well, that's probably
covered other in other areas of
law. So we're repealing that
one. the second one is
impersonating of officers, so,
so somebody goes and
impersonates one of our
employees. There was a statute
in the weights and measures
program, and these are old laws
that were that have never been
used, uh, so we're repealing
that one.
Article 18 bonding requirements.
In the old days, when I first
began at the department 30 years
ago, NMDA had the authority and
the ability to not only inspect
the and to inspect the gas pumps
at the gas stations. We had the
authority to fix them.
So my inspectors were actually
repairmen, and because of that,
the state had to bond them.
Well,
Over the years there have become
registered service
establishments of which we, we
regulate and, and our attitude
was if you can get it in the
phone book, our department did
not need to be competing with
the private sector. So we
stopped that practice. And so
we're repealing that bonding
requirement.
Um, because in the bonding
requirements still there, but we
don't need it because we're not
fixing anything anymore. 764-15
is the public best management
consultant that's covered in
other areas of, of the
definitions, so we don't need
that definition anymore. 76-5-1
is an interesting one. County
commission had the authority to
create colin moth control
districts. This is probably one
of the oldest statues that we've
had. It was, it was promulgated
in 1898.
Uh, when we passed the Pest
Control Act, many years later,
that said you should have been
repealed.
Uh, and I don't know that that
county commissions want to get
into the codlin moth business.
Uh, 76-5-14, um, this, this
section required nurseries to
hold their stock until our
inspectors could get there to
inspect it before they could
sell it. Well, most of the
nursery stock comes into the
state now with some kind of an
inspection certificate from
another state, and we did not
want to impede commerce like as
so we're repealing that
requirement. 76-9-6, uh, it,
it's eliminating the need for
beekeeper.
to have an inspection
certificate, they, when we
inspect them, they get a
phytosanitary certificate, which
is a different certificate in
today's world, and 769-9 is the
we're repealing the location of
apiaries that, that, uh, in the
current law, if someone files
for uh to hold an apiary, a bee
colony in a certain area, no one
else can have a bee colony
within 1.5 m of that bee colony.
Well, it becomes a property.
boundary issue dispute, and that
is that was put into place in
many years ago thinking that
bees only traveled 1 1.5 miles
to keep their
And bees have gotten a lot more
efficient these days, I guess,
cause they travel a long ways,
more than 1 mile and a half. So
working with the Bee
Association, that one is being
repealed as well.
I appreciate it.
I'm like
Um, what has not been touched
on.
Senator are some of the
constitutional and legal issues
that are presented in so the
analysis.
I think sort of touched on this,
but the analysis reads that the
bill raises significant legal
concerns.
by mixing the criminal scienter
of of element, the wilful
knowingly refusal to correct a
violation, making that the 4th
degree felony.
The analysis goes on and says
there are multiple issues, um,
because we're mixing areas of
the criminal code here with
administrative code.
And, and that's out of our, out
of our normal uh practice or
embedding criminal provisions
within an administrative and
regulatory bill and the
penallysis reads that it
circumvents the established
legislative framework.
By placing that, that sanction
outside the Sentencing Act, so
Senator we touched on that. The
bill proposes a $15,000 penalty
for a 4th degree felony, 4th
degree felony as he pointed out.
Is a is a $5000 fine, so we've
got an inconsistency between
between those two.
Oh, I see you're gonna address
this, so let me just, I'll let,
I'll let you come back to all of
these. So one of the questions
Senator De raised earlier was of
some interest to me too. I, I
saw the language you gave me
that the border regions now has
the authority to, to do some of
this. Uh, Mr. Whit, you've been
with the Department of A for how
long now?
Mr. Chair, some would argue way
too long, 30 years, 31 years.
Yeah, so, um, we're not one of
those, we appreciate your
service, but uh, in your
experience with the border
regions in those 30 years.
Give me examples of when the
border region is actually
utilize this authority.
So, Mr. Chair, um,
We've taken rules before the
board of Regents, probably at
least once a year. I haven't, I
have not taken a role in a, in
the past few years, but um they,
they have to approve every rule
that we do. I think the last one
we did was the act,
uh on buyers Act, uh, that was a
couple of years ago after the
legislature passed that, that
law, um, probably one of the
most
Famous rules I took before the
board of Reasons, this was
before I was the, the director
secretary was the bread pan size
law, most, most controversial
regulation I've ever repealed,
uh, we used to only allow bread
pans to be sold and increments
of half pound or 1 pound loaves
when they invented the 13 ounce
loaf, we stopped all sales in
the state of New Mexico until I
was able to change that
regulation. We had 500 people
opposing that change. Uh, I had
one border region.
Vote against that, uh, change,
but it passed and you're now
able to buy 13 ounce loaves in
the state of New Mexico.
So the regions are sounds like
regularly exercising this
authority. You, you mentioned
the one that sticks in your
mind, would this come uh within,
with this describe the efforts
with regard to the hemp
industry, the adoption of the
hemp rules.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, yes.
OK
It brought back memories cause I
remember and I was looking back
at one of the stories, um,
House Bill 581 passed in 2019.
You were there, I'm sure you
remember clearly, uh, with a lot
of dignitaries and so forth that
we were adopting the hemp rules
and this was the latest,
greatest new industry in the
state of New Mexico. This is
kind of consistent with the
theme that I was running with a
little bit on the floor today,
and you're gonna hear from me
throughout this whole session.
We always get the latest shiny
penny, and you, you've been
there, Secretaryhit from the
very beginning that Hempel was
going to be the big thing and I
don't mean to get too far off
the, the rail here, but you
You spent a lot of work, a lot
of time, a lot of controversy in
adopting those rules and
regulations for hemp and then I
don't hear much about hemp
anymore. um
Mr. Chairman, um, I think you
and I were on the same page back
then, but we tried to make it as
good as we could. Yeah, and
there was a lot of political
pressure. We thought, I remember
people saying we're gonna build
car parts, remember that? We're
gonna make auto parts out of
hemp and all of our clothes are
gonna be out of Hampton. We're
gonna fuel our entire economy on
hemp and I, I won't read back
the comments.
You know, the dignitaries made
on uh on the signing in 2019 of
the stamp bill, and you're
smiling because it would you'd
probably find it pretty amusing
to go back, but it's, it's a
little bit off the mark except
to say that, that we get into
these uh administrative
processes and think that we're
really doing a lot. We raised
them a good point for me, which
is
And I, I'm just, I'm concerned
that the ag industry, um, and
the people involved in the kind
of related uh activities that
are in your bill.
are, are aware of all of the
number of additional uh
penalties that are being adopted
here, and they're, they're
substantial, so.
So we touched on a couple of,
I'm just gonna go through a few
more section 7.
Uh, new administrative penalty,
uh, not to exceed $5000 per each
violation of the pesticide
Control Act.
The money from this, uh, would
be expended for purposes of
carrying out provisions of the
pesticide Control Act. I'm
pleased to see the chair of the
Senate Finance Committee said
Munos here because uh, you know,
we're talking about you guys,
um, you, what is this new thing
with running the government by
fees and fines and penalties as
opposed to the general fund. You
should have heard the secretary
just a little bit ago saying,
hey, we're not getting the money
we need to operate, uh, as a,
yeah.
From the
from the,
we're not getting the money we
need from the finance committee,
the budget process and the LFC,
I think you referred
specifically LFC is not taking
care of you. And so now we're
gonna, uh, impose a um
A penalty for
violations of the pesticide
Control Act of $5000 per.
On one section of the bill and I
said, I don't know how many of
these you went through, but
there's quite a few, right? Uh,
lots of them, uh, nursery stock
violation, right, um, the plant
Protection Act, $5000.
violation.
I don't know if that industry is
aware that they're looking at
new penalties. I don't know the
last one the pest control,
folks, I assume that pest
control provisional laws,
everybody who goes out and
sprays to my home, right?
Everybody goes up, race for ants
and roaches and all that kind of
stuff. So they're looking at a
new uh find $5000 each instance
they're in violation.
with the B act.
Uh, administrative penalty,
$5000 for each violation, that's
new.
I won't, I won't continue to go
through too many more of these,
but I, I just, I'm wondering
that the
Pest control, uh, folks are
aware of what we're doing here.
The bee folks, uh, there's a new
violation, I think for the
fertilizer Act, right? New
penalties there too, uh, pecan
buyers.
Senator Bradley, you and I pecan
buyers are gonna look at a new
Uh, administrative penalty,
$5000 for violation of the pecan
buyer's Licensure Act or the
rules promulgated without act.
Not good for cotton farmers, I
guess, potentially.
Uh, $5000 violation under
Section 48 for commercial Feed
Act.
$5000 for each violation.
The egg grading act, um,
New, new material, new penalties
or administrative penalty, $5000
for each violation of the egg
grading Act.
You may know where I'm going
with this, Senator, uh, and
secretary. Um, I'm I'm happy to
respond.
Well, I, I, I'm not really
asking a question so much as I'm
making an observation that we've
been making here for some time
now, which is, we've seen a
number of these bills where the
That were fun where the we have
the agencies coming to us and I
think you said as much that
you're being encouraged to come
here and ask to fund your agency
in this way and uh again, yeah,
and that, and that's what,
that's what he said he was told
by LFC, right? It's go find
yourself.
Um,
Yeah, I'm, I'm wondering why we
need the finance committee at
all anymore. I really do. And
since, uh, since the house says
that that lobbyists can't buy
dinner anymore. They're not
gonna show up anyway, so, um
So we don't have to worry about
them, so you, you know, there
are signboards back there too, I
mean, there's really no need for
a finance committee anymore.
We're just gonna do this whole
thing on autopilot, uh, $5000
violation, each violation of the
weight Master Act.
Um, I'm getting to the petroleum
stuff, got some some petroleum
finds some penalties there too,
the petroleum products Standards
Act.
$5000.
Administrative penalty for each
violation of petroleum Product
Standards Act.
So as we've set this bill up
under each of these 10 statutes,
the penalty.
System is uniform for the
department.
None of these will be put in
place until we go to hearings
across the state and with the
regulated entities and the
consumers and others who might
be interested in our system and
then take them to the board of
reasons for final approval,
which is why we didn't put the,
the effective date of the, of
the Act, July 1 or like typical,
it's effective October 1st, so
we've got a lot, if this is to
pass and, and if it's get
through and sign with the
governor.
We've got a lot of work ahead of
us. We're going to have be
holding hearings across the the
state on each of these laws, and
they, there will be, uh,
Different setups based on the,
the statutes that they're being
promulgated for.
Uh, one thing I want to point
out, the $5000 if, if we ever
got to a $5000 penalty, or if we
got to a $2 penalty.
The penalties do not go to NMDA.
They go to the state general,
they go to the state fund to
support the state, the common
schools.
And so, um, we, we never want to
be.
Viewed as head hunters, uh, as I
said, we are a compliance
assistance uh department. We
work our tails off to make sure
people are educated before bad
things can happen.
And, and I think that's a good
goal because you're right, it's
kind of like the
Foxs regarding the kind of
thing, right, if you're, if
you're out there enforce these
and collecting penalties and
fines. I hear what you're saying
that you're gonna go around the
state and do all these things,
again, I'm not sure that we
wanna, again, abdicate that
responsibility or delegate that
responsibility to all of you.
We, we could put them find some
penalties in our law here, which
is what we've done historically,
right? as opposed to saying
we're gonna have you go do this
by rule, which is what the bill
says, you're gonna go out and
promulgate rules, um,
the
I want to push back on you a
little bit.
Because you said that the fines
and fees are being collected
here are going to go into the
school fund, that's not just
Mr. Chairman, just to find us,
not the fees, the penalties, the
penalties, yes, the penalties
that you say are going to school
like,
yeah, so if you look at page 15.
What am I getting wrong here?
This is money from enforcement
of the pesticide Control Act.
And um so the administrative
penalties received by the
department under the pest rights
Control Act shall be expended
for the purpose of carrying out
the provisions of the pesticide
Control Act.
I'm, I'm looking right.
OK, yeah, I'm looking at
Patriot, so we identified one.
I've identified another. So
it's, it's really not accurate
that these are all going to
school fun in this case, money's
going into the agency.
you, you caught one.
Uh, I have a habit of doing
that, Mr. Chairman. That's why
we enjoy coming to judiciary
I've heard
everybody loves coming to
judiciary, um, Mr. Chairman, I
found one first night we found
this.
No, so yeah.
Yeah, um, I think you also got
to, I, I like your objective,
secretary. I, I appreciate that
what you're saying is you don't
want to be the ones collecting
fines and fees and penalties or
whatever and putting them into
your pocket for your agency
budget, but the bill does that.
I'm gonna have to vote no.
Others on the committee.
Mr. Chair, I think on page one,
there's a reference in the title
and line 23 to the criminal
penalty, but you took that out.
Yes. So that needs to be amended
out.
I just flagging that then on
page 2.
Uh, bottom of line 24, there's a
section that basically says that
a court can grant on temporary
or permanent junction, uh, we
generally take that out, of
course, the court can do that. I
mean, section C would need to
be.
Stripped out, it seems to me,
and what we need to take out on
back to page one of the title
line 23, take injunction out of
that as well. I'm not.
Maybe let's see where this is
gonna go, but we would, I mean,
we would need to fix that. And
then I was looking on page 3
line 7, that's the penalties
going to the school fund, which
I appreciate. I actually had to
change that on the water bill.
That was an issue.
The same thing, you don't want
penalties funding the agency.
Fees, we can debate that. Did
you hear that, Senator that was
that was an amendment for
Senator Munoz, for exactly that
reason for penalties. These is a
different, different story. So,
again, I think we would need to
clean that up if we're gonna
Move forward on this.
Right. Anyone else?
Anything pending? Anybody got a
good idea at this point?
They do.
Most.
Emotion is not debatable. We're
on a tabling motion.
Do a roll call, please.
You see, Senator O'Malley,
Senator O'Malley, are you
looking at the sponsor to ask if
that's a friendly motion or not,
We, we usually do ask if there's
a if it's a a favorite or
unfavored, uh,
um, with an amendment, but on a
tabling motion, we're gonna
assume that maybe the sponsor,
most cases doesn't support it,
so we'll do that as a, as a roll
call please.
And.
I heard you hear.
General.
Yes, explain my vote.
No.
And her story.
They
No the table.
They work
Stewart
OK
I wrote notes to the table
motion fails.
Right, back to the bill. So I
want to propose an amendment.
I would go on page one line 23.
the injunction and criminal
penalty and put the period after
progressive penalties.
In the title just take and I'm
gonna take the injunction
section out in the next
amendment.
On page 1 line 23.
I think all, all this does.
There's no criminal penalty
left, so that needs to come out
and then I'm gonna also make a
separate motion to take out the
injunction section, which I can,
if you want me to do that do
that first. OK, so let's just
the first, OK, let me, let me
strike that one, Emily. Let me
just, uh, on page.
2 line 24 elite subsection C.
And renumber
Sponsored, yes.
Any objection?
That amendments adopted.
They're worth it. Uh, then 2nd
Amendment's back on page 1 line
23.
But a period after penalties and
delete injunction.
and delete criminal penalty in
the title.
Necessary amendment, yes,
sponsors all agreed the
objection to adopting that
amendment.
There's none, that moment's
adopt as well, said a word to
you're still on.
All I have for now.
OK.
Anyone else unamended Tastewart?
Mr. Chair, if I could direct you
back to page 15, section 9 had
concerns about with the
disposition of funds. It
actually read money from the
fees and other sources except
for administrative penalties.
That may, that may address the
concern that I expressed so
that, that will do it, you're
right.
OK. Anyone else?
do it. And Mr. Chair, maybe I'm
missing something, but, but with
that language on 3, saying,
All administrative penalties.
are deposited into that fund, is
that not?
Maybe I misunderstood the issue.
OK, that one.
Ter Stewart
Well, Mr. Chairman, I, I, I
would kind of like them to go
away and take out all of this
references where the the thieves
are not going to or the fines
are not going to the state
school fund because I found one
the first night, you found a
couple. I think it's, there's 10
acts in here. We would have to
go through each one of these to
figure out if each of those was
correct.
So, I, I just think there needs
to be more work done on this. I,
I, I understand why they want to
pass it, and I like a lot of it,
but I just don't think it's
ready. I, I don't think any of
us can sit here and go through
78 pages.
with these issues that have come
up.
What else would you like to do,
Senator Stewart? I mean, the, uh
I moved the table. We didn't get
a vote on that, um, so we're, we
maybe ship
ship ship ship was sail. No, we
can roll it over, um, it'll be
the 2nd time we do it and we'll
send you all back to do it maybe
postpone a vote on it, so I
think that they see a lot of
nuts affirmatively. It is a, it
is a large bill that's not
something alien to us. What's
alien us is, where am I looking
at? There's our part, um,
Senator Stewart,
Stewart to work,
just so you all know, you know,
I came over to the Senate from
the house, so I wouldn't try and
fix every bill. I mean, you
know, in the, in the house, we
used to stay up till 1 or 2 in
the morning, fixing every bill,
so Stewart remembers those days
fondly.
Yeah, so in, in the Senate, I
used to love the fact that we'd
come over here to the Senate and
it was up or down, right? It was
either good or bad or gone. So
now we've turned into the house
once again. It's maybe it's
following me. So we're, we're
gonna roll you over there,
senator. We'll go back and work
on your bill yet again.
Thank you.
Centerham Lane.
We're gonna go, um, we're gonna
do Senator Hamlin, to Senator
Steinborn.
medical suicide and then we'll
get to firearms.
Mhm
Yeah
Looking at the committee sub I
guess coming around.
Yes, Mr. Chair, would you like
me to go ahead and explain the
bill and then we move the sub or
and we can we'll just go ahead
and take the motion for the sub
right now for consideration. So
Senator Ste will make the
motion.
Mr. Chairman, I move a do not
pass on 267 and for purposes of
discussion.
They do pass on the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Cenel 267.
Thank you for the motion,
Senator Hamlin, um, let me just
check real quick. Do we have
supporters off and on opponents.
Just
with Senator Hamblin, we have
About a half dozen people who
have signed up and registered to
speak in support. Are they part
of your organized part of an
organized group, right? So yes,
they are, Mr. Chair. OK, so, um,
and I'm just gonna tell you, so
you've seen this list, you know
who these individuals are.
There should, there should only
actually be 5 on that list.
12345, the last one, there's a
group that looks like it may be
the end of your group, Allison
Friedman, and then, then there's
somebody named Jasmine
Taon, is that right? Is that
also part of your group? Let me
just read them all, so you have
winter Tourrahs maybe, Nicole
Martinez, uh, Rachel Biggs,
Rachel's sitting right here, Mr.
Chair, OK, and, um, Serge
Martinez, Allison Freeman, are
they all part of your group?
OK, so I'm counting 6. That's
all right. It doesn't make any
difference really because you
have, you'll have 15 minutes,
uh, Senator, as you wish. The
only thing that I want to remind
you is I'm relying on you
entirely to uh manage the time
of the presenters, so if uh for
example, Rachel Biggs goes for
12 minutes, there's not gonna be
time for surgery or Allison,
right? So that's the way it's
gonna go, uh, so you've got 15
minutes. Go ahead, sir. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. In New Mexico,
uh, Mr. Chair and committee in
New Mexico, we have 2
Before,673 renter households. We
have a high percentage of
renters living in low incomes.
Of those low income renters, 80%
are cost burdened, meaning they
are spending more than 30% of
their income on rent.
to help insures renters'
future's ability to secure safe
and affordable housing. New
Mexico must enact these basic
consumer protections that we're
talking about in Senate Bill 267
to make rental housing pricing
more transparent and decrease
barriers to accessing uh
housing. We all want to live in
communities that have housing
that is safe and accessible for
everyone regardless of their
health or stage of life,
ensuring everyone has housing is
a key strategy and foundational
to public safety. And this is
something that we can do that
has quick impact for addressing
homelessness and public safety.
Senate Bill 267, the committee
substitute, Mr. Chair, that you
have is a result of conversation
from several of the members on
this committee actually that
took place in our Senate Tax
Business and Transportation
Committee, uh, with Senator
Paul, Senator O'Malley, Senator
Wirth, um, and also with
landlords, uh, and the apartment
association because there was
quite a bit of robust debate,
uh, in tax business and
transportation. But to give you
a little bit of a summary, this
reduces a major barrier to
entering housing by requiring
fee transparency, standardizing.
application fees and regulating
late fees. What this bill does
not do is control rent or
dictate the amount of regular
monthly costs prohibit a
landlord from screening
applicants or prohibit add-on
services that come with an
additional monthly fee. And so
at this point, I would like to
go ahead and turn it over to my
expert, Rachel Biggs, uh, and we
do have folks, uh, online, but I
don't want to go ahead and take
up that time. So I have Rachel
Biggs, who is the chief strategy
officer of the Albuquerque
Health Care for the Homeless.
Also to my right is Alison
Friedman with the New Mex.
The Center for Housing Law and
to Rachel's left is Serge
Martinez from the New Mexico
Center for Housing Law. So I
will turn it over to Rachel
Biggs, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I will be really
brief. I will share an example
of what we're trying to achieve
with this bill and then go
through the committee substitute
and the changes that were made
based on the conversations that
we've had out of Senate tax and
then with the apartment
association.
Um, so one example that we have
from our civil legal services
partners is for seniors living
on fixed incomes, um, they're
paying these non-refundable
screening fees over and over
again. So often $100 or more per
application. Sometimes those
come with holding fees or
application fees, which can be
$200 to $300 that are typically
non-refundable as well. After
that initial investment, when
they, they think that they're
under kind of serious
consideration for that
apartment, they may find out
that that unit wasn't even
available. They've already been
out these fees.
And so while seniors think
they're under serious
consideration for a unit
property managers are collecting
these fees from every applicant
over and over again. And so
we're, we're trying to decrease
the just the barrier for folks
to apply for housing and require
transparency so that our most
vulnerable folks in New Mexico
are able to know the cost, the
full cost of a rental unit
before they sign that agreement,
um, and I will go through very
briefly the changes that we made
in the committee substitute that
are before you. And so starting
on page
to, we had a really great
recommendation, uh, the
applicants definition was
confusing, so we, we changed
that to an applicant means a
person who submits an
application to rent a dwelling.
Then on page 4 of the committee
substitute line 18, um, in this
area, we at first were
attempting to change the
definition of rent and to make
sure that late fees were not as
um assessed off of rent that
included other ongoing tenancy
fees and having conversations
with the apartment association
agreed it was wise to remove
that from the upfront definition
and then just have it referenced
it later in the late piece
section.
On page 7 of the committee
substitute and line 6 and 7,
The intent of this section for
transparency and disclosure was
about cost it previously said
terms. We do not mean all terms.
We did not want all terms posted
in a in a listing, we wanted it
to be specific to cost of a
rental agreement.
And then moving on to page 8,
the apartment association, um,
advised that a digital notice
would be a good addition to
written, so we added digital
notice or digital receipt uh
after written in the places
where that appeared.
We also agreed to add a timeline
on page 8 lines 16 and 17 that
the screening you would be
returned within 30 days if the
conditions following were not
met.
Moving on to page 9, and I will
flag that this section new
material on background checks,
we are interested in changing. I
think we've tried really hard to
make this work and it poses a
lot of challenges legally and we
recognize that, but we did add a
receipt of payments for those
reports in this committee
substitute but are interested in
discussing changes to that
section entirely.
And then the last change that we
made in the committee substitute
following our conversations.
is on page.
page 11.
Line 13.
This is where we change the
definition to account for how
late fees are assessed and
change the language to late fees
shall be calculated only based
on rent, rent calculations to
determine late fees shall not
include deposit, additional fees
or utilities.
So, Mr. Chair, um, I, we, this,
this committee substitute was
based on the conversations with
some of the parties that the,
the previous committee had uh
requested, um, and we also know
that today what we're doing is
discussing and also continuing
on looking at the legal elements
of this, this first committee
said was really talking about
policy and the people that it
wasn't impacting, uh, and
understand that there are also
some concerns in this committee
sub that can be modified and so
we look forward to that.
At this point, Mr. Chair, if we
can go to the public testimony,
uh, unless there are any other
things that you would like us to
address beforehand. it's your
time. All right, so if we can go
to public testimony, those
online. Uh, we have Nicole
Martinez, and then followed by
Mone Silva.
Go ahead, Nicole.
Thank you.
Good evening, chair. Members of
the committee. My name is Nicole
Martinez. I work at the Mesa
Valley Community of Hope in Las
Cruces. I urge you to support
this bill, and here's why.
At Community of hope, we are
struggling to use our vouchers
to help people transition out of
homelessness. Last year we
housed 1,541 people, including
475 children. This year our
point in time count was 316.
This is a solvable number.
However, we face significant
barrier in the past few years,
landlords started implementing
administrative fees up to $200
in holding fees up to 100, as
part of an apartment application
fees. We've secured federal.
funding to address homelessness,
but these new fee tactics are
stalling our progress. These
fees are related to housing
affordability. The fees directly
impact housing accessibility.
Affordable housing is not truly
accessible if these fees exist.
This issue also affects Section
8 housing clients. These fees
prolong the time people spend on
the streets until we can find
housing without such fees.
Community folks a landlord and
we don't charge these fees. We
refuse to be part of this
problem. Any landlord not
charging these fees is still
negatively impacted because of
out of state corporations that
are driving up costs and making
housing inaccessible. Please do
not let these fees continue to
harm our housing efforts. Please
do not discount what we are
seeing every day, people being
turned away from housing with
these fees. Help us get people
inside by supporting this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, Nicole. Next is Mone
Silva from the Coalition to End
Homelessness, and then followed
by either uh Maria Griego or
Anika, um, Erica, Erica, and
then our pro tem from the city
of Las Cruces is also online.
Monet
Sure, this is this is who again?
You're recognizing who?
Uh, this is Mone Silva from the
Coalition on Homelessness.
M O N E T. OK, thank you. Thank
you, Monet, go ahead.
OK. Thank you. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, my
name is Monee Silva and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Coalition to End
Homelessness. And we stand
strongly in support of SB 267.
Um, Homelessness in New Mexico
has surged over the past 5 years
and current data indicates this
year will follow the same
alarming trend.
And with current federal funding
cuts looming, we could see these
numbers climb even more with
what than what the data is
currently showing us. The
coalition operates multiple
homelessness prevention programs
across the state, witnessing
firsthand how undisclosed,
arbitrary, and excessive fees
are being unfairly added to move
in cost. These financial
barriers disproportionately
affect New Mexico's lowest
income and most marginalized
tenants, preventing them from
securing stable and affordable
housing. Your support of Senate
Bill 267 will help break down
financial.
barriers such as excessive fees
that prevent individuals and
families from accessing stable
housing and ensure that rental
costs are more transparent,
fair, and affordable. We
strongly urge the committee to
support SB 267. Thank you.
Thank you, Monet. So either
Maria or Erica from the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty, if you will please
speak.
You have to give me that one
too. That's not on my list. I
don't think Mr. Chair, may we
allow Joanna Ben Como, the prote
of city of Las Cruces to speak.
Well, it's your time, but I had
that leather list, so you're, I
mean, you're gonna abandon the
other people on your list.
Or
And we do have people in person
as well, um,
let me go to um the pro tem and
then we'll go to the people in
the room, if I may, um, protem
Bencommo feels please speak, um,
and make it brief.
Go on
Hello.
Can you hear me? Yes, we can.
OK, thank you. Hi everyone.
Thank you so much for having me
on. I'm of course here in
support of this legislation.
This has been a key cause in
higher evictions in Las Cruces,
as you heard from Community of
Hope, who is seeing direct
impact on their clients, housing
vou vouchers are essentially
rendered useless if people can't
afford it, the hundreds of
dollars of fees it takes to get
into a place. The bill would
have an immediate impact on
access to existing housing and
ready, and people who are ready
to be housed.
Also, it is a consumer
protection bill that creates
transparency and uniformity. I
will just add that just this
last Monday at our council
meeting, constituents came to
talk to us, to ask for help from
us because their landlord was
inexplicably raising their fees.
This is people on fixed incomes
who are feeling powerless as a
locally elected official. I
don't like killly powerless when
constituents come to us with
real issues, and I hope that you
consider and support this piece
of legislation. Thank you.
Thank you. And if we can from
the room, we have Jasmine from
the ACLU right behind you.
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, my name is
Jasmine Tying Fong. I'm an
attorney with the ACLU of New
Mexico and I am addressing the
committee on behalf of the
public safety Coalition made up
of 11 organizations that are
committed to advancing
community-based solutions to
public safety during the
legislative session. The
coalition strongly supports SD
267. All of us want to live in
safe communities and safety
starts with stability. We all
budget differently according to
our needs and preferences.
Transparency is an important
part of that. Knowing what rent
and fees will help ensure that
renters know and can make
decisions around budgeting,
while landlords can ensure that
their tenants are aware of what
they are agreeing to avoid
broken contracts or other issues
down the line. SB 267 requires
that rental costs be transparent
and predictable, allowing New
Mexicans to make more informed
choices when looking for rental
housing. We strongly urge you do
pass. Thank you. Thank you. And
lastly, Mr.
share, uh, members from the New
Mexico trial lawyers.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, my name is
Michael Hart. I'm a New Mexico
trial warrior. A law firm
represents regular people, a lot
of families and children,
particularly those on the lower
end of the economic ladder. We
support this bill very much. We
fully support it because it
enables transparency, clarity,
and provides an appropriate and
reasonable level of security to
people seeking housing.
Thank you.
That is all Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much. We had just one
person registered in opposition
to Eric Scott, are you here,
Scott, Derek Scott?
online, online?
And Scott, right, Mr. Scott.
You hear me, Mr. Scott?
You're muted, sir.
No, uh.
Mr. Scott, can you hear me now?
Yes, I can. Can you hear me?
Yes, we'll recognize you up to 2
minutes, sir.
OK, thank you. Uh, chair and
members of the committee and the
writers of the bill. I like kind
of where they're going with
this. It's not that it's
necessary opposition. It's just
concerned that could this push
the fees into the rent. The
other concern I have is that
there's nothing in the bill
regarding people with
disabilities and the fees that
that involves when they're in a
rental place that might not be
truly accommodating, though they
have the right to request from
the renter.
To get accommodations, um, it
would still kind of be at the
behest of their cost of the
person that's disabled or a
grant that is available here in
the state of New Mexico, a $5000
grant. But renters, I personally
went through problems when I
requested and got kicked out of
the house. So I truly understand
where this is coming from, but I
just would hope that they would
put something in there regarding
fees that deal with uh
disability and access for
disability, uh, changing of
The apartment and our place.
It's something that I've brought
up almost every year in this.
In the Senate in some way, shape
or form. So I just hope I could
get that across. Thank you,
chair. I appreciate it. Thank
you very much. All right, that's
all we have in opposition.
Senator, we're going to go to
committee members. Questions.
Mr Cherry.
Senator O'Malley, was that you?
I'm gonna come.
The
center first, you want to defer.
They do and then O'Malley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I, uh, I spoke with the, the
sponsor about this bill we're on
the floor today.
Um, and I went through
Some, some changes that, that
I'm gonna recommend and so I'm
gonna run through those for, for
the committee, uh, but I think
the intention is you, you said
we weren't voting on this
tonight. I think the intention
is that they're going to come
back with a sub, uh, an updated
sub that will reflect the, the
changes that, that I'm gonna go
through now.
So, uh, starting with, uh, page
2, line 11.
Right now, the definition of
applicant is the person who
submits the application and who
agrees to act as a guarantor or
a co-signer, that, that should
be or.
That should be or instead of an
and, so.
be changing that word on 9/11
page 2.
Uh.
Let's say page 8.
Lying 14 and 15.
Right now, um,
this, uh, and this is talking
about, you'll see the, the
section starts on page 7. This
is talking about the, the
screening fee and prohibited
fees. Uh, this is just some,
some, I think awkward drafting
that says aside from the
screening fee, shall not charge
other fees, uh, strike aside
from screening fee.
So it says shall not charge
insert any to charge any other
fees to process the application.
I think that's just clearer.
On page 9.
Where and line 2, and this is
talking about when they need to
return if a fee has been
charged, uh, that, that needs to
be returned, how it is returned,
um,
The first one is returned by
mail, I think probably
especially if in some
circumstances, this is cash, it
should be by certified mail.
Uh, still on page 9.
uh, the subsection D, it would
be just striking that whole
subsection D, uh, one, because
I, I think it's, it's just
repetitive.
Uh, this, it's already been said
earlier in the bill.
Don't, you can't charge fees for
anything other than, than the
screening fee. The other than
the fee that has been delineated
here. No other fees. I think by
just saying shall charge no
other fees. I don't think we
know that
uh subsection D. So that's still
staying on page 9, the section 4
that's about background checks.
Um,
So right now, this
And and the the the problem and
that from what I understand is
that people are being repeatedly
charged for the same for
background checks over and over
again.
And so, the approach that was
taken was, well, if you already
have your own background check,
you can bring it, Mr. Chair, I'm
not comfortable with that. I
So when I have a client come in
and they bring me their medical
records, I say, thank you very
much.
And then I usually shred them,
and I ordered the medical
records myself because I want to
make sure they're complete. I
wanna make sure I, I
I, I, I wanna make sure that,
that they are accurate and
complete and that I'm getting
them from the source, um, and I,
and that, that I can absolutely
trust what what is in them. I
think any landlord would
probably should, should be able
to have that same degree of
confidence in the background
checks and credit checks that
they're getting, um, not wonder
is this something that God?
You know, manipulated in some
way, or is it totally out of
date, anything like that. So,
uh,
The, what I think that uh what
I'm suggesting.
of the sponsors come back with
is basically gonna be something
that says,
If this landlord, and it might
be a landlord, say as a
landlords, you know, 3 different
apartment complex, complexes or
or uh uh property management,
uh, group.
If you have already, if I have
come and applied, uh, once, and
you already got my background
check and my credit report, and
it is within 90 days of you
doing that.
Use that one. The one, use the
one you've already got. Don't,
don't charge me a second time to
do it again because I applied at
building one, in May, but at
that in June, I went over to
building 3 and applied there
too. You shouldn't be able to
repeatedly charge people for
those background checks, uh, but
you should be able to get them
yourself so that you, you trust
what they say. And so I think
that we're gonna be seeing
different language around that
that would not allow them to
provide their own, but
would say that if you already
have it, and it's timely, it's
within 90 days. Use the one you
already have.
That's the subsection A and B on
page 9.
Right, right. That's going to be
kind of a rewrite of that
section 4 on page 9.
Um, there's also some, some
language.
Uh, the top of page 10, where
it's the end of that section 4,
if
That would require the landlord
to give the applicant.
Uh, copies of any reports and we
just want to make it clear that
it's, of all reports obtained.
So we don't want this to somehow
be read to compel the landlord
to go out and and get reports to
provide to the applicant, if
they have the reports and
they've gotten them, then they
need to give them a copy.
And that's just, just to make
that clear. And then there's
this ling the last sentence of
Section 4 of the screening fee
shall be refunded if the
application is not processed, I
don't think that makes sense to
be in the background check
section. I think that should
probably be one of these earlier
sections, probably section 3,
where it's just, uh, we're just
talking about the screening fee
in general.
And then
On page 12.
Line 16.
And this is talking about
About a private right existing
private right of action to
enforce the terms of the rental
agreement. They there was
language added in there that
saying an applicant.
Can bring that, but that it
already says any party.
the rental agreement can. So I
don't, I don't think it's
necessary to specify an
applicant there. Now applicant
isn't just the person who turns
in the application. It's also a
guarantor, it's a co-signer, but
those people are gonna be a
party to the agreement, so I
just don't think that language
is necessary. And then finally,
Mr. Chair, and this is just for
you, Mr. Chair. Uh, section 8,
is essentially making uh a UPA
claim.
Not in the UPA and I know that
you like having UPA claims in
the UPA. So my suggestion was
that
They come back with if they, if
they want to make this a a
violation of the unfair
Practices Act that they come
back with that as an amendment
to that act itself rather than
the uniformed owner resident
relations Act.
That's a very thorough of you,
Senator. I won that last point,
if I may, a privilege. I want to
make sure that you do these
things, not because it's my way
of thinking about things, but
because you think that's a good
way to practice law.
How's that you need to think.
It's been working for me,
Senator Stewart.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I missed the
first two changes on page 9, so
do he could repeat those.
1st 2 at the top, not the new
material civil penalties
discussion. Yes, so that was, so
the first one on page 9 is line
2. It's just adding the word
certified before mail. If you're
mailing someone back a fee that
they
They sent
mail back certified to make sure
that they're actually it's
getting, you have confirmation
that I got to them.
And then the other part is line
7 through 11, taking out that
subsection D.
Uh, because I, I think it's,
it's just
unnecessary.
Thank you.
Yeah
Anyone else suggestions we're
gonna roll over a boat, uh,
short and then out.
Thank you, Mr. Cha.
Just to clarification, um, going
back to page 8.
Uh,
with certain owner shall return
this screening fee within 30
calendar days to an applicant.
And, but there is a, it says if.
And then section 2 says if the
owner does not obtain a consumer
credit report.
As a performer reference check
or doesn't use any kind of
screen. My question is kind of
logistically, how would the
applicant know?
How would the applicant know
what they are?
To back and refund.
Mr. Chair and Senator, thank you
for the clarifying question.
This is the area where we do
want to keep in the language
that the applicant would be um
entitled to seeing that report
if it was if it was run and paid
for by the landlord, so they
would have a copy of it. And so
they didn't have a copy and the
landlord couldn't prove that
they did anything with that $50
screening fee, then that would
be a case where it'd be
returned. Very good. Um, see if
I had one other.
I think Senator to do he covered
a lot of those.
Um, on page 11 regarding the
line 13 late fee shall be
calculated only based on rent.
Uh, would you want to like to
explain that? So would it be a
percentage of the rent in terms
of a fee or how would that be
calculated?
Mr. Terrence Senator, thanks for
the opportunity to explain this,
this piece right here. So right
now in current landlord tenant
law, late fees are at 10% of
delinquent friends and so we're
in this, uh, section we are
trying to lower that to 5% to
bring us in line with other
states that have also lowered
their late fee assessments we're
kind of in the minority right
now 10% late fee assessment, um,
and then the section, uh, that
we wanted to clarify what we see
sometimes is that um late fees
are assessed off.
of rent, including things like
utilities, a pet fee, a parking
fee, um, all those ongoing fees
that we wanted to clarify that
here, what base rent meant.
OK, very good.
And then on the penalty, um,
section 7.
It says here an owner who
charges an unauthorized
screening fee shall be liable
for $200.
And um
And shall return all these.
Who's gonna be
Who's $50 going to.
Mr. uh, chair senators, um, yes,
this is, uh, this provision is
for, um, private right of
enforcement, so, um, you know, a
lawyer who is is representing an
individual could potentially
bring a lawsuit to to um attempt
to collect this $250.
So go to the, excuse me, Mr.
Chair, so it would go to the
Uh, lawyer who's acting on
behalf of the applicant.
I apologize, Mr. Chair,
senators, um, this would go to
the, it would go back to the
tenant.
To the right. OK. Very good.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I do want
to thank um the advocates for
reaching out and working with me
on some of the language of I
almost um filled the bill
I wanna thank, uh, Senator Wirth
for helping with the motion, um,
and purely accidental, but um,
I, uh, I, uh, when we, when we
talked, I didn't realize how
much effort it takes to get
folks into into housing, uh,
nonprofits who work to do that.
Uh, the cost, the time, and uh a
lot of times, of course, there's
rejections, um, having to do
with a number of things, um, so
I just, I have to admire that. I
think though that um and this
was brought up earlier that her
work was carrying a bill, um,
to, uh, to look at, you know,
creating more housing.
And what we have here really is
the official supply and demand.
We don't have any competition.
Um, you know, folks have really
no choice.
As you can see sometimes
they're, they're they're only
choice is to have to go into an
apartment that is like
That we maintained, um, and yet,
uh, these landlords can charge
what they want because they're
charging with the market would
bear.
And so, um,
You know, whatever, I think what
we can do, I, I disagree with
some of the zoning, um,
recommendations, but, uh, I do
think that what we can do to
construct, you know, more new
housing, um, I think we should
do that. So thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Anyone else,
Sir Paul, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, for, for
Going forward and making those,
you know, efforts to to get with
the other parties, um, a lot of
those questions that I had had
been covered by uh Senator
Duhag. I thought those were a
lot of great recommendations
specifically around the
background checks and really
tightening that up because I do
have issues with somebody being
up the ri their own and I did
just have one question that's
more for how you guys look at
this in future years, which is
that $50 fee for the background
or credit checks, obviously, uh,
those, you know, were
pushing that currently as far as
what those things cost, so how's
that gonna get updated as time
goes on.
Mr. Chair and Senator, it's a
great question. Um, we looked at
other states, there are 17 other
states that have passed similar
legislation and there's not a
lot of states that have tied it
to increases in consumer price
index, but it's something that
we could consider, and I can
talk to the um the sponsor about
that too, um, what we are
seeing, I think we see largely a
lot of application fees that are
around $100. Sometimes we do see
$30 application fees, and I, I
think we recognize that we will
be losing out a little bit by
putting that cap at that 50
because we'll know people will.
So that 50, but it felt like a
fair compromise to make, um,
knowing that a lot of our
smaller mom and pop landlords
are really charging those $30
application fee, so we will lose
something there by seeing those
probably increased to $50 but I,
I thank you for your question.
Thank you. No further questions.
Anyone else?
So appreciate, yep, the good
suggestions. I, um, lot of, a
lot of questions I had have been
asked. The only question I I
really had the same question is
uh Senator Paul, which is how
much does it actually cost these
days to do this and that, are we
gonna be back here down the road
we we may.
The um
There are a couple of references
in here. I, I would agree with
that, I think everything Senator
Doug was suggesting and for
Senator Hamlin, just for future
reference or anyone else that's
new to the committee the
suggestion that this is my
preference, but I think it's a
good blog, um, instead of
putting, we could put unfair
trade practices throughout all
of our statutes in any number of
different places because there's
a lot of things, automobiles and
any number of things we'd end up
with unfair trade practices,
language, everywhere in our
statutes, and if you're a lawyer
and you're trying to figure out,
well, what is the law on unfair
trade practices? You have to go
through.
All the statutes. Um, so we
generally try and consolidate
all of that. We're in the unfair
trade price that where we say,
these will be things that will
be unfair trade practices.
That's, that's why I got a
tutorial on that, on how complex
that is and so those
conversations were had today
about that very same thing. He
just made for lawmaking, right,
is to have one place. If you're
a lawyer, you're trying to find
out what are violations then for
a trip that you look at the
Unfair Trade Practice Act. You
don't look for every instance in
the statutes where some
Legislator decided to put this
in the unfair Trade Practices
Act and you can understand many
of us would be that everywhere,
right, um, and so it becomes a
kind of a big burden. The um,
the only question I had, I don't
know whether your experts have
any idea. In all cases, the
applicant is to receive a copy
of the credit report. Are there
restrictions on that? Are, are,
are some uh credit reporting
agencies, uh, limiting the
dissemination of the report
itself to the uh person with the
report.
It's been retained for I can go
first and then I'll let one of
the experts, um, you know, the
background check, um, uh, the
credit report was of much
discussion because uh there were
a lot of suggestions when we met
with the apartment association
and with with other folks, and
it's really, um, but also the
conversation is anybody can kind
of make up something and make it
look professional. Uh, and so we
wanted to, uh, part of it was
that
Potential tenants were getting
charged for multiple poles of
their credit report. And I'm
sorry, I didn't ask my question
I'm sorry.
So I'm asking something
different. I think your expert
maybe knows what I take care of
it instead of me screwing it up.
That's right. You, you
understand my question, I think,
right, Mr. Chair, thank you for
the question. We do understand
it and it's something that um
our lawyers are going to look
into to make sure that there's
no implications um under the
Fair Credit Reporting Act and
those sorts of things. We'll
we'll double check that that's
exactly what it is. We have a
lot of federal law that applies
to the collection practices and
all those, and I'm, I, I don't
know whether it's just me.
Maybe I've got that look on my
face, but look, there's more
than a few times when I'll go,
uh, and apply for credit buying
a vehicle, what else they told
me they can't show me the credit
report, right? Um, you're
nodding your head affirmative,
you've had that experience. I
don't know why, and I usually
get really angry and threatened
to sue them and then they give a
credit report.
Um, for exactly that reason,
right, in both in some kind of
federal law that
Hope nobody's listening. I don't
really even know the federal
law, but I sure cite it when
make them believe that. So they
show they show me the credit
report, but they'll tell me
we're not supposed to show that
to you. I don't understand that
at all, but you're building a
couple of places says the
applicant, uh, prospective
tenant is to get the report and
I'm, I'm not sure that we can
require that to some kind of
problem, so look at that for me
too please.
That's all. Anyone else?
Thank you very much, Senator.
Thank you so much and thank you
for all your conversations.
OK,
so on a second.
OK
Steinor.
You still here?
you.
me.
Yes,
and we've done 267
forward.
appreciate.
All right, senators, whichever
one of you wants to go, uh, give
me just a second. Do we have
people with support.
OK,
Senator, so just confirm for me
we've got a
So that um
so that we're on the same page.
I've got.
6 individuals who have indicated
they're part of your
presentation, Miss Crystal
Romero Deb Thorn, David Glass,
Light up Tim Timmy, Amy Wong and
Jeff Holland. Is that right? All
those part of your presentation
Mr. Chairman, there, there is
another individual or two here
maybe some folks online.
What we like to do is keep the
remarks real brief and,
and use the time for others who
are here, including the
firefighter and
some others I would love to give
our time.
Yeah, and I'm not sure whether
you're familiar with the rules
of the committee, Senatorste
more and so, uh, Senator Hickey
maybe he's nodding his head yet,
so we have people registering
events so I can keep control
and, and manage the time. So
we've got an organized group.
That is identified on the
signing as, as organized party
presentation, so they would be
part of a 15-minute
presentation, but then we have a
couple of individuals who are
not part of that organized
presentation of the year you
want to have others to speak to.
If we do that sooner then I've
got to tell everybody they got
one minute or something because
I don't know how long we're
gonna be. If I have no idea how
many people are gonna speak, um,
I'm unable to control the, the
committee, so that I've got an
organized presentation, so what
I'll do is I'll, I'll recognize
you up to 10 minutes with that.
group and then we'll see where
we're at, OK. Thank you. There's
some firefighter here I would
say swapped them out for, for um
for uh Jeff Holland at the end.
But, but otherwise, we'll turn
it loose, Mr.
Chair,
the firefighter that's why I do
have Jeff Holland, uh, he's
listed so you can sub him in,
but again, that'll be part of
your time too but we'll just
start running the show here.
Yeah, and the only other thing
that's important, Senator, is
when we put the time limitation,
I'm rely upon you to cut people
off. So I, I don't know whether
one.
She needs to speak for 6 or 7 or
8 minutes, uh, they may, they
may very well, you may want to
have one person speaking for 10
minutes, that's fine, but um I'm
relying on you all to manage the
time that somebody's going on
long, you're gonna cut them off,
OK?
Bye.
So let's turn loose. Thank you,
commit. Thank you committee for
hearing this bill. This is
Senate Bill 219 to create a
medical psilocybin mushroom
program.
Um, psilocybin mushroom has been
researched and proven to be
medically efficacious in a
variety of ways were able to
breakthrough therapy by the
Federal Drug Administration for
Major depressive order, but also
for substance use disorder or
PTSD for end of life anxiety.
This bill starts with those 4
qualifying conditions. So we
seek, we developed this
legislation, Mr. Chair committee
with the Department of Health.
We spent much of the last 6
months going over this bill
every single word of this bill
with advocates, leading people
all the way up to the top of the
executive branch, um,
It creates an ad the, the
program itself would not start
until December 31st, 2027 of the
Department of Health would
establish and make rules for
everything from who are the
qualifying licensed providers
to producers, to dosage, to
medical setting, unlike
cannabis, this would only be um
administered in a medical
setting, um,
Often it only takes a dose or
two. This would not be like
cannabis. There is no car, there
is no taking this at home, um,
very different in that respect.
Um, as I mentioned, it starts
with 4 qualified conditions,
creates a few, and then it
permits the Secretary of Health
to add additional medical
conditions as there's data to
support that creates an advisory
board, which we have an
amendment in front of you to add
a member to that or maybe be
discussion about other good
people that should be on that.
Um, it creates an equity fund
when we fund it so that until
insurance covers this and even
maybe what they do for those
that don't have it, that we are
providing this potentially
life-saving treatment to people
who don't have the resources and
also research is going to
continue to be an important
thing. So we have a research
fund. We have one of the leading
research programs in the country
here at UNM. And so with that,
we've got some colleagues here
that, um, and of course, we've
had in the state of Oregon,
they've started a program
they've had over 9000 patients
be a part of this.
And uh very safely at that. So,
we've got a lot of track record
that we can look to nationally.
So with that, uh, I'd like to
introduce Doctor Hick, uh,
Senator Doctor Hick Hickey and
Representative Andre Romero make
a comment before we turn to
that.
Mr. Chairman and committee, uh,
essentially ditto, this is, uh,
as important to society as the
other fungus that blew in off of
a window sill onto a petri dish
with pneumococcal bacteria, and
we got penicillin. This is a
fungus that in mental health is
gonna have this dramatic an
impact. Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair members of the
committee, um, I want to thank
the Department of Health as well
for being so instrumental in all
of the experts who have actually
helped us craft this bill before
you today. This is very narrow
and science-based. Again, it's
only in the controlled space
that psilocybin would be
administered and the folks who
would be applying it would have
to be well trained in the
facilities would have to be well
managed. Um, this is medically
controlled, and as we continue
to follow the science about
where even our consciousness
comes from where our emotions
are.
developed and how those that
evolution took place in our
brains, but we know that
psilocybin has, um, had some
medically focused, um,
incredible results, and this is
why I'm so thrilled to be a part
of um this effort to bring New
Mexico into the future of
science and how we look at
patients and their health, um,
for treating things that we have
not had a lot of success in
doing worse psilocybin has had
an immense amount of success in
um not having to repeat the type
of medical.
Um, pill-based sort of
administration that we've seen
in the past, um, and with that,
um, Mr. uh, we'll stand for
questions, I think Mr. Chair, I
would add the Department of
Health is here, uh, Dominic
Serlo, which I really
appreciate. So if you have
questions about
How they anticipate the program,
um, rolling out, uh, you know,
he, he, you know, if we approve
this, then he could certainly
answer those questions. With
that, you know, I'd love to run
down the list, Mr. Chair, and
whoever else we have time for
it,
right?
We've turned it in, but I'll
pull it up. We're gonna start.
OK.
So
Folks start lining up, that'd be
great, Crystal.
Doctor Glass
OK. Crystal, we'll start with
you.
Everyone kind of keep their
comments to a minute or less,
that'd be great.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Crystal C Romero, and
I'm a retired Army master
sergeant. I served here in the
state of New Mexico, in the New
Mexico Army National Guard
primarily full time.
I served with honor, knowing the
risks, knowing the sacrifices
that I'd have to make.
But nothing prepared me for the
battle within.
My head. PTSD and moral injury
that nearly took my life.
In 2014, I was medically
discharged from
The military for post-traumatic
stress disorder.
In August of 2014, I attempted
suicide. Had I succeeded.
My 3 daughters would have been
handed more than just a folded
flag. They would have been they
would have inherited my pain.
I have tried everything the VA
has had to offer.
Yeah, I still battled relentless
suicidal ideation.
It wasn't until I worked with
psilocybin under guided care
that I found healing.
Right now veterans like me are
forced to leave the country.
Spending thousands of dollars to
access the treatment that could
save lives.
New Mexico has a duty.
To its veterans and its first
responders.
To provide access to the ceiling
right here at home.
We're not asking for pity.
We're asking for the tools to
heal so that we can continue to
serve.
Not just as veterans, but as
parents and as leaders in this
community.
My duty has never ended, and
neither should yours.
Passing SB 219 isn't about
policy. It's about upholding our
commitment to those who have
already given everything.
It's about ensuring that no
veteran first responder, or
survivor is left behind when
healing is within reach.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Deb Thorn.
I'm a doctor of medical science
physician associate, licensed
and practicing medical provider
in Las Cruces. As a primary care
and integrative psychiatry
specialist, I can tell you that
more than 80% of my patients
suffered with major depressive
disorder, treatment resistant
depression, as well as end of
life distress.
Las Cruces especially has a
large and growing population of
older adults that present with
debilitating anxiety and
existential distress.
Patients are not responding to
the standard of care for these
conditions.
We need to do better and provide
options that work and medical
psilocybin has been proven to
have significant and durable
effects.
As someone who is trained in
both allopathic and psychedelic
assisted medicine. I've
witnessed firsthand the life
changing impact that medical
silocybin can have in a
medically supported environment.
Current research supports
evidence for psilocybin therapy
as proposed in the medical
silocybin Act. Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, I
strongly urge you to consider
the passing of Senate Bill 219
to better the lives of New
Mexicans suffering without hope.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and the
committee. I'm here today
speaking solely in my personal
capacity as a private citizen.
My views do not reflect that of
the VA or the DOD.
My name is Doctor David Glass,
and I'm a board certified
emergency medicine physician. I
trained, practiced, and I live
here in New Mexico.
I'm also an active duty veteran
of special operations, and I
served multiple tours in both
Afghanistan and Iraq.
I've witnessed the devastating
impact of mental health crises,
both in the emergency department
by New Mexico residents and
among my fellow veterans. As an
ER doc, I treat patients daily
who struggle with crises in
their mental health, and New
Mexico has one of the highest
rates of suicide in the country.
The current standard treatments,
a tackle box of meds are
failing, and that often leads to
dependency.
I can cite the literature for
you and all the numbers, but I'm
gonna speak the truth. I'm gonna
speak my truth because my truth
is a shared truth.
I can count on two hands the
number of service members I know
personally that died in combat.
I can count on two hands, the
number of veterans I know that
have committed suicide since
taking off the uniform and
leaving service. But now, I can
tell you honestly and truthfully
that I can now count on more
than 2 hands the number of
special operators whose lives
have been saved by taking
psilocybin through guided
therapy in Mexico.
One of my best friends, Bonnar
of Bronze Star recipient,
recently returned from a
psilocybin journey, and his life
has changed forever. No more
medications, no raging fits, and
not one drop of alcohol. He
confided in me as I was
preparing for this today. He
said, brother,
I had less than a year to live.
That's how dark it was.
Everything has changed for me
since experiencing this
medicine.
I urge you all to support SP 219
and allow New Mexico to provide
a safe, regulated path for those
suffering mental health crises.
I'm happy to make myself
available to any of the
committee members, should you
have any further questions.
Thank you.
Hello, Chairman and senators. My
name is Amy Wong Hope, and I'm a
clinical social worker in Santa
Fe, New Mexico. I'm a very
experienced trauma specialist
and practiced for about 15 years
now and trained with Doctor
Bessel van der Kolk who is
really known as the grandfather
of treating trauma, um, and has
defined it in the diagnostic
statistic manual. I also am a
certified and licensed
psilocybin provider in Colorado,
a clinical facilitator. I'm here
to support SB.
219 because as a person who has
been an educator and founding a
psychedelic studies program at
Southwestern College. I have
seen and I have looked at the
statistics across the entire
spectrum over the past 15 years
that has been published. The
current efficacy rate for all of
the diagnoses that are defined
in this bill is about 25 to 30%.
That is abysmal.
Psychedelics provide a 3rd
generation of psychotropics that
really can have durable effects,
and we're not talking about that
they would need to take
psilocybin every week, every
month. We're talking about 1 or
2 treatments, and people would
be
Absent, they would not have
symptoms of their treatment
resistant depression, PTSD,
distress from terminal illness.
All of these things and
substance use, the numbers are
staggering in the research, and
I am happy to provide that to
you anytime you need it. I have
presentations out, out, out the
window. I mean, I I I, you know,
and I just urge you to support
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Larry Martinez. I'm a
retired healthcare
administrator, and I'm speaking
only as a private citizen, but I
urge passage of this bill
because of the efficacy that we
have seen in a number of studies
and surveys that have been done,
it is a great treatment for
post-traumatic stress disorder
My name, my name is Chris
Biskowski, sir.
Hi
Hi, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Doctor Lida
Fahmy, a board certified
internal medicine physician,
educator and faculty at the UNA
School of Medicine, as a
survivor of war and political
terror in Iran as a child. I've
now dedicated my career to
transforming trauma into
purpose, with over a decade in
academic medicine, I authored
the conscious physician method,
and Amazon bestseller and
developed a nationally
recognized certification program
for the safe in
of psilocybin. I also serve as
the hospice medical director for
ABQ Hospice and palliative.
New Mexico faces a mental health
crisis, one of the worst in the
nation for access to care with
soaring addiction, suicide, and
untreated PTSD. In just one year
of pandemic isolation, child
torture cases in our state
increased twelvefold,
highlighting the devastating
long-term effects of unresolved
trauma.
These patterns persist in
adulthood, fueling addiction,
PTSD, and criminal behavior.
Veterans in particular suffer
from extreme PTSD with suicide
rates for surpassing the
national average. We need bold
evidence-based solutions.
Research from Johns Hopkins, NYU
Imperial College of London and
many others confirms
psilocybin's efficacy in
treating PTSD addiction.
Treatment resistant depression
and end of life anxiety. A
single guided session can
provide immediate substantial
and lasting relief. The hospice
and palliative care community
recognizes the urgent need for
this therapy. New Mexico already
empowers dying patients to
choose medical aid in dying, we
must ensure no patient elects
made solely due to unrelieved
anxiety or depression when
Simons assisted therapy could
provide relief. SB 219, the
medical psilocybin Act offers a
responsible science-backed path
forward. I urge you to support
this legislation and help bring
healing to those who need it
most in New Mexico. Thank you so
much for your time, leadership,
and service.
We've exceeded 15 minutes, but
I'm gonna go ahead and just give
one minute each to Jeff Holland,
uh, Chris Pikussy, and Miguel
Tilman, who all registered, so,
um, Jeff Holland, are you on the
phone?
Yes, Mr. Chair, can you and the
committee members hear me? Yes,
we're going to be up for a
minute and I'll have to catch
you off in a minute. Thank you,
sir, and uh my apologies for not
being there in person. This is a
very important uh subject for
me, as I know, uh, many of the
committee members who have
worked with me on other issues
around substance use disorder,
homelessness, trauma,
depression, um, I would be
there, but tonight at 8 o'clock
as I do every Wednesday night, I
run a group with approximately
20 people who were dealing with
issues of treatment resistant
depression.
trauma, substance use disorder,
and uh tonight we'll be without
one of our members because a
couple of weeks ago he committed
suicide and uh so he won't be
with us anymore. And
unfortunately, I could not
Uh, excuse me, I, I, I could not
tell him of a place in New
Mexico where he could get
psilocybin treatment, um, I
could only say that he would
have to go out of the country,
which he could not afford. And
uh I've been working in this
field for well over 15 years as
far as psychedelics go, and I've
been a clinical therapist and
worked in the fields that I
mentioned for over 25 years, and
I think it's imperative that we
utilize this tool not only for
the people that are suffering in
our community with substance use
disorder, trauma.
treatment resistant depression,
end of life, but very much so
for the people that often are on
the spot dealing with these
people in times of crisis, and
that's our first responders, so,
um, it is with great, great
pride that I suggest we please
pass this bill and utilize it as
a very, very effective weapon
with very, very few side effects
to help those that are suffering
the most in our state. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair and
committee members.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Chris
Biscuski, and I'm a Marine
veteran served in Iraq and
Afghanistan. I'm also a Purple
Heart recipient. After 8 years
of service, I returned home and
found myself in a battle I was
never trained to fight. PTSD,
depression, substance abuse, and
traumatic brain injury. I tried
throughout the years, different
treatments and modalities of
healing, but nothing worked. For
a decade, I spiraled into
hopelessness, burdened by guilt,
shame, and despair.
Eventually, I had to leave the
country to access the only
treatment that truly helped me.
Psychedelics gave me my life
back. They helped me process my
trauma, reconnect with my loved
ones, and for the first time in
years, feel hope.
My story is not unique.
Thousands of veterans, first
responders, and those suffering
from treatment resistant
depression have found relief
through psilocybin assisted
therapy. Please support SB 219.
Thank you, sir, and thank you
for your service, commendations,
uh, Miguel Tilman. Yes, Tim.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Senators.
My name is Miguel Tipen. I'm a
captain with Albuquerque Fire
Rescue, uh, president of IFF
Local 244 and I represent 2000
firefighters in the city of
Mexico. Uh, I appreciate and
thank the
for bringing this. I also thank
every veteran who was brave
enough to, to stand up here and
tell their story. This is a very
important initiative for the
potential that it can bring to
uh my firefighters in New Mexico
and all firefighters in in the
country for that matter. Um, the
qualifying, uh, qualifying.
initiatives that are most
important are PTSD and substance
abuse for us. Um, this is going
to prevent more suicides since
20019. There's been more
suicides in the line of duty
deaths in the fire service. The
potential for this is huge. We
urge your support for this, for
this bill. Thank you.
Beats everybody who's registered
in support. We don't have anyone
registered in opposition, so we
can turn to members of the
committee.
Senator Brandon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, senators and
Representatives. I was ready to
move and do pass as soon as our
veterans spoke. So thank you
guys for being here and for
sharing that. I just have some
basic questions as far as
supply. Where, where is it
grown, whether there's states
have legalized it or where it
still remains illegal and I
guess what, what is the hold
back? Like,
What's the delay?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, thank you
for your questions. Um, so right
now, Oregon is legalized the
program. Colorado has legalized
it, but they're still standing
up the program. We would be the
3rd state. Um, so I know usually
we wait until we're, we're 49 or
50, um, but in this case we're,
uh, we're we're we're backing
that trend a little bit, but
with this bill, what this bill
does, Mr. Chair, Senator, is,
um, the production, you would,
we
Basically the Department of
Health will determine qualified
producers here in the state of
New Mexico, and we know
silocybin can be grown in them.
You know, it's a mushroom, so it
could be grown in various
mediums of mushrooms growing,
but you want to control,
obviously the quality, the
dosage, be very precise on that
in a medical sense. So the
Department of Health would
determine if the bill speaks to
that, the production and the
licensed producers of this, and,
and we would expect that that
you would want those to be um
New Mexicans, including could be
from New Mexico State or or
other, uh, you know, producers
of those in the state. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. So does the
Department of Ag have any
oversight of this?
Um
There's uh Mr. Chair, Senator,
there's no, there's no
Department of Ag here in the
bill. It would be Department of
Health, but certainly they could
collaborate with the Department
of Ag if, if that was
appropriate.
It will charge you $5000 penalty
fees.
Thank you. Well, Mr. Chair, um,
we've done this one.
Mr. Chairman Senators, just to
clarify though, we do not have
any supply growers here in the
state of New Mexico, and so
would it be legal to bring it
into Colorado as soon as this
bill passed, or would we have to
start sourcing it here in New
Mexico. So, um,
Thank you for legal reasons, you
would not want to bring it
across state lines, and I think
this was something identified by
our astute attorneys here and so
actually this is where, um, you
know, we're going to want this
to be produced in the state of
New Mexico and not travel across
state lines. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And so I am, I am very torn on
this because I, I know that so
Simon has amazing, uh, potential
for
Substance use disorder, uh,
intractable depression, I mean,
it is.
There's no, the efficacy.
Uh, there's, there's no question
in my mind about the efficacy.
Um, and I, and I think it's, and
I'm really important medicine to
have available.
Um,
One of my brothers, uh, is an
addiction psychiatrist who is,
has done multi been involved in
multiple studies, uh, and, and
pilot programs using civil
asylum, and it tells me
But what an amazing thing it is
for his patients.
He also tells me we should not
pass this bill.
Um
That, uh,
That he has real concerns, so,
so the, the studies that he's
the one he's in right now isn't
any and I NIH funded.
uh study on using psilocybin on
patients who are on methadone
maintenance treatments, but are
still using fentanyl to see if
it uh might help them stop using
fentanyl, and that is uh a study
coordinated through NYU but that
also involves UNM. He was
previously involved in the UNM
years ago they, they were doing,
um,
uh, trials for alcohol use
disorder, uh, with psilo Simon.
He was involved in those as
well.
I he expressed to me real
concerns.
That, um,
That researchers are still
figuring out or still, still,
you know, determining how
What this, he says researchers
are still working on a model for
safe medical use of psilocybin.
Um, he worries that if we
do this as a state.
And it does not have
Kind of the, the level.
Of oversight that
These, uh, these projects have
now with the federal government,
um, that there's gonna be
Some, some some negative
results. Uh, some,
You know,
Someone who
I, I don't even know why, but,
and that that will set it back
significantly. That then there
will be backlash that will set
this whole movement back
significantly.
And so, I am a believer in this
therapy.
He is a believer in this
therapy, and I am hearing from
him that, that this
That that a cautious approach is
a better one to in the long run,
ensure that this therapy is
available, uh, overall. Um,
So that's my
That's my kind of philosophical
uh issue on this, but Mr. Chair,
I'm also, I'm just gonna kind of
run through some, some issues on
the bill. Um,
OK
And I'm gonna kind of and so
So there's, so looking at, at
page 2, and, and, and the
senator someone had mentioned
there was an amendment. I hadn't
seen that, but I don't know if
that changes anything, but, but
there is an amendment. Thank you
very much. OK, Mr. Chair. And so
that might change some of this,
but I'll, I'll just kind of
start with what I'm going
through. So on page 2 line 7,
there's a reference to an
approved healthcare provider.
I don't know what that means. I
don't know who in a, there's no
definition for what an approved
healthcare provider would be.
page 2 line 14, is a reference
to integrate and integration
session. I think that would need
to be defined as well.
The definition of producer on
lines 15 to 20 is really kind of
combining the concepts, uh, that
we have in cannabis right now of
a producer and a manufacturer,
um,
That might be OK. I don't know
that they are separate concepts
in the cannabis context, uh, so
I would just note that it would
kind of become not in line with,
with how we're doing that. On
the top of page 3, lines 2 and
3.
Uh, this is a big concern. It
does not, it says it does.
This is in the definition of
psilocybin.
Does not include synthetic or
synthetic analogs of psilocybin.
And that is a concern because
what my brother tells me they're
doing, uh, he says,
In research, we don't use actual
mushrooms, which are unreliable
in terms of dosing. Nature does
not equally distribute
psilocybin throughout the actual
mushroom. We use synthetic
psilocybin so we can be exact
with doses.
So if this is excluding
synthetic psilocybin. Um, I
think it's gonna be hard to do.
Do to get the right dosing. Um,
I, I think, I think that
exclusion would need to, to be
taken out, but I also don't know
what other implications taking
that out, with taking that
exception that would have.
Section 4, the language of
section 4 kind of contradicts
itself, because it says,
FDA approved products contain
silo fiber are exempt from this
act, but then it goes on to say
such product is
And it goes on to radio. Talk
about them and regulate them
under this act.
Um,
On page 5.
Lines 22 and 23, um, there's a,
a reference to appropriate uh in
developing the program, the
partners are established
appropriate qualifying
conditions for producers,
clinicians, and qualified
patients. But then when you look
back at the definition of
qualifying conditions. This is.
Post-traumatic stress disorder,
major treatment resistant
depression. These are things
that would only apply to
patients. They would not apply
to, to conditions or, or I'm
sorry, to, to producers or
clinicians.
Um, on page 7.
Uh, Section 8 is talking about
the board that would be created.
And there we have a couple of
Uh
Uh
Memberships of the board that
are specified in enrolled member
of an Indian nation, tribe of
Pueblo, uh, behavioral health
equity advocates, uh,
representative healthcare
authority. I see that, that,
this, um,
Amendment would also include uh
a veteran of the Armed Services.
No healthcare providers are
included.
I think that would, it would be
really important that healthcare
providers be a required position
on this board.
Um, and then still on page 7
looking at subsection B, which
starts at 9:13. I think there's
just some, some repetitive stuff
here. To me, subsection one and
subsection 4 are, are the same
thing. Um,
So I think there is
Uh, there are some, some
drafting issues with the bill.
That, that if this goes forward,
definitely would need to be
addressed. Uh,
But overall I am, I, I am.
I think convinced.
By the person, the only person I
know who is actually doing this
work.
And it's telling me
Well, this could have
This could set it back instead
of a lance it potentially.
And so I, I think I am going to
To take the cautious approach
that
That he is urging. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Just chatting is important since
this has been.
Program's been stood up in
Oregon and Colorado, if they've
been negative results, and
there've been backlash.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, so in
Oregon, this was just disclosed,
there's been over 9000. I
thought they said 12,000, but,
uh, the data I have is over 9000
and they had 11 adverse things
where they had to call for help.
And I think that's over 90.
98%. So I mean that's, that's
hard data.
The state of Oregon.
Mr. Chair, I certainly
appreciate, I mean, obviously,
your brother's got the direct
experience. I mean, Doctor
Hickey, Senator Hickey, you
know, just any, any comments
specific about the medical side
and, and the potential risk of
doing this.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Wirth, uh, there's risk with
anything medicinal. Um, this is
a medicine, uh, and as you watch
the ads for medicines, you know,
the streams on at, at the end.
There's always some risk, but
the Oregon data is incredibly
strong. Uh, I respect, uh, uh,
probably Doctor Doigg's
experience, but that's an
opinion, and there are many
other people who have very
different opinions. This has
been studied.
Johns Hopkins for over 20 years,
the clinical protocol that comes
out of this, and these are
people who've been doing it
directly as well is one in which
uh it's usually done with a
group of people, uh, the, uh,
there is a, a journey and then
there is questioning the
integration. The integration is
where the guides who are very
experienced in this.
Bring the people together and
there's as much that comes out
of people talking in the group
and sharing their experiences
that actually is part of the
healing process. So that's why
the integration component is so
important, and then there is
another day for a journey, and
then another integration and at
Hopkins, I believe they have
basically a week-long model in
which they do a 3rd day and the
integration, and I can't tell
you exactly what Oregon is
doing, um, but again, it is
producing
these phenomenal results that
you heard tonight, uh, there,
there may be a, uh, again, with
all due respect, um, and, you
know, I hear it said about
lawyers, you talk to one lawyer,
you have one opinion, um, quite
frankly, when you talk to
doctors in particularly, uh,
people, while they, they have
their experiences. Sometimes
you're gonna get very different
opinions. A lot of medicine is
personal experience, um, but I
think to delay this with
really set back the impact we
need to start to have. We're
doing major behavioral health
initiative in this state and to
pull back from this now, uh,
when we have such great results
out of Oregon, and we will have
a committee doing oversight. Uh,
yes, you could, you could have a
provider on there, um, but, uh,
uh, we, we know this bill has
been guided by people doing
research at UNM, uh, Doctor
Larry Lehman, Doctor, uh, the
head of the department.
actually been quite a bit of
research with the mushrooms, and
they are not giving us these
negative experiences, and they
do not caution us to hold back.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, can
you, can you address the issue
of synthetic?
And, and why that's
Excluded because I mean, that
does make to the extent that
that is something that's used to
get the exact dosage. I mean,
that argument made sense to me,
so I guess what was the logic
and
I do my best to explain it.
It's, so when we talk about
synthetic products, we're
talking about a manufactured
variation of it, and, you know,
your brother, with all due
respect Senator, there is an FDA
trial right now of a synthetic
product that uses sillas and and
that may be the experience that,
that your brother's referring to
possibly, um, but synthetics,
there the research has been done
has to do with what they call
the whole mushroom, the natural
product, and they
As far as the data, it is not in
synthetic products, nor is that
the expertise of the researchers
here in this state, the medical
community, and so, uh, and there
is a whole synthetic thing going
on with research by the FDA.
There's a drug, that's why we
excluded FDA products, but that
is not the expertise the
wheelhouse it is in the whole
mushroom natural product, and so
it was very much a uh medical
regulatory decision to exclude
synthetic products because it's,
you shouldn't be thinking that
as a part of a natural product.
You should think of that as a
manufactured chemical derivative
that's a different animal
altogether.
And Mr. Chair, Oregon and
Colorado with synthetics, what
did they do?
That's a good question, you
know.
Uh,
OK, maybe if I could call, uh,
Amy Wong who's a licensed
provider in Colorado.
We give it accurate answer if
you like.
We appreciate your input, but we
don't, we don't know.
So just, just one final thing.
I, I, I gotta say, I think this
is perhaps a first on page 5,
section 6. I thought I was going
to see an immunity, a felony.
And instead, I saw the exact
opposite. I said, basically,
we're not going to give you any
kind of immunity and it's a
petty misdemeanor, so I
appreciate that. I truly think
that's, I mean, I don't.
Generally, everyone comes in
wanting to immunize everybody
and felonize everybody, so I
just appreciate the way that was
drafted. So again, I, I think
that testimony of those in
support, incredibly powerful. I
also know that
You know, I've talked a bunch to
Senator Brandt about this, and
again,
Uh, I appreciate this. I think
it sounds like there's some
things we might be able to
tighten up in the language, uh,
I, I certainly support it plan
to vote for it. Thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I
apologize for, for getting so
excited we got ahead of
ourselves. This man just does
two things, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, I'll move the amendment
for discussion.
Thank you, Ms.h. Sorry about
that. The amendment removes the
appropriation. I will say
there's $2 million in House Bill
2 to stand up this program
contingent upon this bill
passing.
So at this point in time, we
think it's appropriate to strip
the amendment, uh, sorry, strip
the appropriation and add the
veteran to the advisory board.
And that's the two things the
does.
question.
Any objection to the amendment?
Moments adopted them. All right,
Senator Worth, thank you for
you. No, anyone else?
And I'm sure so
Senator Hickey was talking about
the, the Johns Hopkins protocol.
Um,
Would it make sense because,
because none of that's in the
bill. So, so you would not be
required to follow that
protocol. That's if you are a, a
medical provider operating under
this, uh, if it's adopted, would
it make sense to put
Some of that protocol.
In
Annabel like this, uh, to ensure
that
that folks who are using this
treatment are following. I, uh,
a known protocol that, that we
know to be safe and effective.
This respectfully, I would say
no because there's a lot of
research since then, including
at UNM and you want the
department to be able to draw
upon the best protocols that are
out there and, and maybe there's
multiple profiles depending upon
uh the situation of the the
person, so.
And that's exactly what we
delegate to the department to
figure it out.
That
Thank you. Anyone else?
Looking for the trial.
Not here.
All right, um.
They're allowing this then me.
OK, then I was in the past, but
the, sorry, go ahead.
Oh movie passed, there's a
couple of do pass motion. So,
um,
You know, Senator Hickey you.
I think you're the one who
alluded to this earlier. It's
hard to turn on the TV these
days without seeing a drug ad
and seeing all the disclaimers
and the qualifications and all
the instructions and all of
those are designed largely to
avoid being sued, right? Um, for
the use of the drug and some
adverse effects, so I'm, I'm a
little concerned here because
I'll just tell all of you, um,
our chili plant is much more
highly regulated than uh this
would be in far more regulated
than um
marijuana use in the state, we
have FDA inspectors all over our
chili plant all the time
checking to make sure that we do
things clean and our equipment's
cleaned and sanitized and so
forth. It's, it's kind of
amazing to me that we have,
we're in New Mexico authorizing
the use of drugs that uh are
outside the FDA, um, uh, kind of
system and um and yeah.
Your your chili, I sure you
pretty, pretty well inspected
and pretty, pretty well
regulated. Um, at least from our
plan. So the, the issue for me
is that I'm looking for this to
see, I guess a few things,
Senator, uh, Hickey and Senator
Sam. I, I'm gonna, I'm gonna
suggest a couple of amendments
here, uh, and I again I said I,
I don't know how much we're
gonna do surgery on bills here.
I'm trying to avoid doing too
much of that, but we may need,
we may need to do some for me to
feel comfortable with this.
One of them is you define what
is a clinician on page 2, a cli
clinic means an approved
healthcare provider, licensed in
New Mexico. Uh, so is that gonna
be, is that gonna be licensed in
what capacity, uh, as a
physician.
Um, a nurse,
nurse licensing, uh, physician
assistant who, who, who, what
kind of license are you gonna
need?
To be able
To administer these health
services. So Mr. Chair, the, the
reason that word was chosen,
number one important word
licensed, so that that it is a
licensed professional. But
number 2 is a recognition that
in this
space there who was a licensed
professional that will be able
to do this,
what will, what will, who will
be licensed, what will be a
licensed healthcare provider to
be able to do this. And I'll
just, I'll cut to the chase.
This is for Senator Hickey.
He'll appreciate this so much. I
is the individual who does this
are they subject to the medical
malpractice Act. Now they
qualified healthcare provider,
and are they subject to suit?
And uh are they under the
patient compensation fund and
will they be insured?
This is how we ensure people are
taken care of.
Uh, I'm not an expert in the
area, Mr. Chair, but I believe
I'm that
I thought you were
you're very much an expert
that well, Mr. Chair, I will
come before you if I can get it
her and back, um, and then
we'll, we'll have that
discussion. So, but yes, I would
believe that um the, I mean,
the, the patient who goes
through this will have all the,
I mean, as I said, the, the
potential
I negatives, which are very,
very minimal. Uh, they will
understand that, um, but they do
not sign away, uh, their ability
to bring uh
Liability should it be merited.
Well, and I agree with that, and
I want to make sure that's true,
and I'm gonna propose some
changes to language because
there's language that may be
inconsistent with that, but, um,
the, like, I guess that's what
we we back up a little bit the
other instances in the history
of the drug producing overdose
deaths.
Under clinically supervised
protocols and where this is
being studied, um,
I
I, I don't know that
specifically, uh, outside of
that clinical protocol, so
should someone do this on their
own somehow some way, thinking
it's all gonna be good and has
friends that have mushrooms.
Yeah, that could that that could
happen, but uh I would doubt
that that would happen. It may
have, uh, in a, uh,
appropriately supervised
protocol.
Yeah, and I, I know your, I know
your bill doesn't really intend
to get to that to recreational
uses and so what I'm just, I'm
looking at again the definition
of clinician is a licensed
provider, and I'm trying to
figure out, so who's going to be
licensed to do this and, and do
you envision that? Is it gonna
be certified nurse
practitioners, gonna be a
physician assistants, who, who's
licensed to do this. So in this
space, it's a recognition
there's a variety of providers
who, who probably do do this,
um, and I don't think we want to
prejudge. I mean it's something
we can definitely explore.
more.
Tighten this up it's
appropriate.
But we don't want to preach out
to this a psychiatrist.
a psychologist, in fact.
We do have prescribing
authority, for example, nurse
practitioners and other
providers in the state who do
it. We have social workers, we
have
in the back who have spoken, who
have their own licensure with
the state who may not be in one
of those categories. So I think
that's one thing you hear, we
hear from feedback is.
We have a variety of different
medical professionals who are
kind of in this space, so to
speak, and you want, you want
to, I don't, I don't know if I
think we want free.
Judge that, but certainly you
want them to have enough medical
training and
So that's, that's why this was
written the way it was, but I
mean, if there's a better way to
ride it, certainly open to that.
try to get an understanding of
who's going to do this and
really the the following
paragraph I'm gonna ask about
too is medical services, so as
inpatient services provided to a
patient in an approved setting.
And and what I've spoken with
you, Doctor, Senator, and, and,
um, and others, that's my
understanding this test to be
that kind of a setting but he
goes, just help me to understand
how this works, so you go into a
doctor's office and you received
the drug and how long does the
treatment, how long does the
fact I guess is the best way to
say it long as in fact, um.
Yeah, how much is the effect of
the drug.
Um, taking in as a patient with
the doctor at the clinic setting
the entire time. Mr. Chair, for
father's been overdose, yes. #2,
I would, I would like to call on
Doctor Amy Wong who's on our
list who actually does this.
a license to do this in Colorado
and someone who actually does
this gave you a real good
answer. OK, just very pretty
simple question. I would assume
you all know this, right? Don't
you? He's got to know the answer
to the administration of the
actual medication.
The length of time and and how
it would be applied. Um, I don't
know if anyone does want to
speak to that, but
It depends on the actual
interpretation from the clinic
clinician at the time of the
administration. Well, how much?
mushroom or sil minister based
on the case of of that
individual.
I don't I don't mean any
disrespect to the doctor. I'm
just, I'm just reading the bill.
It says that the services will
be provided in an approved
setting, so that suggests to me
that the patient is at all times
under the care and any of the
clinicci throughout the duration
of the effect of the drug in
Doctor is saying yes to do that,
so, OK.
Um, I'm just, I'm, I'm curious
how, how this works. So, uh,
this verify my, um, the, the
number of the questions you're
asking and how do you define
being clinically, uh,
License and so forth, these are
questions that the board and the
Department of Health will
determine there is great
experience in Colorado. I know
people in Colorado who have
worked under these regiments and
um they are uh in Colorado, they
have oversight there through
this board and so forth as to
who is able to do this, and so,
uh, I can't, I don't know that
we can specifically answer the
questions. Some people are
psychiatrist, some
psychologists, some
are people who are very
experienced in the journey,
there's been uh a number, a huge
number of people in many in
Colorado who have done this in
Jamaica and in other countries
who have the experiences, but
this is what the board would
determine.
And so I
Where chromatologist really
shows up on page 4 centers if
you look on page 4 in line 19.
can't get the context of all the
questions I've gone through as a
clinician shall not be subject
to arrest and prosecution, since
or penalized in any manner.
Uh, for recommending program for
providing medical services, that
sounds a lot like immunity or
potential malpractice.
Uh, to me, and that's troubling
to me, I think again it should
always be.
Responsible for the consequences
of negligent care.
Patient and so
I would ask the sponsors to
strongly consider striking
lawyersenlyzed in any manner
there.
And also on line 3 on the same
page so I can more penalty.
Because both of those suggest to
me you you arguably creating an
immunity, like for a clinician
who prescribes or provides his
medical services. I, I would
always reject an immunity of
that of that breath, so, um, let
me just propose that to you all.
Would that be an acceptable
change to the bill.
That's generally I can say we
feel it is, um, I, I think what
we're, what we're trying to do
here is we need to strike the
balances if we're saying that
you are not.
Criminalized by virtue of just
administering the program, it is
a Schedule One substance, so we
are excluding them from that, if
you're a proper administration
of the program, right? Now,
obviously, as you're saying, if
you're a grossly neg
Arm somebody, yeah, we're not
saying that they should deserve
immunity for all of those
situations and that's where we
need to find the right language
that does both those things.
Yeah, and I, and I'm supporting
your language that would say
you're not subject to arrest or
prosecution because that would
be the criminal context.
Uh, but on line three, I would
strike the words for penalty,
and then in the context of lines
18 and 19 on the same page, the
clinician is not subject to
arrest or prosecution. I
understand and I agree with
that, uh, but then it says not
penalized in any manner, could
be argued by a clinician to say
I was given immunity for
participating in the program by
the legislature, and, and I, I
couldn't agree with that, so I,
I would ask you to uh
Consider favorably striking the
words penalizing any man on line
19 of page 4 as well too.
And I'll make those, I'll make
those proposed amendments
jointly.
Same purpose, same idea.
Centers.
So Mr. Chami, I think there's
there's agreement here on these
two things, we just need to
wordsmith and then, um, you
know, find the right language. I
just did.
Uh,
just to be clear though, I mean,
it seems to me that this is
different if you again, the
section I was looking at was on
section 6 on line 5
participation in the program by
producer Kaiser Ku does not
relieve or the or the colinician
or the patient from criminal
prosecutions for activities not
authorized liability of damages
out of a motor vehicle. This is
pretty clear in saying that this
is the penalties for
participating in the program.
I mean, isn't, I mean, I guess
I'm having a hard time reading
this is.
Go to line 18 on page 4. A
clinicians shall not be subject
to arrest or prosecution,
penalized in any manner or
denied any right or privilege
for recommending the program or
providing medical, I guess
you're looking at the providing
medical services, yeah, OK, so
they're recommending the program
piece of it,
but, but it would be immunizing
providing medical services. So
why don't we just delete or
providing medical services.
That's fine too.
works, either one's the same, so
I'm OK with that. You'd be
leaving in the penalized in any
manner and striking or providing
medical services does the same
thing as far as I'm concerned.
I'm amending my proposed
amendment.
Restate what that amendment was
please.
in
I'm, I'm receding from my
proposed amendment we're narrow
on it. Yeah, well, on line 19, I
had proposed to strike penalize
any amount, we would leave that
language in.
But we would be ending it on
line 20 after the work program
with the period delete or
providing medical services.
That's the only change.
So Mr. Chair, I think there's
some agreement here. Personally,
I feel like this is something we
just need to make sure we get it
right, but I mean, I think my
colleagues here feel good about
what you're recommending and
I'm, I'm willing to go with that
if that's what it sounds like
everyone else is comfortable
with that. Yeah, there's,
there's nothing we're, we're not
trying to lawyer anybody, uh,
everybody gets suspicious
whether these guys up to
all we're trying to really
assure here is that you're
subject to liability for
providing negligent medical
services.
And um so,
Um, I'll, I'm gonna, I'm gonna
join with Senator Worth on that
proposed amendment, we would
still do, let's see, um.
I don't know what the words were
penalty, I guess we could
probably leave that up on my
story the way it is and we're
probably OK, so I'm, I'm OK with
just the one change then on, on
that line 20 of page 4.
Then my uh I know you've been
trying to get my attention.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Steinboner,
Senator, I think that may defeat
the purpose of shielding people
from criminal prosecution.
I, I like your First Amendment
better.
Because arrest and prosecution
covers the criminal aspect.
And if we delete on
Page 4, line 19, if we did, you
know, strike, penalized in any
manner, that would allow a civil
remedy for someone who's harmed.
But if we erase
On lines 20 and 21 or providing
medical services, then
To me, that clinician can be
arrested or prosecuted for
providing medical service.
We like most uh in I think uh.
We like Senator's
interpretation.
Agree. Yeah, wait.
Re
I know you're new over here, but
that's all right. We, we get a
little informal later in the day
and the session we're gonna get
very informal with all the house
bills coming over here.
Uh
OK
Mhm
All right, so back to wherever
we're at. Um.
Senator Ma.
Anyone else, I'm
I mean, you you're saying you
like Senators's suggestion, but
he's not all he's suggesting is
not the adopting center words uh
suggestion and Senator Wor was
modify my suggestion, so, um,
we're now deep into the weeds.
The chair. The chair was right.
Cli be of.
Yeah, I think I'm back to the
penalizing in any manner fix
their word, um.
Which was the original, I think,
proposed amendment, and I think
is whispering in my ear.
Thinking that that's more
consistent with what his concern
is.
So
What do you think they worth?
one day we saw guns ahead of us.
Um, I think it's still my
amendment. I think Senator Worth
was suggesting a modification
that reminds us suggestive
modification to his
modification, which is to my
modification. So, um, I'm gonna
retain the floor to suggest that
me on page 4 stride on line 19
penalizing in any manner and
otherwise leave the remaining
text as is.
That's my proposed amendment.
Uh.
And I think I heard the sponsors
saying they're better with that.
I see thumbs up.
Andrea.
So,
are you proposing using the word
penalized in any manner.
What's that again, the
amendment? OK. OK now.
That's friendly.
So do it, yeah, on the
amendment. No, no,
uh,
well,
said Hans, so we got a moment
that's before us that I propose
any more discussion of the
proposed amendment, I hear the
sponsors say generally they're
better with it, just wanna make
sure so someone can be
prosecuted.
Now, I mean, the clinician shall
not be subject to arrest or
prosecution for providing
medical services.
B.
Prosecution we're assuming is
criminal. I just worry it means
that.
Where you're, you've got an
argument that there's civil
liability, I'm not gonna bring a
case against you for providing
medical services, which I know
is what we're trying to avoid.
Sort of authorized by the
Act.
How's that work?
It's better.
I think that's a positive
suggestion, so I'll take it. I'm
gonna modify my motion, which is
um to add
After the medical services, um,
Before the period
Adding the words authorized by
this act.
So the medical services
authorized by this act.
Sponsors, OK
so.
Right.
Everyone with it memo, you still
with me? All right, great, good.
Uh, we will, uh, we will hear in
a second I just wanna see if
there's any more discussion and
everybody's up to speed, right,
uh, any more discussion on the
proposed amendment?
Is your objection to the
proposed amendment.
No.
The amendments adopted. All
right, that's all I had on this.
Anyone else? or do.
So Mr. Chas, we're sitting here,
I'm looking at the organ, where,
where an organ is where it's
doing really well.
From, from what I understand
from, from the presentation.
The Organ law is
way more comprehensive.
Um
And
And addresses, I think a lot of
And I, I suspect the reason it's
going really, it's, it is a
successful safe program is
because we have this incredibly
comprehensive regulatory
approach in Oregon.
That we don't have here.
So I would I would suggest
Baby
Rolling this to come back with a
sub that is maybe looks at the
comprehensive approach taken in
organ, adopt some of that and
deals with some of the other
issues in the bill.
Because they're
And unless we want to do that
all sitting here tonight, which
I don't think we do.
But
But I think if, if we have an
example of a of a state where
this is working well.
I don't know why we, we would
not look to that model. Um,
And would
Take a less
Uh, a less comprehensive
approach that where we know it
is working.
Um, that would be my suggestion,
Mr. Chair.
on the bill.
Given the amendments and given
the bill, I'm going to suggest
that we do a committee sub our
practice we may begin to
dispense with that practice as
we get later and closer to our
deadline.
Um, on the other hand, in
response to a Senator Deick's
suggestion, I'm remiss to
suggest that we open this up to
any and all possibilities,
that's what I kind of hear
Senator Do suggesting as we look
at this in a, in a very almost
comprehensive way without
specifics. Right now we've
adopted certain very specific
amendments, and I think the
committee said with those
amendments is advisable and
since we wouldn't be um perhaps
getting that done till Friday
anyway, you may want to get with
the sponsor center and see.
They want to accept any
additional changes, but right
now I, I don't know how we could
draft this committee said and
say we're going to adopt that
Oregon model without doing
anything specific about that. I
think we could really do that,
uh, Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee. Um, this is enabling
legislation. It enables the
board, that's where the
guidelines get drawn up, that's
where they, that's where we
studied the organ and come back
with deeper guidelines later,
but I wouldn't want to derail
this at this point, I think
again, listening to our, our
witnesses tonight. This is
something New Mexico needs to
start moving on now. I think in
the bill anticipates that it
wouldn't actually go into
practice.
until about 27. Am I correct in
that?
December 31st, so that we have
time to get these things, uh,
uh, studied and, and, and put
into any other bill that we may
need to have, but this is
enables us to get going in
specifically, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, just out of that,
Mr. Chair, you know, this
delegates all the regulatory
regime to the Department of
Health.
So that we're not preordaining
that and putting dosage and all
these things in a lot, we're,
we're, we're delegating to the
medical, the professionals to
take their time to hire the
right staff, and we're giving
them the appropriate amount of
time to do that, and that's, I
think, the right approach.
And to be clear, age 6, line 23
does talk about the
administration not taking place
until December 31st, 2027. So we
have a long runway to get there.
Mr. Chair,
I make a revised motion and do
not pass on Xenop Bill 219 and
it do pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 29, which will incorporate
the changes. The amendments that
have been adopted by the
committee. All right, Emily, you
have all those.
Right. That's the proper motion
before us. There are any further
discussion? Is there any
objection to that motion?
I, I
No.
That are doing.
So what, what that December
31st, 20.
2027. I just want to make sure
it says the department shall
collaborate with the board, say
hire
education institutions,
healthcare providers to collect
and analyze data for best
practices.
I December 31st, 2027, implement
the program, but what is the
program like?
I, I think.
I don't think that says this
doesn't go into effect until
2027. I don't think that means
that you would not be able to
use this therapy until 2027.
I just wanna make sure if that
is the intention.
I think that might, I think
there needs to be
Other language in this bill that
would, would make that trip.
Tell me what, tell me what you
What are you suggesting a change
Senator?
Mr. Chair.
And I, I, I, I think they
should, we just need some
Some section somewhere that says
Treatment under this act.
Cannot bega
2027 because I don't think
that's what that language on
page 6 says. It talks about a
program, but we don't hear
about, there's no talk about
There's this talk about programs
through throughout here. I
don't.
Actually, never mind. I take it
back. I'm looking at the
definition of program. I'm
sorry. Never mind.
You're looking back to page 5.
I'm I'm, I'm looking back at the
definition of program. Hey, I
had missed that before, so never
mind, it's good.
OK. We got to do pass motion
with uh Senator Worth
disapproving the Senate Bill 219
by a committee sub with the
amendments adopted, that's
before us, and now is there any
objection to that motion?
Senator Doig.
Others in support of you
gentlemen and representative
have a due pass.
Thank you.
Last bill for tonight, gas
operated semi-automatic firearms
279.
We're doing guns.
OK.
This.
Not
just yet. Let's see.
Thank you.
my.
Slate, um, Senator O'Malley and
Senator Bergman, we left this
bill with a motion that was
before us for discussion to
substitute the bill with the
committee sub, we had not yet
acted on the committee so my
understanding is that the
sponsors do not intend to pursue
that committee sub, but to
retain their original bill for
discussion. Um, I realize any
member can always propose any
motion and take any action.
But right now, the sponsors, as
I understand it,
Um
are not favoring that proposed
committee sub and Senator Dear,
I think that was your proposed
committee sub at the time, so I
would recognize you first. Sure,
Mr. Cha. So I'll, I'll withdraw
the, the, OK. So that makes it
cleaner and easier. The other
thing that I'll note for
everyone is that we're not going
to go back to the public for
public input again, we're gonna
go right to the committee on the
original bill making that
decision for a number of
reasons, but principally because
most of the public input we
heard was not specific to the
bill.
Um,
it was generally about uh
Attitudes towards guns or gun
safety or or public safety, all
important uh opinions, but
nobody was very specifically
addressing the public comment
either one of the two bills, so
there's really no reason to go
back to the public,
uh, in here the repetition, so.
Senators were on 279. I really
do believe we're, we're ready to
go to the committee members, but
I, I'll give you, um, 2 or 3
minutes if you wish to describe
this bill because we spend most
of our time looking at the
committee submit our last
hearing.
O'Malley
and committee members, um.
So a second time. So I do wanna
to to thank you all for what,
you know, Senator Bergman and
Representative Romero, and I
just want to thank you for the
opportunity just to uh present
the SB 279. This is the original
bill that goes to the ghost Safe
Act, and we think,
uh, Senator Duhe um for
withdrawing the committee
substitute, uh, it was clear the
last committee hearing that the
committee substitute and it's no
fault of Senator.
He caused confusion and
frustration, um, while there are
concerns about the original bill
as being an overreach that could
face a challenge. We believe
that the Go Safe Act, unlike the
features Bill, referred it to as
the Illinois Bill is clearer in
its definition definitions and
it's intent, so
Um, before it's a bill that this
committee has, has had time to
review, um,
So, um, I do want to say just a
couple things, um.
Uh, um,
You know, we, we did have a
comment from one of the speakers
in opposition and they stated
that those who um
Who's who, uh,
testimony were, were, that was
in favor of the bill were overly
emotional and, you know, after
all the gun is a thing and it
should not emote any feeling
such as worry or fear, and I, I
found that, you know, um,
Just a little bit, uh, quite
frankly insensitive to say the
very least and, and I just
wanted to also
Say that it really, you know,
that kind of um response sort of
negates the experience of uh of
the trauma that people do have
as a result of gun violence and
and uh I know that some folks
know that I was, um, my house
was uh shot at with the intent
of trying to uh injure um and
it's unfortunate and I'm very
lucky that um no one was hurt in
my family and uh uh in the trial
is on Monday, so
Uh, we have several elected
officials that are going to be
um going to trial on Monday for
the person who did that.
So, um, I do have, we do have
our experts again.
Um, and
With me is um of course, uh Ben
Baker, he's with the office of
Governor of Public Safety
Advisor, Kyle Duffy. He's also
with the office of the
Governor's Deputy General
Counsel. We have Greg LaRock
who's with Every Time for Gun
Safety, and he is online.
And um and he's also um the our
our firearm expert.
Um,
and I'm not sure, Mr. Chair,
when we, we do have an
amendment. I don't know if it
makes sense to what time to do
that, uh, or do we just talk a
little bit about the bill first.
I don't know what your mime is
or does. So, OK, well, let's,
uh,
And this is, we don't know we
don't, we don't evidently have
one.
Uh, it should have been
delivered.
day.
Oh
No, you don't
have extensive is the amendment
to changing a couple of words,
you're changing something
I don't know what that means,
you know, we can make copies, we
do have a copy of it here. Hold
on a second.
Let me, let me take a look at,
can I see that? Let me just see
what that looks like.
I,
I'm sorry.
Are you intending to put this
amendment on Bill?
All right. We'll see you guys on
Friday. We'll do it Friday.
Um, yeah, it's it's an extensive
amendment we can do the
amendment. It's very minimal,
no, no, we're gonna get this
bill right out of this
committee. So this is a, this is
an extensive amendment. It's not
a little amendment, um, we need
to do this as a good committee
sub and we'll do it for you
Friday.
What's that? Yeah, yes ma'am,
we've got to get this right,
so I get it I understand and I
think, I think, I think the
positions are pretty well, I
think we know where they're at.
We're really send you this is
gonna end up in court. This is
gonna be
a lawsuit. Um, and there's no
question about it, and I, I
really want to send somebody out
here that's well done, um, and
so this is, this is substantive,
this is not changing up the
words. Thank you and come back
with the new committee subject.
