Purposes of this bill think of
it as New Mexico district courts
and because New Mexico District
Court to general jurisdiction in
author authorization to issue
findings based on abuse
abandonment neglect experts and
so that would be considered a
juvenile court under this under
the federal law and how we
already doing in practice but
now we're spelling it out here
in statute us to we now have a
section for this that's then
Senator your question.
Does okay.
Right so that's a that's a
federal classification of
juvenile court not state
classification.
Correct.
have the
And that is because you are.
I think that there's a and for
the so that will be doing this
under the family court.
The family.
Investor relations.
Mr chair Senator correct this
how we that we how we currently
do it in practice and that's
constituents considered a
juvenile court for the purposes
of not only this bill but in
terms of how we we already do in
practice.
So this and Mr Chairman I was
working as this is just not
require a case already pending.
You can file this as a as a
standalone basis that.
Mr chair and senator as as a
nation we provide the proper
inspection usually what happens
is it's a joint petition it's a
petition for guardianship
kinship guardianship custody and
then within that petition it's
also adding the special findings
required by by the federal
statute which are abuse
abandonment neglect and that
there's no reunification with a
parent or parents and that it's
in the best interest of the
child not to return to their
country of origin due to
specific serious situations so
it's it's also adding that to it
without those additional
requisites that would not be
approved by USCIS.
And.
So when you combine those two Mr
chairman this rigorous so that's
so like for example in the case
of of representative Travis.
And.
Is that she.
Then that would have been the
case were she she lied for
guardianship over the child as
well as special status.
Mr chairman and senator correct
the the under that process that
she described she had to have
gone to the state court before
the child issues guardian of
turned eighteen before their
eighteenth birthday they had to
have had a an actual court order
with those requisite findings in
addition to that she is now the
legal guardian and then after
that and only after that can the
Madam petition to USCIS the
federal agency that grants the
status pending that status if
there is also a deportation
hearing at that same time at
that point we as advocates can
go to court and then say this
trial now qualifies for
an immigration former who took
my turn relief because based on
that alone they have discretion
to dismiss the case based on
that form of relief pending than
that once that's dismissed
pending the status then at that
point the trial could then get a
work permit to work a child
could then continuing school
feeling safe and have wait wait
there should there be so which
is a special in juvenile says
Lisa and then eventually it's a
pathway to permanent residency
and citizenship.
Mr Chairman.
Senator Representative Martinez
and and by that you mean the
fence concerns that Mr chair
Senator correct.
And so once we pass this law so
does the guardianship.
Still need to be done by a team.
Or can the good can we do a
guardianship.
Twenty one as well as the
petition the staff Mr chair and
senator this bill would allow
for us to obtain the petitions
for guardianship custody except
are a until the age of twenty
one and that would prove that
would be able to get that they
said the petition with those
requisite findings that were
authorized to provide a judge
would would would provide that
and then after that petition is
granted then we can then
petitioned for on behalf of the
child petitioner with CYFD USCIS
the federal agency and then they
would grant the status.
thank you very much appreciate
the.
Do.
Thank you Mr chair something you
said thanks I'm in my brain you
refer to kinship guardianships
under chapter forty.
SB thirty one just past the
legislature and the certain on
the governor's desk and it moves
that can ship guardianships out
of chapter forty into chapter
thirty two ecce is that going to
cause a problem for you all for.
Using just I.
No it's not because that
This covers the.
This allows the family courts to
do that and you think they're
okay this allows the family
courts to do to do this and no
matter what the the kind of
cases in the district courts are
courts of general jurisdiction
so I don't believe it's going to
change the the state court's
ability to do this.
Well Mister chair my
understanding is that
proceedings under thirty to a go
to children's court not sure the
to read this.
This will slow down slow Mr
chair.
During the strain let the
Senator get a question complete
speaking will be and
and and I'd like to hear from S.
Martinez on in Mr chair and and
senator thank you for that
question thirty to a under the
children's court already has
remedies to address special
regional status beyond the age
of eighteen it's the gap is
within chapter forty so even if
kinship guardians studentship
moved to chapter thirty two
eight someone can work under
chapter thirty two eight it's
chapter forty three for the
private actions that we cannot
and that's where we would be
able to address that so even if
it's not kinship we would still
be able to do it through custody
and guardianship in general and
most of our cases are usually
guardianship cases.
The twenty questions someone's
got.
So I'm still trying to work my
way through some of the some of
the questions on this so I would
like to explore some of the
language in the bill itself.
The the first the second section
to build has definitions are the
other definitions of abuse
childhood neglect or child or
those taking out the state law.
No you're saying no you're
saying yes.
Mr chair and senator yes these
are these are the current
definitions that we use in
practice already abandonments
and it comes from the chapter
forty abuse and neglect which we
currently use in practice comes
from chapter thirty two eight
because they don't execs exists
within chapter forty so those
are what we use and and
currently in practice.
And and the reason I would
commit Mr chair the reason I was
not in my that or not I had is
that these are also lined with
federal standards.
says me just make sure that's
clear because and as much as
you're saying yes in center city
Lopez you're saying no but but I
just wanna make sure because I'm
hearing to have an excellent so
it is abuse child neglect child
in this bill the same as they
are defined in Spain our state
statutes Mr chair and senator
correct these are the
definitions we currently use in
practice from state statute and
and so were you able to Seki
said chapter thirty two eight I
find the same definitions for
the new act used child yes
correct.
The reason I'm asking is if you
look on page three.
Under subsection F. we define
with an eclectic child is and
then we have the line twenty
three
I.
Part of the definition of what
is a neglected child care you
know in in subsection if we give
examples of what is a neglected
child of some of these are
pretty obvious of child is been
abandoned or without proper
parental care physical or sexual
abuse all make sense to me is in
the electors child and and when
you're done why twenty three for
supper I says of childhood in
place for care and option
violation of law that makes
sense to me as a president elect
the child that would seem like
somebody's putting their child
up illegally for adoption.
With the language after that
that that it's puzzling for me
so after it says an example of a
neglected child chose place of
for Kernan option relation Law
middling twenty four page
services provided nothing in the
special grant who will collect
classification act so this must
all be new this can't be okay
yes thank you for that Mr chair
the with this is what we tried
to make that we bring into the
federal so that there would be
no question that we're we're
aligning with them but in terms
of in terms of what we do in the
court proceedings we always
address it as these are the main
definitions that we have under
state law and then we say this
is what mirrors with our federal
requirements so that it can
align yeah and I want to focus
on limits because again
sometimes we see these bills I
see what you're trying to hit
with this looks like a really
bad paste and cut and paste job
right so I know you're trying to
put in stuff from the federal in
here just seems like so it's in
the release really strange place
and really strange contacts so
if you look at that definition
of a neglected child it says to
Joe place for care and option
emotional and then this part I
just do not understand after
that it's just provided nothing
in this act shall be construed
to imply that a child has been
provided with treatment by
spiritual means alone through
prayer.
In accordance with tenants and
practices if you'll come back to
the second ten to practice of
recognize church or religious
denomination by duly accredited
practitioner there of it is for
that reason alone of the
electors child within the
meaning of this act further
provided no child should be
denied the protection of four to
all other children under other
provisions of Law Center do some
with that's existence.
I'm I'm with you there too and
so it is that also lives in so
doing this out also within the
definition of an eclectic child
is Mr chair at thirty two a four
to.
How the hell that.
It's it's it's it's it's not Mr
chair but but that is exist the
only thing that's being added in
here is are the references to
special immigrant juvenile
classification okay and I
appreciate the clever gadgets
it's beyond bizarre that
language in the definitions and
I'll have has lived in there so
I want to Kyushu the bizarre
front page job somebody else
that it now and then we years
ago hopefully wasn't under our
watch.
Nonetheless this is a new act
and so on look at some of
language going well.
So then in the on to section
three.
The new material here says a
request may be made by
petitioner for classification.
In conjunction with the petition
so they would cover that.
Yeah this is this is my
I I know where this committees
at these days we're not amending
house bill's I guess so and I
think that's always regrettable
I know the way our and I know
the reasons I understand why but
I just I'm always really.
Troubled by that so for example
here that and I'm mostly bring
this up for you miss Martinez
because I will come back and fix
this when we have time and
really want to do a good job.
So you know if you look at
subsection B. of section three
says the application or petition
for this classification shall
set forth the facts necessary to
establish eligibility no that's
basically eating practice that's
like saying you have to have a
complaint that the sandwiches
one the basis for the
competition right so says
petition so forth facts.
The service that was really
really that's that's really
unnecessary
you Mr such was a new we have to
file a petition with enough
information to file petitions so
you know I I hope we'll clean
that up down the road so please.
Then we get to session forces a
court has jurisdiction to make
findings in the best interest of
the child so how does the court
how does the court get
jurisdiction for this child
coming understand that knows
what work was the basis for the
court's jurisdiction of the
child and I guess in this case
it's also gonna be jurisdiction
for the parent to doesn't.
Mr chair Senator correct this is
supplies in bulk as mentioned
earlier the guardianship cases
custody cases for example and so
for the findings purposes we
have to show that for the best
interests of arguments there has
to be reasoning that would leave
in the federal law and so there
the jurisdiction is not only
just from the statute but it's
also in terms of how the court
reviews custody petitions and
guardianship petitions and
that's how we have we have
jurisdiction over the child to
make the determination whether
or not it's in the best interest
of the child not to be returned
to their home country including
but it's in the best interest of
the child to be with a guardian
in the specifics virtual
situation be with potentially
what we've done in practice
kinship guardian or the custody
of of a of a single parent for
example and so yes the the
parents would be involved in it
but it's a but this is about the
child protection in particular
I'm sorry that doesn't answer my
question how to how does the
court have jurisdiction so if I
understand the way this works
press the parents the biological
parents and child are let's say
they live in New Mexico right
and the petition is brought here
on behalf of the child in this
country and we're effectively
restricting limiting terminating
the parental rights of the of
the parent who Representative
Sweetser is a child was a saying
no I'm sorry Representative
Senator Sedillo was a saying yes
so I get I get hope you'll get
challenge when I'm trying to
look at both of you for signals
you're both saying different
things on the panel so Mr chair
hold on let me just try and just
my question again clearly.
Do not these proceedings affect
the interests of the parent over
the child.
Mr chair and senator that
parents are are given a hearing
they can waive their conviction
that they can consent to waive
their notice and waive their
right if they choose however
most of the time to if there is
going to be a contested hearing
they are they are aware of the
hearing before the court how
does the New Mexico where you're
restriction for a parent.
Currents right.
Living in the Mr chair that the
court the court to New Mexico
all have jurisdiction over
children within the borders of
the state of both under state
laws have been passed and also
inherent parents had to add
years to the power they get
jurisdiction over the parents
because there is a provision in
statute that provides that if a
parent it's like to the extent
of the reach if a parent has a
child in New Mexico and is
personally served or is three
service of process that provides
for jurisdiction and all of the
in all of these cases the
parents are served under rule
four in all these cases and so
that's how the the reach is and
and I'm sure that there was some
outreach to the parent will get
us some there were there
sometimes they might consent to
jurisdiction sometimes they
might
You know the court may I mean if
the court felt that there was no
jurisdiction on the grounds that
would be problematic but
generally jurisdiction over
children in the state tries to
achieve jurisdiction to the
absolute reached reaches of the
constitution.
Yes that's still answer my
question how do you jurisdiction
or the parents to give me the
example with the parent consents
to jurisdiction ballistic McGee
might example here you got
parents in Mexico of their child
is here there's a proceeding
initiated to effectively
impair or terminate the parental
rights.
And you can serve the parents
all you want but that doesn't
mean the court has jurisdiction
over the.
Service service I mean just
because you can serve somebody
in another country has made the
court has jurisdiction Mr chair
Senator the the rights of the
pair are not terminated it's a
temporary basis if if in some
situations to bet but in most of
the time what we see in practice
is that the court has
jurisdiction over the child
based on the fact that they are
often abandoned without any
parent and so at that point
that's where we we we've in the
trials that all the other the
child rules of jurisdiction
based on that interest alone and
so this comes into effect for
the child protection what the
court usually always reserves
the right to then to then come
back to the court if the if the
parent chooses to choose just to
have a relationship with the
child with their rights and at
that point they would no longer
qualify for special immigrant
juvenile status because
reunification would have been
viable.
And and Mr chair the courts do
examine that the the
They look at that question
that's one of the questions that
they have to resolve for
themselves in the border and so
like you said it may be a
temporary thing that will allow
them to get federal law federal
relief look at the let the child
get federal relief and if the
parents rights were terminated
wrongfully the parent can always
come back if there was no
personal jurisdiction.
But there there definitely is an
attempt to achieve that.
But you're right if it's if the
parents had never been to the
state of New Mexico but it is
possible that the parent.
Was involved with with the child
being in Mexico in New Mexico
and then abandoned the child so
there is possibly some contact
with the state but you're right
that if there is a circumstance
where it's impossible to get
jurisdiction over the parent the
order would be binding against
the parent but it would still
allow the child to get federal
relief.
It's so I'm just going to the US
appointment just our members be
blind anymore time I represent a
lot of immigrant families a lot
of reps a lot of first
generation families allowed have
friends and family who were.
Mexico in national
nationalities with families
there and one of the concerns we
always have is this notion that
the children are brought into
this country and
The ostensibly for the idea
they're gonna have a better life
and greater opportunities and so
for this country and the to
Senator here in a of due respect
you know the state with the
parents can go petition to
challenge jurisdiction or
challenge the court proceedings.
New folks that are Mexican
citizens are not going to have
lawyers and.
I come the United States and
hire lawyers a petition so I'm
just concerned about a
circumstance where parents.
I get good intentions for these
children but when it when we we
do abuse and neglect cases
you're probably done so the
lives of the usually the parents
don't believe that they're
abusing neglecting their
children the state CYFD two FTE
may say they are or others make
use of doing so but more often
than not the parents don't
believe their abuse and neglect
of the child and so I'm just
concerned about a circumstance
where parent who may be by our
standards lives in poverty or
has lower social economic means
New Mexico is deem to be have
abuse and neglect of the child I
what are standards or norms may
be and so we say we know better
than you parents and your child
of shows state in this country
under this program of the
circumstances and we won't
return the child to use New
Mexico and you don't like it get
a lawyer and come to the United
States and file proceeding come
court and persuade the court
that the jobs not abuse
neglected
I just need to disabuse me of of
my concern that that that can
happen here to do there is a
uniform custody because city
enforcement act I mean uniform
costume Forsman
It's not an act it's a it's a
convention and it's it's if this
were to happen the parents could
go to Mexico and I'm actually
familiar with the the agency New
Mexico because it's free to the
parents they could go to Mexico
and Mexico would potentially get
an attorney and try to get the
child receives read the.
returned there's also a parent
parental kidnapping
All right chart child kidnapping
convention so they would have
relief certainly and then it
would be easier if there if
there was no jurisdiction they
did have relief over returning
it but those acts are just about
getting the children back if the
children were kidnapped so there
is some mechanism outside of
this this this is really about
the child getting relief under
federal law so all of those
other things of the other issues
that could happen but in this
act up to the judge to determine
what happened to the child and
so the judge is going to look at
all of the circumstances and if
there's something fishy about it
I have confidence in the courts
to say no that this is not
appropriate you didn't notify
the parents or whatever whatever
the problem is with the petition
and and not granted in like I
said they the parents in Mexico
do actually have a potential for
relief if their child were here
without their consent but in all
of these cases there's an
attempt to notify them Mr chair
and senator I want to simplify
this I think it to the that so.
I want to make sure I answered
your regional question states
have authority to.
Over children and and under
these courts there are cases
where there are children there
are two single parents that can
petition for jurisdiction for
custody jurisdiction but and all
the other instances there's
children children have courts
have jurisdiction over children
as to your concern that that is
addressed under federal statute
that if there is ever a
situation where there are
findings that again this this
process is vetted we actually
have to have concurrent like
back to have facts in place to
be able to get these specific
findings so there are there are
checks within the federal
process because the government
will reject it if there are
isn't in the sufficient enough
evidence to show that these
children meet the qualifications
in addition to that once the low
to obtain the visa if there's
ever a question of fraud or R.
or situation where there's
reunification this can be
revoked so that's another that
answer for to address your
concerns and other than others
another thing that the federal
government does is this only
protects the child of a once the
child gets up permanent
residency for example they could
never petition for their parents
or parents from their home
country to get status this is
only about protection for the
child alone.
Mr chair this is beyond the
scope and maybe I remember the
acronym the UCC J. E. eight and
the PKK the parental kidnapping
Act and the CCG which were
coming to my mind when I was
speaking.
And so I might make my concerns
about fraud or kidnapping or
those kind of things it's it's
it's more fundamental to me and
again this is maybe a.
perspective of somebody who
lives on the border into spent
their life back and forth across
the border considers and so very
dear to to Mexico and its
citizens and its residents the
the the experience I have is
oftentimes the thinking is not
and I say this with all due
respect to all of us in this
room in the panelists that our
country so great and we're so
wealthy and everybody wants to
be here and everybody wants to
live here and everybody wants to
be an American and then there's
sometimes a little areas in that
because
people living across the border
very happy have leveling
beautiful families and they may
not have an.
Sixteens TV's and you know.
The latest cars and latest
technologies cellphones but but
I I just I don't have a
situation where we think okay.
Of the judge here is going to
decide it's not in the child's
child's best interest to be
returned to the parents country
of nationality.
That and that could cause a lot
of concern the that up and some
of the the simple like I think
that comes to my mind is we have
we have parents desperate to
come to this country so they
come and maybe the childhood
families we see this horrible
situation is to take place in
the last administration in
recent years worth families get
separated even as a matter of
national policy right to
discourage immigration they
separate children from their
parents you don't keep track of
who the parents are with the
parents are at where the where
the parents and the parents and
become separate the mails get.
Placed in one facility.
Others females get place another
facility children of someplace
else I don't know how many
hundreds I think it's maybe even
potentially in the thousands
even today of children we don't
know for their parents are at
how to re unify them and and I'm
I'm just concerned that those
children and up in this kind of
a system where we say
it's in this child's best
interest not to stay here.
because it's America we're
wealthy in were great and so the
parents have been deported back
to Mexico and in this process
and and now we have a system
that says well it's in the
child's best interest to stay
here even though mom and dad and
or mom or dad or maybe one
moment that are separated the
question is you know.
How do we how do we protect
those families from that Mr
chair if if the family is intact
the there's not going to be an
issue and if the parents don't
of.
That this is not about it at
least in my view it's not about
arrogance and it's not
specifying that the court I say
in the best interest it's
something that the court needs
to decide so the court the
family law courts and and I do
have a lot of experience I have
had situations where the court
returns the child to Mexico
because it's the best interest
of the child to be back in
Mexico because the child's
culture because of the
upbringing you know and and and
so was were in custody you CCJ
E. a custody dispute because
they look at all of the
circumstances and and that's
what this directs the family
court to do is to look at all
the circumstances the children
you talk about that the trump
administration.
For the devastated families some
of those children of the
children that are going to
benefit most from this act
because they've been in foster
care and they know nothing else
and they know they don't they
may not even know some of those
children with their abandoned
were infants and don't even know
their parents and and so that
the hope of getting that that
family uniformed was.
It is almost nonexistent if and
and that was that devastation
was caused by horrific policies
this is a way to address those
children's needs Mr chair I
could bike thank you for that I
first I want to thank you for
your concern because that's a
very valid concern I'm proud to
be from Los crucis and lived on
the border my basically my whole
life are so proud to Sanya here
but I I want to address your
point and and that's why this
bill is very narrowly narrowly
apply to only people that that
qualify for special immigrant
juvenile status one of the main
criteria is that there is no
possibility of of reunification
with a parent because most of
these cases that we see are
serious cases for example of of
young women who higher fleeing
due to gender based violence
where they basically are treated
as property of really serious
like terrible sexual assaults
that's one major example we see
I mean the the list of of
atrocities go on extreme
situations reunification with a
parent isn't viable so there
really isn't.
Point show me where the item is
yes word word is a require
showing that reunification with
a parent is not possible as a
required.
Yes one moment Mr chair that
that is the criteria for special
immigrant juvenile status let me
get it for you.
No matter what to me you know
the court has to make a I do
that reunification presses not
possible then that would put me
at ease yes Mr chair it's on
page six funders three the this
section three the child may not
be viably reunified with one or
both of the child's parents
because the child is an abuse
child neglect a child or
abandoned child or has suffered
similar circumstances your page
what do you sorry page six.
And that's I don't I don't have
the lines but it says here
number number three.
Sorry I'm looking at the wrong
you're using the the amendment
okay.
It's on page five of nine twenty
three.
In the bill in the.
I found it thank you.
The court has to make the court
that has to make that finding
absolute.
And so in short Mr chair.
The court determines that
reunification isn't possible is
one of the main criteria and
prerequisites for this the court
decides the jurisdiction and
then there are there are two
examples of single custody cases
and the jurisdiction over the
guardian and or single parents
so that that should address your
concern and I I appreciate your
comments no appreciate you
pointing out because it does it
does but may have greater ease
the other examples you right
right mmhm from life experience
I don't have a practitioner of
long this is not in an area
where I spend a lot of of of
don't have any expertise in the
example the usually crops up
when people come to me for help
though and I try to help me with
this not to practice law is
usually a situation where it's a
mother versus a father
where dad wants the child to
live with his family and
someplace from almost live with
Joe with her family in some
place for mom and dad are not
getting along with their
separate or whatever else but I
know that's all probably would
be on we can resolve here today
I just I wanted to.
Be sure that this doesn't turn
into a situation where where we
have.
Folks on this side of the border
saying in a week this is a
better place for your children
and so.
They belong here as opposed to
on the other side of the border
for its false or whatever
whatever advantages and
disadvantages of one or the
other.
Yes Mr chair this is not a
custody this would change
regular custody case such as
that.
Okay thank you very much Senator
Ivey Soto.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Given where we are the session
suggests making changes right
now.
But certainly as we live through
this.
What I you know I I certainly
would have preferred.
The definitions instead of
defining court.
We were defined juvenile court.
As being either the children's
court are the family court.
So what we're really clarified.
The dual jurisdiction between
those.
under these cases.
So that if you're dealing with
this case.
Which will be under under
children's court I would really
applaud you for doing what the
guardianship petition.
We clearly apply.
Them and then to use the term
the juvenile court throughout
here.
I just I just think that that
would have.
given given that the unique
nature.
Of these proceedings I think
that would be helpful Mr chair I
appreciate the suggestion will
definitely look at it my concern
is in other areas of the state
they don't have a family court
system more of juvenile court
system it's the district courts
that do all of these cases but
in my concern.
Mr chairman and sources tell us
they don't they don't to
visualize.
And every at every place of the
court of the state that's
correct however the court the
District Court.
Since as a children's court
since as a domestic relations
court.
since as a criminal court and
since as a general support.
right but it would just it just
simply I think what helped in
terms of.
Making sure that.
Whether.
Whether you've got a proceeding
either and a children's court
proceedings or family court
proceedings.
That this would be applicables.
Thank you Mr chair and I'm just
we're just going Mister Mister
chairman Senator thank you very
much thank you and I just want
to highlight that we did put
juvenile court under.
Section four B..
Mr chair and is working as I
guess it's just.
But at any point.
But but it's but but because.
Because we have to report rules
because District Court said as.
The children which of as a
domestic.
Whether they're Division Lester
not I just think that that would
have been helpful in terms of
making sure that you don't have
a quorum at some point saying.
Saying.
With this proceeding I don't
know that I've distinction.
You have to do a different kind
of proceeding that could then
delay where you're at but like I
said that's something that's
something to focus on for the
future as you work on this okay
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr.
And about the regional.
I know we're trying to move on
to other things too quickly and
I I think that we need to a lot
of clean up down the road on on
this bill so section five says
the.
Just as the actual be liberally
construed this this is what was
that all right okay good for
somebody this project with of
the house and then and then that
last section applicability of
this is just one last thing I'm
I'm not come around twice but
the determination this point
this provision is kind of really
really strange this is still
there I hope section six or also
want to ask about it still in
there yeah so it's it's very
unusual but it's still full to
have something a private fiber
retroactively to have a law
apply retroactively the courts
look for that says the
provisions here Shopify
retroactively to a child even if
usually collected are abandoned
this is from the time the child
receives the order I don't
really whether the child
receives an order I don't think
that's really the way it happens
but then here's the part that is
really weird provided that the
petition subject to denial
revocation by federal
immigration agency.
The petition the petition we're
talking about sufficient state
court is that right.
Mr Mr chair know that petitions
in reference to their petition
for special immigrant juvenile
status think of this section is
the savings cost section where
essentially like a fact pattern
like I said there was there's
some really weird
technicalities were what and an
eighteen year old after the
eighteen forty can have be under
the jurisdiction under the court
because they're still in high
school and we've had cases very
minimal cases that they have
been able to get the court order
with the requisite findings the
petition then the United States
citizens immigration services
for the special marginal status
they were then denied because
our state law had a limit then
they appeal the process so
they've exhausted all of their
you know procedures too and that
they were denied again after the
yield so this would then say
that that court order that our
state has found them to be used
by recollected beef up to be
valid based on the type and read
retroactively applying it back
to the time when they were eight
they were eighteen when they
when they obtained it.
There was only about latter
clause says the petition is
subject to the reputation I
federal immigration agents in
the so the HSD ultimately can
deny.
In other positions correct Mr
chair.
Okay so that's why I love of we
have to pass motion anyone else
in the committee.
All right is there any objection
to do pass motion.
I see none shows Senator Pirtle
boxes worth serve on to stew
Hagel Neil Stewart and Ivey Soto
with yes you have a do pass
thank you Mr thank you.
Pharmacy ninety three.
Working.
For twelve thirty okay alright
so about another hour that's
good all good morning Mr chair
members of the committee I'm
here in reply in conjunction
with Representative Ferrary
whose home ill
it seems to be going around
again with me today I have Dr
Sharan the question who is the
executive director of the New
Mexico board of nursing and
dealtaker the executive director
of the New Mexico pharmacy
association and I am going to
immediately turn it over to Dr
McCracken.
Thank you senator good afternoon
Mister chairman.
Afternoon Senators
Both.
Point I will give a very brief
overview of this bill so.
the first section clarifies the
definition of custodial care
facility
to recognize the definition that
is in board rule which has been
unchanged and board rule for
more than twenty years it does
clarify that this does not
includes.
Foster homes or community homes
there's recent case law that the
board of pharmacy has no four
G. to license community homes
are about sixteen of them and
use tend to be places where
their votes simply healthy kids
and they're they're they're in
the system to grow up they're
not there because they need
medical care the board of
pharmacy has also never licensed
foster homes so there is no
change there not a facility
they're not a business but it
recognizes the fourth rule which
is critical because otherwise
the statute is problematic in
some of the terms that are used
such as extended and health care
so there have been arguments
that if a facility is only
employs people who are not
licensed health care
professionals then they're not
providing health care so that
would actually without this
change.
Bring up question as to whether
or not the board is able to
continue in licensing the
facilities that we are
vulnerable people so we're not
not taking care of anyone that
we've previously licensed but we
are recognizing that
clarification and what real so
that we can continue to license
all the facilities that we
currently do.
So that's the first change
most skip over the electronic
mail to the certified mail
it removes support of nursing
from the pharmacists
prescriptive authority approval
process they are in favor of
that strikes the impaired
pharmacists act in favor of the
impaired health care provider
act which is a much better
delineated process and also
includes the interns technicians
and applicants allows the board
to require by rule reporting non
control dangerous drugs to the
PMP when lack of doing so can
create a hazard to patients
increases the allowance of
emergency dispensing from
seventy two hours to thirty days
which is critical for patients
right now there are.
There is a limit of seventy two
hours and are paid their drugs
that can be broken down
including insulin including
inhalers.
So it clarifies surety bonds
removes unnecessary reporting
for non resident pharmacies and
as per provisions for protective
actions and communications for
sections of solving members and
others working with the board
for liability for acts or
omissions exempting information
transmitted to Tyler system some
rice thank you many of these are
identical to several other
practice are you in that remove
the board of nursing.
And Center o'neill Institute
thank you Mr chairman thank you
what problem are you addressing
with this bill and simple terms
why is this bill necessary thank
you Mr chair Senator I'm gonna
have this mechanic cracking into
them.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senators so this is an update
that was recommended as part of
the sunset review process and
the board as Mr Tinker alluded
to is significantly over to you
for the update it just might Mr
chair what why is this bill
necessary and English provides
number I don't have no idea what
you're talking about pharmacy
act blah blah blah why is this
important thank you Mr chair
thank you senator it's important
to support the board and its
protection of the health and
safety of the public.
Okay thank you thank you so do
it thank you Mr chair
service has an immunity
provision in that section seven.
Which.
Is just more for myself
Representative and I
look in minutes in contact on
page twenty one.
And Mr chair this is the kind of
stuff that we.
Strike in all bills come before
this committee.
Also I'm gonna move to strike
section seven.
Mr chair Senator could you
repeat that yes section seven of
the bill and I apologize I'm
looking at amendments and
contact time to bring a passage
on page twenty one yes
So this.
Provides
community I.
Three for autoimmunity.
For folks for anything under
this act
And.
Is also a.
District.
Thank audit trail is can't you
can't access audit trail
information under a breath or
Or you can have ordered by a
court either other than that the
board rules allow it this is the
thing has ever gonna be stricken
from the nurse practice act when
we get to that one Mr chair so I
would move to strike all of
section seven.
so you're proposing Mr chair
Senators district all of section
seven yes and I'd like to have
the director just a comment on
that please.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you senator so.
The.
Proposed language under section
seven actually mirrors that of I
several other boards so the the
protective actions educations
are fairly limited specifically
for instance with respect to
complaints of that have gone to
the board inventive estimated
and not resulted in.
Actionable information and that
can help to protect the person
who was investigated from
potentially irreparable personal
or professional harm.
And.
I think I need to get your fix
thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you senator and and with
respect to the the PMP
information it is it's it's
patients dispensed controlled
substance prescription
information.
And and Mr chair if that's all
the system.
That would maybe be a different
conversation but that's not all
that the staffs
This immunize is anyone.
Who at a current or former
member of the board or in any
way associated with that will
show all will bear no liability
will be subject to civil or
criminal prosecutions for any
action or mission taken
Any any thing any written or
oral communications relating to
actual or potential.
Discipline.
Are and what really bothers me
and it Mr chair is is that
subsection C..
Saying that you can't even get
so so audit trails on the
especially like in malpractice
cases audit trails become are
pretty significant because
sometimes people change stuff
sometimes people change records
and the only way we find that
act is to getting an audit trail
and this is that even a court
could never order it and which I
think is also every time Wirth
we as a legislature are saying
the courts can never order
production something I think
there's a real separation of
powers issue
and so apart from just.
Thing is not being like
necessary information never
being able to be accessed under
any circumstance I have problem
with that but I also have a
problem the separation of powers
elements to it as well and we
just we don't do immunity
and this committee so Mr
chairman and stick with my my
amendment to to strike sections
Senator Ivey Soto on the
proposed amendment act I don't
know that I I I I know it's
difficult for you to be standing
in for somebody else Senator but
all faster anyway.
Mister chair if it's necessary
and you're doing it with other
boards and commissions we we
would accept that thank you
senator every sort of half it it
does seem to be the there are
some legitimate things here and
I guess I would ask the maker of
the motion.
If it might be
Okay more consistent with our
access to strike.
All of subsection a.
And then to strike.
On page twenty two.
Line I.
Put a period after special
public records act.
And strike.
From there the rest of C. and
all of the.
So that so that's what we would
be left with this.
Right that events if they're
doing.
Their communications related to
actual potential disciplinary
action.
They're not.
Public records for the purpose
of destruction of records act.
And that.
And that the prescription
monitoring information an audit
trail.
Is not subject to special public
records act but it would strike
the or subject to subpoena for
schools by quarter it would
strike.
D. as tracking.
Was trafficking second question.
Tribal factions.
Right with on those two on the
proposed the amendment so every
so to use on the floor for that
you suggest to the movie modify
the motion she's indicated to
stick with the motion as is
Senator anything more flexible
you know so much okay.
so I see nobody else on the
motion.
So I'm I'm.
I I never want to sound like a
sour grapes are sour Puss my
dad's words whatever may be the
United I never know what we're
at this stage of the session
because the other day we were
saying well we don't want to
amend house built this too late
and we can't fix them and I
would have liked to have done
some I think very constructive
work on the last bill but I'm
sure the I have a pretty good
feeling the push back within
well it's too late we can't do
any changes to the.
Bill on that last one and then
we have a significant issue that
I share on this one we have.
Civil immunity from suit of.
have the.
I have the distinction I think
unless anybody
dislikes this but sometimes I'm
still describes the last trial
lawyer in the New Mexico
legislature I'm maybe you'll may
belong to travelers association
do good all right good so I
mean.
No no no no no I
you know I mean no offense but
it says there's a there's still
a lot of those so if you just
described by bring up because of
the Saint Patrick's day so
saying happy St Patrick's day to
all of you celebrating Irish
there's some wonderful
traditions on this committee and
the Judiciary Committee of
certain things one of them is
trying to protect the right to
trial by jury and and our court
system and increasingly this
session and in the years past
there are efforts to legislate
and and put in the statute
immunity from suit.
We catch some of the most we
pass some of the the session we
pass setting a number of those
with civil unities usually over
my objection I usually don't go
for the usually vote against
them and I've and I would just
all be without without this
amendment I would vote against
the bill because to do otherwise
would be the again putting into
statute doesn't additional civil
immunity from suit which I just
generally don't support so I
will support the amendment and
and I also appreciate Senator
Ivy Soto suggested his much more
nuance I think it's probably a
good one there should be some
places for confidentiality in
this process
hopefully all will be able to
establish and put it back into
this members passes you wouldn't
have that probably should keep
that in here but I just don't
know the our allows us to do
the.
The fine tuning work Senator Ivy
Soto would want to do and we
probably should what the other
thing that always kind of the
interest me a little bit is.
The role of well I'm just gonna
let everybody have a today so
foundation open government you
know you years and years and
years it coming here and boy
they would fight any anything
that would of the exam
inspection of public records
they would argue for at public
access and transparency that
would be fogs rule would often
we've seen the press here so
show up on some bills when when
they see and the transparency
for the press for sometimes when
they want to continue to make
sure that things get published
in the paper and the financial
advertising purposes but here
again we're.
Without this amendment would be
making a lot of things not
subject to inspection of public
records you think that the
transparency folks would be here
today opposing that but they're
not.
So all support the amendment
nine and I commend the committee
for being willing to make an
amendment to a house bill when
the when it's in the best
interests of everyone and I
appreciate the committee let me
express my opinions about the
need for doing so so we're on
that we're on that that motion
to strike section seven is there
objection to strike in sections
of the job is similar to on the
motion.
The motion
we just heard that the six
sections of the nursing for for.
this is anyone here in is that
same section and other health
care professionals wards and
better for the general.
This committee all that stuff so
if that's.
Senator Mr chair Senator I
believe the agency McCracken can
answer that.
Thank you senator thank you
senator Morris Mr chair.
So
The late enough there yes yes
it's in the medical practice act
it's in the state colleges the
veterinary practice the
chiropractic physician act and
the dental Health Care Act.
Mr chair Senator
the the concern I have on that
we just passed a law which are
both that would remove the
sunset all of course you just
mentioned so we're not going to
get a crack at this again.
Zero sunset review of it goes in
the state so if something is
going to in front of us and this
government for this committee
moving forward since we don't
have the sunset review process
for those boards this is the
opportunity to do that because
we are going to require to come
for us the use of.
So and most of the drops of
bills in this in the future this
practice is.
Sysco issue for that matter for
all the over the course which is
exempt from sunset
laws.
Los dealing with those and fix
so.
Issues that's your opportunity
as majority we're still on the
amendment Senator Ivey Soto on
the proposed meant to strike
sections of Sherman just a two
things one is I do think that
the
Standard that was really
articulated.
Was to try not to unless
necessary.
In terms of equipment house
bill's.
I would deem.
The sections necessary.
but the other thing is.
I'm I'm gonna.
We oppose this amendment yes
because I do think some of these
should remain if this amendment
were to fail then I'll make my
more nuanced.
In center I was so you may want
to make a more nuanced motion
even in this motion succeeds
then you may want to go back to
restore language from because I
I be receptive that I'll watch
the of of goes because
you know I I don't want to vote
against the motion and level of
this language to survive so so
from I'm kind of in a strange
place right now.
That's why this gentleman I'm
letting you know
that all if this doesn't pass up
I will be leaving
here.
Yeah I'm just not sure how
that'll go with the with the
votes for and we'll see how it
goes we're on we're on the
proposed motions for section
seven committees and by god I
want to suggest to centers of
your points not done with me and
I may be open to restoring
language or snow striking if
that makes some sense to do so
Senator Baca.
I just want to point out that
any rate would be changing the
bill Mr chair of with higher
than the going through it.
I understand center do you have
wants to maker amendment just be
more logical to start with
Senator Ivy Soto to that and
then fall she could always come
back to destroy us.
anyway leave it at that.
Yep and I and I take center this
is point the perhaps sometimes
there's amendments that are
worth us making them at the last
at the line I think this race
that level so.
Senator do you have Senator Ivey
Soto wants to reset his
amendment we can.
The committee wants to settle
that percent that's fine.
I left.
I appreciate you do this and you
think that save us some steps
for early so Mister chairman I
would move that we on page
twenty one.
line eight.
Thanks to my hold on one second
and look at amendments in
contact center lecture and
looking at the correct line
members.
Page twenty one line eight
strike the word actions and the
dash dash.
And make communication plural
communications.
Page twenty one removing also
the dash dash at the end one of
the dash session in space the
second.
Page twenty one lines nine
through fifteen strikes of
section eight.
Page twenty two line I.
After the ward Act.
Insert a period.
And strike the rest of the
subsection C..
Page twenty two lines eight
through eleven strikes of
section D..
And of course we letter.
Is a structure.
Alright very good friend.
The thank you of sponsor you
want to weigh anyone take a stab
at whether that so a favorable
or unfavorable proposed
amendment thank you Mr chair I'm
going to defer.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee
It is acceptable and I I
appreciate your consideration.
Thank you Senator is the Senate
on acceptable alternative subs
to motion for you for right now
I'm waiting for a few minutes.
You have the preceding motion so
I'm giving you the opportunity
to withdraw that motion for this
one after we finish second.
The public records act.
From the server so I I'm I'm
good with that and just to be
clear the effect of that.
Is is that none of the things
that you have there about the
clearing house or yield would be
prohibitive for you to do.
It's just that it would not be
subject to special public works.
So you can order some of these
by rule.
To do that but you would not
have those limitations along
with a lot of trails right so I
I know I think I think that
works the so the modification to
the motion I have I'm still
going to kind of consider the
Senate do X. motions Act because
she had the pending motion for
Senator Ivey Soto has so.
Given the cell expansion of that
I guess maybe contractions but I
would think of the original
motion to do it but
so do again has some additional
perhaps input but the the motion
right now would include on page
twenty one striking from line
twenty Representative period the
remainder that subsection and
Senator do we want to explore a
bit more with all of us perhaps
some lack of language on page
twenty two in subsection C. and
Mister chair I think all
subsection C. should be after.
I don't know why.
Especially because if if
something is being requested
Under of for that I personally
identifying information is
already gonna be redacted under
the that this terms already why
are we.
Wire wire audit trails.
Not why can't what can we be
able to on at this why shouldn't
we be able to I mean.
Why should we be able to request
those as public records thank
you senator thank you Mr chair
so audit trail is actually
record of when a query as maybe
some of those results it's not
something that whatever change
over time more be subject to but
it includes patients information
such as their name and their
date of birth and it the results
so it that would have to the
patients it's associated
directly with patients dispense
controlled substance
prescription information as is
the rest of the information in
the prescription monitoring
program Mr chair under the terms
of it from all that personal
identifying information would
already be redacted if any of
this is being produced pursuant
to a public records request so
we definitely want to protect
patients private information but
we ordered one under after this
just says you can't get it
under.
And I don't and and and
protecting patients privacy to
me it is not a reason put this
information in here because that
already happens under the order
they would have to agree to act
all that information when
they're producing so so Mister
chair I think all of section six
thanks to the act so with that
would leave remaining would be.
Whole half of the all all
written and oral communications.
May which.
I'm not sure how they're gonna
oral communication all written
or oral communications maybe
five percent to the board
relating to actual or potential
disciplinary action shall be
confidential communications and
are not public records for the
purposes of the inspection of
public records that will be all
that remains of section seven
yes and and and Mr chairman one
one concern is.
A particular side of her
information Representative
include a person's name.
So that's not PPRF however my
question might.
So I guess I follow up question
would be would be protected
under HIPAA yes yes and and so
if it's protected.
That I would agree with Senator
doing on this.
This section student center if
it's a productive yes.
Because then what you'll get is.
The redacted audit information.
But.
Property tax provider.
Information provider as.
With this network be considered
provider.
And if I could just turn our our
to the to the.
Second principles thank you Mr
chair thank you senators so the
board of pharmacy is actually
not covered by the book.
so pursuant to it for a the fate
would have to be as well as
provided by law.
So but it is an issue really is
that there are read arguments
that.
The information in the PNP is
not confidential because the
there's there's no more in the
statute that specifically says
that it is so we're having to
argue based on federal this done
to me common sense because it's
not good when the state requires
your personal information and
then has issue with
Keeping it confidential.
Mr chairman and.
Are you there to find a new.
Mr chair Senator I do think C.
should remain.
That purpose.
Mr chair have a provides medical
protects.
Medical information I I'm just
thinking back to.
When we were so when I was
apartments out of thirty we're
responsible for responding to
all the L. the upper class we
would frequently get requests
that would in some way include
medical information in the
result in the results and if we
would read all of that stuff
pursuant to to have a even
though we weren't the provider
at the as the the records
custodian I was not a medical
provider
and the it and even some of the
the original source of your game
is from where medical providers
and that stuff was always read
act and wasn't and that was
never challenged so I I really
don't think that patients names
are going to be released.
On if if.
If if we don't leave C. that's
just not been my experience as a
records custodian responding to
the very class right so
so most Representative.
all right.
We're still trying to persuade
somebody but you're trying to
person trying to persuade is out
of the room so Senator Moores
school.
Doing
this year executive director of
this the member would remember
just be that it's disciplinary
actions would be protected
confidential like other medical
boards don't you have a pre
Dale
don't matter to anyone dealing
with substance abuse it could
potentially voluntarily come
forward and as a diversionary
program I came of the name of it
so since it's not a it's pre
disciplinary wouldn't this
disincentive by pharmacies you
might be having a substance
abuse issue from coming forward
to seeking actually meant that
you guys have if that somehow
public.
Are you asking the exact action
or refuse to additional
services.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator is so program again
so I think you're talking about
well with respect to the board
of nursing the board of pharmacy
it was called to the New Mexico
monitor treatment program and
now it's the New Mexico health
professional wellness program.
And I I don't believe that the
change would be service any kind
of disincentive for individuals
to to seek treatment because
that enables them to maintain
their license and to have
structure to be able to practice
more safely
and I'm fully in support
program.
Yes No save people's careers and
got them because they were able
to come forward instead of a
vote in avoiding discipline
they're able to deal with the
substance abuse issues what I
see it but it's not a
disciplinary action it's it's a
diversion program so if if if
the the pharmacist comes forward
that is substance abuse issue
comes for to the point and help
that's not a disciplinary action
you guys help them with that
then that information on the
public record.
The thank you Mr chair thank you
senator we have not disclose
that information on the basis of
federal law that protects
patients who are cheeky seeking
treatment for substance abuse
disorder some of the cases that
are disciplinary and this would
help to prevent the release of
that information so I think the
lack of could be argued to be a
disincentive for right now for
individuals to seek treatment
make sure that.
Folks can come for crisis
without the worry about this
destroyed yes.
The office that that protects
Yes thank you Mr chair thank you
senator yes Mr.
All right so it's a little bit
challenging right now because
you were in different places on
the amendment so here's what I
propose to let's take the
amendment with the exception of
subsection C. and then we'll
come back to see because there
seems to be so still some
disagreement about that so I
think we can take the proposed
amendment to modify the title of
section seven online H. tracking
all of subsection a.
On the subsection be striking up
everything but the first
sentence that would become the
new subsection a.
Unless we don't end up with the
subsection C. so we'll see how
the lettering works when we come
to that and the amendment
includes
by agreement there seems to be
Grumman on subsection well let's
not take see at all and then
strike all of subsection do at
this time that the motion of
course this time at.
And see.
In terms of striking more
subject to some of the school or
or yeah we would put that in
here too I was gonna take see
this entirety isolation so we
just I just like that but we
were agreement with extracting
that so that is for the motion
so the motion would be on the
stricken part of subsection C.
and then we'll come back to the
first part of subsection C. as a
separate motion some of that's
the motion before us is there
any objection the adoption of
that amendment.
I've seen million show Senator
Ivy Soto Neil to serve on this
block approved Moores that
amendments adopted back to
subsection see the issue now is
whether we strive the language
receipts
the words public records act
right.
If we waited that have a good
understanding
of.
So there's lots of.
So I I I want to be clear that
does it for a if you if for a
record despite the questions of
my colleagues does it provide a
name with that.
Senator marketing director I
directing it to either of the
committee members have some
experience with this or a course
response to Mr chair thanks for
thank you miss Mr chair Senator
missed McCracken.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator
We.
If it's in a medical record.
We would generally to our best
to to remove all patient
information but that has been
that has been argued it
including recently that they're
they're not confidential because
there there's nothing in the
statute that.
The.
Supports that
So I hope that answers your
question of if not please let me
know how I can I think it's it's
really that that Mr chair and
and X. for with respect that
that's very unclear to me I I
don't I I doesn't answer my
question the question really is
under it for a are you required
to provide the name of the
patient or not Mr chair.
We've got an answer for okay
what and.
And so.
Representative I would be able
to anybody Mr chair Senator as a
grant when when I was the
records custodian Albuquerque
and we would get it very class
where they would request
information like this we would
always whether we were the
perfect and we work the
legislative
the all of that information is
always redacted the names like
if it is a medical record if of
this sort in those names were
redacted all that personal
identifying information was
redacted I would I would be very
surprised if this revealed a
whole bunch of patient names
by striking this that has not
been my experience and what I've
seen because because we often we
would end up being the
custodians of medical records
from other places and even if
under it right it doesn't
explicitly supposedly say you
can take things out even if you
are not medical providers that
is that is what happens in
reality just like the director
saying they're taking them out
of their own their own records
when they're producing
so I I I think I think we're
safe in reductions policy
struggles I would just say
you'll to center the so close
one you Mr chairman so Mister
chairman Sir Malcolm.
Under the special public records
act section fourteen is just
six.
Protective personal identifier
information some.
Waves.
Over the last four digits of a
taxpayer ID number financial
account number.
Driver's license number.
This year we had a credit card
or debit card number.
Over the year this is that a
birth.
Their social security number.
Under it doesn't provide as
otherwise provided by law.
According to the CDC website.
Help up the privacy rule.
Is.
That and if I if I may back up
real quick let's stick with the
prefer one and if I could Mr
chair and senator so under it
for I didn't hear you anywhere
in their list the name of the
individual he has a court the
individual name can them and
included unless prohibited under
state law.
Unless provided by other law
okay so nothing in it from
directly projects today thank
you.
Then under the privacy rule that
the.
Is that covered entities.
Are not to disclose.
Health information covered
entities include health care
providers.
Health plans.
Health care clearinghouses.
And business associates.
Those of the for covered
entities.
And so there should be a
definition Mr chair and senator
of what health care information
is or what constitutes that and
I would think it would be
a personal identifier.
And be
the the medical information
whatever that is I guess what
I'm getting at here is it seems
like you would need both of us
at least one of those caught up
components to be removed to not
be identifying health
information about an individual
so if we have the names and we
have the medical the medical
information and we find them
both then it would seem that we
have violated hip.
Mr chairman and serve aka only
for covered entities.
Yes.
And that's that's sort of our
lowest ranking subsection C..
I asked the question of whether
they're considered to be a
provider.
Because.
If their network if they're not
a provider.
They're not helpful and.
If they're not.
Of the clearinghouse.
Then.
Then they may be redacted.
But they're subject to being
sued.
And having to release that
information.
Mr chair and the X. were and you
were saying that under that
definition you are not we entity
covered by hip Mister chairman
Senator that is absolutely
correct.
Okay.
Clear thank Representative I'm
done Senator.
So under what basis have you
been rejecting because you said
you're attacking them now under
what basis even reduction in
that as otherwise provided by
law.
Okay so it sounds to me like
it's it's a little bit.
I mean.
It's kind of hard for me Mr
chair to to.
The
accepts are you on one hand if
you do this we won't be able to
redact anything but also we can
read act now even without having
this it's a little contradictory
to me
and.
So I think if there is is a will
to say in here specifically just
those patient names in this
information.
But it include this as a US and
impress option within this bill
and that's one thing to to
exclude this information
curious.
From from being a public record
is is really problematic Mr
chair Senator of director has a
comment please.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you senator I I think that
Senator Ivey Soto
Sort of pointed out what I may
not have done a very good job of
pointing out is that we have
but.
It's it's it's a tenuous
position to be making those
types of reductions and if I
also may say there are numerous
allowances by rule for access to
the prescription monitoring
program including individuals to
get their own information.
Mr chair this is all this well
at this will trump state law is
going to trump the rules so we
put this into law that's in
front of you can't get around
state law by rule
Mr chair I think we need to
strike all offices.
All right so that seems to I I
don't have a motion I don't
believe right now but I'll make
the motion to strike all of
State.
pretty good discussion debate on
that proposal so we'll do a roll
call on strike in subsection C.
units and I guess I should say
the remainder to worst part of
season second remainder C..
Senator Baca no.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator yes.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Duhigg yes.
Senator yes over three three
that motion fails that right yes
our motion fails.
Others.
Mr chair I'll make another
motion to limit see to only the
net patient names within that
information the.
The
Not subject to approximate the
the information otherwise
percentages if the if if the
concern is patient names being
revealed and let's let's address
that.
And just making all the
information available to the
public so but give me a specific
line motion all right Sir
This
twenty two line to.
This is gonna be in our fourth
but I.
After subsection C. inserting.
Patient names in.
So we're very patient names in
prescription monitoring program
information including
prescription information on a
transformation shall be
confidential and are not set Sen
are not public records for the
services.
And I wonder if we can if we I
wonder if we can just say Shaba
confidential I don't know that
the patient names themselves
would be public record
maybe shall not be revealed and
re and public records produced
in response to a request made
under the inspection of public
records act does that work the
just issues and for that covers
that okay okay and that'll be my
motion so page twenty two line
two before prescription.
inserting patient names and.
Mr chair of Senator could my
experts make a comment on that.
Thank thank you Mr chair thank
you senator my concern with that
is with a bright if they have a
patient name and they ask us to
and then we provide them with
the report were only the name is
removed we're giving all their
health information out and this
is contributing to it.
That that would be my concern
with that.
Hello Mr chairman frustrated
because I've heard that the
objections of striking C. was
because a patient names and not
something else.
Mr chair I I know that you I
don't know if you've had audit
trails be at issue in cases that
you've had but they are they are
often a big deal and I know this
is that and the act and and
sometimes you need that
information before you get to a
point where quarters order.
sometimes you don't even know
there's a case there to pursue
until you're getting this
information.
So.
I feel like with at every
amendment we're gonna make to
address the new concern is going
to be met with another new
concern
so.
Sure.
Senator still has the for the
may not finish under districts
that are just so no I'm just
of those support this amendment
up by one question.
And so do they have the language
work for the executive director.
Of course the that I can figure
out.
But.
If my daughter.
Gets prescriptions she's
patient.
But it's on my health insurance.
So we just say patient names my
name is to be revealed.
Could we is there like patients
New Jersey names.
Or something like that.
Mr chair I think that's fine
I don't know if insured names
are revealed with this but yeah
I don't think that be a problem.
We can restate the shortage so
page twenty two lining to before
prescription inserting patient
or insurers names and.
And you have and whether.
Mr chair Senator missed
McCracken.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator.
I would request consideration of
perhaps reference to information
otherwise protected by hippa.
And and that way someone can do
the back end where they're
asking for they have a name and
then the rest is
up for argument as to whether or
not it's protected what in
essence all they do is connect
the dots and you really are
really state someone's
controlled substance
prescription history.
Mr chair I The New in that case
I would say it's has the same
patient names or ensure that I
would just say information
otherwise otherwise protected by
HIPAA and just have that natural
little.
Yeah.
So page two or page twenty two
line to before prescription.
information otherwise protected
by the I have a I'll spell that
health healthcare insurance
portability whatever act
in in.
Yes.
And probably change that are.
Online for twenty is.
For for mac.
Think that's better grammar so
it was which you previously
Senators you've been inserting
language before the work
prescription here your the
language of proposing insert is
as I understand it is
information otherwise protected
and have.
Does that does that read right
so it right information
otherwise protected by have but
in prescription monitoring
program information comma
including prescription
information an audit trail
information healthy confidential
and is.
Right now are not public records
for the purposes of the
inspection of public.
The exchange that are too as.
Question I think that's more are
going to do it.
Because you have that body.
We would.
But that's the motion before us
now I agree twelve state senator
Bob.
Thank you Mr chair so Mr chair
and experten sponsor is that
unfriendly or is that from.
Okay thank you Mr chair thank
you senator
Hey.
I wouldn't go so far as to say
it's unfriendly I I think that
it.
It's acceptable.
Thank you especially as it gets
and yes.
That and that alleviates the
concerns I had earlier that
connection of the dots was
exactly what I was getting that
so I I think that's so much
better so thank you Mr that's
motion that means let's see we
would keep subsection.
C. O. that would become
subsection B. correct so that'll
require relating of that section
to be in addition to the motion
right.
Well that the motion that's the
motion before us is there any
objection.
Sing the show's Center boxer
want is do able Neal and Ivey
Soto in the affirmative that
amendment is adopted.
Number the committee Mr chair I
have one Marshall in this all
right Senator so if.
This exempting.
CYFD facilities for oversight of
the opioid.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator so this is specifically
only community homes only foster
homes which are not regulated by
the board of pharmacy.
Mr chair I don't see the
language as being limited to
only foster homes in the house
I because there are.
There are there are treatment
facilities that are are run by
CYFD.
And then let me ask you this
agency McCracken does B. O. P.
have any role because there are
some CYFD facility is that we're
we're recently shut down and
where we see a lot of leftover
prescription happening and
that's why I'm concerned about
removing oversight from from
some of these facilities so
Bernalillo county at YHA or
desert hill has be O. P. had any
part of overseen and any of
those so thank you Mr chair
thank you senator yes and that
will not change because they're
not foster homes and what we did
in the draft is we basically
took the definition of a foster
home and instead of just calling
it something that's to find
somewhere else to put the
definition and there so would
put me to that yes thank you Mr
chair thank you senator so Hey
that is our main page three
subparagraph two and that is
maintained by an individual
having care and control FIR
periods exceeding twenty four
hours of a child or children not
placed for adoption.
But.
Mr chair look up at one the
principal function of which is
to care for no more than sixteen
children on a twenty four hour
day presidential basically and
they don't receive funds
directly.
From CYFD okay and then
Secretary of monitors please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator so so those are the
there's one and a two and just
one or two so one of the
community homes which we talked
about and to is the foster homes
only so does not change the
board's oversight of facilities
or businesses.
And Mr chair.
I'm still worried about to them
because I I get that you're
craving that definition from
another definition of foster
home but I still don't think.
In the current this language in
the context of of this section
of law would necessarily be read
to just limit that to foster
homes as opposed to to
residential treatment centers
for Houston that we know there's
been problems with because they
would also fall under it
maintained by an individual
having care and control FIR
period sixteen twenty four hours
the child or children's not
placed for adoption.
So why.
Why does the White is to need to
be in there because what I
wanted but I'm going to suggest
is is to strike to to make sure
that we are maintaining
oversight over these facilities
that that need oversight.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator and
because we would it was more of
Where we're putting it out there
that the border is not trying to
make the change so that we can
licensed foster homes which we
haven't and it's not our intent
our intent is to continue
licensing hope we do because I
agree with you they do need to
be licensed and regulated and
we're going to continue so to
that end if you want to remove
to you can it is a definition
only of foster homes if you look
at the definition of foster
homes that's the intent we have
no intent of changing our rural
it's been that way for twenty
years it's so that we can
continue to license those that
we already do to find that
health and safety of oversight.
So I think what I'm hearing is
that if we do start to that
would be a friend is that would
be a friendly amendment.
When we acceptable thank you
thank you Senator thank you Mr
chair yes so then Mr chair on
page three I move to strike
lines thirteen through fifteen.
And the.
Asian.
Decisions as.
Sure.
Well no I now know Mr chair
wanted to under.
Our.
One seven one and and I'm sure
LCS will clean up the amendment
as as needs be need the team
that you're looking at let's try
to get it right here in center
when we do we get it right here
they're going to be pressure the
very and.
If we can do it here I I think
we state so why wouldn't we
still have of one and then in a
in a B. you Mr chair Senator the
director would like that to stay
in okay.
The A. and B. as well thank you
Mr chair thank you Sir yes.
Okay so Mister chair just be
page three struggling to
thirteen through fifteen and the
for I'm sorry so online twelve
Striking or.
And then striking all the lines
thirteen through fifteen.
Okay which is the strike.
We are on this page sensex Mr
chair the director wants that to
stay in this came up to the one
of A. B..
I'm fine either way the strap
okay so Page three line three
strict that one designation
and then line twelve strike for
and then strike lines thirteen
for fifteen.
And when to start.
Emily with this.
I do think chairman.
Aligns.
Read.
Need that level where.
Where that's what I.
Which is here for our.
All that I've.
Mr I think it's fine without it
because I think the of which
kind of handles that provide.
That's right for you one more
time for and we just be
absolutely sure please all right
on page three line to the colon
line three remove the.
Subsection one designation.
Line twelve is the number one
yes yes yes not all the like the
just the number one line twelve
remove or.
And then lines thirty and then
strike lines thirteen three
fifteen.
The motion before us.
Is there any objection it
further discussions are for the
session sing up their objections
the amendment.
Same amendment that amendment is
adopted.
Mr chair that's all I have.
Senator ever so the motion.
So I do have a couple of
questions within the act.
on page ten.
A huge deal for me but.
I think the idea.
The ritual Act was that with the
regular meeting.
Is that my regular mail but if
it's a certified meeting I
believe it's a special meeting
set up by some way where you
verified that people got notice.
And so you're going to regular
mail or electronic mail.
And.
I just put out then that you
lose the.
The verification of the got
notice.
The show that's that that was
just observation.
However.
Of more concern to me.
Is on the sixteen.
And to read it you need to start
on page.
Fourteen.
And we have session for.
The pharmacy act does not
prohibit.
Then at least sixteen.
Paragraph eight.
The pharmacist from prescribing.
Dangerous drug therapy.
Good vaccines and immunizations
under rules protocols and
adopted by the board.
You're moving approval by the
medical board.
It is just saying in
consultation with.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you senator that was and
it's and it now specifies after
approval by the medical board
but it does remove the board of
nursing who is in support of
that okay okay very good.
So it so it still requires
approval by the medical.
Mr chair Senator that's correct
okay.
On page eighteen.
Line seventeen.
You go from may.
Senator the amount of conditions
of surety bond.
If you don't set the amount and
conditions are sure to bond how
is someone supposed to know what
the commander surely bond is.
Are we just going away from
should bonds all together Mr
chair Senator that was to align
with the previous paragraph B.
which specifies that the board
may require surety bond so if
the surety bonds are required
then they would be set by rule
but I think it was confusing to
say you shall set by rule when
you may or may not require them.
Okay.
Okay.
That's awful the context of.
We just.
Thank you Mr.
I'm good.
What's the will of the committee
of.
There Sir Senator Pirtle.
Thank you madam chair of
questions on page that the that
Paula Jones is.
Nine but it is
Under section bill.
So.
A.
Thank you seventeen.
Was talking about the exemptions
on working with the C. act
Seventeen line I and it says the
quantity of prescription drug
misuse does not exceed the
seventy seventy eight hours ago
we just change that the few
years ago so I think that
senator potter was still here
but I remember including no in
fact we want to change this to
seventy two hours what is the
purpose of changing back to
thirty day.
Thank you madam chair Senator Mr
correct lines are thank you
madam chair thank you senator so
the purpose is that there are
Live saving medications that
cannot be provided as a seventy
two hour supply including and
healers and including insulin
and there are also times when
the pharmacist may not get that
prescription within the seventy
two hours in which case the
patient because without
medication so this is simply a
one time emergency thirty day
supply well the pharmacist the
prescription to avoid patients
having to go without their
medication.
So madam chair a motion and.
My name is Shera madam chair
Senator
well this also include opiates.
Madam chair senator thank you
that's a great question and it
does not because that would be
prohibited by other law so the
it there's language in our and
unless prohibited by the law so
federal law does not allow the
dispensing of a controlled
substance medication without a
prescription so there is no
emergency dispensing even one
hell of a controlled substance
so.
Here transposes just emergency
dispensing this is the section
thank you madam chair thank you
senator this this is for
patients who have been on the
medication and they would
experience either an
interruption or harm from going
without the medication and they
don't have a refill authorized
so the pharmacist gives the one
time thirty day supply so my son
has issues with.
Anything that the breathing
machine you have to prescribe it
let's say you know he's having
an apple so they could since
it's on file they could then
dispense that medicine.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator so if your son had no
refills and the pharmacist
determined on their professional
judgment the lack of doing so
woods
Cause suffering or harm to him
and they tried to contact the
physician and the the
prescribing practitioner was not
a available to they were able to
get the authorization and then
let the patient know this is a
one time only thing because I
don't I haven't been able to get
in touch with your physician and
the pharmacist is required to
try and to notify and they can't
do it again but yes because they
would be able to.
But okay so madam chair so that
it would be a thirty day supply
or up is up to.
So does not exceed so the
pharmacist that has the
discretion of it's a Saturday
morning.
You can see your doctor on
Monday give you enough to last
till about Wednesday as opposed
to going beyond that point thank
you madam chair thank you
senator that's correct or if it
was you know of a four day
weekend or something such as
that they could do a five day
supply right now there's just
there's no allowance for
anything in excess of a seventy
two hour.
Thank you for that on page
sixteen that.
Have those two.
Line twenty one
it says the pharmacy from
exercising the pharmacist
professional judgment refilling
a prescription for prescription
drug unless prohibited by
another state.
what kind of situation we ever
be and one that we would care
what other states have outlawed
it's legal here too with
What how would you end up in a
situation where that would be.
Apply.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator so my reading is this is
another state law would be for
instance the board of pharmacy
administers the drug device and
cosmetic Act and the controlled
substances act so with the
controlled substances act which
is New Mexico statutes
administered by the board that
would qualify as another state
law that prohibits at dispensing
and that goes back to the
controlled substance
prescription that we talked
about so Representative another
state talk about just another
state law within the statute
thank you madam chair thank you
senator that's correct.
That the committee will possibly
R. rated read a little
different.
So I appreciate that that's all
I have Mister.
Representative.
The
live I appreciate you.
Your tend to do that section
right there.
I think going back to the
definitions.
Sixteen and twenty one.
The one question for Dale.
Is that that should be not a
prescription drug but a danger
struck.
Madam chair Senator I.
All of the prescription this is
a dangerous drug.
Thank right up to.
Madam that's correct that's what
state should go back to the.
I've I've been on my to do list
for years to go through this act
and change dangerous drug to
prescribe drug.
We haven't done that yet.
Right but if you're struggling
to drug that is required by
applicables federal state law or
will be dispensed pursuant to
prescription.
Or as restricted use by licensed
practitioners.
Right and so and so.
Under the act.
The phrase should be a dangerous
drug I believe and that also
then my definition that would
exclude something under control
substance.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator so so the two terms are
used interchangeably and the
prescription drugs as a term of
the trade and it is synonymous
with the R. X. only which is
required by federal law to be
printed
on the medication so
Madam chair Mr Senator eight I
don't believe that to be a
source of of confusion
well in fact actually are
actually.
Is provided for under the
definition of dangerous drug.
So again under the act I
understand the common
terminology.
Under the act the phrase is
dangerous drug.
Not prescription drug.
So.
But Senator there are
definitions for both
prescription and drug also in
this act I think it's just using
those two deferred to define
terms together.
here.
And I would be I would worry
about making a change just there
and not throughout otherwise
because I think that will create
confusion I think right now it's
probably being prescription
drugs being used consistently
throughout it and.
And I think that might be a
change that might have some
unanticipated consequences.
Really Madam the.
The term is used throughout the
act.
Vectis dentistry.
For example you'll see on page
seventeen line nineteen twenty.
Hi all prescriptions required
preparation of those forms
amounts of the districts.
they just drugs is in fact the
phrase that is used throughout
the act.
So so I I think it clarifies.
As opposed to providing a
Providing a.
If you.
In center I'm I'm just doing it
word search on prescription I'm
just seen other uses of
prescription drugs.
In here like what we're just
looking at with the quantity
that the thirty day quantity
But.
See we can see what that the
will of that but it in in a
different in a different area
we can see with the will of the
the committee is on this
I want to go ahead and make a
motion doesn't make a motion.
Of the sixteen.
Line twenty one straight to work
prescription insert or
dangerous.
Again that would align it to
the the definition.
That is on page three get online
sixteen.
Senator I think you would also
need to do it then on page
seventeen line for.
And.
There's multiple of seventeen.
Page five line twenty five.
C. Hey nine line eighteen and
and senator that's that's why I
I feel like I this this might
not be a great idea I think it's
a fantastic idea.
But it might be a good idea to
do it and maybe in a more
thoughtful ways session for yes
What is the will of the
committee on the spell Senator
all right is there any objection
to the motion saying none the
show centers Pirtle pocket
Duhigg only on Ivy Soto voting
in favor you have to do passes
amendment.
thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you H. B.
two oh five okay Representative
on.
For the livestock board.
Representative.
Senator yes as for the C. have
have how incredibly quickly LFC
and well it will be quick
investigation amendment so
Miss madam chair members of the
committee with me is
representative
Gail Armstrong she carried the
bill on the house side I'm
hearing it here on the Senate
side this is the meat and
poultry inspection programs
statutory authority build the US
department of agriculture food
and safety inspection services
for it has of given an initial
approval to the meat and poultry
inspection program for the state
this position has been funded
with me today I have Dr Tim hit
Penn issue is the director of
the inspection program for our
state and I have the deputy
director of the department of
the New Mexico livestock board
Belinda it could not make it and
she apologizes she has a family
emergency going on right now but
the state has met the
preliminary requirements in
order to go through with all the
rest we need to put it into
statute to allow the federal
government to do this and that
that once the program is in
place the federal government
will in fact pay fifty percent
of the program the for to
propose statutes have been
reviewed by the federal
government to determine if they
meet the at least equal to
standard and that covers
statutory authority inspection
product sampling staffing
training humane handling and our
expert here could answer
questions or talk more but I
know you're in a hurry so you
let us know what you would like
to do at and etcetera I also
suggest that your expert I stand
for questions you do have to
proponents lined up you want to
waive public comment
they could raise their hands
sure please feel free to raise
your hand if you're in support.
One thank you yes yes all right
we did not have anyone signed up
in opposition members of the
committee.
But.
Senator.
And.
If.
A little bit more.
Just maybe.
Certainly and a new.
So we would like Dr Hanisch to
go ahead and get that three to
five minute presentation about
how important this would be for
our state penalty paid even less
than that we'll go we'll go
quickly can someone very quickly
so that thank you madam chair
members of the committee
as I said my name is Tim Hanisch
and the veterinarian I've been
hired to put this program
together for it for the state of
New Mexico there's great support
for this it became very obvious
during COVID with empty shelves
built more shelves we just
didn't have the capacity not
only here but around the country
to produce meat and meat
products what we're looking at
doing this just deals with the
processing end of it this does
not deal with restaurants with
with anybody that is going to be
selling this out the front door
it will be supplying a safe and
unadulterated drugs to those
particular individuals and
industries also for for
individuals with with for
instance custom slaughter plants
they they they can they can they
can slaughter livestock but it
will not be for sale it will go
back to the original owner.
Mentor to turn that you will who
appear through this or if you
read through this is it we have
New Mexico has to develop a
program that is equal to that is
the federal statement the
standard has to be cool too
there there there's there
program for them to approve this
and is is Senator CENIC said
there are components that we
have to meet and we are working
on that and have met some
once we can get it statutory
authority and we can show
financial accountability which
the state has already done we
actually have funding we can
liberal to leverage federal
funds once once the the the
cooperative agreement assigned
so that those are the two big
ones once that happens that will
open the door for us to start
hiring to start training
individuals taking advantage of
federal training programs using
the federal database if we so
desire to do so for this entire
situation the other thing that
allow us to do that is to expand
our program for not only in tri
state trade but also for
interstate trade this call to a
property of interstate shipping
program the that we could become
eligible for in that and there
is a there's another program
called time in attendance
reporting so so it's it's a
great plus the federal
government's doing the best they
can FSIS can but do that the
their numbers their low numbers
it is stifling the last thing
I'll say is it is it being state
ran it allows us even though
will be regulatory it allows us
to lead by education that is the
goal we we we we have working
with other states we have seen
website if you look at the the
requirements to get into the
processing it's rather daunting
however.
Being state ran we have skin in
the game so to speak we want to
see people succeed the last
thing we want to do is over
regulate we want to help them.
A stab wish a good safe program
permit them and work with them
throughout so thank you.
Yeah.
There Pirtle.
Seems like the stress to get
tacked on to ability and I go
ahead.
But there was this simply would
put in
a few things that I actually.
Help with some of the food
crisis things that we
experienced during the COVID
although I think the the main
section bill for us is is good I
don't know how much of an
effective will it will have on
I'm sure.
but this would really expand the
cottage industry part of selling
food within New Mexico
currently in it it also does a
few of the things that creates a
animal share for people because
I'm sure Madam be hard for you
to grow an entire B. by yourself
and consume all of it in a
timely manner so to allow you to
join with Senator o'neill
Senator Baca and then have me
actually grow it because I have
the ability to do that and then
whenever we had a lot of it
would not then be required to be
inspected as it is your cow so
it puts that in there there's
also gross receipts tax
exemption it's kind of funny if
you look at the gross receipts
tax are done if your grandmother
grows grapes makes jam out of
them and sell them at the
farmers market is gross receipts
tax tacked on but if you go by
Smucker's jelly from say Smith's
or whole foods there is gross
receipts tax of fixes that
little loophole there but it it
opens it up really for a
informed consumer to make the
decision for themselves from my
neck of the woods buying of Rio
out of the so the.
Then that you don't know who
this is a common practice and I
trust them more than I do
Barbies just from the recent
springs from a fellow senator of
money so I think this would
actually really improved farm to
table farmers products to
consumers and so that's why it's
tried.
Every single time.
Sanchez so madam chair and
senator thank you this for this
great idea but it really does
not fit in the livestock board
of functions responsibilities
and it does not relate to the
federal program that we are
trying to access but I do think
it would stay our bill would
stimulate the economy and your
bill would stimulate the economy
and madam chair I just be clear
doesn't mean into the statutes
that you're amending it do so
with the with because your
bill's as relating to food you
can essentially amended and
statute that's relating to food
which is what this does and so
we're not touching anything to
do with your
food statutes he still building
the federal government's and
look at us we passed the minimum
standard and it it would not
affect them because we we
amended other statutes or put in
different lost somewhere this
this is and that's really kind
of life support in any way but
would be a standalone
improvement to our cottage
industry law.
So madam chair Senator with the
other sponsored like to comment
Madam chair of senators and
committee if I would've known
about this amendment to possibly
sooner it would possibly be a
friendly amendment but seeing
that it's so late in the game I
would DeMint unfriendly.
That center I think this would
be a great stand alone bill but.
We are function as a
subcommittee right now want to
see I is there any more
discussion on I'm wondering when
we should go running restaurant
us senators about this but if
there's more discussion on the
amendment.
Wait does look like this so.
Yes I recall seeing this on the
floor of the last session of the
is the session before
Side of the added to another
bill as well and I thought it
was interesting idea then to.
To the I have done a bill you
madam chair to the floor look
back again I believe floor is
starting at one
Yes it is for right now.
Let's see if we can get a quorum
just for the purposes of
finishing this bill
okay as we.
If we can't let's see if we can
get one person just to finish
this bill and then we'll we'll
have recess and and for folks
here on other bills we will be
coming back again this afternoon
to get through the rest of that
the agenda.
Let's wait just a few minutes to
see if we can get some.
In
addition.
All.
Madam chair with the okay.
This member has a call of the
house of the minutes.
However is gonna bring in just a
couple more minutes and if if we
can't get a quorum then we'll
both pick up right where we left
off when we meet again this
afternoon but hopefully we can.
Get one more person.
Yeah.
Unison.
It.
It and Representative you need
to go I thank you madam chair I
think I'm being I called houses
been put on Maria and please
feel free to give.
Remember those those bills.
Or the.
You might want to.
I wonder what the topic is that.
There are.
Right.
One morning or to I after can I
don't know how we can.
When her.
Thank you.
All right I think recalling.
