about why you think you got
elected and what you hope to
accomplish while you're here.
We're also going to spend a
little bit of time, Emily, who's
our committee secretary, will
usually be here, but true to my
form, I've got her making some
changes to a document at the
last minute, so she's working on
getting those done and printed,
you'll be up here with those
shortly.
Um, that's the committee
procedures that we'll go
through. Uh, we've also put on
the agenda a little bit of a
what I'm calling a framework for
analysis. Those of you that are
new to the committee probably
have heard my understanding is
that none of the Republicans
wanted to be on this committee.
It's what I was told, so that uh
this was seen as a sentence, uh,
which is why we've got 332
complete freshman members and
one esteemed former colleague
here, but I, my understanding is
all of you are here is
punishment, um, no.
And, and then I was really
offended by that, but then I was
told that the reason that you
were told this was punishment is
because we do a lot of work on
this committee and that made me
actually feel OK about it, so
that's, that's a good feeling as
well too, but I do, I did put on
the agenda what I'm calling a
framework for analysis because
we do try and approach the many
bills that come to this
committee and some of a
thoughtful way and I wanted to
share the, the insights about
what I, what I have, uh, are
incredible team of lawyers do.
We've also added the agenda, the
sentencing commission, um, and,
um, and then Senator Doig to
present a little bit of her
bill.
That's not to give her a jump
start on everybody else's Senate
Bill 54, but, um, I will tell
you that historically, I'm
looking at my good old colleague
Al Park and people who have been
around here a long time, like
Senator Worth and I, uh, we're
the old timers and I was kind of
too, um, we used to rely very
heavily on the sentencing
commission. Uh, when it comes to
criminal sentencing bills, and
I, I think it's important that
we continue to do so we, we lean
on that, and I think it's
important for members to
understand that process.
And why it exists, I'll tell you
my, my version of why it exists
is that I've been doing this for
now getting close to 25 years,
and all those 25 years, whenever
there's a tragedy and and they
always are tragedies or horrible
events. Uh, the politicians are
usually making a beeline to the
5 o'clock news trying to figure
out who will be in front of the
cameras first to talk about the
need to increase the penalties
and sentences for that offense
and that's what the public uh
expects and that's what
politicians respond.
to in the media falls for it.
And um we tried many years ago,
I think more uh thoughtfully to
try and develop a process and a
procedure where the sentencing
commission is to guide us, uh,
and, and maybe avoid some of the
theatrics, uh, so I, I've
invited the sentencing
commission here today because we
have a lot of bills where people
are beginning to think that if 5
years is good, 7 years is
better, and certainly 9 years
better than that, and before you
know it, we're on this committee
and it's a, it's an auction, you
know, to see.
To see who can be the toughest
on crime and it between us and
the executive and the other
members and the two parties and
I, I don't think any of us on
this committee are going to
approach crime uh with that lack
of thought. So that's the reason
for the, the sentencing
commission and Senator Doug has
a
A bill that took a couple of
days to read the title on the
floor, I think, uh, to, uh, I
think she told us that she put
everything she could possibly
think of in this crime
initiative. Part of that relates
very directly to the sentencing
commission, so I've asked her to
take in isolation that one part
of her bill to put it together
with yours too.
Um, so with, with that said,
we've been joined by everybody
on the committee now, I think
other than Emily, and I've
excused her for a few more
minutes. So let's start with our
new members. I'll start with, to
my right, um, Senator Paul, take
a few minutes to tell us about
yourself.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, so,
Nicholas Paul, I go by Nick, uh,
reside in Alamogordo, I
represent, uh, District 33, so
Otero, Lincoln, and Chavez
Counties on New Mexican through
and through. I was born in
Albuquerque, grew up in
Alamogordo, uh, I think like a
lot of folks, you want to get
out and see something different,
so I went to college in
California and then uh quickly
retreated from the metropolis of
LA back to New Mexico, where I
didn't have to sit in traffic
for 3 hours just to go 10 miles.
Um,
in addition to that, I'm married
to my beautiful wife, uh,
Serena, and we've been married
going on 8.5 years now, and, uh,
we haven't been blessed with
kids yet, but, uh, we've got two
black labs and they, they are
like children, um, so we, we
deal with that. Um, for work by
trade, I, uh, am in real estate.
I've been in real estate since I
was in college in one capacity
or another.
Uh, first in the brokerage
world, I still maintain a
brokerage license in California
and is New Mexico as well, uh,
but primarily in real estate
investments. I own a portfolio
of self storage facilities,
that's my main focus these days
is running that business and uh
continuing to grow it. We've
also got some other residential
rentals that we manage um as
well, um, but real estate by
trade, um,
And, you know, I think the, the
reason that, that
I got elected number one is
I think
The district that I represent
wants to see some of the next
generation step up into, into
these seats where some of the
predecessors or at the age of
retirement, you know, they, I'm
filling Bill Burr's seat and uh
he, he did a fantastic job. Uh,
He's a mentor to me. He's
looking to go spend more time
with his grandkids, and so it
was an opportunity for me to get
more involved. I served on the
city commission in Alamogordo
for 3 years, and, uh, liked that
experience, and this was just
kind of the logical next step.
It wasn't something that I had
necessarily planned. I didn't
have it on my vision board, you
know, from 10 years ago that I
was gonna, uh, be in this seat,
but when the opportunity arose,
I jumped on it because to me
it's an opportunity of a
lifetime, right? I don't think
that there's
A whole lot of people in the
state of New Mexico that if you
broke down the numbers and say
that they were able to serve as
a senator for their given
district, and that to me is
something that uh is, uh, you
know, pretty incredible to have
the opportunity to do.
That's little about myself and,
and who I am, I can expound more
if needed, but.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
introduce myself. I'm Aunt
Thornton, um.
Currently we're County,
Sandoval, Santa Fe and Torrance
County District 19, which is
basically the East Mountains
include the Harris, and, uh,
Sandia Park.
Um, all the way out to Edgewood,
Moriarty, and completes the way
out to Klein's Corners, believe
it or not, so it's, it's pretty
big district, but also cause
everything Easter tramway in the
city of Leo County, so I have a
lot of urban as well and 4
hills. Uh,
So I came to New Mexico in 1979.
I was recruited by Sandia
National Labs, uh, uh, out of
the University of Colorado. I'm
an aerospace engineer and uh
they brought me in to Sania to
work at, uh, to work on nuclear
weapons. And so, um, I, I was
there for about 8 months and
they sent me off to get my
master's degree at Stanford,
where they paid for all that
cause I have no, no dues, uh,
no, no fee. They pay for all of
that and uh and I came back and
worked for about 3 or 4 more
years, and they sent me off to
get my.
PhD at Purdue University. So,
uh, I worked for Sandia for
about 27 years and uh primarily
in uh my, my area of specialty
is called computational food
dynamics and, and I specialize
in hypersonic flow. So, um,
And I, and I looked, worked for
Sandia for about 17 years and I
decided I wanted to go work on
instead of just nuclear weapons,
wanted to go work on aircraft,
so I took off and went to go
work in uh Lockheed Martin and
worked with the aerospace
Company in Palmdale, the other,
it's called their skunkworks,
which is their.
Advanced development company and
so I got to work on some really
cool things there. Came back to
Fort Worth, where I met my wife,
uh, my beautiful wife, Glena,
who was instrumental and getting
me to run and supporting me as I
decided to get involved in
politics. She's from Texas and,
uh, and so we were on different
sides of the spectrum at one I I
was.
Formerly a Democrat, and um and
we argued all the time and
eventually I decided to come
over to her side as I started
realizing what was going on,
but, um.
But I, uh, I, I, I then got
involved in politics after I
retired from Sandia in 2015 and
uh I ran for, I became the first
vice chair of Berlino County in
20.
It was 2020, 2017 or 2018. And,
um, did that for about a year
and, and then I was fortunate
enough to get involved in state
level and I ran for lieutenant
governor, I was lieutenant
governor with, uh, Mark
Lachetti. Uh, so I became a
lieutenant governor candidate
with Marco and Key, um.
Neither of those two times Iran
were successful after that, and
so I, uh, last year I was here
as an analyst and so for all
your analysts, you can actually
run for office someday in the
future, um, so I served as an
analyst for the uh minority and
uh the current senator in my
district, uh, Greg Schmed, he
told me he was going to be
retiring and so, um, he asked if
I would run in his bed, and so
We decided after going through a
statewide race, it was a lot
easier just handling a district
than it was going all over the
state, and so I was fortunate
enough to get elected, and here
I am. I'm looking forward to
working in the judiciary, uh, I
come sort of with an analytical
background. I have no judicial
law experience, so I'm gonna be
relying on, on the chair here
for guidance, uh, and I think
all of us here are, are, are
new, so, but we hope you don't
take too much advantage of us
and actually utilize the skills
we have available. Thank you
very much, sir. We have another
a freshman senator, Senator
O'Malley, you're also joining
the committee and joining the
Senate for the first time.
Welcome.
Thank you, Mister Chair.
Um, good afternoon. I'm, uh,
happy to be here today. Um, just
a little bit of background, um,
well, first thing, uh, my, my
family comes first. It always
comes first. I'm a, I have two
daughters, 2 grown daughters,
and I have 4 grandchildren. Um,
and I just recently, my husband
and I celebrated 50 years.
It's a miracle, really.
Um, but there it is. Uh, so, um,
so, am I getting involved um is
uh not because something I was
interested in politics
particularly. I was interested
in improving my neighborhood.
This was many years ago. I
joined my neighbors and we
started to advocate to clean up.
There was a polluter in the
neighborhood, um, took several
years to get that done. And in
the meantime, we, we organized
and we got things like stop
signs and storm drains and
things like that. So, um, and
then when my counselor decided
not to run. Uh, they asked me if
I would consider running.
And I thought, yeah, I think so
because of the background that I
had. Um, so I was a city
councilor, I booked city
counselor for
Oh, I, I had just won my 3rd
term and um and then I decided
to, to, um, run for the county
commission.
And I served 9 years there.
Um
I really feel as long as I can
be effective, and that means I
can.
I, I can be effective in the
sense that, you know, bring
resources to a community. Um,
and, uh, that, you know, I.
This is important, and I, I feel
like I, as long as I do that,
uh, then, you know, I, I will
continue, uh, when that's no
longer something I can do, then,
um, then really, it's time to
move on, in my opinion, but I
still felt they had some um
experience because of my
experience and the fact that I
continue to do work in my
community that um run it. So
that's, that's why I sort of
follow the adage first, do no
harm. Um, and my thinking too
is, um, I really
like to, to, you know, whenever
we make laws, how does this
really affect people on the
ground?
Um, sometimes, uh, mentioned it
sound good politically they may
sound good, but really, how does
it affect children, families,
uh, because we have a lot of
families that's day to day they
struggle, and so that's really
important to me. And also to
bring resources to, to families
and children, housing being a
big concern now, um, and it's,
it's, it's really hurting a lot
of people. So, and that is my
background too. I read a
nonprofit for many years at
Community Development
Corporation and, and permanently
affordable housing.
was something we did. That's in
the sawmill district. I don't
know if some of you the
Albuquerque area know what the
Sami District, but there's a
community res right next to it.
It's about 33 acres and the
entire um
Uh, trust there has affordable
housing over 200 units of
permanently affordable housing.
So that's something I'm very
proud of.
Um, so I guess that's kind of
it. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
All right, so we have another.
OK
Go back to
Uh.
But
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. uh
Crystal Brantley,
a large area of the southwest
corner of New Mexico, 7
counties, much of its very
rural, although it's not all
rural, um, I do come, come in
now after redistricting taking a
large portion of Las Cruces,
which is actually where I'm
from. My dad was a water quality
specialist, professor at New
Mexico State University. My mom
was a school nurse and later
around the school-based health
clinics out of Gadsden, um, I, I
am qualified to serve in the
legislature because I'm
Mother. Motherhood had sent me
here and so I ran for local
politics, uh, nonpartisan soil
and water conservation District.
Later as my girls became school
age, that transitioned to a run
for the local school board which
are done in.
Continue to be very active, um,
I was not married when I came
into the legislator, but I was
actually taking a, a, a
legislative field trip on the
east side of the state and ran
into a friend of mine from
college, and a year later we
were married, and so that's
switched the diamond to
Brantley, and between the two of
us, we now have 5 teenagers. Tom
raised, was raising all three of
his girls completely alone. Uh,
my two girls and they have a an
excellent dad with, with them.
Uh, so we now have 5 teenage
girls, um, and that
is a job.
In itself, he's involved in the
oil and gas industry like
everybody on that side of the
state because farmers and
ranchers own a lot of the land
rights and water rights, so both
with.
produced water and
And groundwater. I have family
in Mexico and so I spend a lot
of time there. My sister and
brother-in-law are down in Casas
Grandes, and he is a large uh um
importer, I guess if you're on
our side, exporter of produce
and and that and, and for many
reasons, the Mexican gray wolf
program that catapulted me into
so and water districts, uh, are
the, the, the problems that
we're seeing in our education
system. I realized the the
importance and the powers that
laws can have on everyday
people.
Right now, I guess it would even
be the threat of laws, right,
with imports and tariffs, we
were having a good conversation
this weekend that that even the
threat of law without uh
considering all those unintended
consequences with skyrocket
prices and what we can do here,
um, my legislative background.
Because I served on the Senate
Finance Committee being in here
for the last 4 years and I
realized this is that money is
not fixing our problems, and we
cannot spend our way out of
these problems. And so I'm
actually excited to be on this
committee because I think if we
are going to make meaningful
change in New Mexico. This is
arguably the most powerful
committee and where it's gonna
happen.
I have an interest in child
welfare just since I've been
here and the atrocities that
we're seeing with that, continue
to see with that. Um, I, I am,
I'm driven to address border
security and I want to be very
clear that there's a difference
between securing and making our
public safe in immigration,
which I think is a federal
issue, but when it comes to the
influx of fentanyl into this
state and with, with open
borders, how do we address that?
And, and the, the damages that
we're seeing there, it's never
lost on me that in just 4 years
that I was serving and my first
session.
I got a courtesy call to let me
know that Officer Darien Jarrett
had been murdered in the line of
duty and in my last session, I
got a courtesy call to remind to
to announce that Officer Jonah
um Hernandez of Las Cruces had
been murdered in the line of
duty, and it's a reminder that
if we cannot keep our law
enforcement safe and, and really
kind of provide the resources
and support that they need. How
do we expect to keep our
children safe and how do we
create a safe in Mexico and I, I
hope that this is the committee
that starts to do that, that
starts to build a safer
Mexico for all of us, and I'm
excited to be part of this, um,
I'm not a lawyer, but rest
assured in Mexico, I have seen
every episode of the Lincoln
Lawyer, and I feel very, very
prepared to be here and handle
the people's business, um, I did
write down a quote on this, and
this was, uh, President Abraham
Lincoln, the first Republican
president I should say, said he
once wrote that the leading role
for the lawyer, as for the man
of every other calling is
diligence.
As I thought about that, I
thought that's why I'm excited
to be here because this
committee has a reputation of,
of putting in the hard work of
of being dutiful and deliberate
and diligent. And so what I will
pledge to you is that we will
come, my team and I, and do the
same.
To build a better New Mexico
that benefits all of us
regardless if it's urban rural,
Republican or Democrat. So thank
you, Mr. Chair, for having us.
And you'll also have the title
while you're here of the ranking
member of the committee and the
newer members, she's the most
senior Republican in the
committee, so we look forward to
having you, uh, take that lead
role for the Republican
minority. All right, uh, we are
new to the committee, uh,
Senator Maestas, you're new to
the committee but not new to the
Senate. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thanks, everybody. My
name's Antonio Maestas.
I'm a state senator from
District 26.
Which is in Burnley County, uh,
west of the river in
Albuquerque, roughly hugging the
bust from Saint Pius all the way
down the bridge, um, up and down
the course boulevard. It's a
thrill to be here. I'm very
honored to be here and very
grateful, uh, to be put on this
committee. uh, I was on a
Well, before I get to the
legislature, I grew up um in the
North Valley and when after high
school, I have the opportunity
to join the civil rights
movement. I, I moved to Seattle,
Washington and worked at a
wonderful organization called El
Centro de la Raza, which is one
of the most prominent
community-based civil rights
organizations in the
Northwestern United States, my
deal, my, my uncle founded that
organization as a result of
occupying an abandoned school
building during the height of
the civil rights movement in
1972. So I worked at the
Central, loved it.
learned the history of the civil
rights movement, liberation
movements internationally, but I
had promised my dad that I would
go to, you know,
I'd go to school, so I enrolled
at the local community college
and then got a degree in
economics from the University of
Washington and came back home.
So after law school, I joined
the prosecutor's office, uh,
loved it was really awesome job,
but I, it was a fun job. It was
like those TV shows that I don't
watch because I did it in real
life, but I, uh, I, I prosecuted
violent crimes for 5 years at
the Berlin County DA's office,
learned a tremendous amount.
Uh, about the criminal justice
system, uh, started my own law
practice after that and I've
been a lawyer for 26 years, so
in, in being a sole
practitioner, I did kinda had
like a general practice and then
a
Kind of a statewide criminal
practice and then
And a misdemeanor practice, and
now I do a personal injury law,
and I'm also of counsel of a law
firm, uh Candelari Law LLC.
So, in the legislature, I was on
House Judiciary for 10 years. I
loved it. It was fantastic.
A committee when I got there,
the chair was
Uh, I chairman Al Park and the
vice chair was Senator, uh,
Cervantes. So that was some
great
great legal minds on that
committee, including the pro
tem, um,
But I switched over to the uh
fiscal side there in the house.
I served on the appropriations
Committee and then served as
chairman of the Commerce
Committee, so it's really neat
to be back, uh.
You know, put in my lawyer hat
on here uh in Santa Fe, so I
hope to, you know, just can
you'll, you'll hear it nausea,
my philosophy on criminal law. I
mean, in a perfect world.
Uh, you know, first degree
murder and jaywalking is on a
continuum in which
The worst crimes deserve the
worst penalties and the, and if
a crime is not worse than the
other, the penalty should not be
more than the other.
Uh, the, the way to, uh, fight
crime is to speed up the process
between arrest apprehension,
indictment, and conviction, uh,
and making the system more
efficient, uh.
You can't really draft a bill
that does that, but we can, uh,
we can fund these systems and
create a statutory framework
which priority helps police and
prosecutors prioritize violent
crimes over nonviolent crimes.
So anyway, you'll hear that rap,
uh, probably more often than
not, uh, but it's great to be
here. I hope to contribute to
the modernization of our
beautiful state and uh build our
economy and.
And not solve the crime problem
back home.
Not new to the committee, but
Senator Doick, former vice
chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm Katie
Duig. I represent Senate
District 10 in Albuquerque. It's
everything from uh Balloon
Fiesta Park all the way down
through the North Valley, uh,
Old Town, sawmill area down to
Tinkley Beach, and then a chunk
of the west side and the pao,
uh,
Eagle
It just spread my mind. Eagle
Ranch, thank you, Eagle Ranch
corridor. Um, and yes, I, uh,
I just started my second term
here. I came in with uh Senator
Brantley.
And uh this committee is one of
my favorite parts about serving
in, in the legislature. I've
been an attorney for, I'm
looking at my classmates, uh, 16
or 17 years, um, and, uh, for a
while, I, I took a break from
practicing law to be the city
clerk for the city of
Albuquerque.
Um, I usually each year try to
pick one big hard thing to focus
on, uh, and so this year, that
is healthcare. Um, but next year
it'll be something else. Uh,
it's, I, I really like, but one
of the best parts I think about
being in the legislature is that
you are constantly learning and
you are constantly, um, being
exposed to new ideas, uh, that I
certainly wouldn't come up with
on my own. And so I love that
about it. Uh, I have a son named
back to if he is in the
building, you will probably know
because he, uh, really likes to
make his presence known, and he
will come tell you all the ways
you're doing things wrong, um,
and have all these lots of
suggestions. Uh, he, he often
gives me political advice during
session that
I'm usually like, oh, honey, you
probably shouldn't ever run for
office because it's
Yes.
It's usually kind of despotic.
Um, but, uh, otherwise, that's
about it, Mr. Chair, I'm happy
to be here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so
what was the original uh
instruction cause I missed the
original instructions. Just talk
about yourself till you're blue
in the face, like that.
Uh, no, that wasn't exactly it.
I, I, um,
You or you should have received
a text. I'll just use the
opportunity you know we're
trying to update ourselves with
little technology. So I just
said, had everyone send a text
to to take 5 minutes to tell us
a little bit about why you think
you're here, who elected you,
uh, what you hope to accomplish
and a little bit about who you
are to all these new faces.
OK.
All right. So, I'm Amy Stewart.
I'm a state senator from
District 17 in Albuquerque after
redistricting, it's gotten a
little more interesting because
the international district I'd
had part of it, and they
demanded one senator, so they
got their wish and the entire
international district is now in
my district. I essentially go
from San Mateo to Tramway.
Uh, from Lomas to the base, so
I've got both central going
right through my district and on
the northern part is I-40, so
it's a, it's a high poverty.
A crime.
Uh, low voting history, uh, lots
of, uh, mobile home parks, but
it's a, it's a struggling area
of Albuquerque. Um, if you've
driven down central all the way
to the east, you'll know what
I'm talking about.
Uh, so,
so I started in Florida as a
baby.
Uh, I was raised in Florida,
Douglas, Arizona, Alamos,
Colorado, and 3s and suburb of
Denver.
Uh, that all happened until I
was 17. Uh, by 17, I had lost
both my mother and my father,
and I was on my own. And that
became quite alive. Uh, I
managed to get myself uh
followed my boyfriend out to
Boston and went to Boston
University and then Wheelock
College for my education
graduate school.
Uh, so, um,
The boyfriend disappeared, but
picked up another one, in the
meantime.
He was from Arizona, uh, and I
call myself from the southwest.
You heard that Douglas, uh, uh
Alamos, uh, Denver. Uh, so we
moved back to New Mexico. He was
from Arizona. I was from
Colorado somewhere, um, and
moved here in 1978.
Uh, so from Harvard.
From uh Cambridge. The 1978 was
the year when 2 5-foot
snowstorms happened within 5
days of each other, Dukakis was
the governor, and he got on the
phone and said no one can go to
work.
Um, so that was fun time. I
learned how to cross country ski
she you couldn't use a car in
the streets of Boston.
Uh, so let's see, where am I?
I'm a 1978 and I moved back to
New Mexico, uh, got a job with
the public schools, uh, my, uh,
my master's is in education, um,
really started, uh, liking
teaching and uh got very
involved in teaching and
teachers union, uh, they asked
me to uh come out of the
classroom for a few years in
lobby. So that's why I wound up
up here. 19.
991 92. Uh, I was part of the
group that got us to do the uh
collective bargaining bill
that's Fernando Macias put a
ten-year sunset on.
Um, that sunsetted when Gary
Johnson came into power, um,
an interesting life.
Uh, I got elected at the same
time, um,
Gary Johnson got elected. I ran
2 years earlier though, and then
the union fired me for my job.
They were kind of outraged that
I took upon myself to run for
office.
Uh, of course, 2 years, then I
went back to teaching two years
later, they came back to me and
said, OK, we were wrong the
first time, you were right. We
need more teachers up there.
Will you run for office? I said,
well, give me some money and get
all my petition signatures and
I'll do it. So cut to the 94, I
was the only Democratic pickup
in the house.
So I went to the speaker. I
wanted it on the education
committee and he said, have way
too many people who want to be
on education, but I need a
smart, liberal on judiciary.
So, wound up on judiciary for 20
years in the house. I was there
when I Park was the chair. I was
there when Joervantes was the
chair. Was there in Gary King
was the chair. David Peterson,
Tommy Foy was the uh chair and
narratives.
Uh, those are fun times. I think
the speaker was glad that he
appointed me until I voted
against gambling and that really
ruined my whole relationship
with him and being on judiciary.
So then my senator, uh elected
as auditor, and so when the
house went Republican. I had the
only escape out hatch, and I
took it.
Uh, so I've been in the Senate
for 10 years.
I ran for office originally
because of education. Um, it's
really still the main reason I'm
here, but as
Others have said when you, when
you're in this position, you've
got to learn about everything.
And I mean, everything, so I
take this job very seriously. I
worked very hard at it. I work
all the time as the pro tem.
You've no idea how many
administrative tasks I have, uh,
when people say, how are you
doing? I'm overworked and
unpaid.
So,
Still happy to be here. I got
still things I wanna do, and so,
hope that was enough, Mr.
Chairman.
Center Worth.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, so I
guess at this point I am now the
Senior member on Senate
Judiciary. I've been here since
2009, which is when I first came
to the Senate.
Uh, I was elected in 2004, uh,
was not the chosen candidate of
anyone, just decided to run, uh,
really fully wasn't chosen by
Max Cole when I ran, when I
decided to run, I just uh had
always had been a lawyer since
1990. I'll say something about
that in a minute. Um, just
always kept a part of my life
for public service and served on
a variety of different
Boards and shared those and then
Max Call who was the chair of
the House Appropriations
Committee decided not to run, I
think on March 1st.
Uh, and I ended up
not really understanding what I
was fully getting myself into,
uh, in a five-way Democratic
primary uh for this seat, which
I won. And then unlike uh
Now Senator Stewart as a lawyer,
uh, I did not end up on the
House Judiciary Committee, but
lots of heat for that, probably
still do, um, Max call and a
number of others.
Again, help.
Kind of me understand the, the
role of
The money in the policy and
Senator Brantly talked about
that, so I was uh on the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee for the 4 years I was
in the house and the energy,
natural resources Committee,
which certainly things that I
enjoyed and it was a fantastic
experience just to learn the
budget and it just gives you
such an insight to how this
place works, how the state
works.
And so when I came over to the
Senate in 2009, thought I wanted
to stay in the, on the finance
committee and again was told
very quickly that things don't
work that way over here. And so
kind of thankful that that's
what happened because I ended up
instead on rules and Senate
Judiciary. Of course, all the
money went away in 2009 was a
brutal, brutal year. Uh, so up
and down roller coaster, uh,
Law school, 1990, and fun fact,
um, the chair and I
We're there at the same time. He
was one year behind me, but we
were moot court partners in law
school.
And at one point on this
committee, uh, I think before
you were here, it was really
interesting. We had
6 of the 10 members on Senate
Judiciary all went to UNM Law
School and 4 of us were there at
the same time. Uh, so it's,
again, it's, it, it was kind of
just the small nature of, of the
state for sure.
Uh, I am married to Carol and
Carol is
Uh, city councilor here in Santa
Fe. So as if we don't have
enough going on, we're all in on
the public service front. I
think she was in law school with
Senator Maestas. So we also
practiced together. We have 2
kids. Uh, they were 10 and 6
when I showed up. They're now 31
and 27.
Uh, we have a grandson, which is
very exciting, 7 months, so,
again, I kind of hearing Senator
Paul talk about the age of
retirement I'm sitting here
going, you know, we've done this
a long time and, and enjoyed a
bunch and it's super important.
uh, also have two chocolate
labs. So they play a big role in
our, our life as well. Uh, but
this is a great committee and
again, I very much appreciate
the way you run it, Mr. Chair,
and looking forward to having
the new members on here.
Uh, we've had, you know, over
the years, I can remember
distinctly, uh, Senator Hardin,
when he was on this committee,
was not a lawyer, and, you know,
I used to sit on the other side
over there and
You know, they're challenging
issues, and I think one of the
things about Senate Judiciary is
that there's a level of trust
amongst those on this committee
that we can have those kinds of
discussions. And again, someone
mentioned, you know, relying on
the kind of the team here as to
which direction to go and
Senator Harden would look over
at me certain bill of up he's
like not sure what to do and I
would always give him a, a
direction that he didn't steer
him wrong, you know, just, and
oftentimes he was born one way I
was voting the other, so, uh,
again, I think this, this will
be a good discussion. I'm
looking forward to.
This committee is going to be
very involved in the public
safety package and so we'll be
looking at that. I know we've
got a whole bunch of the
criminal bills referred here, so
looking forward to a lot of good
work. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
You, um.
My name is Joe Cervantes. I uh
I want to make a promise to all
of you, your time here, your
service, your hard work's gonna
matter. I'm gonna make you that
promise for the next 2 months,
but you're gonna do on this
committee is gonna matter. Um,
it has in all of the years that
I've been here and I'm looking
at my former chair and house and
I had him come after me and we
all went back to learning this
from Ken Martinez and uh him
from this Raymond Sanchez and
others. There's a lot we've
learned and and this committee
has never been about anything
other than being um very much
relevant and um and part of.
solutions to things.
Oh, I, I represent a district
that is about 4 of Donana
County. It's rural South Valley,
my district actually borders
Mexico and borders El Paso,
Texas, there's some really
interesting things that come
about as a result of that, parts
of my district are very
impoverished.
Economically
Um, and at the same time, I'm
proud of telling people that
Sunland Park, which is on the
border, the border of Mexico
runs through Sunland Park, um,
With its low socioeconomic
uh population and poverty and
proximate border still has one
of the safest, uh, communities
in the state when it comes to
crime.
Um, Albuquerque, while
Albuquerque has a crime rate
257% according to the FBI 250%
higher than the national
average, Albuquerque, El Paso at
a comparable population is below
15% below the national average
for crime.
Sunland Park and Anthony, which
I both represent, um, the
lowest, some of the lowest crime
rates in the state.
Um, so my experience there is
unique.
On the Texas side, Texas is
exploding population growth,
economic opportunities and
development when we talk about
economic development, we see it
driving to the airport, driving
to go shopping every day, those
of us in southern New Mexico.
Um, the, the, the valley that I
represent that Southern Park
Farming Valley was where my
grandparents began farming a
long time ago, they didn't have
any formal education, they
didn't finish high school. They
just knew how to work really
hard and, and they took a lot of
risks. They became very
successful with anyone, I think
today would measure is
successful my grandfather sold
watermelons out of the back of
the truck. You all know what
they, what, what we all see them
parked along the road, and
that's what our, that's what our
farming business began a long
time ago. I, uh, I spent a lot
of time working the
field s
Uh, as a young man, my parents
were pretty insistent that we
harvest with the ride the bus in
the morning, share the same cup,
uh, use the same toilet,
throughout the day and you learn
one thing when you're working
out in the fields and working
that hard in the summertime in
southern New Mexico, harvesting
vegetables.
You learn you're going to
college.
uh,
driving a tractor does not have
quite the romance that it may
seem to have driving back and
forth. Nowadays they have air
conditioning in the cabs and so
we, we, we were lucky back then,
we'd fight over who got the
screen, uh, to to get some
shade, but you do a little bit
of time ranching, which we did
in Demming and you do that
farming and you realize you're
gonna maybe take a different
path, but I'm fortunately my
brother and sisters still taking
care of the farm while I get to
be with.
All of you. I studied
architecture. My dad was an
engineer, so I studied
architecture at UNM and
graduated there, went to
California, uh, enjoyed two
years of graduate school, I
don't think that I spent a lot
of time off the beach or in the
uh in the, you know, wine
growing fields of Central
California, San Luis Obispo, but
I enjoyed it. I practiced
architecture for a while but
came back to New Mexico,
attended law school. Peter, uh,
said we were on the moot court
team when he leaves out of the
equation is the moot core team
is the team UNM sends around
the.
country to compete against other
law schools.
And uh we're the only guys
because they, they want really
intelligent writers and and
briefers and and people get on
their feet and they, we were, we
were the charity, uh, of, of the
team because the rest of it was
all women, right, so, so we, we
bonded as the as the guys. Uh, I
came out of law school and
joined the module Sperling law
firm in Albuquerque at the time,
it was the state's largest, it
was a very prestigious and
privileged opportunity to learn
from the best lawyers, really,
in the state doing some of the
most complicated.
Well,
uh, there was.
And um um then I began to join
all of you in the meantime, have
3 daughters who are everything
and I'm looking at the smile on
Senator Stewart cause she
remembers him being very, very
young, um, and very young, she's
gesturing their height. They
were small, they ran around
here. Um, just couldn't be
prouder, the oldest graduated
first in her law school class at
UNM, um, and is having some
success as a trial lawyer. Uh,
the second is, uh, now doing her
residency as an obstetrician in
Houston. I have a new son-in-law
who's in
orthopedic surgeon. They were
married this year, and my
youngest followed me into
architecture, and she's in
Austin practicing architecture.
I'm fortunate to be I'm married
to Jennifer, um, pretty close to
35 years now, she's a New York
Times bestseller, very
accomplished author. She works
as hard as my grandparents did.
She um was writing this morning
at 6 o'clock and she'll be
writing when I come home
tonight. She's on her 13th
novel. It's been published in 14
languages, so we books, so uh
very, I'm, I'm around incredibly
successful women.
Uh, and, and I am here as well
too. I'll just tell you that,
uh, I get asked the same
question that I think Senator
Stewart and and maybe Senator
Werth do oftentimes, why are you
guys, we were just in Peter's
office. Why are you guys still
here? Al Park ask me that all
the time to look at him, he
says, why are you guys still
here? What do you, what, what,
what are you doing here? And,
and I'll come back to where I
started with you all, we're
gonna matter, right? We're
gonna, we're gonna do stuff that
matters here. And that's the,
that's the only reason really,
um, I'll tell you that I've,
I've loved being a lawyer. I
still love being a lawyer, I
have two partners. We have an
office.
Uh, with, with them in El Paso
and.
I'll just tell you, you all have
made me an incredibly uh
successful lawyer, and I owe it
all to you. I really do, I, I
attribute my success as a lawyer
to you because I've learned uh
how to compromise.
And I've learned how to look for
results, and I've learned how to
work really hard and I've
learned how to compromise my
beliefs and my thoughts when
appropriate and necessary, all
of those skills or things that
don't come naturally sometimes
to lawyers, uh, and the skills
that make us good lawyers and
litigants and and fierce
adversaries sometimes need to be
tempered, and this, this is a
good place to learn how to
temper that and at the same
time be very strong about our
beliefs and so I, I want to
thank all of you for giving me
the opportunity.
chair again, I want to thank
the, the president of the Senate
for uh putting this committee
together. I think it's going to
be a really very excited about
it and my jokes about all of you
being sentenced to this
committee are are going to be
things that you're from time to
time gonna remind me of uh
Senator O'Malley. I made a note
of what you said, do no harm, I
think that's important. I made a
note of Senator Master said he's
going to speak ad nauseam, no,
he's not, um,
um, I, I, so I'm, I'm paying
attention to all of you as well
too.
We have with the, with the
senate, with the Senate
president's assembly of, of this
committee. I've had the
privilege of being able to
assemble what I call the firm,
um, and the firm exists next
door, I've got to tell you in
the next 60 days, the best law
firm in the state of New Mexico
is going to be right next door.
Um, the people that are working
in that office are here, they're
extraordinary lawyers of uh
Senator Brantley, you said, uh,
Senator, uh, uh, you know, Aunt
Thornton and others said, well,
I'm not a lawyer. I don't let
that discourage you. You, you,
with your staff and our staff
will have access to really some
of the finest lawyers and people
that have been with this
committee a very long time. Some
of them been here since their
mother raised them here, Philip,
uh, and, and, uh, so I haven't
been here long before any of
these long
stories that you're hearing
about today, uh, they, they know
how we operate, they candidly,
they know how I think.
They have to listen to me a lot,
talk about how I think and I
think most of them can predict
pretty well where um where I
think we need to be doing the
work we do, so look, I want to
take a moment to introduce them
to you and I've got a list so I
don't get it wrong, um, before I
do that, let me first of all,
introduce you to Emily.
At my right. So Emily was a
little bit late because she was
doing with Emily has to do,
which is doing last minute
corrections to a document that
I'm doing at the last minute,
which is what um I do typically
with agendas and such and uh
Emily, uh we've had a really
tough time this year, getting
her to come back because she has
an excellent excuse not to be
here, which is two grandkids who
uh let her show you the
photographs so you get a chance.
They're just adorable and
beautiful and young, and she
gets to spend lots of time with
them, so.
Uh, we're gonna have to make a
difference up here because she
needs to be realizing that being
here is as important for them as
her time with them, uh, and so I
hope you'll appreciate and
respect Emily being here with us
again. She's invaluable and
you'll see that when we're doing
that. I did make a promise to
her, which I will appreciate,
um, when I
When I came over to the Senate.
Somebody used the word escape. I
can't remember who one of when
it was you, Senator Stewart said
was escape to the Senate.
Escape how you did. That's
exactly what I wrote down, um,
it used to be when Senator
Stewart and I and Senator Park
were on the House Judiciary
Committee. It's where the young
judiciary Committee was out. The
Senate the Senate had all the
old.
Senior lawyers and the house was
accustomed to working 12 in the
morning, not on, uh, you could
lay your heads nodding. 1 or 2
in the morning, uh, working on
bills in the house.
And at some point in time, I
thought I'm too old for this,
um, and so I'm going to the
Senate where down in the Senate,
they don't fix bills, they don't
amend bills, they don't, if the
bill was good, they voted it up,
it was ready to go, they voted
it up, but most of the time they
voted it down, it wasn't ready
to go, it wasn't prepared,
wasn't, wasn't, uh, uh, the time
and place for that bill. So they
just vote them down over here
and I thought, yeah, I want to
be with, I wanna be with that
group.
Sounds like my kind of group.
Things have just got, I really
have screwed up this committee,
uh, because now this committee
is the one that's fixing things
and amending things and look at
Senator Stewart nodding her
head. She's like, yeah.
Yeah, that, that, that wasn't on
camera. Uh uh
so, so we're gonna, we're gonna,
uh, we're gonna do a couple of
things with Emily in mind, which
is we're not gonna do those late
nights and it's not just Emily,
I don't think we do good work at
one in the morning. We used to
think that was a, a hazing
ritual, I think for the House
members and judiciary, but, but
doing work at 1 and 2 in the
morning habitually is probably
not wise, and we're not going to
do that if I can uh have any say
about that, so we'll come to the
procedures here in a moment,
but, but Emily's back, we're
gonna, we're gonna not.
be here when the weather's bad,
uh, and we're not gonna be here
when we're too tired to be
thinking straight and and making
sense among ourselves, so
Emily's back as the committee
secretary and you'll see some
procedures that we refer to her
in a moment. I'm not in the
room, Miss Kiko not here will
come here we'll we'll,
we'll we'll get him in a second.
I have uh Kiko Bauer, who is uh
also a committee secretary.
She's not really, we don't, we
don't call him a committee
secretary. He's my assistant,
right? My assistant, but he's in
the office.
to bright young men, I'll
introduce him to you here in a
moment and extrating Emily,
you've been here how long? With
judiciary, 13 years. And how
have you enjoyed your time here?
Oh
I, I like it.
That's way.
Uh, Emily was the secretary
editor of my predecessor,
Senator Martinez as well too.
Um, I sort of introduced him a
minute ago, Philip Larigoerte
has been coming here how long?
Um, Mr. Chairman, I've been
privileged to be here with you,
um.
Um
You, you, you can't even count
anymore. I'm happy to tell you
my first session with.
speaker of the House.
So it's been a couple of, uh, I
was actually
This
is territorial days.
Oh it was, I was actually raised
in the shadow of the capital
I've been privileged to work at
this or something.
Uh, with Emily and.
Total privilege. My mother was.
You.
Uh
of
All of
Also
Yes.
That's why
Thank you, Phillip. Phillip has
seen a lot of chairs come and
go, a lot of centers come and
go, he left out that he also
worked upstairs for legislative
council for um
of I was right out of law
school. I started as a doctor.
I was to represent a number of.
including the university of
Mexico, um, judges, the Museum
of New Mexico and others.
There
Um, so I live here.
My house.
Yeah, you, you, you lift, you
lift, you lift out the time you
left.
You left out the time you
represented big tobacco.
um.
Nice jets, huh,
and I'll just, uh, appreciation
to them and our leadership. I
also.
commission appointed by a
Uh, for about
Governor and Bruce.
Exactly
Right, that's fine.
So
This is
What I do, I will just say,
we work here,
people that do the numbers.
Very, very
Thoughtful in this.
He particularly good at, um, you
have enough pencils
we go through quite a few, so
please note that um legislation
before this committee.
Yes, it's a red.
I
Not just by the staff, but by
the member.
Thank you. Thank you, Philip. I
told, uh we, I, I, he could come
over real quick so uh Kiko's a
man in the office, but in his
absence, but this is Kio Bauer,
uh, and you may know his dad,
who's been with us for quite a
bit over the last several years,
Ben, uh, Kiko, you want to tell
us about yourself just real
quick? Um, sure, yeah, I'm Ben
Bowersson, um.
Relatively young out of college.
For a couple of years now, just
wanting to learn, um,
and just love working in
something where I get to see how
my state.
And grow and
I really enjoyed the process.
Well thank you for having me.
Thank you. Thank you, for you.
Back to work.
Um,
one of the things that I, um,
um, I'm very privileged to have
is what I said to and referred
to as the firm, so I'll
introduce you to uh the
attorneys who were uh in the
office with me, all of them are
returners, some of them for
quite some time now. And uh the,
the experience they've had again
means they've spent a lot of
hours sitting in my office and
me in theirs talking about the
things. Oh yeah, I see Moy back
there smiling too. We've had, we
have former members in the
audience too, uh, former members
of the firm who are
here with us today too, so let
me introduce you first of all
to, I think probably the longest
serving, right, Brandon?
Yes
You want to tell us anything
real quickly about yourself,
Brandon?
And who are you
I
What
Oh.
Thank you.
Rebecca, you're back with us
again.
Pro
That
Bye
I like that
Um, and I was like.
I do it all.
I
Really, I'm so.
You, Anna?
Good afternoon. My name is.
Uh, my name is.
My mother, I was raised in the
beautiful.
Uh, I currently reside in Albu.
Right
I
I the outgoing laureate.
This is my
In the Senate
Years,
Every day I drive home.
Thank you. And I began, but I
want to give her a moment or
two, so Emily, tell us about
yourself just real quickly too.
Well, I'm a proud grandmother or
Nana, as I'm known to my
grandkids of 4 beautiful
grandchildren.
a lot of time with. I retired
from the state government in
202005.
And I've been working for the
legislature now for 17 years.
And I enjoy it. It's been a lot
of fun.
Every year, every day is a
challenge.
She's looking at me. Did you see
that?
Thank you for having me back. So
we, we would have a hard time
doing it without you, Emily. So,
all right. So, uh, we've also
got a number of analysts back
over here. Why don't you
introduce yourselves if you
would please and let us know who
else is staff and I know some
other's back, but we'll start
over there with Samantha there
on the backside, they'll just
come around the room and
introduce yourselves. Tell us
briefly about you.
And
I'm from.
Oh, I want Christine. I, this is
my first year. In fact, this is
my 8th day, to be here.
I was.
Legal aid work
That legal
Housing services.
In
the
All the way from
That
I grew up in New Mexico.
And that alley as well on.
little community right between
and.
up there, I went to elementary
school and I.
Also
Oh.
Start commuting at the age of.
Oh, I never stopped, ended up
commuting to the hospital.
a round trip 100 miles every
day.
If my kids and they wanna move.
Law school was my midlife
crisis.
No
single mom.
the state of the world.
16 and 17.
At school
and
it is a small community, um,
I've run into at least 5 people
I know from law school just.
It.
I'm thrilled to be
that this protege.
They
Yeah, go with her anywhere cause
I can't follow her. I cannot
keep track of her. She's like a
gnat. I love it, and she's gonna
teach me she's gonna download
everything.
to be here
Mhm
Good afternoon. My name is Ash.
Everybody calls me.
8.
As an analyst for the majority
um
I was born and raised in Santa
Fe. I started out in child
protective services for 13
years. I was a social worker
dealing with all the issues that
We're all familiar with. I did
that, then I went on to law
school.
And I became a prosecutor, uh.
I was elected district attorney.
Your terms
I retired, came here,
I asked me to come here. I came
along, uh.
In my spare time, my work is a
pro tem here in Santa Fe and I'm
also a member of the New Mexico.
Thank you much.
As one tell us who you are back
there. You're you're gonna be
with us, aren't you? For the
duration?
Maybe, maybe not.
How's this operator.
5.
Uh, my name is Matthew
Gutierrez. Uh, I'm helping, uh,
Sam operating on
webcam operator, uh,
The chamber, uh, I'm a
filmmaker, uh, which led me to
become visual technician.
Um
Albuquerque.
the colleges
And we've got a number of
attendants, some of them who
have been around almost as long
as some of the rest of us, so
why don't you guys introduce
yourselves to us. Go ahead.
A
the first.
Yeah
But
I
the
Thank you.
7 years
Or
you?
Right.
Thank you.
Others, yes.
Welcome.
You got
yes, oh my gosh, OK, I forget
that
I've been here for 19 years.
Uh, well with this committee.
Well
The life
I
30
Yeah
The NFL could use some help
after last night.
I never lost an argument. If I
did lose enough, if I did see
that I was losing the.
That
We can learn a little.
I missed it up.
Yeah.
red
Oh
At
uh.
OK
That
Wing
Mhm.
Yeah
house.
Yes
Right
all these years.
Thank you, bro. I see the
analysts attendance, staff,
anybody at all?
All right.
Um, next topic.
A couple of years ago when I,
how long have I been chair now?
3 years?
4, maybe 4 years.
45, whatever. Um
When I, when I had the chance to
be in chairing this committee
not long after that, we began
and adopted a set of rules which
I'll pass out to you here a
little bit in writing, not just
yet, because I'd like to explain
a little bit about what they are
and why they exist, and I'm kind
of pleased working with uh
Senator Doig that I, I think I
see almost the same rules being
adopted over in the rules
committee. Your problem is I
just changed ours, so you may
have to keep up, um, but, but I,
I think there, I think I'm glad
you're doing it, I think it's
useful.
And um one of the, one of the
things that I've observed being
here as long as I have is we do
so many things just because
we've always done it that way.
And uh sometimes it's really
great to have new people come in
and I hope you'll ask us, why,
why do you do it that way?
Um, one of the things that
occurred to me over the last
several years was the way that
we hear bills and we advocate
for bills, left me uh feeling
unfulfilled principally because
a sponsor might get up and
present a bill for 5 or 10
minutes and and discuss it and
explain it and tell us why they
needed it, and then, then we
turned the room over to the
public in the room and people
would stand up and tell us who
they represent and they'd stand
up for a minute or two and tell
us why they support or oppose
the bill and it, it left me very
unfulfilled.
In part because we'd hear the
same thing oftentimes from the
same um same argument, same
reasons, and there was no real
opportunity to really dig into
the meat of the bill and and
here true reasons for
opposition, which in my mind
takes some time, just as the,
the proponents take time with
experts and a lot of time to
present the bill, opposition
really requires the same and
getting everybody up for one
minute to the microphone,
jumping up and down. I I thought
was very unproductive.
Um, I also realized that a lot
of groups and organizations want
to be heard and and the public
at large wants to be heard and
they become accustomed to being
heard, and that put me in a
difficult position as the chair
because I would come around the
room and decide how much time
everybody would get, and
sometimes it'd be 30 seconds a
minute, maybe on the outside, 2
minutes, and oftentimes because
of our schedules, some people
would be left unrecognized, they
didn't get a chance to be heard
and they might be waiting around
here for some long period of
time to be heard.
So with all of that, um, mulling
around in my head, I, I
developed a set of rules which,
which this committee is now
operated with for a couple of
years, and I think it works
well.
Uh, and we heard a little bit
about it on the floor today with
the majority leader in the in
the president and others about
how we manage time and how we
curtail time and the, the chair
this morning and rules, and I
want to explain how I do that,
why I do that, and, and, and ask
for your support when I do so.
So, as opposed to the past when
we would go to the room and
allow anybody who came in to
offer public comment. We don't
do that anymore in this
committee. Um, we have
established, and a mailbox where
we encourage anyone from the
public who wishes to speak on a
particular bill to send email
comments to that um that public
mailbox and encourage members
to, to review that mailbox. Now,
everything I'm gonna explain
right now is always subject to
change, uh, on the specifics of
a particular builders or issue.
that may require something more
than that, but the, this, this
issue became even more
pronounced during COVID, where
many of us were at home,
including advocates and
opponents to bills and lobbyists
and so forth, and they'd all be
at home and then we'd be trying
to manage them on the screen,
trying to admit them in, out the
Zoom uh wouldn't work, the, the
uh equipment would freeze, the
Internet would slow down. It was
just really, it became unwieldy
to think that we could let
anybody who's at home, who wants
to be heard on an issue, be
heard.
It just became really unwieldy
as, as chair, and I always felt
bad for those who I couldn't
recognize, didn't have the time
to do so, so I encourage folks
to to give us the email
comments. You'll get the email
address and uh we encourage all
of you to please give those
people that, that email their
comments, the, the same
opportunity they would if they
were here, um, being heard in
the room.
Um, the, the bills are heard uh
with the proponents given 15
minutes of time to advocate as
they wish, they can present with
experts, they can present on
their own. They can bring up 20
or 30 people if they wish to
have them all be heard in that
15 minutes, I leave it entirely
to the sponsor if you all are
sponsoring here or if you have
colleagues who are sponsoring
here. I leave the, the 150
minutes entirely to the sponsor
to use as they wish, um, if they
have one person who's gonna talk
for 15 minutes, they, they burn
that 15 minutes. Um,
They want to have 8 people
speaking, well, they're going to
have to allocate the time. I
leave it up to the sponsor to
interrupt and to manage the time
and to allocate the time. And in
that way, I hope that we're not
getting redundancy, that the
sponsor is doing a smart job of
saying I want you to speak on a
particular topic or address a
specific issue and manage that
time well and decide how many
experts they need and how many
speakers they wish to have.
The, the sponsor can always
reserve part of their time of
that 150 minutes for rebuttal.
That's the lawyer in all of us.
We, we usually give the
proponents the last word in a,
in a courtroom process and I
think it works well.
The um
The opponents to legislation are
also generally given 15 minutes
if they coordinate themselves,
in other words, if the
opposition coordinates behind an
individual or group who's going
to take the lead in opposition.
They'll have 15 minutes to, to
oppose, and they may have just
one person speaking, one expert,
um, or two people really digging
into the reason why they may be
opposed to a particular piece of
legislation, but again, it, it
avoids that shotgun approach
where a bunch of people are just
coming in and, and giving us a
lot of information. Nobody can
really dig in.
to the meat of the opposition.
Um, that, that is also that 150
minutes is also to encourage
that kind of organization in the
opposition that they, that the
opposition to legislation
coordinate themselves, speak
together, manage their
presentation and do so in a
thoughtful way. If, if they
cannot do so, then we'll still
hear her opposition, but it
won't be 15 minutes, it'll be 10
minutes, and it'll be 1 minute
per speaker. So again, we'll,
we'll resort to the old way of
doing things, and I think you'll
find very quickly how that
leaves you feeling a little
unfulfilled when it comes to
the opposition that, that again,
hopefully encourages opposition,
so you'll see that, um, both of
these two procedures, the
sponsors and the opposition,
please make sure that you sign
in. There's a one hour cut off
before the meeting, so uh there
are forms in the office where
you sign in, whether you
identify whether there's a, a
coordinated uh opposition that
the spokesperson who's going to
manage the time of all those
individuals like I'll just say
the way it usually works is you,
you think you have 15 minutes of
opposition and one person
speaking for 8 minutes and
uh who else is on the panel is
clawing uh the table because
they're waiting for their turn
to speak and they may find they
never get their jazz to speak,
so again, having one person
coordinating the time as a
spokesperson avoids me as the
chair trying to guess who should
be heard and who needs to not be
heard and who's important and
not, so I encourage the
coordinated opposition and again
all of that is gonna be given to
you in the, in our written rules
with again sign ins at a time
and then that's followed by the
rebuttal.
In, in the past, we used to have
uh a lot of our time eaten up by
every organization, mostly
lobbyists and so forth coming in
and filling the room and
standing up and going one by one
and introducing themselves and
giving a small little mini uh
presentation of who they
represent and their organization
and how many members and that
they oppose or or uh support a
piece of legislation. We're not,
we're not gonna do that here.
Again, that costs us valuable
time, that there will be a sign
in uh beforehand of meeting and
I will read and identify.
Organizations and support or
opposition to legislation, but,
but we'll, we'll save ourselves
some time. All of this, I hope
members will find ultimately uh
fulfilling in the sense that it
gives us more time to do the
work, which is to to debate here
amongst ourselves to ask one
another questions, ask questions
ourselves of the experts and the
sponsors and amend the
legislation. I, I don't
generally um see the need to cut
off that time early in the
session, but ultimately, and
again, this is a subject in
matter. I, I don't like to cut
off numbers, but I, years ago,
Senator Worth will remember this
when I first chaired a committee
and I began to impose time
limitations on members, you
would have really thought the
world had come to an end. Uh,
the, the notion that anybody
would have a time limit was
not anything anybody did, much
less a young house member to a
senator, right, telling him, you
only have a few minutes and I'm
cutting you off. But what would
happen is, uh, especially in the
interim, people will be driving
all the way to Taos all day long
and you'd have one member asking
questions for 20 or 30 minutes
and the other members again left
without that opportunity. The
only way that seems fair to me
is to allocate the time among
all of you in that usually means
me asking how many of you will
speak on a topic. I'll take the
amount of time we have on a
given topic, and I'll do that
simple math and divide that out
and try and allocate it fairly
so that if you're speaking last,
doesn't mean that you're not
going to get hurt. Uh, and if
you, if you jump the gun and
jump in there first, you're not
gonna monopolize the, the whole
committee process. So I think
it's fair, um, it seems to work.
But I, I realized that it also
again is less than perfect, but
we have, we have a limited
amount of time and I'm gonna try
and make sure that we, that we
don't ever have um the
The committee become a place
where where debate is exploited,
and I'll just use the word, I
mean, we, we all know that the
the drill and we've used it
before, which is uh if the, if
the conversation is dragging if
it's intended for stalling, uh,
or delay without a real purpose,
I'm gonna interject myself as
the chair to do that. I, uh, you
all really love this, but I
bought a gift for the committee
at Christmas time, I know I'm
waiting, I know most of you all
didn't get me anything, I
noticed, um, but, uh, but, but I
got you all something.
How's that?
So, uh
So, so, you know, it's kind of
like the old school teacher over
there, Sara Stewart, if you, you
know, if I have, oh, we do have
a gift. I said, if I, if I have
to bring this out, you're aren't
gonna like it, so got a big
dish. It's a big digital clock
with a timer, you know. Yes,
look it through.
Now again, you could, you could
hang your head in your hands,
but those of us that are lawyers
appear in court, go into to
court, and there's a green light
and a red light and there's a
timer with a big clock in front
of it, and we know how much time
we've got and how much time we
do not have, so it works for us,
I think, and.
Um, we're not, we're not at that
point yet. Let's see if we can,
uh, dispense with that. But, but
if we need it, it's right here
next to me, uh, that and the
gavel, so you'll get the, the um
procedures that I've just
described for you and uh we'll
pass those out here in a little
bit. We'll pass them out to an
Emily, so we don't have people
distracted.
Uh, but one of the things that I
wanted to cover today, and I
know we have a hard stop today.
This is a good example of a day
where I've been advised that
there's an important uh meeting
involving several members of the
committee that cannot be
delayed, cannot be missed. So I
will try when I know that
there's a hard stop, I will
announce there's a hard stop.
And again, I will try to uh
consider the bills that we want
to hear, uh, if we have experts
who have come from out of state
sometimes, uh, uh, they're
traveling, they're uh in a hotel
room and so forth, trying to
make sure that their time is
respected as well too, but also
knowing that if there's a hard
stop, we're gonna have to manage
that. So, again, I hope the
committee will trust me to to be
fair in managing that time.
Today we have a hard stop.
So we'll use the time between
now and about an hour from now,
if necessary, to hear from you,
to hear your input on what you
think works and what does not
work, but we also have the
sentencing commission today and
I did want to take a moment to
um have Philip very briefly here
because I've asked you to
present this. Um, I, I put this,
I, I try to sometimes tease you
all with an agenda, so I, I
tried to tease you today by
telling you a little bit about
how we analyze bills, uh, in, in
the committee and believe it or
not, there's
process and the procedure that
I've asked the staff to follow.
So Philip, you want to try and
explain in about 5 minutes what
that process or procedure is, 5
or 10 minutes, please.
Thanks chairman and members of
the committee, I'll be very
brief. Uh, the touchstone of our
analysis in this committee is
the Constitution.
This is where we start. This is
where I suggest all of you start
when you look at your
legislation, um, the
Constitution embodies a lot of
provisions which are framers
felt were important legislative
branch. Many of those provisions
involve the structure of the
bills, um, how the bills are
titled, a lot of technical
requirements in the
Constitution, um, Mr. Chairman,
I'll just go through a few of
those for you, and I'll just let
you know how, how I look at the
bills.
Um, I look at every bill that's
introduced in the legislature,
every House bill, every Senate
bill. I take a quick look
through the bills. I mark them
up, make a couple of notes, um,
try to get a sense of all the
kinds of legislation that are
moving through the process,
whether they're duplicate bills
in the house and in the Senate,
um.
As we move through the, as we
move through the agendas in this
committee, we'll see that the
first thing is the title of the
bill.
What we want to do when we're
looking at bills is we want the
public to be uh fairly apprised
of what's in the legislation.
The purpose of the title of the
bill is to put the public and
all of us on notice as to what's
contained in the bill, so we try
to be careful with the title to
make sure the title accurate ref
reflects the contents, um, of
the bill. Some of the things
some of the factors that we
really try to be careful of our
first separation of powers or
the branches of government.
exercising the appropriate
powers given to them in the
Constitution.
Um,
sometimes, depending on the
issues, particularly in the
judicial branch, for example,
sometimes you'll see court rules
that maybe look like statutes,
statutes that look like court
rules. So, uh, we try to look at
some of those issues, um, the
strong preference is that one
branch of government, um, Mr.
Chairman, members, not be
exercising the powers of another
separate but equal branch of
government. So that's really the
first touchstone.
We're going to look and see if
the legislation is needed? Is it
redundant? Do we already have
legislation? Is there already a
law about that very thing, that
very subject, is it addressed
elsewhere? Would this be
duplicative? Does it have other
implications? Does it conflict
with other areas of law, um, so
that's generally, Mr. Chairman,
some of the things that we look
at, um,
We're trying not to duplicate
the laws that we already have.
We want to make sure that the
laws as written are easily
understandable, um, the, the
judicial branch has rules about
how they interpret legislation,
rules of statutory construction.
Our preference is that there
never be any statutory
construction. We prefer for the
legislature to speak plainly on
these topics so that the court
doesn't have to struggle with
trying to infer what the intent
of the legislature might have
been.
Um, for that reason, and one
small example, our purpose
sections and findings in
legislation, that's something
that this committee eschews, um,
again, because we want the
statute to speak for itself. And
sometimes when you offer other
information like purpose
sections, um, that gives the
court the sense, uh, or another
opportunity to interpret
legislation that should have
been clear at the
upset. With that, Mr. Chairman,
I'm happy to continue. I'm happy
to go through specific
constitutional provisions, if
there are other uh areas that
you would like us to highlight.
Um, we're always happy to visit
with, with, uh, people involved.
We do ask that
We focus our attention on the
legislation that's pending in
this committee. So we don't
often have the leisure to look
at bills from the other house
before they move over. Um, we'd
love to be able to help
everybody with their bills, um,
but at this point, we read the
bills as they're introduced and
try to evaluate them as they
were introduced.
So now would be a good time for
about 10 minutes or so of
committee members have any
questions about the process or
procedure, let me, let me
emphasize a couple of things
that, that uh Philip um touched
on. Oh.
A lot of what happens here in
Santa Fe, from my observation is
inertia and, and this is, this
is directed a lot to, hopefully
the newer members of the
committee and new, newer members
of the legislature, um,
everybody comes up here and
begins introducing bills, uh,
they think that's what this job
involves because that's what if
they see everybody else doing,
and that's what they think
they're supposed to do, and
that's all they've ever seen
anybody do, so everybody
introduces bills, and there was
some teasing the other day, one
of our former colleagues
introduced, used to introduce 50
bills or something might.
past 3 or 4, if, if he was lucky
on a good day, look at the
smiles on my colleagues. They
all know who I'm talking about.
He's moving on to bigger things.
Um, but, but there's this desire
to try and, and work hard. We
all want to make a difference,
we all want to do things and we
think that the way of doing that
introducing bills.
Uh, some of us had been
practicing law for as long as I
have 30 years, began to realize
there's, there's frankly, very
little need for most new builds,
uh, most of it's already covered
in, in many places. Um, and
I'll, you'll hear that from me
quite a bit. That's an attitude
that I have really become even
more and more fond of as time
goes on and realize that lawyers
and judges and, and the people
that operate in our, in our
justice system and our civil
practices, they're expected to
know those laws, they're
expected to be able to
understand.
and predict what judges will
interpret those laws to mean,
and when they're constantly
changing, and when they're
constantly growing and
expanding, uh, that creates a
great deal of difficulty for for
the judiciary, frankly, and, and
there are rules of statutory
construction. Philip referred to
those when the legislature is
not clear.
The judges are left to try and
interpret that, and they have
any and know different rules by
which they use to try and
understand what we meant. One of
the, one of the things they do
most important is they look and
they they will say the most
recently passed law generally is
intended to supersede or to the
extent there's a conflict, uh,
be interpreted over an an
earlier bill, that creates
conflicts.
Um, I will tell you as a good
example of this, some of this
has very real implications.
We're we're hearing again a
desire to change the law on
felons in possession. You all
heard that in the state of the
state. We've been hearing about
that during the special session
here over, we've changed the law
on felony posses with 4 times
now I think in the last 5 years.
Um, it's creating a great many
problems for prosecutors or
courts for judges, they have to
try and figure out which date,
which act applied at which time
and which sentence applied.
And so we're, so just the notion
of adding years and changing
laws for the sake of doing so,
sometimes has very negative
consequences and in fact may
have the opposite of the
intended consequence or I'm, I'm
told anecdotally we have
defendants who are being
released and discharged for
felon and position crimes in
part because of, of mistakes in
charging the right version of
the law, which was in place or
enforced in a particular time.
So there's unintended
consequences and, and just
passing laws for the sake of
doing so.
I'd like to add to that that one
of the things this committee
does will continue to do, I
think very useful is I'm trying
to model this a little bit after
what I see sometimes when I
think good things come out of
Washington DC, some of the, some
of the great things that happen
in our country or have been the
result of hearings, uh, where
the issue is not legislation,
but I, I grew up in the
Watergate era watching those
hearings. I watched recently
this last year, the insurrection
and the rioting in Washington DC
on January 6th, and I watched
those hearings with great
interest, and we had a hearing
here in
this committee, um, last year,
where we looked at what was done
in New Mexico to try and
overturn the electorate here in
New Mexico in the presidential
election, we, we, we brought it.
General and the full analysis. I
hope those of you that were here
watched it was fascinating to
see the level of the conspiracy
that was in place here just in
New Mexico. I think that hearing
was useful.
Um, for many years, the courts
relied on a tool called the
Arnold tool to try and assess
and evaluate the risk of
individuals being released. This
committee had a number of
hearings on the Arnold Toolle
began to dissect it, and I think
the courts responded to that by
really taking a harder look at
the use of that tool. So we're
gonna use hearings as an
opportunity to learn, educate
ourselves, and it's not gonna be
all just about hearing and
passing bills. So that's a
little bit about the process and
procedure. We have just a few
minutes, uh, I'd really like to
hear from you all for a
s particularly those of you that
have been on the committee in
the last several years about
what you think works and what
doesn't work and what you would
suggest we maybe do differently.
Anyone?
Senator, Senator Stewart, I see
Senator O'Malley anxiously
wanting to. You just got to jump
in there, Senator. All right,
Senator Stewart.
Oh, Mr. Chairman, I find your
hearing is very useful.
Not being an attorney, it, it's
really important for us on this
committee that are not attorneys
to be in the hearings where we
learn all these uh judicial
procedures and processes and
You know, hearing from the
criminal sentencing committee.
So I like the hearings and I get
a lot out of them.
I just worry a little bit that
it pushes us back from where we
need to go, especially this year
when our focus on public safety
is so front and center. So I'm
hoping we get to those pills
pretty soon, but I really like
the hearings.
Thank you. And if I, if I can
just add considers worth and I
just had this one of the things
this committee does really well
is oftentimes we're gonna do
this a little bit with Senator
Doug's bill in a moment. We have
a lot of bills that he
introduced on crime. They're
sometimes in conflict with each
other or or they sometimes need
to work together, uh,
collectively, and they may be
the governor's agenda or there
may be others and the and so
we'll sometimes have hearings
and hold the bill without taking
a vote on the bill, so we get an
opportunity to hear the other uh
proposals on that subject and
try and bring them all together,
try and have the committee.
Having heard both sides of an
issue and in us trying to do so,
otherwise we end up passing
perhaps one bill on one day only
to find out, uh, the next week,
another bill may be in conflict
with that one that we like that
bill as well and then we're
leaving it up to somebody in the
house, God help us, uh, or, or,
or, or somebody upstairs to try
and reconcile things that we
should have done here, so thank
you, Senator Stewart. That's,
that's, we're, we're going to do
some of that and I do appreciate
your emphasis and the leadership
throughout the special session.
on the crime issues. We think we
all recognize a very serious
problem. So Senator O'Malley.
I just, I'm really pleased to
hear that bills are really
vetted.
to take the time to look at
them, um.
Because, as I, as I mentioned
earlier, you know, what is the
effect of, of some of the, you
know, the, this particularly
having to do with private public
safety on on uh at the other
end, right? And really thinking
about that and thinking through,
um.
You know, cause I, I usually try
to come from the point of, you
know, having a family and what
effect would that have on, on uh
family members or people in my
community or or people in the
neighborhoods. I'm glad to hear
that. So I have a question, so
you, uh, and I'm not, you know,
I also feel the same way about
bills. I'm like, I, you know, if
it's already happening or
somebody already, it's, you
know, good for them. I mean, I
don't need to reinvent a wheel
or anything. So if there is a
bill that comes down and that
you feel like it maybe the title
isn't clear or things.
like that. You circle back then
to the sponsor and talk with him
about it.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
we do. We either apprise the
committee of the fact that there
may be a conflict or a duplicate
bill in the process in the other
house or perhaps another piece
of legislation, and we have
mechanisms to track those
conflicting, uh, or potentially
conflicting sections of law. So
yes, we will alert you to that
and uh and and often suggest
technical amendments to
accommodate that. I would remind
us all about our uh
professional staff, uh, in the
legislative council service.
This is our nonpartisan staff or
bill drafting agency, uh,
lawyers, our researchers, we
have an excellent research
library upstairs, uh, take heed
of your drafters, if the
drafters will sometimes, uh,
give you ideas about the
legislation as you're drafting
it and as it's in process, um,
so, so please work with the
drafters, it's both an art and a
science Bill drafting. It's
challenging, it's difficult
Um,
sometimes.
we ask for things, um, that may
be sound in a political sense,
but perhaps not in a policy
sense. So just be mindful of
that, this process is designed
to accommodate all of those
countercurrents and cross
currents, but, um, please, um,
work closely with your drafters,
be wary, uh, this is your
prerogative to be introducing
legislation, sometimes you may
find yourselves working with
others with other advocates with
other experts.
Uh, please note that when the
time comes to present that bill
to this committee, uh, it is the
sponsor who is sitting here
presenting that bill, perhaps
with an with an advocate or an
expert, but uh I, I, I, I'd ask
all the sponsors in the Capitol.
Please know what's in your bill.
Um, don't just rely on the fact
that you, uh, authorize somebody
to go get a legislation prepared
on your behalf, um, just know
that it's your responsibility,
if I can say it like that, uh,
to know what's in the bill.
It's got your name on it. Um,
so, so please be familiar with
the bill before you bring it to
this committee to present it, or
you'll probably wish you had.
Yeah
So you
uh, Mrs. I also, I, I really
appreciate the kind of
informational hearings that we
get as well as a lawyer. I mean,
uh, actually in one area of law
doesn't mean you know any of the
other areas. And so I
One of the, uh,
Things I try to keep in mind.
Uh, legislating overall, but
especially in this committee is,
uh, being aware of what we don't
know.
Um, and being, uh, and
understanding that, that all of
us are going to need education
on a lot of issues because none
of us are, are experts in, in
all of them.
Um, one of the other things that
I always thought of as a
framework for analysis in this
committee, and I wonder if I've
done so, uh, incorrectly. Uh,
but I've always appreciated is
the approach of uh if something
is already true, you don't have
to say it. And in fact, saying
things that are already true can
get problematic because then
judges start thinking, well, if
you haven't said it, then it's
not true. Um, so, as we're all
looking at our bills coming
before this committee, I think
that is a good lens to, to keep
in mind of, if it's
already true, take it out.
And that, on that, Mr. Chairman,
I might, uh, remind us all the
first rule of statutory
construction is I think the
legislature is presumed to know
the law.
So,
that's a good place to start,
right there.
Are you all are laughing about
that. I'm looking at Mrs. Barton
Castle. We get a water law and
everything else that that's a
really important rule of
statutory construction. The
court is going to assume that
when we pass a law that we know
all the other laws and that we
considered all the other laws
when we passed this law and uh
Senator Duke's right, none of us
up here would be so brazen to
think we know all of those laws,
but the court's gonna say, yeah,
we must have, and that's again
why we have such a good staff to
make sure they're alert us and
aware of those things. Sarah
Maestas, you know?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just,
um, I think, um,
I look forward to this year in
particular. I think it's the
first year that it's like a post
COVID year. I think the the
folks, particularly the folks
that came in in 21.
a disadvantage cause we were
Legislating over Zoom.
Very difficult to amend a bill
over Zoom, and it was like good
idea, bad idea.
You know, and folks, uh,
So now when you ask questions or
want a woman to build some of
our colleagues think you're
against them or whatever, you
know, you, you might, you might
not be, not might be trying to
just make the statute better, so
I look forward to the getting
maybe not crazy like back in the
day at 2 o'clock fix, you know,
spending 3 hours trying to fix
the bill. That's not our
responsibility, but, uh, but
definitely.
Uh, you know, improving on us,
on, on, on a statue before us as
the bill moves along. I look
forward to that intellectualism
and that aspect of uh.
About fixing statues.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
thought I'd reiterate kind of
what we're doing process wise
this session, which is a little
different, uh, with kind of an
expedited behavioral health,
public safety package. So we'll
get a bill.
Probably 3 weeks in, so not too
much.
Farther down the road from the
house, I think centered around
the criminal competency bill and
then based on what you've said,
Mr. Chair. I think there will be
a number of things we've heard
here and we'll make a decision
about that amendment to that
bill. This is what we've used in
the tax committee very
effectively between the two.
The two chambers, and so we'll
do a Senate amendment to that
bill and omnibus amendment will
decide if the things in the
House bill that we disagree with
and we can take those out.
Uh, and I just want to reiterate
though, it doesn't mean that
that's all we're gonna do on
public safety. There's a whole
string of other bills that may
need, you know, far more vetting
and more hearing in the 2nd 30
days, those will all be out
there and in place. So, I just,
I wanted to just, this is
something we, it's a little
different, but I do think
This emphasis, the leadership in
both chambers has agreed to
this. The governor's on board
with this kind of front loaded
process and we've got to make
sure that what we're doing has
been thought through and a lot
of that intern work. That's the
big difference between where we
were kind of on the front end of
a couple day special session
while we've spent the interim
working on a whole range of
items, and so I think the
product that will, we'll put out
will be something we can be
proud of that makes sense and
senses an important signal to
the state.
No, Mr. Chairman, just 2 hours
of introduction with all you
lawyers. I look forward to
amending
the introductions yeah, yeah, I
started amending the
introductions, right? Um, it's,
it's, it's gonna be a learning
curve for us but we're here.
Actually, I will say we were,
we're having a sidebar over
here. The hearings could be
extremely helpful for us. And I
think just asking mainly some
very basic general questions
it's gonna be, it's, that's,
that's the time that we're gonna
be able to kinda ask our
questions. So we do look forward
to those hearings.
Thank you for consideration.
I'll just, uh, to feed on what
my uh colleagues have noted some
of us have been here a long
time. I, I have seen and I'll be
frank about it. I've seen
members increasingly resistant
to good advice, uh, particularly
from legislative council
service, and I think there's a
real reason for that. More and
more legislation is being
drafted outside the building by
a nonprofit organizations and
they're and they're uh getting
behind members and their members
and and they have attorneys on
their staff and they write bills
that they're very fond.
But the point was made, I think,
by others before already, the,
the writing of legislation is,
is a specialized practice of law
as any I've ever seen. Um, I
wouldn't begin to try and write
a will for any of you all if you
ask me to do it cuz I wouldn't
know how to do a competent job
of it, I wouldn't know how to do
a probate, saidor would, uh, but
I wouldn't or trust um Senator
Doig has been working on
marijuana legislation for quite
some time. Maestas has a
specialization. We all have our
lanes, and one of the important
things is you know when you're
stay within your lane, but, but
members are increasingly coming
forward with bills and, and, and
what'll happen is we'll, we'll
talk to the legislative council
and say, how did you write this
and how did you approve this and
as often as not, they'll tell us
very sheepishly, they tried to
work with the member and the
member wouldn't uh respond to
their suggestions and comments,
and so it comes down here and
we're asking them why the bill
still has a purpose clause or a
history to it, and we're going,
why? We know we're gonna take
that up.
They know downstairs we're going
to take it out and get a member
insists on it being in the bill
and so please take the advice of
good lawyers, um, and
experienced lawyers. It is a
very specialized practice and
some of us now have better than
20 years of, of doing it.
Um
The, um, I'll, I'll give you a
couple of other good examples as
we make our, our, uh, transition
to the next hearing real
quickly. We, we had a raid, uh,
last couple of days on a very
large marijuana farm in Estancy
Valley. Um, we've been talking
about that farm operating
illegally for 2 years in this
committee. We've had hearings
after hearings, and what we were
told, what I was told in our
interim where this by the law
enforcement, well, we don't have
authority to do anything about
this, right, um, uh, that's what
the sheriff would say, that's
what the state police would say,
that's what the
s would say, they all say we
don't have any authority to do
anything about this, and yet, uh
earlier this week, they came in
with an army, right? and and
raided and did something out
there, I assume they did
something out there for but, but
for years I said, well, we need
a law to give us that authority,
and somebody made the comment, I
think it was you that are doing
the absence of because the
because the law doesn't say you
can't do something or you can do
something that mean you can't do
something, right? So they they
they, they've been telling us
for two years, well, we need
permission, we need authority,
and we don't, we need to get
into a debate of this subject,
but
again, it's one of those
circumstances where we can
probably maybe learn from, from
something there too.
Um, the, uh, the next group up,
let's, let's move to the
sentencing commission. I, I,
there's a good, there's a good
example again for, for the newer
members and for the public for
the last, um, I was just in Las
Cruces, we had a town hall, come
on up, gang, get seated. Uh, we
had a town hall, uh, a month
ago.
One of my colleagues from the
house pointed out New Mexico's
DWI statistics are still
abysmal, we're still probably
one of the worst, if not the
worst states for DWI deaths and
injuries. And of course, every
time that happens, the response
from the public and sometimes
numbers is we need to increase
the penalties for DWIs, and I
think we may even have some
bills doing that this session. I
don't know if that's what we've
got, but we may, and, and the
point that I've been making the
last couple of years, not um one
that's popular to here is, we
can add more years to the DWR.
penalties, but when you've got
cops that are on the take and
being paid off to not show up
and to cook the cases, what good
am I doing by increasing in any
more years to the, to the
sentencing, and that's just
another example of, again, the
notion that adding sentences and
years to the process is
sometimes not the, the, you
know, panacea that I think a lot
of us in the public and then
again, the media love it, uh,
then they jump all over it and,
and it, it's just, it's, I
think, um,
Frankly, it's just untrue. So
sentencing commission, we've got
about 30 minutes if that'll work
for you all. And again, we've
got a hard stop it at 10 to 4,
so I'll ask you to be respectful
of that. Thank you for being
here on short notice.
Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee.
Uh, we appreciate the
opportunity to to come for you
today and update you and inform
you on the work of the
sentencing commission.
Um,
those of you who don't know me,
my name is Bob Cleval. Um, I was
appointed in the year 2000 by
Raymond Sanchez to the criminal
justice and juvenile
coordinating council over a few
years it was
Uh, statutorily created to the
New Mexico Sentencing
Commission.
We have a 27 member uh group and
as
Um, Senator Brantton said that
most of them are attorneys.
Myself and Martin are not, but
We, uh, try to keep those
lawyers in, in check. Um, we
have several committees that
that we work out of and keep in
mind we have a small staff and
Doug will explain some of that
in a little bit. We have
approximately 6 full-time staff,
a couple part-time staff here.
So the majority of the work of
the sentencing commission comes
from the agencies and the others
that are from the public, um.
Uh, either appointed by the, the
president pro tem, the Speaker,
the governor's office. So for
the last 5 of the last 6 years,
I've been the acting chair for
the last couple years, the
governor's uh appointee to to
chair this uh this commission.
Uh, we have the juvenile
committee.
The grant committee, which is
the grant reduction Act, the
moneys, we have a reform
committee and the chair of that
was Spence Pacheco, who stepped
out for a minute. Um, and the,
uh, legislative committee. We'd
like to talk a little bit about
the legislative committee cause
they meet um regularly during
the session and they go over
every criminal and juvenile
justice bill. On that point, uh,
we have a couple of bills coming
out of the juvenile committee,
um, relating to uh criminal
justice.
this, uh, Senator Maestas is
carrying one and the other one's
coming out of the house side.
Um, over the years, our role has
has changed a little bit under
uh Governor Martinez, we're
pretty stagnant. Um, we have
come back and, and got uh
involved in, in, in criminal uh
legislation, criminal and
juvenile legislation. So I'd
like to introduce um Martin
Swazo. Martin is the vice chair,
but he's also the chair of the
grant committee.
the legislative committee, the
acting chair of the Sentencing
Commission, and many of you know
him when he was a council
services, Doug Carver.
And um I'll turn it over to
either one of you.
Who, uh
Wish to go.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, it's
always a pleasure to be in front
of San Judiciary. I remember it
well from my time at a council
service and for my time in this
current role as well, um, for
newer members, um, new people
new to committee or new to the
Senate. This is definitely where
the rubber meets the road with
legislation or to quote from a
famous film franchise. This is
where the fun begins. Um, great
committee.
Um
I've given out and I think Emily
is distributed to each of you a
handout on the commission. uh,
Mr. Chair, given our hard stop
and I want to leave a lot of
time for questions. I don't want
to go through the whole thing,
but consider it a briefing paper
on the commission and the role,
the many roles that we have. I
don't.
Know if the um legislature
realizes how often they have
added to our duties over recent
years, which is fabulous. We
love it. We love what we do. I
have a great staff working at
the commission. Everyone says,
um, how much they enjoy the work
and how engaged they are with
the work. But it's a lot.
Um, the overview really quickly
where criminal and juvenile
justice policy resource to all
three branches of state
government.
Created in 2003, um,
By Governor Bill Richardson
succeeding the criminal and
juvenile justice coordinating
council. We got expanded
membership and greater
responsibilities are organizing
statute for anyone who wants to
look it up is that section 93,
10 MSA, um, we've always been
housed at the University of New
Mexico.
Um, the staff has always been
housed there. And we have a
great synergy with the
university in that arrangement.
Our mission is to provide
impartial information analysis,
recommendations, and assistance
from a coordinated cross-agency
perspective, with the emphasis
on maintaining public safety,
making the best use of our
criminal and juvenile justice
resources.
We have 27 members of the 4
subcommittees that the chair
just mentioned.
And our principal duties on the
2nd page here.
are to advise the three branches
of government on policy matters
relating to criminal and
juvenile justice.
Facilitate the integration of
criminal justice data across the
state that was a task given to
us in 2019, when it was house
bill 267, I believe, um carried
by uh Representative Eli and
others gave us those.
Data integration duties.
And in that same bill, we got
duties outlined in the crime
reduction Grant Act.
We also have statutory
obligations to um
Sent to DFA the amounts owed to
counties for holding prisoners
under correction that are under
the jurisdiction of corrections
pursuant to the county detention
facility reimbursement Act.
We maintained the list of
collateral consequences, um, as
or as um outlined in the uniform
federal consequences of
conviction Act.
And when the violence
intervention Program Act was
passed a few years ago. We have
a coordination role with
Department of Health on that.
On the bottom of that second
page, I won't go through all of
them or all the reports that we
publish annually, all those are
available on our website.
And then if you flip the page,
there's other reports that we do
periodically sort of ad hoc and
reports, um, literature reviews,
we did a couple reports on fines
and fees, but that was a big
issue for the legislature.
And we're regularly tasked with
joining task forces such as the
jail and prison integration task
force in 2022. The Pria, the
prison rape Elimination Act task
force that was um authorized by
memorials in 23 and 24, uh,
we're working with the council
of state governments Justice
Center on the Justice Counts
initiative, that's another.
Initiative to bring criminal
justice data in front of
policymakers and um with the
justice reinvestment initiative
that's going on now. Senate Bill
54 is something that came out of
that initiative.
I'll talk very quickly about the
crime reduction grants on page 4
of the handout or the 12
purposes for which the crime
reduction grants, um, can be
made and on page 5 you can see
um how that program is escalated
escalated since it began, um,
with a fiscal year 2020 grants
to um recent where we've been
dispersing millions of dollars
all across the state.
Um, to the criminal justice
coordinating councils that are
in each um judicial district.
Um, and I'm happy to talk with,
um,
Give you more details about all
of the work with the crime
reduction grants.
The commission also, if you look
to page 6, those are our data
integration responsibilities and
how we've been tackling that.
We actually had a grant when the
first crime reduction grants was
to help the administrative
office of the courts launched
the data exchange, which brings
together um various bits of
court data. It's meant to be a
platform where we bring lots of
criminal justice data together
so that the different systems
can talk to each other.
And, um, ideally, again,
developed some um information
for policymakers.
The, um, missions also
contracted with the New Mexico
Tech Institute for Complex
Additive Systems analysis,
usually hurt, um, usually
referred to as iCasa, to help
drive our data integration.
Um
Our data integration work.
Um, they've been working with us
on data flows.
Assisted with automating um
uploads of information from
corrections department and
they're creating a data
dashboard for the criminal
justice coordinating counsels to
track criminal justice trends by
counting judicial district, and
they're also working to help get
more county detention centers
onto that data exchange platform
and automate systems at the
county detention centers. Um, if
there, I think it was one of the
last CCJ meetings on New Mexico
Tech.
Cassa gave a long presentation
about all their data integration
works across the state and they
talked about the commission in
detail then.
And part of that effort is we're
hoping this year to relaunch
what's called the Justice
Information Sharing counsel,
which is a way to get all the
data people in the state
involved with criminal justice
around the table.
Talking to each other.
Um, pages 78, and 9 is some
detail about our commission.
Um, commission members.
I laid out the statute for you
and saying who appears for each
of those.
Um, in each of those various
roles or for each of those
people or who their designees
are. Um, I also have on page 9
an alphabetical list of all of
our members. So again, that's
very quick, um, run through of
this document. I'm happy to
answer any questions that
members of the committee might
have um about the commission.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sure, would you like me to
go to the table just just from
here.
So, Senate Bill 54 and uh Mr.
Carver noted in there this, the
justice reinvestment initiative
that they're working with. So
that is part of the crime and
justice Institute, which is uh
kind of an offshoot of our
federal DOJ and the state asked,
uh, them to come in and they
Uh, they gather a lot of data
about what's going on with
public safety and help develop,
uh, public safety policy that is
data-based. And so they put
together a work group that is a,
was a multidisciplinary
bipartisan work group of folks
from law enforcement from our
judicial system, uh, the
Secretary of Corrections.
Mr. Carver, um, and a couple of
legislators thrown in there for
good measure, and we spent the
summer meeting and going over
data that was presented to many
of us and see you and CCJ I'm
not throwing this at you. I
swear, Mr. Chair. Um, and
SB 54 is the result of the
majority of the policies that
came out of that, uh,
multidisciplinary bipartisan
work group. One of the things
that we had talked about in
there.
And it's actually two things
that would change would, would
add to what the Sentencing
commission is doing. Uh, the,
the shorter and easier one is
creating a public crime data
dashboard in conjunction with
DPS, um, that would be hosted on
the Sentencing Commission's
website, uh, similar to, to a
lot of these other data
dashboard work that they're
doing already.
The other thing that is probably
more substantive is that the
Sentencing Commission would
coordinate re-entry efforts for
folks who are being released
from prison and detention
centers, foster collaboration
and communications among
stakeholder groups working on
re-entry issues and established
minimum standards for re-entry,
including pre-release
assessments, behavioral and
physical health continuum of
care, employment, housing, and
basic needs. So, basically, what
we wanna do is we want to have
Statewide standards that are
gonna, that when people are
being released, are gonna set
them up to be productive members
of our communities, um, rather
than folks who are going to be
unproductive members who go
right back into detention. And
so we would be, so the
sentencing commission would
essentially be the hub for that,
for, for helping develop
coordinate and develop those
statewide standards, uh, so that
when folks are released from
detention, hopefully, they will
be successful, uh, and not.
be going back.
It
On
I'm sorry, thank you for that.
Yes, I was, I was about to, uh,
identify for the folks that are
watching at home or or online,
the members of the Sentencing
commission just quickly and
briefly the 27 members, which to
me seems unwieldy very candidly,
but, but right now you've got
representatives from the
Attorney General's office or the
Department of Justice. Um, the
district attorney's office, uh,
public defender's office,
district judges, magistrate
judges, law school, Secretary of
Corrections, Secretary of Public
Safety, Secretary of Children,
Youth and Family.
Secretary of Public Education.
Representatives of behavioral
health or representative of the
sheriff, members appointed by
the governor, members appointed
by Senator Stewart as the
president of the Senate, members
appointed by the minority
members of the House and Senate,
members of the appointed by the
Speaker of the House, um, public
members appointed by the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court,
representation by members of the
Native American community and um
by the New Mexico Victims
Organization. Again, a very
robust composition that really
should be a great resource to us
for
for the things that we've asked
them to do, I'm concerned that
perhaps we're asking the
Sentencing Commission to do too
much because
With a special session called
and with a number of hearings
that we had leading up to the
special session. A lot of hours,
a lot of days leading up to that
special session. I and with very
specific bills that were under
discussion, I don't recall the
Sentencing commission giving us
any advice or feedback on any of
those bills. Um, and, and I
don't recall the district
attorneys taking any position on
any of the governor's
initiatives for the special
session, and I don't recall the
public defenders taking any
position, and I don't recall,
uh, really any of the people
that are doing this every day.
All the time and with the
specialized knowledge that I
would hope from the Senate
commission giving us advice for
somebody like me who does not
practice in the criminal
library, so that, that's, that's
just a start to the dialogue,
but I hope we'll go to committee
members and I'll tell you why. I
think your role is so important,
uh, because I will tell you that
when our staff is meeting, one
of the first questions I'm gonna
ask a sponsor when they want to
have a bill her them and say,
what is the position of the
sentencing commission on your
bill, and that means I expect
you all to step up and, and be
able to give them uh a snapshot
opinion on where
The bill is at and when a member
says, I haven't heard from the
Sentencing commission, I'm gonna
suggest their bill may not be
ready, uh, to be heard by this
committee, but as I said before,
I, I, I don't believe in the
whole auction sentencing, which
is, uh, and we see that, we see
it a lot. I'll, I'll call you 2
years and I'll raise you too,
uh, it's, it's an absurd, it's
it's, it's it's comical, but
members of the committee who
wish to be on the debate and
discussion. Senator Brantley and
then Senator Maestas and then
Senator Thornton.
To your point, Mr. Chairman, my
question was if the sentencing
commission is bringing forward
and proposed legislation or
recommendation for lawmakers
this year.
I'm sorry, Senator, what was the
question? Does the sentencing
commission, Mr. Chairman, do you
have any proposed legislation of
your own or at a minimum, a list
of recommendations for lawmakers
this year as we enter into a, a
public safety session.
Senator,
the two bills that we do have
going this year, originated out
of the juvenile committee. Um,
we have been involved in
legislation just recently like
uh acting director, Carter said
with the fines and
bill that was a couple of years
ago. Um, you know, going back
to, um, Senator Cervantes uh on,
on the legislative committee. We
have 15 members, Department of
Corrections, the AG, the AOC,
CYFD, um, other attorneys, uh,
the sheriff, and everybody's got
a piece of what the legislation
is cause it affects them all,
department of corrections,
particularly um Ages, um, I
think that
To your point, Senator, um, Mr.
Chair and other, other members
of the committee, we do need to
find a better way to get our
information to you. Last year we
did develop a one page, um,
where we're looking at where
there's issues where we always
get back to the sponsor. We get
back to the first committee
providing information if there's
problems with the bill if we're
all in support of the bill, uh,
things along those lines, but we
are definitely
open to, to be able to get
information from you as to how
you would like us to present
this to you back in the uh
several years ago when Tony
Ortiz was working for the
sentencing commission, he would,
he would stand up in front of
every committee and present what
the findings were from our
analysis and those of you who
have been here back then,
Senator Wirth, uh, Senator
Stewart would recall that, um,
and we're gonna look at trying
to do that more of that.
this year.
I mean, I missed that. I'll be
honest with you, I'll miss that.
So send Browley Chairman,
I guess if I'm reading this
mission, it says that the
commission's mission is to
provide recommendations for
maintaining public safety would
be helpful, especially for those
of us that are new to have a
list of very specific bills that
you are either endorsing or
opposing based on the analysis
and research that you have is,
is to what legislation your
sponsoring one or at least, um,
uh,
Supporting along the way and so
I still left a little bit
confused as to what you would
recommend we do as lawmakers
this session, if you could
follow up with that.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman commissioners, thank
you so much. Refresh your
memory, Mr. Chairman of Carver,
what is the staff?
In addition to the, the, the
commission members tell us about
your staff and where you housed.
Um, uh, thank you, Senator Mais,
um, Mr. Chair committee
We have a staff, it's 5
currently, um, because we have
one vacancy.
There's uh the executive
director, the acting director
now, who would normally have a
deputy director as well. One
staff attorney. We have a
research director.
Who has to uh full-time
researchers are working
underneath there.
We also have a uh finance people
who we sort of co-share their
time with two other research
institutes at the University of
New Mexico, all the staff are at
University of New Mexico have
been since the commission was
founded in 2003 under an IGA we
have UNM staff or actually UNM
employees, so my email has a
UNM.edu um, uh, suffix the um
websites hosted on the UNM's
website.
Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, it
just, uh, just appreciate the
work that, that the commission
does. It's tremendous and has a
lot of credibility when you
Support something which may not
I mean I, uh, have initial
support, you know, amongst the
members because as the, as the
chair said, we do a bad tax
bill, we do a bad whatever bill
we can come back and change it
or whatever. If you
Passing sign of bad crime bill,
it is a nightmare to undo it.
Uh, just, just look at the
decade of the 90s, um, and all
the states that are trying to
undo that that craziness. So,
uh,
So to get some
Uh, technical advice from the
commission is just fantastic. So
look forward to working with you
and this this session in the
interim as well, um, I just
appreciate you guys signing up
for it. They, and also Mr.
Chairman, the um the commission,
there's been certain governors
that have like steered the
commission or even shoved the
commission, one good thing this
governor is, I believe, allowed
the commission to do its job
and, and I, the independence of
the commission now I think
bolster its its credibility, uh,
as well.
So,
Mr. Chair, thank you very much,
uh, I had a question with
regards to page 6, you did
integration. You mentioned the
Mexico data exchange. Has this
been implemented completely
statewide?
And is it in every county?
How, how do you collect this
information, then I'll just,
I'll have a follow-up question.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Senator Thornton. Um,
One clear um clarification on
data exchange, it's really
hosted by AOC. So, uh, they
would be best um in the position
to talk about how it's
implemented to roll out this one
have that copy out, but I can
give you some good information
to start.
Oh, it's not implemented in any
account every county, every
county is welcome to join the
data exchange and something that
we have found in our it's 5
years now working on data
integration efforts. um, is that
everyone recognizes the need and
the importance of sharing data.
No one wants to have their data
shared by other parties.
Everyone wants everyone else's
data, but people are reluctant
to um release their own data.
That's not a New Mexico problem.
I've gone to national
conferences, the same problem in
every state. Um, it's not a
technical issue, technical
issues could be sorted about
uploads and and um whatnot, um.
That's, it's a personality
institutional problem. So the
data exchange is now on, I
believe 3 counties, um, yes, San
Juan, Sandoval, Berno Leo.
I think I heard that Bernolo's
connection might have been
broken and needs to be restored.
Um, there's a question on, I
believe, San Juan's isn't
publicly available data, so we
are working to break down those
barriers, and that's part of
what the commission has taken on
in the last, particularly the
last year and working with um
the people at ICASA to talk with
the counties, work with the
counties, and try to convince
more and more people to get on
the data exchange, particularly
the county detention centers.
We're hoping it will.
be a snowball.
Um, effect. So the more, once
people say, hey, it's not too
bad.
Then we will, uh, we can maybe
jump on and uh continue there.
One thing in the crime reduction
grants, we added a new purpose.
I believe it was 2 or 3
legislative sessions ago, you
all, uh, we brought a bill to
modify the crime reduction Grant
Act, we added giving grants for
data integration efforts to as a
purpose of the crime reduction
Grant Act, and we gave our
first, I believe it to Valencia
County, um, this last round of
grants. We gave our first grant
to a county who had applied for
data integration work.
So it's been a very slow ongoing
process. COVID really threw
things off because the bill was
passed in 2019, we got COVID the
next year, um, and that really
sort of threw the momentum, but
we're starting to rebuild and
get some momentum in that work,
Mr. Chair and senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
I appreciate that, that
feedback. One of the concerns
that Senator Duhe uh did mention
with respect to the fact that
we're gonna be making public
policy and it has to be
databased.
And so we will be relying on you
all to provide that data, but if
you don't have the
Input from various sources and
I'm, I don't want to question
the data that you're presenting
to us. And so my, my hope is
that you all could, and if you
need funding for us to support
you in developing that
integration. I can, I know that
I have a tremendous benefit to
not only this committee, but
probably to the community as
well, understanding how things
are happening across the state.
Thank you very much.
Other committee members,
comments or questions? Anyone
else?
Senator Wirth, just one quick
question. Do you all, I think I
remember agency analysis. Do you
do a sentencing commission
analysis on bills. I know.
I remember seeing those.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator Wirth,
we do, um,
We get a request from LFC, we
submit those on pretty much any
piece of criminal justice
legislation and um senator and
Mr. Chair, this will be a great
time for our vice chair Barnzo
to talk about the work of the
legislative committee and how
the committee during the
session.
comes up with recommendations
and discusses bills and how we
get those bill that information
out to policymakers and
lawmakers.
the vice chair.
Mr. Chairman, uh, senators, uh,
thank you for, for having us,
uh, here today and, uh, you
know, it's, it's been set in on
a long uh uh historical session,
it's, it's good to see a lot of
you guys I've known through the
years and it's it's a pleasure
to be here with you guys today,
uh, as you, our executive
director was saying, uh, we, I
serve as the chairman of the
legislative subcommittee.
And to answer and to answer, uh,
send, uh, uh, Bradley's, uh,
concerns a while back, uh, you
know, we do have every, we meet
every Tuesday at 10 100 a.m. and
right now it's in the PERA
building. We do have, we've set
up a build tracker, uh, which
basically gives us uh analysis
of, of every bill that that that
deals with crime legislation of
some sort in some shape form or
fashion comes before our
committee. Uh, it's, it's viewed
uh
You know,
In depth, each and every bill,
and there are recommendations
that are made uh forth at the
end of every single, uh, Tuesday
session. Uh, we would be honored
to make that available to you
guys, Senator, so that you, you
have an idea as to exactly what
the feelings of the committee
are. Senator Wirth, uh, we have,
uh, sent them forward, um, most
of the time they're
noncontroversial, uh, once in a
while, we'll have a bill that
that has a varied opinions, uh,
as we did last year.
Your policy is, uh, we, uh,
Listed in detail what the pros
and the cons were of that bill
and uh again, we would uh uh be
uh more than happy to make those
available to to you guys here at
the at the uh.
Of this committee and uh and so,
uh, yes, uh, I think, uh, as we
pointed out before, we have 15
uh legislative uh members of the
legislative committee, and
they're really from all walks of
life, we got, you know, the, uh,
both sides of the aisle,
defenders, prosecutors, judges,
and members of the public, as am
I.
Mr. Chair, can I just say, I
think that's why the information
is so valuable, quite frankly.
You've got the diversity and I
do.
Remember, good friend Tony
Ortiz. I think what can happen
is if you do an agency analysis,
it gets sucked up into the LFC
FIR and it just disappears.
And that's why having Tony
Stand up and actually present it
with so effective, so I just
wanna flag it. I, I think what
you're hearing loud and clear is
that
This committee really needs the
input from the
The panel that you have put
together who do represent all
those different
Different views on a piece of
legislation, and that'll be very
helpful to us. So thank you, Mr.
Chair. Mr. Chair and Senator,
just very briefly, if I may,
that build tracker is posted on
our website, so when we compile
all the notes from the committee
that's posted on the NMSC
website under our reports. I
also email it to committee staff
and um particularly Senator
Brandley if there's um some of
the public committee staff, we
want to get that and just get
their email and I'll add them to
a distribution list. um, so at
the beginning of every session I
hit.
The main criminal justice
community is the two judiciary
committees, the two public
affairs committees, and get
staff emails for those and
anyone else who wants it, but
it's also posted on our website.
Um, and I'm happy to send it to
people individually as well if
you need to, um,
thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have
a brief con uh question. So on
page 7 when you list everyone.
Um, I'm reading that appointed
members shall serve at the
pleasure of the appointing
authority. To me, that means
there's no term limits. There's
no time, so I don't believe I
appointed Martin Swa so and by
the way, your name is misspelled
on page 7.
but I did appoint Sydney West,
so is it true that people just
tend to stay for a long time
because it's rewarding work and
you like your
your uh business and work and
everything because I don't see
much movement from the people
that I appoint.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair and, uh,
Senator Stewart, you're, you're,
you're exactly right. There's
no, no the term limits, as I
said when I first sat down, uh,
Speaker Sanchez appointed me in
the year 2000 in every speaker
after that just kept rolling me
over, um, and then I became the
acting chair when uh when um our
current governor came in and
then then became a chair, uh,
now, obviously the, the chair
would probably change with the
new government.
coming in, um.
As you had mentioned that uh Mr.
Schwazo has been with us for 20
years or so. So he's been rolled
over by also by the Senate
protes that have been been in
here as well.
Mr. Chair, oops, is that
working? Via, um, Senator
Stewart, um, these are old
statutes when I was at council
service, I did a lot of work
around boards and commissions.
And if the commission were
created today, the statutes
would look very different. When
I started at the sentencing
commission, I believe about 7
years ago as a deputy, I
instituted, um,
not really a policy. It's just
something I did. If the
appointing authority changed.
I would reach out to the new
appointing authority and say,
hey, did you know?
You have these people on the
commission. I usually reach out
to um staff members and whatnot
and say this, this is who you
have, do you want to keep them
or not?
Um
And uh that has generated some
change um over the years in a
way that didn't happen before,
because we would have people to
serve.
On and on and on.
All right, thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Stewart.
Anyone else?
So one thing went by us pretty
quickly, uh, it was sad and I've
heard it before, so I'm gonna
re-emphasize a little bit. I
think that unfortunately, some
of the sentencing commission
work becomes political, um, and
I'm seeing all the heads, not a
yes. So for example, during the
8 years of the Martinez
administration. I heard somebody
saying, and I'm seeing the heads
nod before I say a thing or ask
a question, but, but, uh, you
had a district attorney as the
governor who had very strong
beliefs and opinions of her own
and perhaps had very little need
for the sentencing commissioner
certainly wasn't about to take
advice from all of you, and I
see a lot of heads nodding, um.
That, that, that was, uh, that
was 8 years of understandable
district attorney as the
governor, uh, uh, but that's uh
been 6 years ago plus, maybe,
maybe 10 years ago and um I, I'm
hoping that we're gonna build
this back to the robust place
that I remember it being, um,
and, and again, I'm, I'm, this
is not a criticism, it's in the
observation of the fact that
the, the composition of the
Sentencing commission is largely
made up of governors appointees,
uh, a very heavy majority of
these seems to be governor
appointees.
And the fact that we didn't hear
from the sentencing commission
on the special session
legislation to me is is speaks
volumes candidly. I don't, I
don't know what it means. I
don't know why that happened. I
don't know whether uh you all
were, were felt constrained or
didn't have the, the resources
or the time or, or maybe had no
opinion. That's hard for me to
understand as as a practitioner,
hard for me to understand how
changing the felon in possession
again, a 4th or 5th or 6th time
and adding more years that you
all had no opinion on that. That
just doesn't make any sense.
To me. Um, and, and realize what
we've done is we used again, not
being a criminal practitioner,
we're lucky to have a senator
who now does, but we have, we,
we established a sentencing
structure. We have a first
degree felony and a 2nd degree
felony, and 3rd degree felonies,
and there's corresponding
sentences for each of those
things. And, and now even those
don't seem to work because we
kind of know we fudge around the
edges. We have a 3, 3rd degree
felony, but notwithstanding the
sentencing for a 3rd degree
felony, we're gonna add a couple
more years to that one, right,
or something in you're not
yours, the the whole thing's out
of out of kilter really.
And, and it's, it's spinning
seemingly completely out of out
of control. Um, so I, I really
do think important we you're our
first hearing.
Uh, because I think that you're
an under unutilized resource and
and I'm putting some pressure on
you too, and I'm putting
pressure on sponsors. If you got
a crime bill, I'm gonna ask you,
where does this fit in the
sentencing structure with all
the other crimes. Is this
higher, lower, is this fit in
right? Is this Goldilocks? Is it
just right? Or do we really have
something that's out of kilter
with the rest of the criminal
justice system and they haven't
been through you all. I don't
have an opinion from you. I'm,
I'm gonna understand that to
mean something.
Uh, the one of their last point
that I'd like to make is that
years ago I, I introduced
legislation that required that
any sentencing enhancement,
increasing penalties had a
appropriation or necessarily
with it, uh, that there had to
be an FIR with it because you,
you mentioned it briefly in
passing, but when we add years
to a sentence, we're implicating
uh corrections, uh, our, our
budget of corrections in prisons
were increasing the budget of uh
district attorneys, uh, public
defenders, courts, all of
them are burdened by uh
increases in sentences, and we
seem to be oblivious to that.
Let's just again, let's go into
sentencing auction and figure
out who's gonna outbid somebody
else to look tougher on crime
than their opponents without any
thought at all to the
corresponding costs of all of
that and um you know, all of our
debate in the special session
and sentencing increases. I
don't remember any discussion at
all about what this would cost
to do these additional crimes or
additional sentences. I think
you all play a valuable role in
that as well too, so are we, are
we?
prepared to pay more money to
imprison more people for more
crimes, and we should at least
recognize that that that is um a
consequence of that too. So,
yes, and then we'll wrap it up.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'd
like it this time if we could uh
have Spence Pacheco step up just
for a second. Maybe she can
refer to some of uh Senator.
she chairs the reform Committee
of the Sentencing Commission.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, excuse me for a
second.
Uh, thank you for allowing us to
be here today, um.
Mr. Chair, I've been listening
to you and everything that
you've been saying and
As I've been sitting here.
Um
From, from my perspective, the
role of the commissioners are to
present.
As much information as we can to
all of you, you are the policy
makers. Our job is merely to
assist you, and
A little bit of our hesitation
is that it's very difficult
because we're trying not to play
politics, we're trying to just,
you know, it's hard to know how
far we can suggest things to all
of you, so that's part of it,
um, you know, there we'd be more
than happy to make more
recommendations, but again,
it's, you know, we're trying to,
we're trying to stay in our lane
of the road, basically.
Because our job is mainly to
provide you with information.
And you are the ultimate
decision makers. If you would
like more information from us,
especially on the reform side,
we're more than happy to do that
if you would, you know, could be
more specific about what you
would like when I think of
sentencing and, you know, we've
been working on the sentencing
restructuring the sentencing,
and you brought it up.
And I went through it again. I
mean, we have.
4 different 2 degrees.
We have 5.
Different 3 degrees.
And we have 2 4th degrees.
We also have two first degrees
and then of course, we have
capital and, you know, as
Senator Maestta started out as a
Prosecutors just like I did, you
know, as as baby prosecutors, we
only had 4 levels, and that's
what we dealt with, but now it's
kind of like, well, which 3rd
degree felony is this? Is it 3
years? Is it 6 years? Is it 9
years?
And one of the things that we
have recognized.
Is that, and quite frankly, you
have illustrated it by the
special uh
Uh, sentences you've attached is
that are 4 levels are too rigid
for all of you.
We need, we need to expand the
levels to give you the lead work
for you to be able to do what
you want. If you have a crime
that you think deserves 9 years,
you shouldn't try to figure out
is it a third degree, but let's
make it 9 years versus a 3rd
degree versus 3 years. I mean,
that's what we've been trying to
figure out is how to, you know,
expand the levels of felonies to
accommodate all of you, because
basically by the legislation
you've passed,
showing us that you need more
flexibility.
And the only way we can provide
that flexibility to you is by
changing the sentencing
structure.
And, you know, I know that.
Mr. Carver has been good about
discussing it with the, the
House leadership, I understand,
and they're in favor of that.
And we're hopeful that the
Senate leadership would also
support that. I will tell you
that one of our fears about
going forward with all of this,
cause we really would like to
see this professionals to go
forward, is that once it's
introduced that we're
And this is where all of you
would have to come in is that we
don't want the rest of the
criminal code as part of the
process to be tampered with,
because we're only wanting to
stress the restructuring of the
felonies.
And so, I mean, but that's
beyond our control. I mean, that
would be, that is all, you know,
your responsibility that if we
are able to introduce something
like that, that we can just keep
it.
To the sentencing structure. So,
I mean,
Anything that you want, we are
more than happy to accommodate
you, which is, you know, tell us
what it is that you need and and
we have, you know,
There's a lot of experience on
the commissioner's side. I will
tell you though that we have a
very small staff.
Very small.
And they're hurting right now.
That's all I can say, you know,
cause we've placed the
legislature has placed
additional responsibilities on
them, and they've they've done
it, but
It's been very difficult, so I
don't know, I'm open to any
other questions or comments you
have, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. A couple of
observations real quick. We're
going to try real hard in the
early days to avoid references
to things like AOC and so forth
because I've got colleagues who
have no idea what AOC probably
means, I think, right? My, am I
right about that?
Oh they exactly there not and
who can blame them.
Administrative Office of the
courts, there's no reason they
would know that and they should
expect that, so we're gonna be
careful about that. I think it
would be useful to have a tail,
a table and perhaps a brief
presentation about what is a
first degree felony, what is a
second degree felony? Don't,
don't feel bad over here to my
right, I don't.
really know what the 6 levels of
5th degree felonies are either
cause just not the area of law
that I practice in, but, but we
should talk about the idea that
there used to be these 4 levels
of felonies and now that wasn't
enough, so now we've got the
subcategories of all of those,
and it's a mess. Um, it, it
really is, and, and I'll just
end by saying that we're going
to have to find a sweet spot
because you're, you're telling
me that you want us to be the
policymakers and to be guiding
you, um, from here, and we're,
and I'm telling you, we're
relying on you.
As experts in the field to tell
us what to do and it's again,
just characteristic of a lot of
what's wrong about our crime
system and probably New Mexico
is everybody's pointing the
finger at somebody else, and,
and nobody wants to hurt
somebody's feelings and nobody
wants to get on the wrong side
of politics, and I'm not being
critical of you. I understand
what you're doing, but we're,
we're up here all doing the same
thing. We don't, we don't want
to offend the, the Albuquerque
Journal or the Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, so we've
got them telling us how to, how
to do crime bills and pretrial
detention where the Chief
Justice of the
Supreme Court came to speak to
us the other day and made it
very clear that all of that
noise about pretrial detention,
whether it comes from upstairs
or was is unconstitutional. It's
just patently unconstitutional.
It's never gonna fly. Uh, so,
um, you all need to hear it, and
we need to lay it out there and
be, be straight about it and um
again, we need to figure out
where we're gonna get the
information from, and I'd like
to think it's coming from people
like you, not the, not the
media, um, and, and not the
radio hosts, um, and, and we
need to be careful about not
falling for any of that. And I
I don't think we will in this
committee, so.
Anything else? Last parting
comments. We'll see you
Wednesday. I will ask you all
between now and then to perhaps
see me or at the next committee
think of hearings, topics that
you think would be useful.
Again, I've given you an idea of
what we've done on some hearings
recently. Are you heard the
members say they can be
incredibly useful and it may be
uh things that are new to you,
but you'd be surprised they're
probably new to me too. So thank
you all very much for thinking
about that. We'll see you
Wednesday.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Oh
Oh no, I'm sorry, members, uh,
would you, would you swing by
here, um, we have the rules I
