That.
Yeah I'm getting.
Solves.
Yeah.
We.
Thank you.
The other alternative in the
past I propose is to encourage
or allow.
A group to have a spokesperson.
Speak for them in which case.
allow more time for that
spokesperson for a group of
people and that that allows that
person to maybe fully explain it
discussed a little bit more
detail in a bit more further
away but but the department that
they will not advise that
there's a individual who wishes
to speak for a group of people.
And in that are here in the room
as opposed to that then you will
you will hear many people as we
can but realize that your
opportunity maybe very brief.
You and I'll have to be fair by
I'll do that among everyone.
for those that are here to
express to show hands can I just
see if the show has for those
who are here to speak in support
of Senate bill two as it
presently exists.
If you support.
All right.
That looks like about five or so
and then opposition leader idea
show fans of people who wish to
speak in opposition.
Again
Really I saw that ask you want
to speak in other a lot more has
now there's not so many so we'll
see we'll see how that all works
out all right let's get started
Senator Lopez Senator Ivey Soto
Senate bill two four years Mr
chairman I could also ask you to
please explain to the public how
much time the presenters are
allowed to have.
Of yes thank you so the of the
rules that we use that was for
the judiciary are to in in this
case with the time today up all
last for you is the sponsor to
present the bill in ten minutes
Senator up again whatever you
wish to do to explain your your
bill in addition that.
Will are you an additional ten
minutes to recognize anyone we
wish to recognize and support
the bill so you'll have that
free time as well and will rely
upon you to coordinate that
issue which will cut people off
issues Madam after that will
hello fifty minutes of
opposition you can reserve a
when I stepped in intent realize
that allows you an update for
for reserving time for rebuttal
so you may wish to let me know
how much of that time you wish
reserve and I'll be watching
whatever time you asked me to
give you so that I can help you
keep track of that time so you
don't have to do so all right
but but the goal there on the
rebuttal is to allow you
sometime reserve to address any
opposition to your all right
okay and Mr chairman I decided
just to take the full twenty
without any time reserve for
every bottle then I can use
that.
Yes this is not correct you can
use the full twenty minutes and
if
even with that said I'll still
always love you an opportunity
for brief closing.
After the the opposition's
express okay thank you Mr
chairman and one more
clarification for any amendments
that are proposed how much time
do we have for anybody in
opposition to say something.
So the medicine that answer that
we always been on how many.
Amendments or both of students
come in so I I can't answer that
one up front center off of the
district gauge that is it comes
I don't know where we're gonna
see and my my job is to be
watching the clock at the two
hours to find a way to do more
business and at times of but
with twenty minutes I think you
have more than adequate time to
present your bill's going to and
and allow time for rebuttal you
wish to do so okay no I
appreciate that Mr chairman that
we the audience gets to hear
also I'm what are processes that
we're operating under.
so I thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee I know
some of us have heard the
presentation before because some
of us do sit on Senate rules and
we just heard this bill in
Senator Ivey Soto committee just
a few days ago.
I'm.
Mr chairman Senate bill two
Delineates and proposes for us
for our consideration at the
redistricting I was based on the
twenty twenty federal census.
you know over the past several
months both Senate Democrats and
I know and I'm very sure Senate
Republicans have participated
and engaged in a citizens
redistricting committee process
you Mr chairman members of the
committee including listening to
public comment committee members
deliberations reviewing many of
the map concepts provided in the
process and analyzing the
committee's work evaluations and
the bill that we have in front
of us today contains much of the
work provided to us by the CRC.
And that in the last committee
Mr chairman members of the
committee it was of course I
mentioned that it's about sixty
eight percent of what the CRC
has in their maps and and we
have used that Mr chairman as
the basis of what we have here
in front of us.
So I would like to take this
time to say thank you very much
to those members of the citizens
redistricting committee for
their work and dedication I know
when I understand what they went
through many of us participated
ten years ago and I served as
the chair of the state of the
legislative co chair of the
legislative redistricting
committee my counterpart in the
house was state representative
Mary Helen Garcia.
And what we are of what's in
front of us also Mr Chairman
reflects the diversity of our
state it fully recognizes the
needs of our native American
communities and protects the
many communities of interest
within our our borders.
At the bill in front of us Mr
chairman adopt the consensus map
that was approved by the pueblos
C. Gadhia and Mescalero Apaches
and the Navajo Nation.
It is important to note that the
deviations from the ideal
population in the consensus plan
establish the maximum and
minimum deviations for the other
Senate districts in the state
which is approximately six point
nine percent as a negative and
three point one percent in the
positive and Mr chairman members
of the committee I'll briefly
review the key points the Senate
bill two and in a few minutes
what are like to do is I didn't
Senate rules committee is allow
are native American
Representative I to say a few
words about the concept that we
have incorporated into the map
this in front of us so I could
Mr chairman.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Casey
dumont I am attorney from the
public one as well as the co
chair of the all India Public
Council ad hoc redistricting
committee it's a pleasure to be
here with you this morning.
I came to deliver the message on
the importance
As in
These numbers work so well the
deviations as close to zero.
But they were split apart
committees of interest break
apart.
The importance of sitting down
with Navajo Nation leadership
pueblo governors and he can be
a fascination with something
beautiful to see because in that
In part of our map that we
presented to the north with for
the Senator thirty.
We renounce the district made a
continuous brought in Lansing
the public with that we're no
longer in Senate district thirty
and resource stated them with
the public methadone thirty.
One of the very important
aspects of ten years ago.
Apple this from the Senate
If American plant in the multi
trouble plaintiff's request
regarding maintaining native
American communities of interest
provides for fair and effective
representation of the citizens
of New Mexico
Which is consistent with both
the federal policy of respecting
tribal self determination.
And the New Mexico
This is a fundamental component
to the court years ago.
Was the knowledge.
I will go New Mexico
dissipation.
For many of us here in this on.
Senator our duty is to process
begin in nineteen forty eight.
When begin to heal from the
Senate.
The state of New Mexico fifteen
the right to.
This
call was concerned what we're.
Similar
tribes of those nations.
Great state answered the call of
the disk.
Working hard to.
Since
that is.
Is the importance of self
determination of communities of
interest in this process that
cannot be ignored and that is
what's reflected Senate Bill to
thank you.
Good morning Mr chair committee
members my name is Keegan king
and co chair along with Casey do
much of the APC G. redistricting
committee we stand in support of
SB two **** we support the
northwest quadrant plan the
consensus plan being part of
Senate Bill to as is today we
are honored to have governors
from our sovereign public
nations here with us in the room
as well as representation from
the Navajo Nation I believe on
the call representation from
hickory Apache nation
this case you mentioned over the
past eight months we've worked
with all of the tribes in our
state to get agreement on one
plan
governor Toledo here from the
public payments can speak to
that governor co we me from
public una can speak about
Senate district thirty in the
reason why it is the way it is
and and during that process it
was really an iterative process
the pueblos have their plan
initially the Navajo Nation had
their plan really this consensus
map takes the best thinking of
all of our tribal nations and
puts it into one
Uniformed plan moving forward in
the middle Rio Grande we've
attempted to keep
those communities of interest
together for their wishes in the
south in Senate district thirty
soon the Act Camilla gonna slow
to have opted to build up Senate
district thirty as an influence
district at thirty four point
five five percent.
The pueblos tribes and nations
continue to support this map and
would oppose any amendments to
it moving forward we thank you
Mr chair committee members for
your time today and I appreciate
this.
I thank you very much Mr
chairman and thank you
gentleman.
I'm just for a quick reiteration
of what we're looking at Mr
chairman
Going to the northeast part of
this of the Matt it's in front
of us you'll see that you
Harding and curry county.
These counties are largely
agricultural and their in are
populated with many ranchers and
farmers as well as home to
cannon Air Force base the status
quo these counties
Representative
are maintained with little
change.
As we continue to go
south of thank you help for the
doctor to be seen better.
well as we look I'm sorry to the
we'll go back up north I
apologize.
If we look into kind of the
central northern part Mr
chairman members of the
committee population declines in
district eight Representative by
Senator Campos has proved to be
challenging by bringing the
district within the deviation
range required other education
districts to lose population and
resulted in the district
representing all of the city of
Las Vegas as well as parts that
were in district six
Representative
by again be existing Senator I
agree to see Garcia public
hearings it became abundantly
clear from public comments as we
go further now looking to Senate
district thirty nine.
It was more G. R. representing
the northern areas of New Mexico
and at the seven most County was
largely not within a community
of interest which was Lincoln
County
so as you see on the map Mr
chairman members of the
committee Lincoln County is no
longer part of Senate district
thirty nine and of course this
was represented in the maps of
the State are seated
the concept maps that they did
vote on.
so at this point if we look
again in the northwest quadrant
which we've just had a review of
this map currently in front of
us does incorporate the native
American consensus map.
So as we go further south from
there Mr chairman members are.
District
twenty six thirty five is now
being made whole there's changes
within Senate district thirty
five and twenty eight due to the
fact that a population concerns
also but looking for communities
of interest the Senate twenty
eight and thirty five is
essentially flipped.
Senator twenty eight now
encompasses
Sierra County Hidalgo Luna
because more of a community of
interest and then Senate
district thirty five has more
the rural parts which
encompasses catching County for
Sierra County alright and then
also Sapporo more of the
ranchers and and so many other
communities of interest in there
also.
And when we look at at the Los
crucis area Mr chairman those
particular communities again
have a community of interest as
you see along the corridor but
specifically in Senate district
thirty eight there is a request
from Misia to be kept whole so
we have honored it in this map
for Missy it is no longer split
as it had been previously.
Senate district thirty one now
does take into of course not
that that just that as well as
son and park it also now
includes the majority of shop
around.
And you will notice of course if
In southeastern Mexico we were
not totally able to include
chaparral in Senate district
thirty one but the majority of
it is.
Senate district thirty seven of
course has a large population so
again we had to redistribute
the population amongst those
districts and some of the
population of course was pushed
north into
Senate district thirty.
See my own chairman.
I think that was going to Senate
district
What is that one thirty five I
think okay.
And when we go to the southeast
part of the state Mr chairman
again there is a population
growth and much of the south
eastern part of the state does
reflect again what was proposed
in the Senate to see Arsene apps
we no longer have a pairing of
senators who are in that
district and in those districts
so
again we try to work on that
making sure the populations met
the deviation range again as we
have been honoring the native
American concept maps of
negative six point nine two
positive three point one and
again that's in statute as to
how we have a ten percent range
of which to work with in regards
to population in the state of
New Mexico Mr chairman if we
could just take a quick peek at
the Albuquerque area Bernalillo
county.
there are some changes that were
made within this this area.
population because of
Senate district and forty
different correct.
I have an overabundance of
membership the population.
So what has happened on this map
the Senate district twelve was
removed from downtown
Albuquerque and moved up to that
northwest quadrant and that is
where we're able to move some
population around and do a
better fit as to population
growth was exceeding the numbers
in that area.
And you will see Mr Chairman
members of the committee there
are some changes that did happen
with regards to the Bernalillo
county metro area
you have a communities of
interest between Senate district
ten and thirteen now that doing
compass of the north valleys
Senate district twenty three
did still have to find a bit of
population and still reflects a
good part of what it currently
has in existence today.
on the far west side of course
you can find it looks huge but
if you look at to the population
there's not much out there other
than Jack rabbits communities
and other animals maybe some
house to.
the south valley area south of
central Mr chairman members of
the committee there was not much
change other than Senate
district fourteen because of a
couple of precincts that removed
due to the native American
consensus map now goes over into
mesa del sol.
I'm looking for population if
you go after to Senate district
sixteen that particular Senate
district map took some of the
downtown area University of New
Mexico and that was previously
in Senate district twelve so we
try to do make sure I've
coverage for those populations
Senate district seventeen of
reflects pretty much of what
you'll see in the C. army C.
maps where there is a request at
the west mesa high school in
Albuquerque which I was present
at requested it of the
international district B.
capital so what we have done
that at this point in the map.
And as you can see further rap
again trying to accommodate for
changes that were made with the
removal of Senate district
twelve we have some movement in
the also in the northeast
heights.
Mr chairman I think that this is
a quick overview of the match at
the front of us.
And I'll stand for questions.
Very good seventeen minutes
thank you for using your lot of
time.
All for that reviews it
otherwise.
The
See what would normally be they
get to go out to the audience is
here to support opposition on
this job but I have advised in
advance of there's a propose
substantive.
Annalise's objection from the
committee.
I'd like to at least have the
substitute considered by the
committee before we go to the
public support opposition so
that those in support or
opposition can address both
Senator Lopez is bill in any
proposed substitute or
substitutes so we don't go back
to the audience the second time
again one point a substitute and
get the same time give everyone
a fair opportunity to address
all of.
A number of different
alternatives so at this time Mr
chairman would you consider at
least in light of that at least
asking for those in the audience
who are in support of the bill
as it stands just to stand.
That could be beneficial.
Senator bills ever everyone who
wishes to support either this
map or any alternatives or
opposing the move will all get
opportunities I have to go I
think it'll be clear to do it
this way let's give it a shot
and we'll see how we do
but but I do think that anyone
who do does wish to speak should
have the opportunity to address
both this building any
substitutes at that time.
And I think the best way to do
that is for us to to address any
such substance of this time and
as I said I've I've been advises
answer maybe one or more
substance of this time the the
chair will pay any.
The proposed substitutes for
discussion purposes could be
moved to the committee for
discussion Mr chairman I was
just and notified that is the
web up I was just notified that
it was down it just came back up
to okay.
We're having internet problems
Mr chairman.
Okay.
I'm aware and I appreciate you
letting us interview if you're
gonna we have a problem anyone
here's your problem.
Thank you all right sure this
time will be entertained and the
proposed substitute the
substitute for Senate bill.
Senator.
This.
Mr Chairman.
just for the public listing
online.
if they go to the Senate bill
two landing page on the.
Website.
I think any proposals to our
list of there's one so that the
public can can see it from home
as well.
In the in the process on maybe
RAC by members agree by get my
attention as it does anyone else
have a proposed subs and other
than Senators.
There being no Senator Stewart.
Sure we recognize you for ten
minutes to discuss the proposal.
I thank you Mr chairman and.
I must first say that this
substitute is a collaboration
among many people.
In the Senate.
We try very hard to be
collaborative and to work as an
entire body I'm not not just one
party and so I was approached by
the minority party with ideas
and in addition we continue.
To want to not have pairings in
these matters.
So these changes are proposals
that do three different things.
First of all in the southeastern
part of the state the maps that
we offered all were offered very
late and the minority party
didn't really have a chance to
have the state and that southern
part and so of the changes in
this map respect reflect them
working together.
Mr Chairman could somebody bring
me a glass of water on the
water.
I'm open to.
Thank you so those are those
changes are between forty one
and forty two thank you thirty
four and thirty two and thirty
four and thirty three.
so
I am not going to go into detail
with those
they certainly are in line with
our redistricting processes
trying to keep more communities
of interest together they can
describe this better than I but
I guess I'm the one up here so
it was a community interest more
than anything that made these
changes between these few
districts in addition the map
that we started with
which was essentially C. R. C.
C. one I believe had paired
senators and forty one of forty
two.
Between eight and forty one of
forty two and in thirty three
and thirty four.
so we attempted to unpaired them
without their input and after
their input
those to the changes in the
southeastern part of the state.
In addition.
In
district thirty and twenty nine
we have attempted to keep the
wonderful new native American
influence district impact of but
to make some changes at the very
edge well we're Senator Paypen
Senator Sanchez work pair.
and in doing that it required us
to make a few changes I think
one of them can really be
appreciated not all of act from
was in thirty so that changes
that this makes just adds a
little land to the south of that
so that we cover all of act from
that remains a strong native
American influence district with
thirty four point one five
percent native American.
And finally Mr Chairman in the
north west corner of the state
We of course started with the
really amazing consensus math
learning even more.
Tribal nations we have the
majority of that we've made a
few changes between three and
four.
So with the changes we've made
Senator moon yo's.
Would be.
Representing forty percent down
etcetera etcetera.
The representative six.
We have made some changes so
that
chapter houses or not split
between the three and four.
At the chapter house lines don't
follow precinct so sometimes
that's difficult to do so we
were what.
At.
So with these changes.
with regard to the native
American consensus now that was
submitted to us district one.
There changes a hundred percent
in this.
A district to of the native
American consensus now is a
hundred percent.
District three is seventy nine
point five percent tax.
This
four is eighty two percent of
that consensus that.
District twenty two is a hundred
percent of the men and district
thirty is eighty seven point
seven percent.
What this map really does is
have.
Three solid native American
history.
District three seventy two
percent native American.
District four is six percent
native American.
The district
district one and district thirty
both over.
Thirty four percent native
American influence districts
so we have we've tried very hard
to maintain the majority of the
right consensus map but deal
with issues of pairing and deal
with issues of
drastic changes to a few of our
seats so.
We think we think we have try to
bring people together on this as
I said before this represents a
different groups trying to come
together to maintain our the
solid native American districts
but not to pair up encompass at
this point in time and with that
I will stand for questions or
for whatever process you do want
Mr Chairman thank you Senator
Stewart.
My intention is to do a number
of things but before I do that
let me re announced the
procedures that have been
adopted for this committee
during the special session they
were published in advance of
twenty four hours before the
meeting those procedures allowed
anyone in the public to assure
their comments would be before
the committee by written email
and we find a way.
In those procedures for anyone
to email anything so which we
have a record allow it to be
created by email all announced
through throughout my last
report there was no email
received for any written
comments so we'll be relying
entirely on all comments for
public input today.
Before the chair will take any
motions on either Senate bill
two or the proposed committee
substitute percent bill to I'm
gonna go to public comment for
taking of the motion.
And so at this time what I
propose propose to do is to have
ten minutes of support on Senate
bill two as it exists.
Ten minutes of any support for
the committee substitute for
Senate bill two followed by ten
minutes of opposition to Senate
bill two and ten minutes of
opposition to the committee
substitute.
Given the number of people that
may wish to address or speak on
these issues all have to do the
best I can to divide the amount
of time on each of those
sub category so the first the
first process will be here those
in support of Senate bill two.
Alright from the committee
substitute for so can I see a
show of hands of those in the
room here to speak in support of
Senate bill two.
All right.
I'm seeing about ten people that
means each one of you will have
a minute if you would please be
prepared what I'll do is I'll
start on what is your left side
of the room the committee's
right side Senator Lopez Mr
Chairman do I get to make a
statement whether I support or
do not the amendment.
Of your FIR is a.
Not.
We we are this on going to
public comment on that.
Senator Lopez are then I'm I'm
not gonna have a presentation
but if you I'm gonna ask you the
question we always ask which is
the do you support or oppose
present.
Mr chairman that's what I'm
asking questions to make sure as
the sponsor of the original bill
that I still get the same
whether I'm in support.
So Mr chairman respectfully I do
not support this amendment
and if there the amendment that
we have in front of us Mr
chairman
essentially denies the native
American consensus plan and will
have a possible effect on many
other relationships I firmly
believe.
I know that we do have others
who are here that will state
that I do want to say that I am
in opposition thank you all
right so we're going to see.
Word of Senate bill two and as I
said I saw about a ten
individuals to do that and
perhaps allow for any time that
we might have for people that
are during remote we will look
for that opportunity as well to
so if those who wish to speak in
support the beauty come forward
and stand behind the presenting
to us I mean just look for two
or three people ahead of you so
when you see two or three people
in the space please just get
lined up so we can move more
quickly and all this stuff for
you in a minute so please be
aware that.
Please identify yourself it's
not necessary to sit down with I
don't know that is in the state
for the microphone of thinking
you can use the handheld
microphones are.
Good afternoon I will chair and
respected.
Members of the committee.
I'm gonna quit from the level of
a good today the public gonna
testifies in support of the
tribal consensus not contained
in Senate bill two that reflects
the collective support of the
public stations Karia pagination
and I will nation the public
good work diligently alongside
our sister pueblo tribes and
nations to create redistricting
maps that provide native
American with the opportunity to
let candidates of our choice.
Senate bill to honor Civil
Rights Act tribal self
determination and the
constitutional mandate of one
person one vote.
Our tribal consensus Matt leave
no doubt about where our tribal
nations want to be within the
legislation legislative
districts each district in the
northwest quadrant of the state
has been wait discussed in that
it by our leadership to protect
our people's right to vote and
have a meaningful impact on the
political process Senate bill
two maintains our come
committees communities of
interest Senate district thirty
would soon be pueblo Act mope
will blow this little Pueblo and
the Navajo Nation for which we
share common interests history
and revenues for lance.
As the influence district our
mission provision for the Senate
district thirty is to capitalize
on the opportunity to elect the
candidate who reflects my
people's collective values and
shared experience.
Redistricting affects us for the
next ten years and because of
the implications of what is
decided during the special
session we understand.
We understood months ago that we
must prepare and work towards
our tribal consensus not.
Over I'm gonna have the two of
them started the.
On page which everyone could
understand how.
much I regret as the chair
having to cut anyone off to our
others to speak on to do so.
Thank you.
Others.
Work.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
purchase I don't I'm the first
to ten a governor for the public
back then.
I'm here to express our strong
support for SB two in the map
containing the legislation and
oppose any effort to amend the
bill and changed boundaries of
Senate districts.
We ask this because the public
has contributed greatly over the
past eight months to the
configuration of the map in the
northwest quadrant leadership
not only Act movement others
often tribal governments spent
countless hours meeting with
awful council governor's
revision Committee and appeared
before the citizens
redistricting committee to
express our wishes and
preferences especially with
regard to Senate district thirty
where my problem lies.
In the end after like we just
like the discussion and careful
deliberations all the pueblos
the Navajo Nation at the hickory
pagination United behind the
tribal because census Senate map
contained in Senate bill two.
Any changes at this time will
undermine the efforts and wishes
of New Mexico sovereign tribal
governments.
Lastly the map contained in
Senate bill two reflects highly
value concept of self
determination the concept deeply
embedded in the heart of tribal
sovereignty.
Therefore Mr chairman I ask the
committee to support SB two
without amendments get the bills
do pass thank you Sir the
governor.
Other support.
Yeah.
Senator.
One of the Sherman on was tender
to.
Committee my name is young just
call.
No date New Mexico.
On the former renewable industry
because of for twenty years
hello to you know what school
portal shaking president.
And for Wingate high school for
Wingate and then cumulative
boarding school of in the
president and then also opened
in they can accomplish can you
call the school board secretary.
And only some.
on the vin number in.
And open discussion on one and
then also on page with you miss
Army National Guard to and I got
this on what this chart with a
ten.
On top you can two questions
that will thank you Mr verse
then one eight.
And I've talked to most people I
do need and we want a senator.
He can represent.
Right now on the Senator to is
representing us I don't.
To put this on gentle is
critically Senator no I respect
him for his it is way up there
and do for us to go to support
three all the time.
Additional no came and.
You sent to me by three have
always come over here and we had
to stick to table I Senator you
fifty fifty dollars
for which we what we'll have to
check immediate comes over and
then also he even come to HSD
close on the committee up there
you put on the legislation
engine I don't I don't I don't I
don't I don't I don't.
State and was in but you don't
have a lot of present is good
thank you know I support but the
only thing is that we don't want
to do that get that when you the
the change but you have to then
you have to put the thank and
you right on cue Smith right the
group I got to know what the
answer committee to support
noted areas and thank you I can
head again.
Mexico is only to say the
capitol take care because we had
to do this monster desimone
integral family and your
community thank you.
Service revenue.
Good morning good morning
Senator members of the committee
my name aren't the quality of
the tribal councilman the pueblo
of Zuni New Hampshire as well to
echo the same sentiments of
support and discussion often
Senate Bill to and all Senate
bill to reflect the pueblo sin
expressed interest when it comes
to incorporating or communities
of interest into the Senate
districts and like I said the
fuel to build on the foundation
that complies with the voting
rights act in the traditional
redistricting principles we
asked the New Mexico state
legislature to respect our right
to self determination in under
our ability to decide what is
best for people.
Conclusion the problem student
supports Senate bill to install
the disconnect is in the
amendments to Senate bill two
that have not been vetted by our
tribal nations thank you very
much.
Other supporters.
Good morning chair committee
members.
I'm Patty Williams I'm the
registered lobbyists for the
Navajo Nation council office of
the speaker and the Navajo
Nation has been involved heavily
in the development of the
consensus map that C. or C.
which is reflected in SB two and
we would accept nope amendments
to the northwest quadrant which
goes down as far as has just a
Senate district thirty the
Navajo Nation would not be
opposed to and hearings outside
of that quadrant but the way the
amendment is presented get the
affects two important
considerations that we're
heavily considered precinct by
precinct in the northwest and
the Navajo Nation cannot support
the amendment as it's before
this committee now thank you.
Good morning on a Rotarian
Committee to non members when a
missile governor drums or from
the public via.
In support with the Senate bill
two Senate bill two contains the
blessings of our respective
tribes and nations because it
represents.
Months of deliberations to help
us reach consensus respective
published tribes and nations
understand the importance of
obtaining a consensus in New
Mexico redistricting.
For many redistricting cycles
throughout history Arbor or
voice were often ignored from
this important.
Democratic process as a result
four people suffered extreme
voters discrimination and lack
access to representation which
champions the issue at the heart
O. for survival it was simply
easy to more people.
Those are the days we do not
want to go back to.
So our tribal nations have
undergo the daunting and time
consuming.
Task of bringing for tribal
consensus not that is reflected
in Senate bill two.
Senate bill two in as it has
been introduced presents the
best remedy under the voting
rights act and helps.
To his historic wrongs of voting
a border discriminate
discrimination Senate bill to
promote the best approach to
increase in native American
participation in the political
process we urge you to support
Senate bill two with no
amendments thank you for the
public the.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Khan right she no and I am
the restaurant lobbyist for
PTA's Pablo.
Anton's published in support of
Senate bill two the government
without any changes on the also
wanted me to express to.
to honor the wishes and the
preferences of the other tribal
sovereign governments here in
the state they would also acts
on the to understand and
appreciate them all the time.
Work and effort.
That went into the development
of this tribal consensus map.
They would also ask that you use
your own experiences
your participation in respective
caucuses to arrive at a
consensus on can only imagine
the challenge of bringing
together twenty two sovereign
governments and having them
arrive at a consensus and
agreement it was quite
challenging and required careful
deliberation and meaningful
discussion in order for them to
arrive at an agreement on a map
so with that Mr chairman I ask
in earnest Committee two of
support Senate bill two without
amendments thank you.
The normal chairman committee
members I'm gonna make a little
junior famous focal.
Since July and the ship has been
engaged in redistricting process
we have worked hard to achieve a
tribal Cincinnati among the
problems is and the Navajo
Nation.
The creation of our tribal
consensus was guided by the can
you just using constables
established with the native
American redistricting.
New Mexico courts have
recognized the tribal input and
redistricting.
It's vital to maintaining
essential committees of New
Orleans.
Tribal nations we are in the
best position to inform this
body on the community's interest
and the destruction that will
provide native Americans with
the best opportunity to elect a
candidate of our choice.
And remedy the historic border
discrimination.
Four people.
At the door.
So I would like to.
Ask all of you to support Senate
Bill.
To.
Thank you honorable chairman.
We will.
Other support.
Thank you senator and members
the committee on start up this
morning and hello everybody my
name's Austin we ask in the
political Representative of I
want to start off by thanking
you for providing only sixty
seconds for all these folks who
showed up at eleven AM on a
Sunday tribal leaders who were
elected the only speak for sixty
seconds on what will ultimately
affect their communities for the
next ten years for a committee
some of which was recommended at
ten AM this morning with our
consultation
we're very proud of these bills
and I was happy to stand in
support of this bill in Senate
rules because of the eight
months of work that went into it
and the extensive tribal
collaboration and consultation
that happened to get to those
bills and and that unity which
is truly historic and and for
that reason we are happy to
stand in support of Senate bill
two without amendments and
without with the consultation of
tribal communities.
Good morning Mr chair vice chair
members of the committee I'm
Eisaku Sato Saudi and the
current chair the native
American democratic caucus
representing all of our tribal
communities within the state of
New Mexico today we stand in
support of SB two up without
amendment the eleventh hour past
that we see today without
consultation of our native
American tribes is not only a
travesty.
But it's it's a direct violation
of much of the work that has
been done not for just today in
the last couple of months but
for decades.
Education you might talked about
earlier this is a struggle is
been ongoing for over seventy
years and when we need gate our
native American voices in our
communities and those of our
elected tribal leaders we do
disservice to those communities.
Our community as as a leading
proponent for democratic values
amongst our our tribal
communities stand in full
opposition of any amendment that
would diminish those folks and
diminish communities of interest
such as senator senators
communities that will be
adversely affected by any
amendment that was added today.
I think as we look at where we
go and how we progress we need
to be in a collaborative effort
and ensure that tribal
consultation is always added
before members of this body
members of the house and even
the executive decide what is
best for tribal regions so today
we stand in support of SB two
without any amendments thank you
so much.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and honorable members of the
committee on Regis Pecos a
former governor of Mexico to do
in a member of the all public
council of governors committee.
I just simply want to reflect on
the long history of the
intentional enactment of
policies and laws that have
prohibited the speaking of our
negligence in our schools the
prohibition of the free exercise
of religion the laws and policy
disconnecting us from our
homelands the dismantling of our
families by matter of federal
law the dismantling of our
communities in various ways and
forms and I just want to say
that in the last one hundred and
fifty years of that kind of
actions of laws and policies in
acted deliberately the United
Nations referred to those as the
worst crimes against humanity
but I want to say that in my
thirty plus years in service to
the state I am grateful to say
thank you to express my
appreciation that the
dismantling of the worst project
actions of government you have
been a part of this mentally and
building a whole new Fundacion
and free more and at the heart
of that kind of framework as a
government to government
principles you've act.
Act into law you have provided
consultation as part of the
statutory framework and that.
Do it the the intervention of
Congress and the courts have
created opportunities for native
people to serve in this body
that have impacted with your
support building a new
foundation and framework that is
the example of the United States
part of the state can do with
what you all have done
collecting collectively and I
just want to express my
appreciation and hope that your
support without amendments of
Senate bill two that is the
consensus bill that is boric
monumental all that we see this
kind of action here today thank
you Mr.
Hi Mr chair members of the
committee my name is muddy ana
and I just and I'm here on
behalf of the people's Matt
coalition we stand in strong
support of SB two as it
currently stands as it honors
the tribal oil and tribal
sovereignty at those you've
heard today thank you so much
you.
Senator maybe just distributed
or expanding that'll probably
conclude our presentation rooms
work.
Good morning chair committee
members I'm off to Chavis a
member of the denomination and
you will Pueblo in the eighty of
enemy to vote I support the
tribal consensus plans currently
contained in Senate bill two as
a member of the native
redistricting coalition and all
of the council of governors
adhoc redistricting committee we
have worked with tribal leaders
since June to produce a set of
maps for New Mexico and this
redistricting process we met
with each individual tribal
sovereign nation some over
governed dozen times and often
and regional tribal groups to
achieve consensus to improve and
maintain the voting strength
with native American regarding
districts the tribal consensus
maps are consistent with New
Mexico law traditional
principles of redistricting and
voting rights act and a set of
principles of redistricting that
were established by in twenty
eleven by the native
redistricting our workgroup key
to those principles of
redistricting established
include tribal self
determination ensuring the
doctrine of self determination a
particular the tribe's tribal
communities are in the best
position to determine what is
best for their own communities
which were up held in litigation
following the twenty eleven
redistricting process and just
been me of the hill Jr rules Mr
chair committee members the
courts have recognized the
tribal input is in redistricting
is vital to maintain essential
communities of interest
maintaining these points were
made during the many of these
points were made during this
year C. process the time of of
but with meaningful engagement
of all twenty three tribal
nations to make these decisions
common cause an American votes
also stand in support.
That that that's a code.
So we take the packet that body
hello good morning my name is
Kelly Jake thank you committee
and honorable chairman for
learning time to speak today.
I am a member of the need to
redistricting pollution and I am
also someone who has grown up.
His life was shaped by the
voting in elections I grew up
with some of my friends and
relatives quite frankly back
here as children witnessed the
fight for the petroglyph
national monument
to be quite Frank the hurt that
I feel this morning that the
committee would try to push
something so.
Blatantly disrespectful to
tribal nations is the same hurt
that I felt at that fight.
And I just messed urged you all
to pass.
Send it to you as it stands in
its original form thank you do.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Susan Markham I'm the chair
of the Rio Grande chapter of the
Sierra Club this will be short
we stand in support of SB two
unamended and in opposition to
substitute discussed because the
flies in the face of consensus
difficult to.
The number.
Quality.
Close to thirty five forty
minutes on the video.
Let me ask the committees of
support to the least recognize
and do we have any other elected
officials.
Your who have not.
Elected officials.
Yes.
We do we do with with big Sir.
Good morning and thank you.
Michigan.
Adam is Roger Montoya I am
elected as a state house
representative in district
forty.
I am I full by the fact that New
Mexico.
Has taken a stance point to
listen to the citizens
redistricting committee giving
finally justice to native
American vote.
The nation is watching.
We have a moment here to make a
vote.
To retain I do not support any
amendments to Senate bill two.
I think our vote matters today.
Dig deep into your conscious as
you think about what we're
doing.
And how far we've come how
prideful I am as a new member of
the body.
To make history.
In our state and send a message
to the nation in the world thank
you Representative.
The food by thanking all of the
governors lieutenant governors
and are there.
Stephen honorable
representatives we have here
today I'm I'm humbled as the
chair of lonely Senator chair to
have governors of other nations
the pueblos here today thank you
for that.
All right in the time being
about twelve thirty we have a
number of people on the internet
we've made arrangements to
recognize some of these
individuals let me first of all
the turn to the room and I see a
show of hands of those who wish
to speak in opposition and
because we've already heard
is actually a combination of
opposition and support for both
the committee substitute and
Senate bill two I've breaking
down the role that I started
earlier because it it fell apart
on me so which is perfectly okay
so at this time we'll hear
opposition.
to Senate bill two or to the
committee substitute five people
who have not yet spoken.
And we'll we'll entertain that
at this time so if you wish to
do so and I've not yet spoken
please come forward again please
keep two or three people in line
and will recognize each one of
you all for a minute and a half.
Hello good morning tenable
Czerny
Apple Senators and tribal
leaders I wanted to be here
today I do want to speak in
opposition of the
the amendment I just feel like
we have a democracy to protect
and so it's extremely helpful to
make sure that we are
transparent as best we can.
Thanks Jeff Clark director
interview I'm terribly sorry to
do so would you give us your
name again please hi my name is
Laurie we us and connect comment
steam in the problem.
And it's just important to make
sure we are transparent as we
make the shift because these
consensus bill
That making has been a whole
process for the tribes and we
really want to can tentative
process of trying to protect our
democracy by making sure things
are transparent by making she
sure things are equitable and we
believe that Senate bill this
ammendment I guess is is not in
that
spirit and therefore we ask that
you oppose that amendment to
Senate bill two and leave it at
that is.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
members of the committee.
I to stand speaking opposition
of the amendments one of the
things that's very adamant
within the.
Okay my name is Casey dumont I
am from the public will not as
well as a co chair of the ABC G.
at this disturbing Committee and
one of the things that's very
important in this process is the
concept of self determination
that very fundamental principle
embedded not only of federal law
reflected in state law.
That is something critical to
this redistricting process
because it informs this body all
of those communities of interest
it gives deference to our
communities we know what's best
for committees to identify those
areas which are significantly
reflected in our maps.
One of the things that was.
Very
that comes to mind is ten years
ago during the litigation.
Also examining Senator out of
there was the model for.
And senator Robert there.
Let me with total arrogance as.
I know it's better for the both
of us in the governor back among
self.
That is what we see in this
alternative not.
We see claims being made for
what's better and best interest
maximize the what the governor
and leadership of acting as
already stated within consenus
map thank you thank you thank
you.
All right others who have not
yet spoken please.
We're not going to go back and
have repeated the speakers.
Mr chair Keegan king co chair of
the APC G. redistricting
committee we stand in opposition
to this amendment as Mr Casey do
dimension Pueblo that much been
very clear about what boundary
should look like for their
district percent district thirty
SUNY Act malignant etcetera have
opted to
you move into Senate district
thirty eight have that been
influenced District thank you.
Very much all right we'll go
next to those on the internet
recognize of those individuals.
yes I'm sorry yes.
Would you introduce yourself
please.
What the hell I.
Thank my name is Lee to pi sinus
also Washington multiple medical
equipment I'm from the public
us and the community however I
have lived for twenty thirty
years in Rio Rancho Santa Fe
County.
I am also part just you can see
a member of the native American
redistricting coalition I am so
in support of
SB two as amended to make not
that it's a part of.
Mimi Stewart spell.
Actually presented it we've
worked very hard to reach
consensus among all of the
tribes and I hope you will
respect that.
Thank you.
I feel I.
Good morning
members of the committee my name
is amber Currie and I am from
the public in a I reside in
Albuquerque New Mexico I am the
executive director of the all
public council of governors and
I'm honored to be with you today
and to be here with our
committee members the ad hoc
redistricting committee of the
all public council of governors
has undertaken the monumental
task of working of redistricting
for several months now and
during that period of time we
reflected very deeply on what's
important to redistricting for
our communities and we.
Did a very deep dive into
communities of interest and have
found profound meaning to that
and have.
Really done our best to keep.
Not only are communities at the
heart of redistricting and the
fundamental structures and
infrastructures of democracy but
to also think of all of the
citizens of New Mexico as we're
doing this and to think of of
the needs of of all New Mexicans
and and.
Apps to create a better future
for the next ten years and so
it's been my honor and pleasure
to be part of this of work for
for several months now but I do
stand in opposition to the
amendments we've worked
diligently to have collaboration
among tribes nations and
published in other communities
and so I thank you for your
time.
What's the whole point.
What's called half of trump's.
Good good morning everybody my
name is Sophie the screen up I'm
from the provost of Cochiti
insightfully B. also where many
other hats and on also serve on
the readable one and that New
Mexico environmental improvement
board as well that before this
committee and some of the the
approval to sit on the on that
board and I appreciate this
opportunity and your recognition
chairman all of our tribal
leadership that's here today.
It's so important as Mr to my
explained earlier.
That we listen to our tribal
leaders.
As a tribal member.
I have to take their leadership
to hard.
Not just to be a check box.
And the process but to
wholeheartedly respect.
They're inside your guidance and
their leadership.
Because most positions whether
elected much like everyone on
this committee but also pointed.
There in those positions to
speak for the people to speak
for all of us for the lan what
are the Erin environment.
And it's so important and this
committee has an opportunity to
respect that position and that
voice.
By listening to our tribal
leaders for me to see all the
tribal leaders here today is
what gave me the strength to
stand up here to address you
this morning so please I propose
the amendment please support the
original map as proposed thank
you.
Good afternoon chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Charlotte little I can hear
from the public a sampling
pandemic.
I come to register my of his
opposition to Senate to add to
the Senate committee substitute
for.
Senate bill two.
I also propose and greatly take
offense at the disrespect that
has been shown to tribal
sovereignty to the leadership
that has been here presenting to
you as well.
I commend the sponsors of Senate
bill two I also commend the
house for honoring tribal
sovereignty and tribal
leadership.
Through the consultation that
has taken place I respectfully
request that you oppose the
amendment to Senate bill two
thank you.
before I I would consider you
speaking a second time I have to
go to people who have not spoken
yes or so we do allow people who
have not yet spoken.
Thank you chair members the
committee my name is just a lot
of time with the American those
New Mexico we stand with our
needed brothers and sisters and
community and opposing the
amendment and supporting that
original map as drawn thank you.
This time we'll go to
individuals.
Our online and we wish we
recognize each of them we
recognize up to a minute
starting with the letter Corman
followed by press and sciences
and then heather Ferguson there
are others but in that order
first Mr Gorman.
and then the presence Sanchez
nine heather Ferguson.
Department.
To
And executive director for.
It's commission.
Office has been.
Government to Representative
Singh
is affected.
As with the customer District
and.
Mission opposes the steps to.
It affects.
And.
First and foremost mission made
every effort to.
The president is in constant
which level six.
Successful County the subject
to.
Houston.
By our community of interests
because it's it's on local
governments yes it's.
And also.
It's wrong chapter.
Chapters chapter is comprised.
Thanks sixty
six that the proposals it's the
chapter and a half second food
truck truck tractor.
Located in nineteen fifty five
it is split thank you very much.
A press incentives for up to one
minute recognize.
The members of the committee my
name is Preston Sanchez.
New Mexico.
It's to protect the ants needs
to collective rights of New
Mexico's indigenous people that
as you claim to self
determination the right the
right to have access to credit
process at this time Mr Chairman
closes the proposed amendments
to Senate.
Because I respect the sovereign
rights of tribal tribal
communities to determine what is
best for their own community.
Consensus of ten.
The path the nation's.
Strain on native American voters
it was not accounted communities
of interest that are most
important Mexico's tribal
communities.
Many others just does not adhere
to the voting rights act of
nineteen sixty the court's
findings from the twenty eleven
redistricting litigation and so.
Is tremendous and we support SB
two as originally drafted thank
you thank you heather Ferguson
one minute.
We have heather Ferguson.
Is this back.
Members of the committee had a
focus that can director of
common cause New Mexico.
Strong support of native
American communities and pass a
lot of the voices expressed me
original form of SB two.
Americans that approximately
twelve percent of the total
state population both
significant role in our national
and state and local elections.
You just mentioned a prototype
for mechanize the tribal input
in redistricting is vital to
They do make a difference in the
lives of native American working
families
with their communities and
support the needs of the
committee maintains about this
from the native American
consensus mapping SB two to
ensure that you protect the
communities of interest thank
you to and next have the
following three individuals and
I have a long list the gross
from there's a song treat Yoshi
I believe Robert Opeth aka
during the call around and more
pleasure in that order song
tree.
The she are Representative I
mispronounce your name.
Jack.
Mr chair committee my name is.
Of course that.
And the chair of the federal
county and the credit card.
Part of just the two.
And opposition.
I thank them.
I just wanted to share that are
eight percent.
And the and I ask that you are
that type of fabric and the
Revenue Department tractors
stop and I acted on the thank
you for your seven seconds thank
you very much Robert often are
good phone more marines program
with Lee Robert Apodaca for up
to one minute.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that will have to and
the Richard this for the.
He can definition
that the education.
Today.
This and this and support of
seven to.
Of the.
And this will.
Because the education center
with the programs and the.
Some
and also just to respect tribal
sovereignty
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
reading program I forgive me if
I pronounce your name correctly
or not S. K. O. W. R. E. am I
believe that writing all by
March force and Andrea Serrano.
Gallery.
She did instead was to actually
Matt.
Can cross out of his.
That legislation establishing
this year she will.
Guidelines.
In the fall of this year and she
had on a tribal consensus.
Interested protection and
further.
Extra consideration to
compensate for past
discrimination thank you thank
you Marc Fleisher followed by
Thank you atria Serrano then
followed by governor mark
Mitchell our pleasure for up to
one minute.
The committee.
Sure sure lobbyist for the same
Gallup and support that.
And we.
Your job expanding it.
Having Senator district for.
Into this yeah well.
We.
As expected the.
In the other tribal efforts.
We have one in Gallup and
district for our.
District that it'll.
Our.
K..
American I think you should talk
with Stephen will survive this
district from our districts
round.
Not found support because of its
Gallup.
Encouraging you to support which
would include
District for Gallup thank you
for your time you.
It Rio Serrano.
All of our governor Mitchell.
Adrian Serrano.
The committee under just the
executive director at that for
all of the tests that we heard
from tribal leaders.
The point of SB two aboriginal.
And the amendment on any
amendments that have that.
Complication
Of the native my district in
question and I have spent more.
It's time to spend with that
that tribal sovereignty and self
determination and.
Report of an amendment
to SB two and urged passage in
its original plan.
Governor mark Ritchie into one
minute.
Mr chairman members of the
community.
For the public to see okay it is
my statements will come to
ensure our ancestral lands of
two sixty pueblo.
The students that were.
Slide on a colleagues governors
attended governor's others the
public to suki stance in support
of this between without.
Thank you to governor Rauner.
Joseph Hernandez followed by
it's like Pamela the way.
Those of Hernandez you recognize
for up to one.
And thank you thank you Mr chair
members of the committee
that doesn't mean that you
should and should Representative
New Mexico
the end of the night is a move
budget recommendation for that
but
But.
Because the this ammendment.
It's the benefits of that movie
communities just to.
redistricting map is truly
represents our tribal nations
the
should consensus that all right.
Communities to to.
I I have spoken to this.
Revenues
and.
And he said.
The sixty two percent for each
district that we have a.
Representative last night I
spoke to my Representative.
And.
Need to share with you guys the
state legislature about me too
as.
Last night.
To the.
Thank you Mr what this does is
takes it away thank you thank
you hello we.
Followed by.
Thank you Mr.
Forward we.
I'm almost we.
Are you there.
The second time I called are you
there recognize of one minute.
Yes the.
The lawsuit.
I have a looks like the CM the
queen.
We have assumed if we.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak my name is Michael.
The county.
Mr chair the principle of tribal
self determination in the
protection of human rights.
Well established as legitimate
considerations when drawing
district lines that will last
for the next ten years.
Respect Mr chair members of the
committee the protection of
current incumbents is not.
Yes.
Yes as introduced thank you.
Of all of that she really.
And then Mario Atencio.
At issue.
Really.
Thank you for allowing me to
speak I am from Gallup I propose
the committee substitution plan
I believe that the tribal
consensus map should inspected
thank you thank you.
Mario Atencio.
Your recognized up to one
minute.
Thank you.
Committee members.
Concern around the.
Mr vice president
official capacity elected member
for my community Mr position to
start the.
To the consensus agreed upon.
Mission to achieve this goal
that you.
In the pebble shins.
To destroy stand opposed to your
then the two it that expertise.
Thank you.
Committee members I can report
that completes all of the
individuals we have signed in to
speak in advance the fifteen
members
you conferencing and then in
addition to those weavers.
Meeting it head and neck I
apologize that we also have
governor Act in the he was
unable to get here in time he is
here we can allow him his one
minute of time to make a
statement place.
Revenue.
And you have a.
Because of our time limitations
in our floor you need to the
committee are best suited to
keep your time to no more than
three absolutely Mr chairman
thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
provide a statement this morning
this afternoon
I am the governor of the problem
economic name is brown and I.
I'm here to.
Right right.
Google strong support of SB two.
And we propose we strongly
oppose the amendment that is
being proposed.
Our tribes or pueblos or tribal
nations have worked very hard.
To write a consensus now.
This map represents what we.
Tribal leaders.
As well as our experts.
Still is in the best interest of
our tribal communities and I
hope that you'll respect.
And I respectfully ask you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
To move at the speed to for.
Continue to knowledge.
Sovereignty over problems then
tribes.
And the great work that has been
put forward.
Communities towards for.
Thank you the governor.
For your Mary thank you and
again all of the representatives
from lows the tribe nation.
We're honored to have so many of
you governor's lieutenant
governors and other elected
officials here today.
I'm truly honored sure committee
your presence and Mr chairman I
apologize but we do have one of
our colleagues also if you've
got here just a bit late as we
were trying to get the word out
of anybody but you can also let
our colleague Senator pro say a
few words to.
Yes Representative mobile two
minutes.
You're calling all of our
senators and representatives
will be for a long time I will
be sure Mr chair thank you Mr
chair thank you committee
members I stand in strong
support of Senate bill two with
all the amendment this was a
herculean task where native
American communities to develop
this consensus they worked with
us let's on that thank you.
All right times about the five
minutes to one that gives us
about thirty minutes from
committee work.
So at this time the chair will
look for members would be
recognized or take motion.
So members of the committee
pleasure.
All.
Mr chair Senator.
Mr chairman I I wanna also say
that I really appreciate the
testimony today.
I think redistricting is one of
the hardest processes that we
all fell through as elected
officials.
So.
If we had more time we could
take another few months I think
we would come up with the same
amendment suggestions today and
we would all be happier about
that no because of COVID and
because of the delay of the
census bureau we don't have
anymore time so Mr chairman hi I
move that do not pass on Senate
bill two and eight to pass on
that committee substitute for
Senate bill two number of.
Seven three eight point one.
I might not have the right I
don't have bill actually itself
up.
Yes Representative seven three
eight point one.
Do not pass a bill.
Two thousand.
Seven three point one.
Session.
During the session.
This is just really are I mean.
What we're just doing our best
to amend to consider changes
that considering the changing
believe there's gonna be some
really this debate on the Senate
floor.
Thank we're doing a jet you know
things can floated like we
change this is what you do is
redistribute you get a proposal
you know you look at it you you
yes you to leverage and then you
should be made suggested changes
in the way this I'm having a
hard time with this because.
Yes support this bill and
certainly not respecting the if
you hope to lay an effort that
the native American Community in
the state for eight months I
mean I get that but at the same
time we're as a as a person
that's as a legislators
redistricting you know we we do
we have the obligation to to
discuss and to and to amend at
points and and I just I just
have a hotel on.
And supporting this substitute
and somehow disrespecting my
native American fencing brothers
and sisters in hopes that hurts
my feelings but it's just like
this is the redistricting in
west to sure whatever happens to
this committee said after this
committee if it does if it does
it's going to continue the
discussion is going to continue
and thank you all for weighing
in right I really appreciated
this is a process and we're
doing the best we can thank
goodness I live in New Mexico.
You do if you wish to read.
Thank you Mr chair yes.
I I agree with senator and you
know that this is.
This is that a hard issue and I
really appreciated.
All the testimony today
and and I agree that it is.
Really important to honor and
respect that the incredible work
that the American coalition has
been putting them of the last
statement
I don't know that but respect
doesn't mean they're not being a
discussion and and respect
doesn't mean that.
That that that things are our
intention
I need to hear the.
Making notes about some of the
statistics of Senator on to it.
Have you mentioned this during
her presentation that.
There are under the order
there's no changes to Senate
districts one two and twenty
two.
Because I what we're really
talking about here today our
overall six districts one to
twenty two there's no changes
to.
Three.
Under the San.
Ninety seven point five percent
of districts three matches the
native American coalition.
Did I miss almost all Act
holidays seventy nine point five
percent
the district for eighty two
percent a district for.
Bill reflects the native
American publishing map and
district thirty eighty seven
point seven percent of that
district under this reflects
native American coalition.
And and I understand that.
For those three Mr Stewart
making K. three changes to to
the back I understand that is
not a hundred percent.
Center is is what you all spent
a lot of time and energy working
for
and and I understand that that's
what you want to see here today.
I am glad to see that.
The vast majority of the work
that you all day.
and I.
From what I've seen.
The acknowledging that it is
not.
What the what the the coalition
that opposes a hundred percent
it does look like it still
preserves the three twelve years
the quality is that Mr dumont
mentioned when he was five seven
Mr king about making sure that
we have three strong native
American district.
a native American influence
district thirty and we also have
native American influence
distracting in district one is
about.
And I don't see that these
changes would.
Would make it.
So that native American voters
are not able to select the
candidate of the actual.
Which is which is what we're
going.
And so.
It is not this is not an easy
issue and this is not an easy
vote.
I'm I'm going to vote for the
Senate
And I look forward to this
discussion continuing as senator
annual that all as as continue
to make its way through our
chamber
but I do want to really thank
everyone who has but incredible
is it because.
Because this is this is our
starting.
Actress I appreciate the work
and I know this is a.
Thank you.
The committee members.
Comments or questions Mr
chairman Mr Mr chairman I I want
to just correct that and more I
don't remember who spoke about
it and what we actually with the
amendment up kept the twin lakes
chapter house whole it was split
in half.
with the original sensible to
and we are restored that on on
the amendment I just wanted to
ensure people knew that.
Remember.
Yes could you do me a favor.
Marginalizing.
Let me repeat you honor me
today.
anyone or Senate you honor
committee by your presence in
your work.
June the.
I greatly appreciate all of you
and I wish that we could have
more time to your all of you
because I know there are many.
Concerns.
And and a great deal of work
went into your your efforts.
This is the district that I
represent.
Senate district thirty one this
is the the state of Texas on the
border of Mexico right I could
not be farther.
Then anyone.
From many of your parts of our
beautiful state.
I'm about as far as you can get.
In my district.
But I would want you to know
that when we began this effort
of creating these maps.
Senator Lopez was part of those
discussions.
We began mapping the entirety of
the state including royal Dona
Ana County all of you can.
We began mapping my district and
all of my colleague the data
County by a recognition and
honoring your work.
Our mapping began with your map
and we built our maps outside
of.
Your map was the starting place
that affected all of.
Your maps affected all of the
districts as I understand it all
the way down to the southernmost
part of the state.
I want you to understand that
because that's the level of
respect.
But I believe you you are due
for all the hard work you put
into this and I would want you
to know that even in building
our maps in the far this remote
part of our state from where
you're at we we began honoring.
Been working from your from your
work your maps I hope you will
accept that.
As the level of respect we have
for you and we're.
Thank you my comments members of
the committee.
You're looking we have a we have
to do passed motion.
there's a second arguing
requires second of all right
there's a second to the motion
is properly before the committee
will do this is a roll call vote
Emily please.
Senator yes.
Senator.
Senator Lopez no.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Senator yes.
Senator Senator yes.
Vote of seven to to the motion
to do pass within up to a
committee substitute thank you
all.
being no further business before
the committee of center Moriches
just wanted to find out what
we're going to be next we're
gonna have to of make this
subject to the call of the chair
we have one of the bill in the
