Here's Senate bill three forty
is our first item we'll keep
trying to find Senator Ortiz
Pino.
The next item
I have for my agenda is house
bill one twenty nine.
This is a pharmacy benefits on
certain prescriptive medications
give me just one second on the.
Well he is okay in would you
tell center the sort of the this
bill for.
The members the committee give
me just a minute please Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino was on his way.
Representative Armstrong I see
you with us.
And I'm looking for any other
house members that we have.
We go okay so so
Let's see Representative
Matthews I see you to a couple
things just while we're waiting
for synergies appear to get
here.
Number one we're supposed to be
on the Senate floor at seven
o'clock we have the pro time
with us so we'll take signals
from her in when we see her
leave will know that it's time
for us to be on
Why am in in this committee I am
allowing the proponents of all
legislation to have up to
fifteen minutes to present their
bill as they choose to do so
that means you are responsible
for recognizing the experts and
any other proponents are
advocates you wish to
recognizing your fifteen minutes
I'm relying on you to cut them
off and recognize them in
whatever order in as much time
as you want so you may allow an
expert to speak for fifteen
minutes and that's the best way
to explain can advocate for your
bill the the opponents them have
ten minutes to a closure bill if
they wish to organize themselves
behind a single speaker
spokesperson Rexford they're
allowed to do so so that they
can fully develop their
opposition to bill if they
choose if they don't then
they're not organized behind a
COVID spokesperson organizer
then we'll simply just take the
ten minutes allow for opposition
and divided as best I can that
usually means the opponents get
only a minute or very short
period of time propose a bill
which I don't find very
constructive for supporting or
opposing a bill but nonetheless
that's what we'll do if that's
the alternative were left with.
So hopefully that'll make some
sense I said we're joined by
Representative Fajardo as well.
And
Still looking for was told that
we would see center or cheesy
Pino.
This proceed on to house bill
one twenty nine.
House bill one twenty nine
Representative Fajardo in center
Ivey Soto.
Let me I can tell you with.
So we have
The number of proponents and
opponents identified so
Representative Fajardo I hope
you join us with enough time to
understand you and so ready so
it'll have up to fifteen minutes
to recognize your expert
witnesses I've got four of them
identified till maddening
medically H. Ste Stiffler and
then I see a couple of
individuals registered as a
proponents as well too you'll
have fifteen minutes I'm leaving
it up to all of you to admit
them cut them off in a fifteen
minutes your time will be
concluded so Representative
Fajardo the time is three twenty
seven.
House bill one twenty nine it's
your for.
Representative Fajardo your
microphone is muted.
Chairman thank you so much I do
apologize I'm I'm a little
delayed right real quick I need
to grab my notes for quick
seconds I was busy trying to log
into the computer issues so one
second and while she is doing
that let me if I may just let
everybody know that we have the
option amendment I'm getting the
number for the amendments it was
sent out to everybody.
We just seconds.
what we're looking for that
senator Ortiz Pino we up we we
had called for years for stop we
started after a little bit but I
want to give you an assurance
we'll go right back to you after
done with this bill or.
You're you're also muted Senator
thank you Mr chairman of the in
my committee I was trying to
finish of a vote on a bill there
so.
I'll leave the legislature and
and your staff text me I'll be
right back.
And I I'm sorry I didn't realize
you were Cherry your committee
but up we'll we'll we'll make it
work for you.
Thank.
Right Representative Fajardo
your microphone is still muted
okay.
About a V. eight committees of.
If I may just so everybody knows
the amendment is two two zero.
Five zero eight.
Point three eight two two zero
five zero eight point three.
And
and just so that everybody knows
when you're looking at it.
The first three.
Points on the amendments strike
the entire Original Bill.
So when you pick up a number for
that becomes from there to the
end becomes the bill so that's
what you're looking at and as we
do our presentation and that way
also you can also see that I
our.
But I actually decimated one of
my own built in advance.
R. and so Representative Fajardo
if you're ready to go.
And we've got doctor Mack in any
as well go ahead Representative
thank you senator and thank you
members of the committee I think
that yeah Senator did a great
job explaining so that this is a
very complex bill
we did we've been working on
this a lot and I have a lot of
notes I where we started and
worry and ended up
one of the things that was
important is that you know that
we have
I'm basically what what's
happening in with with some of
these these these farmer guys is
is.
One second I got my nose up I do
apologize.
How much out there are there are
coupons that are being offered
by pharmaceutical companies to
their patients and when they get
to the pharmacy the coupon is
the value the coupon Act is
being dispersed amongst all the
patients that go to the pharmacy
whether they get that particular
medication or.
And all this says is if you use
that coupon.
You have that product or to your
mats and that credit also should
count towards any copays or out
of pockets that you are
responsible for.
And so with that let me go to a
doctor making any real quick and
let her make a few words.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I am Barmak
Committee I am a past president
of the New Mexico Medical
Society as well as a past
president of the American
medical association currently I
am CEO of oncology practice that
serves Albuquerque and Gallup
and we created an in house
pharmacy that we use to provide
our patients with access to cook
oral chemotherapy and I also
studied pharmacy benefit
managers in all of their tricks
when I was working with the AMA
so I have seen first hand in my
practice the harm that is caused
by some of these PBMs tactics on
my patients and I see them
struggle with the costs and I
learned that the AMA that forty
two percent of the cost of drugs
occur after the dried leaves the
manufacture house bill one
twenty nine offers a method for
the New Mexico legislature to
address a problem that plagues
New Mexicans and indeed the
whole country the high prices of
drugs the focus of house bill
one twenty nine is the copay
accumulator and this is here at
home I have a letter from
Presbyterian explaining how they
implement it to their patients
as it ensures company.
The coupons do offer help to
patients with a lower cost drugs
but they are essential for my
patients drugs in my practice
there is a large.
A group of six employees that I
pay to fill out the paperwork
because the sick people cannot
go through the copay assistance
process there are no inexpensive
options for my patients and
without the coupons my patients
would not be able to afford
their chemotherapy if the pills
are five thousand dollars a
month the coinsurance of twenty
percent is a thousand dollars a
month and my patients don't have
that kind of money when they hit
the out of pocket maximum the
coupon stop coming and the
insurers then covered the total
cost of care.
But isn't that why we buy
insurance we would not need
these coupons if the insurance
company stopped requiring copays
on essential medicines.
If we as a nation are going to
get our drug costs under control
the first step is to understand
where the drug the money is
going there are seven ways PBMs
make money on every transactions
so yes the manufacturer's list
price is too high but the PBMs
are pushing it higher for their
own benefit and not at any other
value so I favor the
transparency part we need to see
how much of the profit of these
drug costs are staying in the
pockets of the PBMs of the
insurance companies.
They're going to say that they
do this for quality of care well
I will tell you that they charge
my practice because we don't
counsel patients on their
cholesterol I'm a cancer doctor
I'm not treating cholesterol or
selling cholesterol drugs.
We actually they will also say
that the list of drugs is on
their website but actually we
can't find it in primary care
doctors have to play guessing
games trying to guess which
prescription the patient will
fill without having to go to
prior authorization so this bill
will allow our legislature to
take an active and needed step
to control drug costs for the
benefit of our patients and for
my patients this bill will save
lives please support this bill.
Thank you very much we also have
a rough McLeish probably
osteopathic medical association.
Mr chair my name is Ralph McLish
on the executive director for
the New Mexico osteopathic
medical association on the
amendment will strike the
transparency language from the
bill
we're going to be looking at
transparency over the interim
it's something that caught the
eye of of representative
Armstrong and feel that she's
going to utilize the entrance
agenda to dig really deep into
the supply chain of
pharmaceutical companies to stay
entire supply chain
so the amended bill concentrates
on co pay accumulators.
And the need for chronically ill
patients.
To utilize the coupon money that
they receive.
To go towards their deductible
and out of pocket expenses.
So many of us on this committee
and attending this committee
meeting never even think about
our deductibles the chronically
ill patients think about their
deductible every three December
thirty first because on Jan
January first it resets and they
need to pay they need to meet
their obligation of the
deductible.
Early in the year so that the
pair covers a hundred percent of
their care from from the time
they meet their out of pocket
expenses forward and like Dr
MacNamee said.
These patients need that.
And thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much and we will
reserve the rest of our time for
the end of comments from other
people.
R. so
Mister Roberts if there are
people in opposition go ahead
let them.
Thank you Senator Representative
of let's see we had the.
Public comments that will
recognize Felix Garcia sounded a
little Christiansted we're
national psoriasis foundation
opponents of the bill and all of
the time you concluded three
thirty seven of.
Thanks for the bill have not
advise me of an organized
opposition but we listed persons
registered including Joe
Thompson PCMA Regina Stivers
PCMA hat block prime
therapeutics as a pharmacy
benefits manager Brent Moore
American health insurance plans
and Dr Lucina Mendez Harper we
have those individuals please
admit them to the conference
room conte's Senator in just one
second and will recognize them
as we see them as they have been
admitted as a point of order of
Senator Stewart just so Mister
chairman of people are talking
about the amended bill I was not
sent any amendments I have
plenty of amendments from the
house if we could at least be
sent up the amendment that's
being proposed which I
understand is substantial that
would be very helpful.
Mr chairman and madam approach
Sam that was emailed everybody
on Saturday March thirteenth at
eleven fifty one AM again the
total number which I'm asking
for is two two zero five zero
eight point three it was sent to
you Saturday March thirteenth at
eleven fifty one AM.
We'll look for it thank you Mr
chairman thank you that's
helpful to both of you I hope
that everyone is watching and
the the non legislators
recognize we're we're getting by
the pandemic responses and
comments that we're getting
hundreds and hundreds of emails
every day
from from everybody proponents
opponents experts would lobbyist
are you name it and so when we
get email it's very common for
me and I know all of us to not
be sure what emails we receive
more received also it's awful to
have that number so we can
search for in our email and I
appreciate Senator Stewart you
on making sure that we all have
in front of us and that we're
all working from something that
we're we're all of reading would
be sent again Mr chairman yes
they just entered again thank
you.
Very good.
All right thank you very much
okay so we'll go to the
opponents.
Of and we'll admit all of you I
have five of you registered in
opposition and as I said will
allow ten minutes for the
opposition so you'll each have
all recognize each of you for a
minute and a half that.
Time so we'll start first of all
with the do we have Joe Thompson
on the phone.
Our web hosted do do we see Joe
Thompson Mr chair we don't have
Joe Thompson we have Patrick
block brand more and Dr Lucina
then this hoc Harper on the line
right now.
With those three individuals
being the registered opposition
we can recognize each one of you
for up to two minutes artwork
to a half minutes in opposition
that will get us to our ten
minutes where time in opposition
so we'll start first with that
block you're recognized for two
and a half minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman and might
I request that Regina Stivers
from the CMA be let into the
room as well I believe she's in
the waiting room she is one of
the people on the list and with
that good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee on Pat blocked with
the Otero consulting a
registered lobbyist for prime
therapeutics a policy budget
budget manager and we're here to
speak in opposition to house
bill one twenty nine today we do
appreciate that the sponsor
Representative Fajardo has been
willing to discuss the bill and
to work on amendments we do see
that this is no longer a bill as
anything to do with transparency
it's a completely different bill
the substitute bill that is
presented today as an amendment
really just focuses on coupons.
So I will just quickly hit on a
couple of points with the the
coupon programs that are put out
by the drug manufacturers and
first I will note that studies
have shown that the prices for
drugs with manufacturer coupons
are going up at about twice the
rate of non coupon drugs
thirteen percent versus seven
percent or so also coupons
really do one main thing and
that's to the benefit of the
pharmaceutical manufacturers the
increased use of branded drugs
these are all the drugs you see
the TV commercials for ask your
doctor about the latest drug
with lots of Jay's exigencies in
the name of the studies of the
data shows the increase in
branded sales is sixty percent
higher than
Other drugs it reduces the sale
of bioequivalence and generics
they bill the cost of the
coupons into their pricing and
the manufacturers use them to
maximize brand loyalty to
bolster sales that's why you see
the the barrage of TV
commercials
lastly I will just quickly note
that coupons are banded federal
programs like Medicare and
Medicaid and also with military
veterans health plans the
federal government those
programs have deemed coupons
illegal kickbacks we are largely
latam commercial market but the
federal government where they
have control over the programs
like in military federal
government and Medicare Medicaid
they have banned closed because
they do increase cost so if the
true goal is here.
costs thank you Mr chair thank
you Regina Stivers recognized in
two minutes.
Mr chair I don't have a Regina
Stivers in the waiting room Mr
broadcaster hundred minute but
we don't have we do not read
more you recognize for two and a
half minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Brett
more I'm a registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans and we opposed house bill
one twenty nine in its original
form and to the extent we
understand the amendment that is
but before you we propose that
as well the bill has been shut
down to coupons and you really
have to understand what's going
on with coupons coupons are a
way that manufactures drive
consumers patients towards brand
name drugs in away from generics
it's a strategy towards
increasing profits by avoiding
generic drugs so what happens is
they set high prices we all
around the state that high
prices in Q. one to become a way
to avoid the generics that are
out there so when you look to
the proposal as I as I try to
understand it you look to
subsection one AA it talks about
amounts paid on behalf of the
enrollees so those are the
coupons that's what we're
talking about you look to
a sub section one and subsection
two it has without a generic
equivalent so it allows for you
to to assess whether or not
there's a generic equivalent but
it allows for the medically
necessary provision so what that
does is that allows the
manufacturers to continue to
market to providers saying use
these drugs the continue to
issue the coupon so that they
avoid the generics the bill is
problematic because.
As Mr block said federal
programs a band these coupons
because they view them as
kickbacks you could also look to
Mr chairman what California and
Massachusetts and done they have
banned coupons when there is
a generic that is available so
they've taken a middle road
approach but what you really
have to understand this your
bonds are way that
pharmaceutical manufacturers
manipulate the market to drive
people away from generics in
towards brand name drugs it
really just makes the problem
even worse so I would
respectfully ask you to to not
move forward with this proposal
as it is a coupons are pervasive
in the marketplace and they're
really only out there for
brand name drugs and one other
point I would make is are
selected use throughout the year
if you want to thank you Mr
Moore but so little over to
thank you very much
Dr Mendez Harper well you're
recognized for two minutes good
afternoon chair members of the
committee my name is Dr Lee Jean
amend this Harper I am a
pharmacist and government
affairs principal for five prime
therapeutics we are a key and
that's owned partially by Blue
Cross blue shield in New Mexico
and I'm appearing in opposition
of today of house bill one
twenty nine what I wanted to
just focus on was manufacturer
coupons and really trying to
explain why the why there cost
drivers very when I think it's
hard to understand how the
coupon that saves members money
at the pharmacy counter
ultimately increases costs so
one thing I want to start with
is that in general there's two
entities that pay for
prescription drugs that when
you're an inch in the insurance
market you have the member he's
paying a portion of the drug
costs at the pharmacy counter
and then behind the member you
have the ensure that's making up
the difference so for example if
you have a job that's five
hundred dollars the member state
has a copay a fifty dollars in
the background you have the
ensure that making up that
difference a for.
Didn't fifty so
in talking about two months I
think the best example that I
can think of of how to explain
how these are cost drivers is to
share with you situation that I
find myself in I have a fifteen
year old son who's well on his
way to getting his driver's
license and he and I have an
agreement that we're gonna
jointly purchased his car and he
is going to contribute fifteen
hundred dollars towards the
purchase of the car.
we have he's gone out and found
a couple of cars that he's
interested in Honda offers a
five hundred dollar rebate for
first time buyers and jeep
offers a fifteen hundred dollar
rebate for first time buyers.
So from his perspective he wants
to go with the jeep because it
covers all of the fifteen dollar
dollars he supposed to
contribute and then he can use
whatever money he saved for you
know getting that you know bass
thumping stereo but the problem
is that I have to come up behind
that fifteen hundred dollars
that he pays and I make up the
difference so if he goes with
the Honda I'm gonna pay twenty
two thousand dollars if he goes
with the jeep I'm gonna pay
thirty two thousand dollars so
that's the exact same way that
these coupons work is that it
takes care of the insured
members out of pocket costs
but it's driving folks to the
more expensive options so total
cost are higher
so that's what I just hope that
we could talk through and help
folks understand
Mr black and Mr more were very
accurate what they were saying
we we know that in states that
allow or it when we have
manufactured coupons out there
that the price doubles every
year versus non so thank you
very much if we ever a fine
either Regina Stivers or Joe
Thompson.
Mr chair Joe Thompson is joining
now Regina Stivers is down on
here.
All right Joe Thompson is there
is it is it not for two minutes.
Also Mr chairman genus I just
shut up.
Mr average you're recognized for
two minutes.
Thank you thank you chairman
chairman and members of the
committee I'm Regina Stivers
director state affairs for PCMA
PCMA is the national association
representing America's pharmacy
benefit managers or PBMs who
administer prescription drug
plans for more than two hundred
and sixty six million Americans
we respectfully oppose house
bill one twenty nine PBMs are
transparent to their plan
sponsors on services they
receive in accordance with
contractual requirements ians
are hired by plan sponsors such
as large employers government
programs unions and insurers to
maximize the value of
prescription drug benefits
ensure websites allow members to
access patient specific
information about their formula
ari and benefits such as what
drugs are covered what tier
there in an out of pocket cost
the cost for their medicines at
various pharmacies near them
including where the medicines
can be obtained with the most
cost savings and if the
medicines the member is on has
in the unit utilization
management of programs in place
such as quantity limits prior
authorization or step therapy
with house bill one twenty nine
reporting of general non patient
specific formular information to
OSI for central publication is
duplicate duplicative and adds
administrative burdens to the
healthcare system and it really
accomplishes nothing except
providing information PBMs
already provide to their clients
P. eight in transparency is just
one entity in a long complex
drug supply chain and should
drug price transparency be the
desire the legislature we do not
believe focusing on one entity
in the drug supply chain will
provide the legislation with the
most complete picture of drug
pricing trends and policy
opportunities thank you so much
for the opportunity to prevent
provide testimony today thank
you Mr stood we.
Refined Joe Thompson.
Mr chair he was in the meeting
but she laughed all right very
good all right we'll go back to
the proponents Representative
Fajardo in center Ivey Soto you
had five minutes remaining on
your original fifteen minutes
you wish to use are you ready
for us to go to the committee I
like to split that without
Kristin Stiffler going first.
All right and do you up just as
a reminder we had signed up in
advance Russel till one with
doctor Mack NMAA Ralph McLish
Christian so if we're Felix
Garcia and the Christian
suffered second time so all
right you've got up to the
visual five minutes Senator
Representative go ahead which.
Rest of our state.
Thank you good afternoon
chairman and members of the
Senate Judiciary Committee my
name is Kristen stepladder and
I'm the state government
relations manager at the
national psoriasis foundation
representing over fifty thousand
New Mexicans living with
psoriatic disease I'm gonna talk
specifically to the amendment
that has been addressed for
today which is limiting the
language that very simply
ensures that all payments made
on behalf of the patient are
counted towards their deductible
and out of pocket maximum I
appreciate the analogies that
have been provided today but
hopefully this is the face that
we can give a face to the actual
patients are being harmed by
these types of programs so when
patients are faced with high out
of pocket cost we know that
patients do not use their
medications appropriately
they're skipping doses in order
to save money and abandoning
treatments altogether we know
that patients in an effort to
maintain their health and
quality of life sometimes they
have to use assistance programs
and these are called copay
assistance programs we know at
the end yes we have a survey
that from twenty twenty that
shows that eighty percent of
patients with psoriatic disease
who take a biologic and have
commercial insurance use these
programs historically the the
copay assistance before these
programs were put in place what
apply to the patient's
deductible and out of pocket
maximum however what we've seen
in recent years starting in
about twenty seventeen at that
these copay accumulator
adjustment programs are popping
up all over the nation and
they're excluding Kobe
assistance from counting toward
the patients out of pocket costs
and going towards that
calculation what we see is that
these are discriminatory
practice especially towards
those who have chronic diseases
and rare diseases and we also
feel that this that the payers
are shirking their fiduciary
responsibility.
I would also like to point out
that.
Hi it as we know what insurance
is you pay the premium every
month as well as the patient
you're paying the deductible in
out of pocket maximum and then
you expect that your insurance
should fully kick in once all of
those costs are taken care of
and now we're finding out that
insurance plans are choosing to
exclude copay assistance which
are real dollars and they are
helping patients pay for the
deductible but these but these
copay accumulator adjustment
programs are making patients pay
for their deductible all over
again I can't imagine going to
the pharmacy counter and being
told that I am supposed to pay
three four five thousand dollars
to get my treatment because my
insurance company did not
applaud my copay assistance
towards my deductible and out of
pocket maximum thank you very
much appreciate that let me just
very quickly for the application
of the committee share my screen
to let you all know here's a
letter of support and I'm not
going to read the letter let us
for profit one point nine I want
you all to see.
As I scroll down all of the
various organizations.
That have signed on in support
of house bill one twenty nine.
And in addition to that.
In addition to all these
organizations that are signed on
to the bill the other thing is
That I want to make sure that
everybody understands in terms
of the opposition on the bill on
right this is what we're talking
about right here this is the
entire bill.
The entire operative alright.
Is right here.
We got a couple of definitions
one of the things you will see.
Is that is that this bill only
kicks in if there is no generic
equivalent everything you heard
that was just talked about by
the opposition saying this is a
way to keep people away from
generics that is excluded.
By this line right here.
Okay.
This only for for Medicare for
I'm not where there is no
generic equivalent or where it's
determined to be medically
necessary.
The other thing is let's be very
clear that
medical costs are out of control
that's a national problem this
is not about instituting a
coupon program.
This is about a system that's
already out of control
nationally.
The question is what's gonna
happen to New Mexico's patients.
When New Mexico patients are
sent coupons from a national
pharmaceutical company.
In order to make sure that they
can get the care that their
doctor as has determined to be
necessary for them.
That's what this is about.
And.
During his funds are used thank
you.
They conclude fifteen minutes of
support will Mexico when we get
the screen clear to committee
members of questions if I may
see by a show of hands those who
wish to get on the list to be
recognized I'll do so.
Anyone on the committee.
I'm seeing no one with questions
Sir Stuart I see around the.
Are you on me Mr Chairman I see
your hand center yes right.
so Mister chairman the FIR on
the original bill with a three
year cost about one point two
million we have no updated FIR
on this ammendment we have no
committee analysis on this
ammendment unless with all the
hundreds of emails I've received
I've also agency that I'm just a
little concerned so what is the
FIR cost on the new amendment.
Mr chairman and senator so the
the the cost.
Eight are from the original bill
the racial bills was five
sections long and that had a
fair amount of reporting that
was required the cost was
actually from the reporting
aspect of the bill and in terms
of of again the data analyzing
the data and maintaining the
data updated the data etcetera
all of that was removed from the
bill.
And so as a result of them I
don't believe that there is a
direct cost of the state but are
superintendent of insurance is
present Mr Cole and and you'll
be able to address that issue
but but but that's that's one of
the reasons why we remove the
reporting information in
addition the fact that some that
is already available nationally
miss.
Mr chairman and senator thank
you
Senator is is correct or if I
are well as to the substitute
that came out of the house which
had many requirements for
reporting and analysis and all
the rest of that my R. would not
be appropriate for this
ammendment.
I would just the Senator
wondering if I could and that is
Change of effective date General
one could be made the most
health plans all of their
changes and do all their patient
notifications and do all their
calculations on a calendar year
plan you're basically
that would help mitigate costs
and improve the bill.
Chairman thank you Sir.
Thank you very much of a miss
and and and Mr Chairman actually
did have a note from OSI about
that and and I fail to
incorporate that in what we were
doing with the amendment I do
apologize and I would ask to
amend the amendment to change on
July one twenty twenty one to be
January one twenty twenty two
so that it does align with the
health plans that is.
Our.
And I I I I appreciate you catch
of us are.
So Senator the the amendment is
apparently here is so you you'll
be asked to be raised a restated
Senator as the for the amendment
so Mister chairman.
So we're on the amendment
apparently are we on the
amendment yes.
So.
So I guess my question is why is
there so much opposition to the
amendment if this takes care of
the reporting issues and other
things that
Problematic why do we have so
much opposition still do the
amendment I don't understand
that.
Mr chairman and Senator Stewart
a lot of the opposition wants to
the provisions that were in the
original bill that we listen to
and that we specced and bringing
in the amendment and
and and so and so the the
comments that you heard were
based on the issues that we
actually Center hard
Representative part of and I
we're being responsive to.
And Mr chairman I heard several
people say they were in
opposition to the bill and the
amendment offered so I don't
think you've fixed everything or
we wouldn't be hearing people
still being propose but never
the less thank you Mr chairman
that's all.
Use disorders during
Committee center doing your
next.
Thank you Mr chair and thank and
senator I just have a question
about the reporting part because
it was my understanding that one
of the reasons the reporting
part was taken out was because
it didn't cover all of the
entities that should have but
the it's going to be brought
back in the future when it's
more comprehensive is that
correct out of Mr Chairman
answer to it that is that is
correct so so one of the things
the bill as drafted.
sought to have the reporting
from a from the pharmacies and
PBMs no the pharmacies and PBMs
Senator if we made report we
would like to have other
pharmaceutical company's report
as well
the the reason that we that we
created that that structure
originally is because is because
that's where the funds aren't
getting twelve rue where the
pharmacies and PBMs however.
The the the four of the bill is
is is the section that you have
remaining and and so in
conversation with a number of
people we we decided you know
because this is really a
national issue in terms of the
of the cost of of drugs and the
flow of those of that cost to
the patient that that really
should be something that would
be looked at in a and interim
committee process.
Thank you and Mr chair Senator
and one question about the some
of the opposition that we heard.
My understanding of this bill is
that if this bill were to pass
the financial benefit that is
currently going to a lot of the
PBMs who we heard opposition
from would with that financial
benefit would would now go to
the consumers is that correct.
Mr chairman and senator that is
correct yes and and and I don't
want to know what happened is
very interesting knowledge about
the jeep verses on that.
You know I don't I don't know
about anybody else when you've
gone to get drugs at the
pharmacy with a prescription
I've never been asked my
preference of the many factor.
Thank you Mr chair that's all I
have.
Thank you senator all right Sir
Stuart I see your hands up back
to you I'm sorry Mr chairman
could we see the amendment on
the screen again because of my
secretary printed out and it
reference it's that self on my
coffee yes Mr Chairman a second
page why is.
Why are we referencing that bill
right in the middle of the bill
itself understand that.
you right here yeah that's that
appears to be a type of for much
consul.
That would not be a substantive
part of the bills it does flow
our pharmacy benefits manager.
If you exclude the H. B. one
twenty nine page to.
We're in a hurry we are about to
a adopt amendments with an error
in the middle of it so Mister
chairman my other question is
that what folks are telling me
is that coupons drive.
Consumers to brand names.
Not generics so I don't quite
understand how.
This would save consumers money
if they drive them to branding
over generics I don't know if
that's true but that's what I've
been I've been told.
This Mr chairman and Senator
Stewart so again one of the
things that we address in the
amendment.
Is that is that this is done on
behalf of any other person for
brand name prescription that is
without a generic equivalent so
again we've heard that concern
we've addressed that concern in
the amendment so that that is
often.
All right
if you say so as not what other
people are saying but I get it.
So I think the amendment needs
little work Mr chairman thank
you.
I'm in our at that this time
though I wouldn't move the
amendment
with eight removing.
The amendment the page number
and the and the bill number that
it somehow got in the taxed and
shades of the effective date of
January one twenty twenty two.
So that's a member of this
before the committee right now.
Other members of the committee
with questions or comments on
the amendment self.
Questions I'm not seeing anyone.
This was to roll call please on
the amendment family.
On the amendment.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez yes.
Wirth.
It.
Yes.
Yes.
Did did you record a vote for
consider pirtle yes Sir I did.
Very good thank you.
All right that amendment is
adopted by the committee were
back to the bill the house bill
one twenty nine as amended by
the committee other questions or
comments.
Sir sure.
So Mister chairman the it the
issue is is the between the
generic taking up generic
there's there isn't I think it's
an or instead of and then we
could put that up again.
That is that is correct Senator
short that is which is
appropriateness of consistent
with other bills that we have
passed for example when we did
the bill on insulin prices last
year part of what we had in the
bill on the insulin prices one
is
that you needed to do a four
formulate or medically necessary
all turned.
because there are some people
who don't tolerate the generic
and and that is part of the step
therapy our program that we have
adopted today so that people
move up in from a from a generic
to the brand name if they don't
tolerate that.
Right thank you.
The committee members with any
questions.
Anyone else.
Is there a motion Mr chair and
just a quick this is
Representative part of I'm
looking just for point of
clarification and just as you
proceed I'm looking at the
amendment on my computer and
that language those that H. B.
one is not on my amendment so I
don't know what's going on with
that with the computer or
there's a glitch but just so you
know that's not in the amendment
that I have.
When the let you know.
Thank you.
All right members the committee
pleasure twenty.
Moviepass.
So do echo motion to do pass.
On second second by Senator
Lopez.
Is there any objection to do
past motion.
The chair saying none.
Please show all members of the
committee present having voted
in the affirmative we have a due
pass on house bill one twenty
nine as amended in this
committee.
And Mr I want to but thank you
all very much and thank you
expert than other people who
came that's why I also do want
up to the committee that I
walked in with a twelve page
bill and by my own hand and
walking out with education.
You know you know how to get to
my heart.
We have center in on Senate bill
three forty will hear that next
Senator Ortiz please no.
Thank you Mr chairman this.
In Judiciary let me let let me
let you know Senator Ortiz you
know we have nobody registered
in opposition to this bill we
have one register proponent with
you Fernando Trujillo if he's in
the conference will make sure
that he's admitted Fernando
Trujillo other than that you
have fifteen minutes Senator
advocate for your bills in the
Mr chairman I do have a three
members of the department of
health staff would like to be
available in case our questions
that is area and showers Billy
Jimenez and dominate zero.
So Mister chairman look.
Don't be admitted as you choose
to Texas and I just I see the
pictures appearing even as we
speak Mr chairman so what this
bill is an attempt to doing is
something that we thought we had
done pretty well years ago and
then the third so the.
The side and we need to get a
little clearer and our insurance
on the language this is a no
then deals with the situation
when.
somebody from another state.
Rules eight.
Medical cannabis license
legally obtained in that state
comes to New Mexico and once the
user license to obtain.
Medical cannabis in our state
and
It is working currently the.
Didn't do the trick it was we
were taking word word we're now
trying to get come up with a
little group for and and working
as all of page seven mile
section W. of the bill.
Bennett has to do with now we're
saying that a reciprocal
participant is somebody who is
not in New Mexico resident.
But who is enrolled by the
government regulatory authority
to participate in the janitors
medical cannabis from another
state.
One individual movement of
federal meant by governmental
regulatory authority of the New
Mexico Indian nation tribe or
pueblo to participate in our
medical cannabis program.
I'll turn it over Mr chairman to
government exert all who is in
charge of the medical care of
this program is a department of
health to speak further on the
bill.
But thank you Mr chair members
of the committee and thank you
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino my name is
Dr Dominic's are low and I am
the director for the medical
cannabis program at the New
Mexico department of health when
the department of health.
Medical cannabis program started
to implement the reciprocal
participant portion of the Lynn
and Erin compassionate use act
which was amended in Senate bill
four oh six in twenty nineteen
we did we started to see some
unintended consequences one of
those unintended consequences
was that individuals could
bypass the usual enrollment
process for the program and not
see their current medical
provider if they were a resident
of New Mexico instead what they
were able to do is pay a small
fee to a medical provider and
service in California.
And up through that in just a
five or ten minute interview be
able to get a letter stating
that they had a condition to be
eligible in California and then
utilize that letter to enroll as
a reciprocal participant in the
New Mexico medical cannabis
program rather than as a regular
patient in the program.
In addition to that the language
the other yeah I'm intended
consequence created by the
language from Senate bill for a
six is that individuals who live
in other states or other
jurisdictions also we're able to
do the same thing and so they
were not necessarily enrolling
in a program in their local
jurisdiction or state instead
they were in rolling through
this this option in California
and then using that letter from
a the medical provider from
online to enroll as a reciprocal
participant in the New Mexico
program.
The biggest issue that this
creates is it means that these
individuals are not actually
seeing their medical providers
and ensuring that this is a
medication which would be
helpful for them in essence the
program in the department of
health want to ensure that
medical cannabis is used as a
medicine just like any other
medicine under the direction and
in consultation with the
patients regular medical
provider.
In addition the proposed
language will require that the
reciprocal participant present
identification to show their
enrollment by an authorized
government entity in order to
participate in the program this
would mean that letter simply
from a physician in California
would no longer be eligible for
an individual to rip and role as
a reciprocal participant.
The other point that has been
raised recently is with the
possibility of adult use
legalization of cannabis
depending upon the language that
would be utilized for adult use
reciprocal participants may end
up not being required to pay the
state excise tax which is
proposed if this were to come to
happen this would allow a
loophole for reciprocal
participants.
To not pay the state excise tax
and end up in a resulting loss
of revenue to the state.
Thank you very much I appreciate
the ability to be able to speak
thank you.
Mr chairman we have a few more
minutes so I'll give the.
The mystery menace and may
showers and opportunities a few
words as well.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino but definitely yield to any
questions of the committee we
definitely think this is an
important bill as a some of the
members of this committee no
we've had lots of litigation
over the past couple of years
with regard to the original
piece of legislation and this is
just one more effort that we can
take to maybe resolve an
incongruence too that's
currently on appeal at the New
Mexico court of appeals so thank
you very much this afternoon.
Mr chair members of the
committee I appreciate you
during the spell I don't have
the.
We can stand for questions and
thank thank you.
Mr Chairman will not stand for
questions.
Thank you senator as I indicated
there's nobody who registered in
opposition to your bill will go
and then to members of the
committee with questions.
The committee.
Senator.
So Mister chairman I just I.
This bill is I just don't
understand it what do we care
about this we're about to
legalize adult use cannabis
hopefully maybe we've only got
six states I just don't
understand why we would try to
clamp down but people that have
received a medical card from
another state it doesn't make
me.
Mr chairman and and Senator
Stewart go hazardous and then
I'll turn it over to the doctors
are low.
We we have an legalize
recreational use yet that hasn't
happened secondly and it may not
happen.
You know depending secondly what
we what we use as as doctors
it'll pointed out that if we do
legalize we have a the provision
in the legalization bills the
three is medical cannabis
participants from paying a tax.
And so therefore.
We would be.
Limiting the amount of revenue
the state would get from running
a legalization program if people
could register in California
remit for not existing medical
condition the.
Used by their gender this year
in the state and not pay the
excise tax and other
recreational users would.
But let doctors are low at get a
better answer to that I I I
don't want another answer so
we're all we're doing it for the
money.
That's the reason
Mr chairman and senator I
wouldn't I would disagree with
you we're doing it for the
integrity of the medical program
we we run a very tight medical
programs which really ties their
condition that the person has
having seen a doctor and being
determined to really have a
condition so some states
California Oklahoma coach in
range the runner a loose medical
program for anybody who wants to
to say I've got a bad headaches
you your medical cannabis card
then they can use it to buy.
Mr essentially relaxation
purposes or recreational
purposes we have a right or
medical program that way we have
a very honorable medical program
we like to keep an honorable we
are one of the she ate it with
this imported getting around us.
Right thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator.
Your next next thank you Mr
chairman thank you etcetera
etcetera
So.
What what states do have so with
with this bill require an actual
card government issued card from
another state in order to
participate in the medical
program here send Mr chairman
doctors are a little.
Mr chair Senator Duhigg.
It would actually require a
documentation so if another
state does not actually issue a
card but issues instead a letter
of participation it would allow
for that and that could be also
states that may impose it or or
require that in the future what
this really would do though is
to ensure that that document
whether it's a card or letter or
some other document would
actually come from a
governmental agency rather than
simply from a doctor.
Thank you Mr chair
So and and and maybe this is a
question for for doctors are
low.
Hello so how many how many
states provide back.
That document that governmental
documentation.
Zero.
You Mr chair and Senator Duhigg
currently all of the states that
actually have medical cannabis
program and all of the
jurisdictions do you actually
utilize a government issued
documentation at this current
time.
Thank you Mr chair doctors are
low what.
How easy is it to get that
documentation in the other
states.
Mr chair Senator Duhigg that
varies depending upon the
medical cannabis programs if
each of those jurisdictions and
so each of them have their own
requirements just like we do
and so those very as Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino mention some
states are much more loose with
their requirements and others
are more strict with their
requirements.
Mr chair Senator to the Pino
I think one of the reasons I'm
struggling with this bill is
because.
It seems like that that way
would be of a pretty
inconsistent standard then if
it's just based on when each
state how hard it is to get that
documentation.
I also I have concerns because
Senator to the piano.
Said well in California you can
say I have bad headaches and
just get it get a letter that
way.
To my understand is that's the
case here to
so I don't see a huge difference
between getting a letter from
someone in California and and
the official letter from someone
in New Mexico
if this.
Mr chair if this bill was
seeking to.
Required criteria that is
required for anyone in New
Mexico to be part of the program
like the medical criteria to be
part of our program would be the
state medical criteria the any
our resident with that out of
state authorization must meet
that would make more sense to me
but without first just for
standardization purposes Mr
chair with that without
something like that I.
I'm I find myself agreeing with
Senator Stewart in wondering why
why there is a need for this
particularly given the direction
we are going and in this state
with cannabis and I understand
the revenue thing I get that but
if that's the only reason I'm.
I'm I'm not sure that that's for
me at least Mr chair okay
Compellent compelling enough
one.
Mr chairman and and senator let
me let me try to to to to deal
with that.
Legalization bills all of our
agents are I've seen so far
there is a strong information
maintain the medical cannabis
program.
That's because they're a great
many people.
To use the medical cannabis
program.
Despite what you said about how
easy it is to get into a serious
medical conditions.
They cancer treatment they they
need this to be able to have
enough appetite to maintain
their health.
They don't want to smokers alone
she.
Which is where the big money is
going to be when we are open to
recreational.
They would like to be able to
have an access to a form of
cannabis you can use did you
ever medical conditions serious
medical conditions.
Senator this way and let our
medical program the slow
internet and and and reduces its
effectiveness.
Those people are going to be
left on the outside looking in.
Providers will simply not not
see the need to.
To do the extracts the
suppositories the.
The teenagers this these people
maybe because of all their all
the money resorting to the
people who will go ahead medical
conditions were willing to pay
the money and that would be
taxed I simply getting medical
card from another state.
We wouldn't be issue we don't
issue cards that easily here I
don't think so I would like
doctors religious respond to
your allegations and we're just
passing out these cards there is
really an information return
honorable program here.
But if we don't pass this bill
we don't we we would have no way
of controlling that because they
can get those cards very easily
elsewhere even New Mexico
residences up to change we make
sure to just maybe in in
internet transaction records in
California and then it leaves
our medical cannabis program or
in.
And and and and really resource
so I don't know your user would
you want to respond to her
concerns about our children
being one where anybody who
wants to walk in and grab the.
The secretary we but I don't
think that's we we rented and
and and and Mr chair Senator Ivy
Soto I I have no doubt I I I
understand the importance of
this as as a medication for
folks and and and I am not in
any way question name I the need
to preserve to preserve our our
medical program
I can tell you from my own
experience and what I've seen
multiple folks that I know that
they obtained cards by saying
they have headaches or anxiety
or or just some of a single a
single appointment with self
reported ailments of any sort
and and they got those cards but
Mr chair Senator at what other
states and are there any other
states that have medical program
that have the same requirement
and require governmental
documentation in order for.
For this reciprocal
participation.
Mister chairman Senator all
yields and our crews are a
little of that.
Mr chair and senator do hate
currently at this time the other
state there are other states
that do have reciprocal
requirements and they do require
that individual show
identification that they are
enrolled in another medical
cannabis program in addition
right now and currently.
The conditions that you
mentioned about headaches and
anxiety are not current
conditions in the New Mexico
program there are twenty eight
specific qualifying conditions
which a medical provider does
have to certify that individual
at some of those are items such
as Alzheimer's.
Hello let me let me interview
just because I know that we have
a long agenda but my question Mr
chair was answered my question
was at what other states require
governmental documentation that
they are certified and and that
and that and a program in that
state in order for there to be
reciprocal participation.
And Mr chairman and senator Dick
I don't know exactly which other
states too but all of the other
states that require reciprocal
participation do require
documentation for a reciprocal
participant to join and to be
able to purchase in their
programs.
And Mr chair doctors are low
under the law as it is now New
Mexico we require documentation
it what it says you have to have
proof of authorization to
participate the change being
made here is that it would have
to be governmental proof.
and Senator so that's my
question is is this a standard
that governmental per standard
is that one has been adopted by
it any other states.
Mister chairman Senator Duhigg I
would have to come back to you
with regard to that my
understanding is that the other
states do require that kind of
documentation in order to be
able to enroll as a reciprocal
participant but I would have to
double check on that.
Thank you Mr chair chair and
doctors are low has the
department ever had denied any
any medical card applicants.
Mr chair Senator due date it is
extremely rare for us to deny
those individuals are to deny
individuals who apply for the
program because we are relying
on those medical providers who
have seen those individuals and
we are not trying to interfere
with their practice we want to
ensure that if someone is
working with their medical
provider regarding their
medication we are not
interfering with that usually
the times that individuals are
tonight is when they have not
been able to find that kind of
proof of interaction or
certification from a medical
provider.
Mr chair Dodgers are my
understand is that there was an
it per request to the department
and that every question that
there is actually no one has
there been zero to Niles is that
correct.
There have been a handful I'm
not sure if that Mr chair
Senator Duhigg there has been a
handful since the program first
started I'm not sure how or what
time frame that it pro may have
requested that we have not had
any in the last year I can
state.
And and Mr chair the only reason
the reason I'm I'm asking that
is because again I think it's
pretty easy to get a car here
already I thank you I think the
I think we would see a lot more
denials if it were not which
again just makes me wonder what
what the necessity for for this
changes but but that's all I
have Mister chair thank you.
I need to respond Mr chairman
and senator.
That you would not see the
denials the level of the state
as a somebody goes to the doctor
you are the doctors and you
don't have the condition.
This they will give them a card.
And earlier and earlier point in
the process maybe it in your
shopping for another doctor who
will.
They have the condition but
that's not that's not a to the
Department solidified Department
education denials simply means
that they don't get the ones the
doctor isn't in the in.
And Mr chair centered that
that's a good point thank you I
appreciate that clarification.
Thank you for your question.
Mr chair yes.
Members of the committee with
questions.
What else.
Senator I.
Want to thank you and
Some of the words you use
resonated strongly with the I I
like the fact that you talked
about a program that has
integrity I wrote that down if
that mattered enough that you
can use that word
because that's where that
matters a lot to me and and you
also use the word honorable
program I wrote that down
because that that's where that
means something to me to having
an honors program and having
integrity I bring it up because
of course the the point is been
made here that we may be looking
at.
marijuana legislation in the
coming days in this committee
and probably some detail and
talking a great deal about it
and the the.
Make the point that was made
why.
By secretary is those are low
I guess program directors really
really want to call you is is
interesting to me that that it
seems like a very short and easy
way for folks to take advantage
of the system we had here too
and probably go beyond what you
consider what Senator might
consider to be honorable or a
program of integrity so I want
to thank both of you because I
think you've tried to preserve
that I think that's good I am.
Couple of sessions ago I needed
a break after a long six sixty
day session we I join my wife
and daughters who were who had a
little place and and
Representative for a few days on
Venice beach should be there but
not to Venice beach recently you
know I see I see Mr Logan I
think is that he knows where I'm
going if you go on Venice beach
of the the beach boardwalk now
is no longer of cotton candy and
skateboards or muscle man it's a
doctors who were seen patients
to write prescriptions for for
marijuana and then and then shop
there's only marijuana right
next door and that's the that's
the boardwalk of Venice so I can
understand how there would be
concern that that folks would be
able to really find a way into
the system that I don't think a
lot of us would have thought was
what what we did when when
candidly.
I supported very strongly the
medical marijuana in fact
Senator will recall this with
them back in the good old days
the bill the medical marijuana
bill used to get referred to the
ad committee in the house
because the there was a certain
death.
Rate the acts Committee tended
to include my friends and the
new ideas and Donna women me and
others and that was a pretty
sure way to make sure that that
bill never got out of a house
committee back in the day and I
I pretty strongly on that
committee to to be an advocate
for this program because I heard
people with very powerful
stories and and really in great
need for for this kind of help
and all of them with your word
centered that we we want to and
I voted for a program of
integrity and and I commend you
for for trying to maintain that
so thank you for that thank you
Mr zero thank you as well all
right that's the end of my
comments anyone else in the
committee.
Ready for
motions on the committee.
Senator Lopez with the motion Mr
chairman I move it to pass.
Question is do you pass.
I'll second the motion.
Emily would you please call the
roll.
Now.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes.
Lopez.
Yes.
Course
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart.
No.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Although yes so that the
chairman has picked.
Senator.
No difficulty doing that yes it
would do pass Senator thank you
very much Mr chairman and
members of the committee for a
very interesting discussion
thank you.
Thank you.
will next year Senator Kernan on
Senate bill two forty two.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
he I'm here I hope.
Good you are we can hear you
you're accustomed I hope by now
to remember in the long run in
the committee giving you up to
fifteen minutes of time to
advocate as you wish
I'm looking to see whether we
have a sign in sheet but because
you were I know in your area a
recent addition to our agenda I
may not have one so let me let
me tell you that you'll have the
fifteen minutes Senator Kernan
to control your fate so you'll
recognize your own experience
your own advocates within that
fifteen minutes all right thank
you thank you very much Mr
chairman appreciate the
opportunity here Senate bill two
forty two and I do have three
people I believe that are
waiting I have Shelly butcher.
I have judge Snyder.
And I have Deborah Gilmour I
don't know if secretary at.
Ryan Blaney lock is on or not I
think he was going to to turn
that over to miss Gilmore so I'm
let me just quickly tell you a
little bit about Senate bill two
forty two IST just maybe the
state masters getting my people
on this began as a CYFD agency
bills but in working with the
staff of both CYFD and the steps
to carry by rig council we
address them recommended
amendments and so therefore we
have a committee so before you
Senate bill committees the.
Senate bill two forty two CYFD
acknowledges that oversight is
critical to comply with captive
which is a federal law related
to child abuse prevention and
treatment that it expands on the
intentions of Capt about
creation of the grievance
procedure through the council
this secured by Rick.
The council is an independent
agency that was established in
twenty sixteen it's
administratively attached to R.
L. D. for administrative
purposes only the AOC notes
confidentiality requirements in
the bill as abuse and neglect
legal matters and not open to
the public this is committing as
I think I'm going to just turn
everything over now to I hope
judge Snyder is on and and let
her it could go from from this
point.
Thank you senator Mr chair
members of the committee good
afternoon I am anti starter I am
the chief judge in the twelfth
judicial district which is
comprised of Lincoln and Otero
counties I preside over at all
criminal Julia Julie Quincy and
child abuse and neglect cases I
also serve on the children's
part improvement commission the
juvenile justice advisory
commission the children's court
rules committee and I am a
member of the children's court
judges association I am also a
member of the substitute care
Advisory Council and I currently
serve as chair for the council.
Thank you for allowing me to
present this afternoon and in
the interest of time I'll be
respectfully brief the social
care excuse me SB two four to
updates and expands the purpose
of the citizens substitute
review Care Act the amendments
expand the council's independent
and objective monitoring of CYFD
and it codifies the federal
child abuse prevention and
treatment act requirements in
our act it adds definitions to
the act it modifies the
council's membership increasing
the members from nine to eleven
and this adds to the secretary
of early childhood and education
and childhood education and care
as a member as well as the
secretary of CYFD as a non
voting member.
As B. two four two amends the
responsibilities of the council
and more clearly outlines
such as your address your
council's administration and
staffing it provides for legal
representation to advise and
consult with the council it also
provides a grievance and process
for the council staff to review
and help resolve grievances
involving CYFD and it provides
that that council rules and
Supreme Court children's court
rules will govern how and what
cases are designated for review
and Mr chair members of the
committee with that I will stand
for questions.
Thank you at I don't know if
that miss Gilmore Mr chair would
like to say a few words.
Thank you Senator Kernan Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is Deborah Gilmour I am
the director of the office of
children's rights at the
children youth and families
department and I just want to
note that the just the AC and
it's expanded role with a Senate
bill two forty to support CYFD
is commitment to transparency
and our accountability to
federal and state child welfare
laws.
This continues to provide an
oversight vehicle it encourages
with these amendments I'm sorry
with this bill meaningful
dialogue and solution building
and it brings an outside that
outside perspective in for the
purposes of continuous quality
improvement in our vital
services to Max to New Mexico's
children and families for these
reasons and the one stated
Earlier we urge support a Senate
bill two forty two and I thank
you for your time.
Thank you very much and I think
we're ready to stand for
questions Mr chair.
Thank you senator for of being
consistent and well organized
we've neglected to recognize
that we also have on our call
Representative Matthews who I
understand to be a co sponsor
with you on that Mr chair I
apologize I I wasn't sure she
was on so if she has some and
then if you have a minute left
for her to say a word.
Many times are used five minutes
of your fifteen so.
Thank you as.
Senator Kernan thank you very
much yes I'm now sponsor of this
bill and
I would just encourage and we're
we're very happy is being heard
and hope that we can get it to
the house it will improve.
The the council and improve the
the need
he responsiveness we think of
CYFD December the concerns that
people have with their program
and and their support and the
fact that it's HSD bill I think
it's very important with that
I'll be quiet and at the
committee answer questions.
Thank you Representative Senator
Kernan anyone also want to
recognize I believe that's it
thank you Mr chair I think we're
ready for questions all right
because so we began this item a
little late on the agenda.
I am looking to see whether
there is anyone who registered
in opposition I'm finding none
I'm not aware of any opposition
and I'm being told there is not
so president to members of the
committee with questions.
The committee Representative
center doing.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Kernan Representative
Matthews for bringing this bill
and I think this is a great bill
Senator Kernan I thought you
mentioned when you begin that
there is a committee substitute
is that correct so so Mister
chair and senator it came out of
health and Human.
Out of the Senate health and
public affairs committee as a
substitute so you have before
you what what it what it is at
this point.
Okay Mr chair Senator thank you
I just want to make sure is
looking at the right thing my
only my only thought when I was
looking through this is that
on page twelve I there's some
language that struck About
specific criteria I for
designation of cases
and that's that's on lines three
to about eleven.
And then later that this is
adding in language I think it
lines eighteen to nineteen
saying that that the rules are
developed by the council will
establish Craig that established
criteria I I was just wondering
why why we're taking pressure
out of statute and and maybe put
making that a rulemaking process
and stat thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator in I think if
this is what you forwarded to me
I did supply that to judge
Snyder and Mr chair and to miss
Gilmore may I would judge not to
respond to that please.
Mr chair Senator certainly.
Mr chair Senator director of the
reason that we called that
language out and I first I
actually understand your concern
because it's it it appears to be
a pretty comprehensive list of
the types of cases that would be
reviewed but it it is actually
pretty restrictive and just as
an example of the kind of a case
that wouldn't be included in
what is in our statute now it K.
where a child is believed to be
over Medicaid there'd be nothing
in this for specific group
review of that type of case and
so with the addition as you
noted online dating eighteen and
nineteen it gives a broader
scope for us to work with the
council work with CYFD as part
of the council under this new
legislation to to determine that
criteria in in a more fluid way
and then also some of the items
that are currently listed
there's not really a way to
track or review like that
behavioral health status of
household members I'm not even
entirely sure what that means so
it's it's it's it's not a good
list and it's not a
comprehensive list thank you
senator Mr chair thank you Mr
chair judge thank you for
explaining that that that makes
total sense to me thank you
that's all I have Mister chair.
Thanks to other members the
committee with questions.
Sir Lopez.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and I just wanted to say thank
you Senator Kernan as our
discussion that we had on the
floor the other day on Senate
bill one twenty seven the family
representation legislation I
know these are bits and pieces
of the puzzle I think as we
began to to strengthen on what
we can do more for our our
families our children that
become entangled within our
system so I just want to say
thank you very much I appreciate
the committee substituted it
clear out a little bit more of
some of the concerns I was and
flagged myself so I just wanna
say thank you and I know this is
it's just again as part of that
puzzle so thank you Mr chairman
Senator.
Thank you.
Senator Lopez anyone else
reading.
Questions any other questions
the committee
motions of the committee.
I moved to pass through Sir
Duhigg got there before you
Senator Lopez you got to be
quick with the new freshman you
know I've noticed it got a lot
of Splunk a lot of energy in
their fast I know exactly I'll
do a second Mr chairman.
With.
With with the respect their
elders that's all on all ask for
me not use that a little bit
about me talk about me Senator
doing with the motion Senator
Lopez with the second we'll take
a roll call vote on this one
family please.
Two passed motion.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes.
Senator Lopez.
Yes.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart yes.
Got to Senator Pirtle.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Representative you
together have a due pass motion
on Senate bill two forty two as
amended committee substitute.
Thank you very much we
appreciate it thank you so much
thank you senator I will next go
to house bill forty seven as
amended and I'm gonna take a
very brief break Mr chair.
and turned the gavel to Senator
Ivey Soto being here by in the
absence of of o'neill will we'll
be back in just about five
minutes but Senator would you
bring up house bill forty seven.
We have Representative
Armstrong.
With this very well yes I'll be
happy to and Representative
Armstrong so the way that we've
been conducting.
The presentation of bills in the
Senate Judiciary Committee has
been that the proponents have
fifteen minutes for both the
presentation as well as.
All persons in public comment
and then and and that is talk to
your time to manage as you would
like including reserving some
for after opening speech and
then the opponents will have ten
minutes.
To to make their case for the
committee and then that will
give a maximum amount of time
for the committee to be able to
deliberate and consider of the
bill.
So with that it is four fifty
right now and the next fifteen
minutes are yours thank you Mr
chair and I believe my co
sponsors senators to fan X. is
going to take the lead.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee we are
here today presenting house bill
forty seven as amended the
Elizabeth white field and of
life options act.
And Mr chair I will briefly go
through this then go to my co
sponsors that are expert
witnesses and then our
proponents and we are aware of
the time.
This bill specifically would
allow I don't.
Only adult.
With a terminally ill condition.
With less than six months to
live to be able to work with a
physician and another health
care provider to request a
prescription to end their own
life themselves with no other
assistance there are many
safeguards in this bill.
The health care provider
includes medical physician
osteopathic physician advanced
practice nurse or physician's
assistant there must be a
physician if there's any doubt
about the mental capacity there
then referred for a mental
health evaluation that this has
to come from the individual
themselves a terminal illness
means a condition or disease
that's incredible your
reversible and that we're will
result in death within six
months.
Details The bill details the
responsibility of a health care
provider to determine the
eligibility.
It looks the health care
provider looks at the history of
mental health or any disorders
mental health disorders.
It the bill provides a sample
request form that must be signed
by the patient we just witnessed
and becomes part of the medical
records and family members
cannot be the only witnesses to
this request so that there is
not pressure for the individual.
This requires health care
providers to inform terminally
ill patients of all options
consistent with medical
standards of care including
hospice care and palliative
care.
It states that the death
certificate should show the
cause of death as the underlying
terminal condition.
That the medical aid in dying or
end of life options will have no
impact on wheels or contracts.
It also goes on to indicate I
mention the mental health
provider already it prohibits
any physician from actually
administering end of life
prescriptions for lethal drugs
or any I. B.'s this is not.
Lethal injections mercy killing
or use the nation euthanasia a
person must request that
themselves and use it themselves
okay in the men's the public
health act excuse me to drive
rules to make it clear or to
report annually on how it is
being used and it exams of
persons who have been given
immunity so any person who has
any
William with conscience is not
required in any way to
participate in this bill and
there is a section in the bill
that addresses that.
So Mr chair I'm going to go to
my
house co sponsor who's been
carrying this for many years for
people who are hearing this for
the first time it was introduced
in nineteen ninety five and at
that time my expert witness at
that time was professor rob
Schwartz and he's one of our two
expert witnesses today so he
stuck with it with all the
different sponsors over the
years representative Debbie
Armstrong will speak next I do
know that senator bill o'neill
and senator Kerry Hamlin are
also Senator Sanchez
Representative Armstrong.
Well we're about five minutes of
your time please proceed thank
you thank you Mr chair and not
thank you senator us to panic so
I'll keep my remarks short as I
can add on during a Q. and a
second let others speak but I
just want to
the state that.
You know I have the number one
question that I generally get
asked is why do this and my
answer has always been more
professional
I have worked with geriatric
patients work hospice work with
terminally ill children
over
decades and have been present in
care giver for
several family and friends
friends
and.
But it's really really personal
now and I know that many of you
on of the committee.
I know my daughter Erin's and
know some of her
struggles are with cancers and
she was diagnosed as a teenager
over twenty years ago.
And I'm but since you've had an
opportunity to hear this bill
and I think the last time you
heard in the Senate was and
twenty seventeen.
in the last two years Aaron's
cancer has
metastasized to her brain her
bones her liver and expanded in
our loans she's on a clinical
trial
the side effects from a clinical
trial mean that she now has to
actually come back on the dosage
another side effect
from treatment drugs is now the
phones are hips are becoming a
product.
she still has an inoperable
brain tumor sitting on the nerve
to her face and she fights every
single day to live.
And fights hard to live.
But at some point.
The treatment is going to not be
effective anymore.
She's never been in remission
for more than twenty years she's
never been in remission and at
some point.
Things will change and we know
what it means to have X. Scrushy
aiding bone pain nerve pain
inability to breathe because of
the.
Tumors in your longs and she has
made all her health to care
decisions from the time she was
a teenager life and death
decisions about what treatment
to do what treatment not to do.
And at the end of her life.
She deserves the ability to make
that decision again thank you Mr
chair.
So Mister Mr chair
I don't know if my other co
sponsors want to say a minute of
anything but if not we would go
on to doctor Steve Koenig our
expert and professor rob
Schwartz.
Before.
Given the seven minutes you have
left I would recommend you go to
doctor can again rob Brock
sports.
Mr chair members of the
committee good afternoon and Dr
Stephen canning to retired new
phrenologist and long time New
Mexicans.
Our medical profession has been
very successful in alleviating
physical pain in the
overwhelming majority of
patients with severe and
terminal illnesses.
But emotional suffering and
emotional pain are just as
powerful as physical pain.
There are many terminally ill
patients for whom not being in
control of their destiny of how
and when and where and with whom
they will die.
Is the cause of emotional
suffering and pain every bit is
decimating as physical pain.
Third of those who request the
cocktail like the one provided
by this bill never elect to use
it.
But a hundred percent are
enormously relieved and much
more at peace knowing that they
had the option.
Medical aid in dying is not
suicide it is not a decision
that death is preferable to
life.
Suicide indeed means choice of
life over death but terminally
ill patients are not making that
choice.
As a physician I'm strongly
supportive of HB forty seven not
only is this in accordance with
the most sacred covenants of our
profession is precisely what it
means to be compassionate at the
most difficult time of the
patient's life.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm rob Schwartz I
am a member of the UNM law
school faculty the law school
I've been a law school faculty
for the last forty five years
where I have studied among other
things of the law of end of life
care and you have before you
today a carefully crafted
compromise end of life options
bill that's based on the
statutes that have been
successful and successfully
implemented in now ten
jurisdictions in some cases for
the last two decades and I do
want to take up time from the
the the other people are going
to speak today who are the
reason that I have been working
on this for the last quarter of
a century but let me just
quickly say that this bill is
based on two principles that are
extremely important and form the
basis of health care decision
making law in New Mexico and the
other reasons that New Mexico
has been a national leader in
healthcare decision making law
and they are first respect for
the diversity of religions
cultures and values of the
people of New Mexico that's of
value in New Mexico that is a
positive value in New Mexico and
second related to that
interested diversity in the
strong libertarian principle it
says that each one of us gets to
decide what medical care we will
get that is a question for each
human being it is not a question
for the government this
principle says that New Mexico
the New Mexico government trusts
individuals to make these
decisions I'll be happy to
attempt to address any questions
that you have for me about the
nature of the bill thank you
very much thank you very much
press reports of who is next to
speak.
Jackson.
Members of the committee Gen
Jackson for disability rights
New Mexico because of the
controversial nature of this
bill within the disability
community disability rights New
Mexico is neither promoting nor
a so promoting or opposing this
bill but we're comfortable with
this neutral position because
the sponsors have worked closely
with us to it not to address the
concerns that we had raised as
this legislation was being
developed we want to acknowledge
I appreciate that we are
confident that there are
adequate safeguards in this bill
that is sure that this option
will only be available to
individuals with disabilities
who are at the end of their
lives and you have the capacity
to fully understand the issues
and make this decision
involuntary voluntarily thank
you.
Thank you very much Sir Libby
Hopkins.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name's Libby
Hopkins and I'm a hospice nurse
here in New Mexico and have been
for many years I'd like to share
with you the story of a patient
whom I will call Mr eight might
cared for some years ago Mr a
had prostate cancer which had
metastasized to his bones into
his brain because of the disease
in his brain he had
increasingly severe seizures
they became more severe and
frequency and duration and and
their severity.
He was terrified of the seizures
and he had them despite the best
hospice care which included a
stay in hospital patient it
included continuous infusion and
much other
wonderful hospice and palliative
care one day when he was talking
to me about his fear of dying in
a seizure he said I wish I could
die like they do in Oregon would
be.
But he couldn't.
About a week later Mr a did die
he died in the throes of what we
called status epilepticus which
is an an extended prolonged
protracted protracted seizure
that we can't control it was a
horrific front sight his family
was there he did die
The death that he had not wished
to die with his family present
it's for folks like Mr a that I
hope you'll support the judge
Elizabeth Wakefield and of life
options at thank you.
Thank you we have called on.
And Mr torn you have one minute
left in that time.
All of our.
I'm sorry he's not here he is
the spouse of judge Elizabeth
white field.
Dr Kate Morris.
Mr chair person Senators thank
you for allowing me to speak
today my name is Katherine
Morrison I'm an associate
professor of surgery I support
this bill and I hope the
following story will explain
why.
At the time amendments Curtis
when I was practicing as a
surgical oncologist in Oregon
I've worked with thousands of
cancer patients.
She was the first to ask me for
help with medical aid in dying.
I had cared for her and her
remarkable family for over a
year when the cancer recurred
and she asked me for this it was
a very difficult decision in a
career challenging choices and
yet I'm incredibly thankful I
said yes because of the piece
that I thought overcome her when
she received that answer she
told me now I have a door I can
open if I need to.
In the following months she
lived with immense joy with her
family and tell her condition
worsened suddenly.
She called me at that time told
me Dr Jim I'm suffering and I'm
going to use this medication
Monday will you be there.
I was with her and I was with
her family that cold December
evening I witnessed fierce
determination to celebrate her
life and her family and to have
a peaceful passing by exercising
her agency under this law.
It was transcendent this is the
grace that I pray you will
extend to terminally ill
mentally competent patients who
would choose that for themselves
in New Mexico thank you thank
you very much doctor Morris you
actually ended right at the time
so
Representative Armstrong Senator
facts thank you very much for
The presentation I will also
note.
On the list of Russia proponents
we've heard from a couple of
these also are Senator pan
Judith Perlman P. M. M. D. E.
Louis Hopkins sacking Tero a
Nancy about gland Buckland hard
at what that'll match dean Dr
Morris Jim Jackson Louis Hopkins
K. R. garland Paul Gibson and
that of the hill Center Pam
dynamic cast Marcia Hammons
Diane cook in the paint I don't
want to thank all of you for
registering give comment today
and I please want to to
appreciate that the time
constraints is so the committee
can have an adequate amount of
time to build consider the bill
and and be thoughtful in our
consideration of that this
legislation.
We now move to the vote of the
bill and is there an organized
up.
A presentation in opposition to
the bill.
Very welcome not seeing anybody
indicating that there is an
organized a presentation in
opposition to the bill.
Be part of that I have Richard
R. John Fulton deacon Steve from
jungle to propel the policy
alliance you can see from
conference got the bishops.
Danych adult eight dates of the
address John blocked by the air
from patients rights action fund
Kolton Miller New Mexico
coalition against physician
assisted suicide and Jon Kelly
from not dead yet if each of you
speaks for one minute you will
be able to get to everybody and
if not we will cut off after ten
minutes of the time now is five
oh eight and and so
let me just start with in the
order that I have them of the Mr
pulled.
Thank you my name is John Paul
with family policy alliance
thank you Mr chairman and
members on behalf of thousands
of New Mexicans we oppose house
bill forty seven because of the
underlining impact it would have
on families assisted suicide
enough with additional strides
away I need to re
first it forces them to choose
between caring for life we're
taking life.
This is enormous pressure on the
elderly and infirm.
Nine twenty nineteen and origin
fifty four percent of people who
requested assisted suicide did
so because they fear being a
burden to their families it also
escalates the threat of pressure
from financial predators in the
family.
Mexico was House health in
recent years passed measures to
encourage people to report
financial exploitation builders
this legislation would go in the
opposite direction by enabling
financial creditors in the
family who would seek to reduce
reduce the burden of care and
get access to wealth for these
reasons and many more we urge
you to oppose house bill forty
so.
Thank you very much Sir Didi
deacon Steve are from the office
of Catholic bishops thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
thank you for allowing public
comment my name is taken Steve
Rangel associate director for
the New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishop and we're in
opposition of house bill forty
seven doctor assisted suicide
opens the possibility of human
error just the same as it does
for the death penalty if there's
a chance that a person would be
killed we didn't choose to take
their own life then it's called
murder that is clear that we
have how to care and hospice to
deal with pain if we're not
willing to provide health care
politics care and hospice for
everyone then we have no
business writing prescription
drugs to kill we should be
talking about making healthcare
available for everyone so they
don't have to make those tough
decisions between life and
death.
Elder abuse is considered a
major health problem in the
United States with fellow
federal estimate that one in ten
elder persons are views facing
legal drugs the focus drugs into
the hands of abuse charities an
additional major risks to elder
persons the church believes in a
consistent ethic of life can
confection to natural death and
on a personal note my mom has
been on hospice for four years
when we first told about her
condition we toters we were told
that she would make it six
months it's over four years now
and by the grace of god you
still with us so I ask you to
vote no to house bill forty
seven.
Thank you very much a deacon
I'll also know by the way and
I'm this is before the Douglas
price also registered as an
employment we now move to two
under any oddity.
And then to well yes okay all
right thank you.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
members of the committee
I propose the assisted suicide
bill based on the following
phone ordinance many of the
justifications for the suicide
or to ease the suffering of
individuals which ends up being
an emotional argument and and as
you can see Rachael said it is.
The the needs of the dying can
be matched with hospice wrongful
deaths have occurred in
Washington and Oregon it will
also happen in New Mexico.
Not every New Mexico resident
has a loving family some
builders are pressure to commit
suicide insurance companies have
withheld lifesaving treatments
and states with assisted
suicide.
And disable people are
especially vulnerable as their
lives are devalued investigative
reporting in Washington over
Oregon have covered these
problems we know the accord  we
don't know the frequency because
of lax reporting requirements in
those states for example the
Oregon department of Human
Services does not have the
authority to investigate
potential abuses.
Forty seven what why does not
have a bus patient protection
and puts Mexicans at risk
underserved communities will be
especially vulnerable and I
point to the fact that the DNA
I talked on the association
which is the Navajo Nation is
released an official statement
opposing HB forty seven on March
eighth of this year please
reject HB forty seven.
Thank you very much I'm gonna
continue with people
representing organizations right
now Matt by the air for the
patients rights action fund.
Hello Mister chair members of
the committee the New Mexico
legislature as a critical chance
to addressing glaring issues and
our health care system revealed
by the pandemic you know things
like increase access to care
education for patients programs
for more training in palliative
care hospice care for medical
professionals home health and
personal care aides family
caregiver relief in other words
to access the gold standard
which should be the top priority
giving doctors an immunity
passed to assist our patients
and suicide not only addresses
and none of the problems that
can only exacerbate the current
disparities in health care when
some people get suicide
prevention others get suicide
help our pro are broken profit
your health care system sets up
a two tiered system access where
death results for the devalued
group we made a maxed New Mexico
don't even have access to
running water reliable
electricity never mind top
quality medical care to societal
financial pressures and elder
abuse on the rise but will
people will get pressure take
suicide death rather than taking
the care they deserve that is a
gross distortion process adds on
to our time we will be with
disabilities people of color
faced a myriad of health
challenges and now this pandemic
are experiencing greater
disadvantages due to lack of
access it's no wonder do that
groups like black in the DNA
disability rights organizations
for the most part are opposing
this legislation.
When you have a system that.
where we're tough cases I think
nothing away I have also care
for dying people it is not an
easy road and.
When tough cases do make bad law
though what a when a lot of that
like this that could
hypothetically on some first in
some people's view helps some
very small number of people and
a great number of people are
going to be put at risk of
deadly harm to mistakes abuse
and coercion.
I urge you with all my heart to
vote no on this dangerous and
discriminatory public policy
whatever time I have left please
I see it to John Kelly Act I'm
happy to answer any questions
that you may have thank you.
Thank you very much Mr valley
are actually going to call to
Miller from the New Mexico
coalition against physician
assisted suicide after him will
be John Kelly from that date
yet.
Mr Miller.
But I guess we will proceed to
Mr Kelly from not that yet.
Thank you my name is John Kelly
I just turned sixty three and
it's been thirty seven years
since an accident left me
paralyzed below the shoulders.
I love my life is full of
meaning and connection and I'm
privileged to be able to work
part time as a disability rights
advocate and yet as someone
commonly described as paralyzed
from the neck down I have to
witness these better dead than
disabled bills introduced year
after year pretending to be
about people dying in
excruciating pain with no relief
possible what really about
people who are becoming
dependent on others the top five
reasons out more again I've
always been about people's
psychological reactions to
increasing disability and
dependence on others people use
the word data they all the time
saying they want to die with
dignity saying that being cared
for by others is lack of dignity
how dare you as the state
legislative branch decide who
does and who does not have
dignity that it's dignified to
get the state to help you die
because you feel like a burden
or because you want to leave
hide and Harradence to people
coming after you are people
don't want to take care of you
and because there's no home
benefit under Medicare and you
have to impoverish yourself if
you want to get care and this
bill as all built across the
state is being pushed by one
demographic the wealthier
professional classes who are
used to having control and
respect in their lives it's
opposed by poor people working
class people of all races and
especially in the black and
brown communities who would know
the best not just about the
individual and the pros and cons
of their individual lives but
that we live in a network of
family where we all are.
Allies to others and others all
of their service to us thank you
about now.
Thank you very much Mr Kelly we
have about one minute left if
there's somebody else in
opposition who would like to
speak.
I'll be happy to recognize you
for about one minutes.
And otherwise we have registered
opposition and so thank you all
very much I know that this on
both sides a very much issue and
and I very much appreciate the
sincerity of everybody who's
given Mr that Mr chair I have a
moment that you may yes Mr chair
members of the committee J. son
Dion's registered lobbyists for
the Navajo Nation office of the
president we respectfully oppose
house bill forty seven.
Well the demolition opposes the
bill because we believe all life
is sacred and the laws of nature
that guide a person from birth
to death must be respected.
Now renewable nations concern
that medical aid in dying would
have a disk proportionate
negative impact on disadvantaged
communities like ours as doctors
and insurance companies may deny
more costly medical treatment
individuals who live in poverty
or elderly or have disabilities
and instead push for a medical
aid in dying of thank you for
your opted for the opportunity
to speak on this topic thank you
Sir thank you very much Mr
something M. S. and of Mr black
I do know that you also
requested to speak however we
are at the ten minutes Mr price
we are the ten minutes I'm very
sorry Mr chairman I'll and the
committee back over to.
Thank you thank you Sir and for
the up to take a brief break
although I was there for most of
all of the tessellation thank
you all for the testimony on
both sides of the issue I will
go to members of the committee
I'd like to see my hands right
now those who wish to speak and
so I can begin to prepare that
list so I just hands real quick
can I see who is interested in
trying to ask questions or speak
on the subject.
I'm seeing none.
Let me then ask some questions
of my own way something no one
else on the committee.
These will be introductions I
hope for a.
Perhaps for one of my former law
professors the social workers is
good to see you again.
And I know you've been working
on this for a very long time as
well.
So
I'm not sure I guess the
question should be directed to
to
Senator fine Sir to
representative Armstrong how
would you vote for that I'm
really Senator Stefanics is
leading thank you okay all right
so address the law direct these
to you representative Armstrong.
We.
I'm gonna look for the
opportunity in this bill to try
and.
You for those of you that were
on the call earlier look for
opportunities is Center
Representative trying to tighten
up the legislation whenever
possible.
And eliminate.
Language that I think is
probably unnecessary.
So let me begin on page two.
With what is subsection do
you'll forgive me because I'm
looking at a version of the bill
that has the amendments in
contact.
So I I'm gonna avoid referring
to page in line numbers because
they won't align.
But if
If we're on the same section
section two.
Subsection do close the
definition of a health care
provider yes Mr chair I thank
you and the so begins a
health care provider has as many
that means any of the following
individuals this is authorized
pursuant to New Mexico drug
device and cosmetic Act when
asked about that language there
why is the language pursuant to
New Mexico drug device and
cosmetic Act necessary and why
wouldn't it just read following
individuals authorized to
prescribe medication to be use
what what is the what is the
purpose for need for the words
pursuant to the New Mexico drug
device and cosmetic at.
Thank you Mr chair I'm will
refer that to professor about
forty.
Thank you very much now Mr
chairman members of the
committee the idea there was to
make it very clear exactly which
professionals would be able to
engage in of the described
activity under the statute in
New Mexico in this sense New
Mexico is slightly different
from some other states were
rural state we don't have
physicians as many physicians
especially in rural parts of the
state yet everyone agrees that
this statute should be as
available to people in rural
parts of the state as it is in
the Albuquerque and other urban
areas so The New Mexico The New
Mexico drug device and cosmetic
Act describes who in fact can
prescribe that issue maybe
change their there are for
example
a nurse licensed advanced
practice pursuant to the nurse
press practice act is can in
fact
Under the New Mexico drug device
and cosmetic act prescribe
medication to be used could
could be does can't get
prescribed the medications which
will be used in medical aid in
dying but in fact that's changed
over the years impacted changed
fairly recently and in fact
there are different kinds of
advanced nurse practice of an
advanced practice nurses with
different kinds of authority in
our attempt here was to try to
be crystal clear in exactly who
is authorized to actually
participate in the various roles
that are permitted within the
statute.
And so
Senator of.
Professor shores so when you say
that that this very pursuant to
Mexico drug dot it was coming so
who does that include that what
is that because this to
prescribe medication so our our
as I understand your answer
there are individuals health
care providers other than under
the New Mexico drug device and
cosmetic Act who can prescribe
medication is that right.
well no I I believe that these
are
Mr chair I believe that these
are the old the ones who can in
fact now prescribed medication
upper prescribed these
medications
let's see following
give me just one second here
because I haven't let me
interrupt you if it what you're
looking because you repeatedly
said Kristen Stewart authorized
to prescribe these medications
but right now nobody is
authorized to prescribe these
medications that's the purpose
of this bill is to decide who
would be authorized to prescribe
the medications so so that's why
this one definition there's
something that I think I want to
be really clear about.
A district for what what happens
if you delete the words pursuant
to the and then going for the
word act what happens to the
bill if if those words are
deleted.
Mr chair and members the
committee I believe that the the
the problem is course no one is
authorized right now to
prescribed the medication for
this purpose but people are
authorized to prescribe these
medications and in fact it's
only those that are listed there
in the statute in section D. in
the definition or authorized to
prescribe these medications so
in fact there might be some
advanced practice nurses for
example who don't gorge
authorized to prescribe
medication in order to in fact
be able to do the prescription
under this statute you'd have to
be authorized under the New
Mexico drug device and cosmetic
Act to prescribe the precise
medications that will be used in
this process and there are
medications which have in fact
changed slightly over the years
as researchers showed which of
the met the medications are the
most effective and I'll find for
the most humane and dignified
death but in fact you have to be
authorized by the New Mexico law
to write the prescription for
those medications and in
addition to that you have to fit
into one of these four
categories so for example you
could imagine a that that there
might might be a nurse who would
have be able to do some kind of
advanced practice nursing but
not the authorized to write the
medications right prescription
for the medications that would
be used in medical aid in dying
that in less it is a nurse and
advanced practice nurse
under is who is recognized as an
advanced practice nurse under
the nurse practice act who is
also authorized to write the
prescription under the New
Mexico statute that person
couldn't write the prescription.
That person wouldn't count as
the health care provider so it
is no there there in in ways of
narrowing I think the number of
people and the classes of people
who can participate.
Mr chair
as as an example there's
advanced practice nurse
midwives.
And a nurse midwife I think has
a narrower
of formula area of drugs that
they are authorized to
prescribe.
What a crucial is what I'm
trying to do quite simply really
is this I look at the.
We we say any of the following
individuals were authorized
pursuant to the act to prescribe
medication that we're going to
listen in for subparagraphs who
those individuals can be and I'm
trying to avoid with number one
redundancy in number two and
inconsistency because if we ever
amend the New Mexico drug advice
in because medic Act what
happens when that that scope may
be different than the scope in
Paris of perhaps one two and
three and four we're we're very
clear that the the the health
care provider would be in a
position licensed to practice in
osteopathic physician licensed
pursuant to the osteopathic
medicine FY we may want to pause
there because I discuss as was
our this or that we may have
limited the session we're in the
process of eliminating the
osteopathic medicine act
monetarily sure whether that's
we did or not.
Whether we go in paragraph three
at a nurse licenses best
practice in the position of
assistant as is described there
once again we have another
reference to the osteopathic
medicine medicine that but but
I'm still perplexed if we're
going to we're going to list the
for individuals who can
prescribe the medication why do
we then have the language by
defining the individual who is
authorized pursuant to the drug
device and cosmetic Act in other
words does that does that act
require an individual to have
certain qualifications to
prescribe a medication that
would be use and if so where do
we where do we specify this bill
with those Medicaid medications
are now at
Mr chairman members the
committee it let let me take
another shot at it because I I
think that I can understand
where you're coming from now and
I think that that's a very
reasonable question we spent a
lot of time trying to get this
very paragraph paragraph D.
right so that it would actually
work and serve the purpose that
we intended to serve in this
bill so there are two
requirements before someone can
actually be considered a health
care provider under this statute
for purposes of the statute one
that person has to be able to
write prescriptions and we look
at those who can write
prescriptions for the kinds of
drugs that would have
historically and are likely to
be used in medical aid nine and
those are those who are
authorized by the New Mexico
drug device and cosmetic Act
what is representative Armstrong
suggested there are some people
who maybe are authorized to
write those that fit in in
particular categories but there
are some people licensed to
write some of those
prescriptions who may not in
fact fit exists might not be
authorized to write all of those
prescriptions so in addition to
being authorized to write the
particular prescription that's
necessary for medical aid in
dying one also must be either a
position in osteopathic
physician a nurse licensed in
advanced practice.
Or a position assistance
licensed in advanced practice
for example
there are some of of
prescriptions that pharmacists
can dispense the pharmacist may
be able to write and there
probably will be more down the
road that the pharmacist is not
going to be considered a health
care provider you may fit under
the first part II maybe an
individual authorized pursuant
to the New Mexico drug device
and cosmetic Act to prescribe
medication but it doesn't fit
under the second part so that
person while meeting part of the
requirement doesn't meet all the
requirements for being a health
care provider under the statute.
And I understand appreciate that
answer a professor within that
still leaves me with my original
question which is what is lost
by striking the word pursuant to
the New Mexico drug device and
cosmetic Act if you're already
of limiting that scope whether
following fourth subparagraphs
what's the point of having the
preceding language.
You're you're gonna have to be
you're going to have to be
authorized to prescribe the
medication if you're one of
those other four subcategories
are you not.
Well no no no
Mr Mister chairman I'll you in
fact you could be of for example
and advanced practice nurse
midwife and not be authorized to
prescribe the appropriate
medication and you're still and
advanced practice nurse under
the nursing practice act so you
didn't get a gory three.
But you would not be considered
a health care provider for
purposes of medical aid in dying
because you're not authorized to
write the particular
prescriptions that you're gonna
have to write under the New
Mexico
a drug device and cosmetic Act
you're not authorized to write
the particular prescriptions you
have to write to write a
prescription that would be
meaningful under the statute.
So I believe they're both
necessary and again we tried to
make it simpler we tried to make
it shorter and we were concerned
about this this same point and
there was no way that we could
figure out to do it that we that
maintained the professional
training we thought was really
important and also the
prescriptive authority.
So I think what will help me
quite a bit is that help me
understand what drugs are we
talking about where the use and
for what purpose.
M. let me Mr chair wonder if I
could ask doctor Koenig
if you could address this
question was probably a in a
better position to tell you of
the names of the drugs imported
these do change over time as we
see what the most effective
drugs are for this purpose.
Thank you doctor caning
Mr chair and and the Mr Schwartz
I unfortunately don't have in
front of me a copy of the exact
medications that have been
authorized to be used and
situation but I strongly support
everything that professor
Schwartz just said I think it's
absolutely critical that we are
ex absolutely clear as to who is
authorized to prove to provide
these medications I can see the
potential for trouble down the
road if it's not absolutely
clear so while I certainly agree
with you
Mr savant is that it's very very
important to not have duplicate
information that
clutter is up to the bill under
the hundred and in this act in
particular I think.
We should err on the side of
being completely completely
clear.
And it if I may add Senator
Mondays I can read you from the
from the twenty eighteen Oregon
report and tell you exactly
which medications were used in
Oregon if that would be helpful
there were several different
alternative combinations that
were used in in twenty eighteen
how.
Let me let me interpret
provisions I I don't know the
names of the drugs or the
manufacturer because I would
know when the that means anyway
and would be able to pronounce
it right after you said it
anyway the the the issue for me
is I just want to send the
process no it's I'm assuming
there is something of some kind
of form of our Bituin or or
depressants or something that
slows down the bodily revivals
of systems why don't symptoms
and eventually leads to cell
death I was kind of ensuring
what what what what how does
this happen in this comes up a
little bit because you're right
we we have of executions are
performed areas places I hear
terrible stories about how
sometimes those procedures are
not smooth or or more of
merciful or anything other than
than really very troublesome so
I'm just kind of put I just kind
of interest and what what do you
what is is is it going to be
multiple drugs at a series of
drugs is it up as a couple of
pills I mean to help me just
understand I don't have the the
names of the the specific drugs.
Well
etcetera as a foundation members
the committee again I can't tell
you the class of the drugs I
guess some of them I can I can
recognize what the names are but
there are calm there two
combinations that were used in
twenty nineteen most commonly
and an Oregon I suppose I can
give you the names of drugs
drive data could tell us what
what they actually how they
actually work together but I
really don't understand the the
medicine either so I'm not to be
a very good person described as
though the way they they operate
the the most commonly used
combination well as diazepam
digoxin morphine sulfate and
amitriptyline
in Oregon but there was another
combination as well that was
diazepam digoxin morphine
sulfate and.
We're the ones that were used
not all of those licensed health
care providers are authorized to
prescribe all of those under the
New Mexico statutes.
And I'm
you Mr chairman.
Senator Ivey Soto yes I do
apologize for interrupting but I
just wanted to let everybody
know that.
Since I have been asked by
leadership not to exercise my
senatorial duties on any house
bill's I will not be
participating in in in the
consideration of any hospitals
I'm terribly sorry for this we
will also no longer in my
committee the considering any
house bill's at this time of
disable future thank you very
much and I'm a wish everyone
well on this bill and I'm very
sorry not to be participating in
consideration of this bill
because I find to be incredibly
important for us to be doing in
our work in the legislature.
Senator Ivey Soto before you
sign off of you the service sort
of.
Okay well
thank you for that.
let's see.
You may now have to regroup here
I I'm without a vice chair so
that's all right will will slog
through it anyway so I am
familiar with diazepam you
mentioned morphine.
I'm not a doctor commission or
anything of the kind but but I
think wearing my right to say
those are effectively
depressants.
Mr chair I'm sorry that I can't
I feel uncomfortable and beyond
what part professor Schwartz the
doctor needs to answer that
question thank you.
Dr king where do we have you
here for your medical expertise
please.
Yes and thank you as.
Senator Cervantes
The combination of medications
are being prescribed are have
been very very carefully
considered and have been proven
in other states that have
refined this over the course of
many years.
so for example digoxin given in
high quantities is capable of
stopping the heart other
medications that have been
prescribed are done to alleviate
any potential for
the person who is receiving
medications to feel discomfort
and basically just be become
deeply sedated so that they're
able to and in peace and without
any discomfort whatsoever and
also the reliability of these
medications is extremely
important to somebody just
pointed out we don't ever want a
situation in which these
medications are provided and do
not succeed in what they were
intended to do so I I hope
that's very safe that that
that's helpful in understanding
this a little bit better Senator
**** it is helpful Dr alone when
I'm gonna want to explore this
content I I don't I don't mean
to be labor but but we are we're
were authorized by this law a
patient an individual to be able
to take the medication
themselves to end their life and
I I want to have a very clear
understanding of what that
process involves so morphine is
I understand is a medication
that's administered to interfere
with paying for the experience
perception of pain that's my
understanding whether working
would be administered is to make
sure that there's a painless
experience diazepam I assume is
intended for sedation what you
mentioned also I think that
jocks the Johnson is that right
which is the heart stopping
medication correct.
And and that so how does this
how does this following always
obviously you're gonna follow
sedation by a heart stopping
medication is there a delay to
the to the medication that that
terminates the cardiac function
does that become delayed and and
giving enough time for the
station drugs to have their
effect.
Senator Cervantes I I think that
these this has all been very
very carefully done over a
period of of many years and and
and a number of states that have
come up with a contamination of
medications that are effective
that are painless and that we
know we're going to work and
it's all done to answer your
earlier question is all done by
the cocktail that the patient
drinks there is no M. and
injection involved it's entirely
painless and you know it has
been refined over the years
originally the mixture of the
medications was different and it
didn't always work as well as it
should as they should have in
many many years gone past but
that is long behind us now and I
think we have an excellent track
record of the people who have.
Taking advantage of medical aid
in dying and that once they
drink this cocktail
it works over a period of
minutes to at the very most
several hours and it's always
been not only effective but
paintless.
Mr chair could I add something
Dr Kate Morris who's with us has
had experience with several of
these drugs as she indicated to
me and so perhaps pharmaceutical
E. she could answer some of
these questions.
Thank you have a terrific I
appreciate that.
So
doctor Morris you do have the
questions yes ma'am Senator
Stefanics Mr chairman my
understanding is the question is
about the order that the drugs
are taken in and the the way
that they work and I have the
experience that I had an organ
with several years back in with
was with a slightly different
cocktail medications but the
things that they share in common
are an anti nausea component to
help with the narcotics and the
sedative effects as well and
certainly you can speak to I
think that a cocktail that was
mentioned was marketing and day
diazepam surveilling to
sedatives and then the digoxin
the digoxin my understanding and
Dr Kenny could certainly speak
to this for pharmacological
standpoint better than I could
but the digoxin would take some
time to actually take a bill the
level and take a fact in the
system so the patient would take
that cocktail together
preceded by an anti medic if
needed and then would lose
consciousness over time and that
was the experience that we had
an organ the nation's conscience
in about half an hour.
Again I appreciate the
understanding I I should let you
all know I sometimes get
involved with medical issues in
my legal practice and I I would
like to understand the a little
bit of the science of the
medicine avid because at least
in my practice sometimes things
go wrong
and and I understand that that
you're both giving us assurances
that in this context things do
not go wrong but I want to know
that I want to know that an
individual who takes a drug does
not find themselves in a
situation where one of the one
of the drugs does not work and
again I I hate to use the
analogy but we see this again
and and efforts to try and and
the proposed well performed
capital punishment where it
appears to me that the humane
effort and a life sometimes is
not that at least from the the
experience reported by eye
witnesses and such and so I
wanted to understand that I was
also somewhat.
Also because of course one of
the earlier answers was that
death is produced in something
between minutes or hours that
that to me is a very large
variable.
Units and and so that that I'm
still puzzled by the by the
Physiology the will of the of
the process we're describing
here where were in some
individuals though the death
might be producing a matter of
minutes and some individuals
that might be produced in in a
matter of hours and so I I want
I want to make sure that a
person is not left in a bad
situation whether a left and a
half way situation where they're
actually experiencing pain or
anxiety is or something like
that when the drug that stops
their heart kicks in on items I
just I want I and I have a great
trust that the the medications
have reached that level but I I
wanted to know what what's
involved with some with some
understanding of what the person
is going to have to go through
we're we're authorizing a person
to do something here I want to
know what is what we're offering
as an authorized him to do.
Certainly.
In the and also the point we
wrong which is who's gonna be
the health care provider to be
controlling all this you know in
other words I wanted very learn
and skilled individual is going
to be prescribing these drugs
and making sure that they're a
properly administered and we all
we all know it we'll see it
sometime structure mistaken or
missed provided or a missed
mistakenly taken wrong dose
wrong pills mixed up and so
forth so
I appreciate that that question.
The
there are there are so I think
to to try and improve the bill
from the standpoint of verbiage
on the next section of section
II.
We have an important definition
medical aid of dying.
Some of this is going to seem
small but again I'm I'm just I'm
I'm wondering why we have some
language in here so in the
medical aid in dying we talk
about an individual who may self
administer the medication to
bring about this as a peaceful
death again in statute I don't
know why we would include the
words a peaceful death the the
issue here is not to produce
that but rather to produce staff
and that that really
straightforward HBs subjective
about that issue but but we try
and usually keep those kind of
subjective standards out of
statutes.
The of the same thing is true
with the definition in paragraph
on it so this Salfit minister.
Softened definition of self
administer means taking an
affirmative conscious voluntary
action to in just a
pharmaceutical substance.
It seems to me that we gain
nothing by adding all of the
take affirmative conscious and
it simply means that suffer
ministration is taking a
voluntary action to in just a
pharmaceutical doesn't it what
what is gained by requiring the
southern ministration to be
affirmative and conscious as
opposed to just voluntary what
what's the point.
I'm a senator Senator Mondays
the a point is to make it clear
that this was an actual
determination conscious decision
by the patient who has decided
to take that medication so in
fact the initial requirement in
Oregon now over twenty years ago
required this self
administration as additional
confirmation of the fact that
there this was an independent
decision
Thomas decision of the patient
so to make that very clear the
discrimination must be
affirmative that is merely
merely failing to do something
is not enough there must be an
affirmative act it must be an
act taken while the patient is
conscious and it must be an act
taken while the patient is
acting voluntarily to ingest the
the pharmaceutical substance and
the a draft the drafters in
Oregon initially and in the
other line jurisdictions
subsequent subsequently have
determined that these did these
are clear and precise
requirements provide extra
protection to anyone who fears
that there might be abuses
within this a statue like this
and it may be one of the reasons
that there have been no abuses
in the the thousands of cases
where they've been used.
Well I appreciate you you all
should have been here the last
few nights as we go through
other compact laws and others
where we often times will get
laws of other states and then
and then we question the
judgment but but again if some
of the ministration of you to
say it's a voluntary action why
does it have to be conscious how
can you take a voluntary action
that's unconscious how can you
take a voluntary action is not
affirmative what what that all
although organ may have the
language what do we gain by just
saying supplementation means a
voluntary action thank thank
pharmaceutical what what is what
is different about conscious
involuntary
Mr Chairman they are they
actually do cover slightly
different
part of the road give it to be
conscious you will you must be
the patient must be conscious
when the patient takes the the
medication that is the patient
can't decide voluntarily ahead
of time to arrange a mechanism
for example that will deliver
the medication later when the
patient is no longer conscious
the patient must be conscious at
the time further the patient
can't simply have the passage of
time or the failure to take an
act be the determination that
will cause the that will lead to
the ingestion of the medication
it must be an affirmative act
actual something that the
patient actually does not
failing to do something but must
do is doing to do that the
patient must do something is a
difference between and acted on
and on and All mission Senator
so in fact it the fact that it's
affirmative is different that it
must be taken while the patient
is conscious which is different
than the the fact that it must
be entirely voluntary and the
thought was that it provided
additional protection to include
all three of those adjectives in
that definition.
Well I appreciate your your
certainty Sir so I'm I'm far
from persuaded but I but I
appreciate your your certainly
with the when the answer
All right
let me just so I don't Bob
apparel evening.
let me move on to section three
of the bill.
The service subsection three
appears to list what a doctor
must determine.
In deciding to assist a patient.
with with aid in dying and and
subparagraph a has the
determinations the doctor has to
may.
Subparagraph B. I had a question
about that that this is
currently in something I support
but it says that the doctor has
to have been a doctor's provided
care to the individual is that
right.
That's correct senator.
in in what was puzzling to me
and I guess missing and all the
bills and all the other nine
states is there's no specificity
about when the doctor provided
care to the individual who's
prescribing the medication so my
question would be this could be
a doctor who who provided care
to the patient
are arguably in infancy as a
pediatrician that's an absurd
thought but it's certain but the
bill certainly does not put any
recency or contemporarily
component to the bill at all
just so the doctor has to
provided medical care to the
patient and sometime in the
patients passed their lifetime
and and I see a doctor carried
shaking his head no but I find
nothing in the bill that that
would say the doctor who
prescribes is has to have
provided medical care to the
patient and any time with any
kind of temporal recency help me
figure out where that is that in
the bill.
I'm yes Senator members of the
committee I view the requirement
that the the care be provided
within in accord  with accepted
medical standards of care to
again make clear that the
prescription itself that's
written which is of course
what's being described here in
section three who's writing the
prescription must be accorded
must be done in accord  with
medical standards of care and I
think that the doctors are here
today we'll tell you that
medical standards of care will
require it to be a position who
has examined the patient and in
fact understands the current
condition of the patient and if
we of it to make that clear in
section F. which follows the
committee in the house added to
amended the the bill to include
the statement after conducting
an appropriating examination
there is one
participant in this process you
must be a position and that
position must under section F.
conduct an appropriate
examination of the patient
what's more.
healthcare providers boast both
must act within accepted medical
standards of care so I think
that we have to give find some
trust to the healthcare
providers who are providing this
care and in section after the
physician who is providing the
care and in fact because we've
changed the statute that after
conducting an appropriate
examination I think that the the
assumption I think is that the
examination would only be
appropriate it was the
examinations that were conducted
at least contemporanea round
contemporaneously with the press
with the provision of the
prescription.
Well I appreciate that again
that would have to all be
assumptions that we're making
thank because I don't find
anything those bill that that
supports any of that
but let me give you my example
so that appears to be the
subsection B. of section three
is a requirement which I'm
repeating I said is a good
requirement which says the
doctor who's making these
determinations and prescribing
the the dying medication has to
be a doctor's provided medical
care to the individual what what
I assume some paragraph yes but
help me if I'm wrong is that
this is to assure that that you
don't have a doctor reading of
this medication who's not been a
treating physician of it without
that's what I understand it's a
program B. to mean but but in in
my incorrect about that then the
center that is a correct it
should be someone we want that
that was again included in this
statute a law is not included in
all of the statutes because we
thought that it would be
important to have the provider
who writes the prescription be
someone who provided medical
care to the individual.
I absolutely a hundred percent
agree with that the issue of
concern I have is that the
person right that prescription
find the medical care there's no
specificity about how recently
they provide that medical care
the person writing that
prescription in well you
referred back to subparagraph
have of this this is an entirely
different standard this graph
after a provides for a position
or osteopathy to have determined
that the individual has a
terminal illness and the ability
to self administer those are
different standards a doctor who
the in support rep has to
determine you have a terminal
disease you are you have cancer
the terminal and the you have
the ability to Medicare so
that's that's what paragraph F.
is the standard of for the
doctor to determine what the
preceding paragraph here is the
determination of administered
administration of the drugs
themselves that's why I think
this is junction between being
out that Senator
our members the committee I
certainly understand where
you're coming from here but I
believe that the language of the
statute the languages the bills
right now fully covers that
issue normally the person who is
if described in section have and
the person described in section
B. are going there's going to be
an overlap between those two
people obviously in the in
ordinary.
Why is that this provision.
Well because in fact they're
going to be done to health care
providers involved at least one
is going to be a pro it can be a
physician the position is going
to conduct an appropriate
examination and the person
writes the prescription is going
to provide medical care in
accord  with the accepted
medical standards of care and
generally it's that physicians
who in fact is making the
determination and confirming in
the right this the this finding
on the record was also gonna be
writing the prescription.
So in the very commonly they
will in fact be the same person
there's a second health care
provider also involved except
where the patient is on hospice
as well so there is a second
health care provider but again I
don't think there's any question
that under this bill as it is
written now the health care
provider would be someone who is
in the ordinary course of things
taking care of the patient it
wouldn't necessarily be the the
position who is the the last
physician to attend the patient
for example it when a patient
enters a phase where that
patient is likely to die very
soon the patient may have
several positions there may be
several different health care
providers taking care of the
patient we're not describing
which one has to be designated
as the one who writes the
prescription but in fact it has
to be someone who is actually
provided medical care to the
individual in accordance with
the accepted medical standards
of care and and again I just
that that we're dealing with
with licensed health care
providers we're also bound by
their licensing requirements and
no one who saw the patient as an
infant sixty years before is
going to a write a prescription
under this statute that would be
inconsistent with the ethical
and almost certainly legal
obligation of the position.
Right and I pointed that out
early would be absurd to think
that you have a pediatrician
making that argument but but the
fact remains that I find nothing
in the bill that has anything of
a temporal requirement for the
the the doctor who's making the
certifications and so well
you're telling me that that's
good medical practice in that
that's what doctors would
understand to do I'm again I'm
looking for something that says
it has to be a doctor who's
provided care to the patient in
the last six months in the last
year maybe even the last two
years but but there's nothing in
the bill that gives me that
assurance.
Let me move on.
The the next so programs I'd
like to ask about is.
Of the subparagraph DP.
The position making the the
prescription.
Again and again if I certain
things about some program sees
as determine a good faith
individual request does not
arise from could coercion or
undue influence by another
person.
I'm gonna tell you as a lawyer
there's an entire practice of
law when it comes to insure your
familiar with this professor's
words when it comes down to the
education of wills and trusts
and other estate documents an
entire body of law and a great
deal litigation about what is
coercion and undue influence and
and the so I'm wondering how
does a doctor make a
determination of whether a
person is under coercion or
undue influence of how how we
gonna ask a doctor to make that
determination when we're usually
leaving that up to the judges
and juries well thank you very
much a center that's another I
think are a really good question
and let me tell you how I would
imagine that a good doctor would
do it and then I'll ask a doctor
Katie drugs to tell you how he
would imagine it would be done
but as I understand the way it's
done in the other ten
jurisdictions is that the doctor
will talk with the patient will
talk with the patient's family
we'll talk with will will
generally want to get to know
the patient will look to be able
to understand what influences
there are on the patient what
the birds are on the patient
what the pressures are on the
patient and we'll do the best to
determine whether or not that
patient is acting again free
from coercion and undue
influence that will almost
always include an opportunity to
talk privately with the patient
and to talk separately with the
patient to talk privately in
separately more than once if in
fact the doctor thinks that
that's important to raise issues
which give the doctor any
concern whatsoever about
questions of coercion and undue
influence and I believe that
it's that process which is
normally followed in other
jurisdictions which are dealing
with the sensually substantively
the same language so again that
would be what I believe any good
health care provider we do but I
should point out senator that I
think there's some limit to how
much we can micro manage the
doctor patient relation we we in
fact have to assume I think that
the doctors are going to do what
read.
Renewable doctors would do under
the circumstances would good
doctors would do and again
there's so many different
circumstances that can arise
we're gonna have to trust the
creativity and the
thoughtfulness and the good
faith the honesty and sincerity
of the doctors in maintaining
these doctor patient
relationships.
And if if I may Senator survive
days either yes good I would
agree a hundred percent with
everything that professor shorts
just said I would only add to
that that I don't know of any
physician who would go about
this without having given it a
extreme thought and
consideration and have done all
the things that you've just that
you've just heard to make
absolutely certain that we're
doing this in the right way that
there has been no coercion that
there isn't any thing that's
lurking behind that might in any
way unduly influence a decision
like this if anything I don't
know any physician who would
bend over backwards to make
absolutely sure that this is
being done the right way.
I respect very much that and and
agree with that Representative
thank I know some doctors who
provide palliative care and the
have a great deal of respect for
what they do that the challenge
of course is always as you said
professor the determination of
good faith on the meaning of
course under influence and then
and then my trying to figure out
how that's any different than
section three subparagraph a one
and three which is the doctor in
those sections has to determine
the patient's capacity and
number three that the the
request is voluntary for the aid
in dying which to me would be if
you could make that
determination without already
covering.
The exclusion of coercion or
undue influence so they they
there's almost seems to be a
redundancy here in in all of
subsection D. subsection do seem
to really be just a duplication
of subsection three a one and
three to me but but again I'm
not with the hour is late we
don't have a quorum right now
and so I was not gonna start
trying to mend the bill in this
committee.
But but will look forward to
working with the sponsors maybe
down the road
I'm gonna just try and go
quickly because of the time it's
late in because because we don't
have a quorum I will would be
able to even entertain any
amendments to the bill.
That would be adopted by anybody
so we've been talking about
amendments on talking about them
perhaps in the abstract or
perhaps in anticipation of a of
a floor amendment or floor
substitutes
The the the the greater concerns
after the bills are those at the
end which really deal with more
with the legal issues much more
so than the medical issues where
I'm.
Clearly out of my M. I. Li.
section five.
I would greatly prefer.
That the section five pans
after the word written in what
would be the third line under
subsection may which is that the
medication would be filled for
forty eight hours.
I believe that's what you all
described earlier as the bill
does and then it sort of does
that but it has an exception of
course and it says that the
medication can be filled
immediately if if the the
provider believes that the
person may die before the forty
eight hours have expired so I
think this is a probably
intended to deal with very
exigent circumstances but it's a
it's a great concern to me that
an individual could be
prescribed the medication and
take it let me immediately
because I'm sure the forty eight
hours just intended to try and
reflect a cool down period or
some time for reflection or or
some thought maybe outside of
the outside of the a difficult
circumstance so it is there is
there any one welcoming of the
idea that we would require and
retain a forty eight hour wait
period.
Mr chairman again that is a
really good point I I'd like to
point out like to suggest that
the reason for waving the forty
eight hour waving well waiting
period is that this whole
process takes weeks often months
in California for example where
there is a fifteen day statutory
period it takes on average fifty
days for there to actually be a
a prescription written in the
normal course of events it is
extraordinarily time consuming
consuming process there's some
reason to believe that in
California from what I could
tell looking at least some at at
all and a large number of cases
in California that over half of
the people who could benefit
from a dying and wish to make
use of aid in dying aren't able
to because of the delay in time
so the forty eight hour period
may sound like such a little
period of time remember people
don't make this request until
the very end all of us want to
live very few people really want
to really recognize it when the
end is near New Delhi and is
very very near that we we want
to do it extend our life as long
as we can and when that forty
eight when when in fact we do
make the request we're gonna
have to go through to health
care providers there may be
referral to a mental health
consultation that it is a long
process and that there are an
awful lot of people who will die
in terrible suffering if in fact
we require forty eight hours
even in those rare cases where
the patient is likely to die
during that forty eight hour
period and so it's for that
reason that we have included
here this exception there are
the the the earliest States to
adopt eight nine Oregon for
example has now amended its
statute so that it reflects Lee.
What we what's included in this
bill Washington is in the midst
of amending their statute so it
will do the same thing and there
will be an exception to the
waiting period California has
before it's legislature the same
change right now as well
everyone has discovered that
there has to be some taught way
of waving that waiting period or
else to many people who
desperately need access to the
statute won't in fact actually
get access to the statute and
that's the reason that that
limitation that exception to the
forty eight hour waiting period
is included in this section.
And the professors I understand
if you're you're you're telling
us that Oregon was the first
state to adopt legislation like
this yes Oregon was the first
state to adopt
legislation that allowed for
this kind of medical care how
long ago was that that was it
was adapted in the mid nineteen
nineties it became effective in
ninety eight.
What about the state Washington
Washington was later of a bit
later than them or again I must
say I just remember the year
that Washington adopted their
statute in California would have
been a twenty sixteen well but
again already they've seen that
they were too restrictive in
their statute in no state has
the law become more restrictive
after the law was passed the
move has been to become less
restrictive as states recognize
how well the statute actually
does work in practice.
And and yeah we're gonna want to
make the point that that while I
appreciate that my number states
are considering adopting this
language from what I understand
you're telling me that it's not
yet been adopted.
in Washington which is have the
statue in place for quite
sometime California for quite
some time only Oregon has
adopted and eliminate the wait
period so again well I
appreciate those states are
talking about it and of
introduced perhaps legislation
there's a lot of legislation
introduced this session that a
little never up see the light of
day and and so I don't mean to
make light of that I just want
to know whether this is
something that that really is is
being done but but that'll
that'll continue to fax me a
little bit more and I'll move on
from what I understand that
you're you're arguing that that
there should not necessarily
always be a wait period and I
hope you can probably appreciate
I'm I'm not.
Yet convinced of that despite
the fact that Oregon has has to
eliminated that requirement and
then and and and
Mr chair let me just also point
out that that again it's a new
that that's a new understanding
it's a with the data has shown
in the last few years that are
an awful lot of people who won't
have access to this if in fact
that period remains in
Washington I believe it's just
recently passed the house and
it's were awaiting action in the
Washington state Senate so it
really is a pretty fast
development for Oregon to change
their law and almost immediately
thereafter Washington likely to
change their law this year and
California likely to come along
right afterwards again I really
do think that is the the new
more respected version of this
kind of statute.
Gonna get appreciate that thank
you a professor.
and I won't belabor the point
that nobody's actually done it
yet except Oregon
section six of the bill.
Like to ask about that house
section six of the bill any
different in section three C.
five.
Section six as the health care
provider shall inform the
terminally ill patient of all
reasonable options legally
available then that would be the
standard of care.
and section three C..
Says that they drive let's see
with a state three C..
Receive I.
Three C. five the doctors
required to inform the patient
while feasible alternatives or
of a feasible alternative
concurrent or additional
treatment opportunities
including hospice palliative
focus on relieving symptoms
reducing suffering how is how is
section six not just a
redundancy of effectively the
same thing on section three C.
five yes
Mr chair of the three C. five
applies to the drugs in writing
a prescription for a under the
statute for medical aid in dying
section
six the right to know provision
applies to all terminally ill
patients not to pre people who
are not just the people who are
receiving a prescription for
medical aid in dying but for all
terminally ill patients so once
a physician determines once a
provider determines that a
patient is terminally ill then
this statute provides that that
provider has an obligation to
provide to do give the
terminally ill patient
all of the information about all
of the forms of treatment all
the reasonable options that are
appropriate for that patient's
care.
Even if there's no intent in the
provider or the patient to ever
seek eight nine it simply isn't
essentially independent right to
know statute related of course
to terminal elements.
Right and I understand the.
Mention the distinction thank
you for clarifying the.
section seven.
Representative question for the
doctor maybe you for professor
section seven says that in the
event that an individual takes a
otherwise using aid in dying
medication that there evidently
there's certificate of death
will list the cause of death as
the illness that led the patient
to reach that decision.
And so why statute we would be
dictating to the medical
examiner who I imagine what do
the certificate or cause of
death for perhaps a position.
But we would be in statute
directing a physician or a
medical examiner to what to
state what the cause of death
would be despite the fact that
that would be I'm not medically
true the the the the cause of
death for an individual who
takes the the medication isn't
is not cancer.
cause of death is taking the
medication but but according to
the statute the cause of death
would be cancer and and so I'm
puzzled by by putting into
statute something that seems
inconsistent with medical ethics
medical practice I don't I don't
know how we as as lawyers and
lawmakers can tell the doctor
did indicate to them what the
cause of death is going to be.
Senator with all due respect I
disagree with you about the
actual cause of death if someone
is dying of cancer and is near
death with cancer and
participates in a dying I think
that from there is no logical
way to say that that patient
didn't die of cancer let me give
you an example of how this
became clear to me and it
actually happened when I was in
law school watching an autopsy
now watching a doctor perform an
autopsy Rupel lawyers watching a
doctor perform an autopsy to
learn how they were done and
what they meant in fact and I
remember they they the doctor
did the autopsy and said at the
end he said well you know we
absolutely we have no idea what
the cause of death was in this
case I have no idea we maybe
we'll get some more information
from last but I have no idea you
know I'm gonna put down for
cause of death cardiac arrest he
said you know we this was a long
time ago this is no longer the
practice I should I should make
clear but in fact he said
whatever we don't know we put
down cardiac arrest because you
know if someone dies their heart
has to stop and it in this case
it's true that cardiac arrest
was the cause of death for that
patient cardiac arrest is in
some sense always cause of death
but has no logical meaning it
has no a personal meaning it has
no epidemiological meaning to
say that really in fact that
person who will with the autopsy
I watch died of something else
and we hope that the death
certificate and he hoped the
death certificate would have
some other information that we
could list is the cause of death
and similarly here when in fact
someone dies of a of the cancer
then in fact we want to be able
to say that it's cancer that
really because that person's
that that's epidemiologic Klay
important when we go back and
look at the data that's what's
going to be important to the
family that's if you were to ask
that patient what he died if he
could come back for a moment and
you can.
Asking what he died of he would
tell you the cancer and so I
don't think that that's an
inaccurate
at answer to that question.
Yeah I think with the
philosophically disagree about
that one too professor because
again I don't think we allow the
patients to determine the cause
of death the patient may say I
died of cancer but but we don't
the office of medical examiner
doesn't rely on the family or
the patient to tell them what
the cause of death was and and
here the issue here is you know
you're you're using the example
where the where the death is is
promoted by the medication close
to the time of death but but we
we may not know that in other
words we may not know the person
may determine that they have
pancreatic cancer they're told
that they have a twelve months
of life and then maybe choose to
to take the medication right
then they may not wait the
twelve months they may decide
that that's the appropriate time
and so I'm just I'm I'm really
perplexed that we with with an
act a law.
and I'm very concerned by it
that we would that we pass a law
that would tell a doctor to what
did they must put down what the
cause of death is
and and I appreciate what you're
saying is yes I've I've had
those cases where there they
could not determine the cause of
death.
And and I realize that sometimes
the puzzle that never gets
answered
it particularly in cases where
there's no autopsy performed
wind and then you're really left
with a with a great mystery but
But while you're right
alternately the ultimate.
Of I guess the one arguable
final cause of death is cardiac
arrest the heart stops clearly.
But but here we're not saying
any of those things were saying
that the cause of death will be
shall be mandatory the
underlying terminal illness and
and I don't think that's honest
but I understand the doctor
wants to recognize or answer the
question so be happy to hear his
opinion on that one thank you
Senator bye days if if I may
there's another reason why this
is very important and the reason
is to protect the patient who
who has died and that's because
if we did not do this there is a
reasonable probability that
insurance companies would take
the opportunity to consider this
as being suicide which case that
would invalidate is like that is
our life insurance and I think
if patients knew that they are
the potentially subject to
having their life insurance
nullified and therefore their
family not projected they would
be very very reluctant to and go
get them back at that medical
met medical assistance in dying
so what we're really doing years
protecting patients and giving
them the solace of knowing that
they have that protection in
their and their eight days.
Thank you very much Senator it's
it's an excellent point you're
making drive that's one point
and one that that will matter a
great deal as we get further
into the bill because the coming
session the bill related exactly
that issue which which frankly I
think it's probably
unconstitutional but but the
with there may be disagreement
about that what I'm trying to
avoid is there's lots of
litigation that's always been my
goal is to really believe it or
not as a lawyer try to write
laws that that to avoid
litigation and you're exactly
right doctor is an individual
has a.
A life insurance policy that
they may go out and get a life
insurance policy for a lot of
money and and their wife and and
then by the language we're
putting in this bill the policy
would be payable.
and and the any suicide
provisions or clauses of the
contract would be by this by
this statute unenforceable and
an invalid and I think that
would probably lead to
litigation I I think that the
insurance company would say of
the legislature cannot tell us
that we have to pay on a life
insurance policy
that precludes coverage in cases
of of suicide but but the
legislature has superseded that
contracts will right and if you
look you're right in the in the
next section section eight
because you're you're right
doctor that's why I'm asking
these questions in section seven
which says that the the doctor
would be by statute putting down
the the cause of disease but
that I don't know any other way
said that wouldn't be honest
that's not honest we're we're
we're creating a fiction so that
an individual does not have to
worry about losing their life
insurance and and that's a
laudable goal I I understand
that but it's but I don't think
a lever hold up frankly in in
accord  lease gonna say well the
legislature said you died of
cancer and so it didn't matter
that you took a you know a drug
that stops your heart
you died of cancer and so it
it's it's it's I I really
appreciate the heartfelt reasons
and thinking behind this bill
this is a tough question this is
gonna be a tough issue and I I'm
very confident it'll probably be
pretty heavily litigated.
because in section eight of the
bill says and the provision of
the contractor will or other
agreement including life
insurance that would make a
resent the request is not valid
so we're essentially saying what
contracts are invalid
subparagraph pieces an
obligation under an existing
contract shall not be affected
by the medical aid in dying and
subparagraphs ceases on lawful
for insurer to deny benefits
available to an individual based
on aid in dying or influence so
tackle those.
Again what I will goals but but
there's also a great opportunity
for fraud or abuse sad to say
but it's it's with this wouldn't
be a it would not be no in in my
experience that the that
individuals take up in the life
insurance and then and then take
their lives the that wouldn't
building something new to my
experience.
so I guess the question would be
this is this languages language
in existence and all the other
states that we're modeling this
bill on.
Senator yes it's in in substance
this is and all those other
bills to my knowledge and there
has been no litigation in any
state to my knowledge over any
of this in part because of
suicide clauses are limited to a
very narrow period of time and
there are very few life
insurances policies that are
actually are written in
meaningful ways to patients who
in fact are terminally ill so
the issue just has never arisen
even in the it's in the
thousands of cases in which is
now in use in other
jurisdictions it has never given
rise to litigation.
And and when you're you're
telling me that they in all of
the other states that have this
act professor shorts they would
have this language the same
provisions invalidating
insurance contracts and such
I I believe I can't recall the
language of every single one of
those statutes now and there are
slow all slightly different but
certainly there's something more
or less like this in the vast
majority of them anyway.
Mr chair on that point yes Sir
do there's a two thousand
eighteen Supreme Court case
being the mail at the mail and
that dealt with the Minnesota
law that said essentially that
when people get divorced if your
prior spouse was a beneficiary
on your life insurance policy
they are automatically taken off
and there was a whole analysis
that was done about where and
when the contracts clause would
apply and to legislation just
like the state legislation that
would change the terms of
existing insurance contracts and
person and under the the logic
used in that case I think this
is just fine that was one of the
biggest things that jumped out
to me when I read this bill I
spent a high three days in to
increase certain supplements
and and I gotta say I I I don't
have any concerns about a
contract clause issue I.
With with the language that's in
a spell.
Okay thank you and I'll
recognize you after I'm done
Senator do we can go back to
you.
In any event back to work where
I was at and I think well look
at the divorce cases and and the
other authority that may apply
but my concern here is that what
happens is again we we create a
litigation context and and
pressure towards your right
usually my expressions policies
is there for their payable even
in cases of suicide after a
certain period of time I think
is what you're saying is that
right that your experience also
yes Senator.
But there but also conversely
they're not payable when the
policy is taken out a certain
period of time within a day
preceding death.
True.
death by a suicide I don't know
if that's true other forms of of
other kinds of causes of death I
I just don't know Center you're
right you're right I should be
more clear that number was I
think it's hard to go out and
get a life insurance policy for
five million dollars and then
take your life within two or
three months of that and have
that be able would be my
experience with the way life
insurance usually works is that
is that your experience
professor.
Well I'm I'm I'm I hate to
comment very much on life
insurance but I would suspect
that that might could well be
true yes again it's never come
up in this context so.
That
issue I guess
The card I'm getting near the
end of the bill for more
strictly for all of you so
the if you look at subsection.
Or section nine.
This is immunities.
We usually in all the years I've
been here precluded immunities
this will be the first I think
where we are we're an active
civil immunity if we were to
enact this bill without
amendment or change.
Of subsection nine separate
faces a person shall not be
subject to civil criminal
liability licensing sanctions or
other disciplinary conduct for
that goes on to explain what
those immunities are for I'm I
stand corrected with actually
granted immunity for spaceport.
and we did that again this
session apart from spaceport I'm
not aware of any other
immunities that we grant what
this would be a first this be
the first for civil immunities
for doing a number of things
participating refusing to
participate it's that are being
present and so on.
I know the.
We don't have any of the.
Lawyers who usually oppose
immunities with us today so I
may be all up there by myself.
But the but in St section nine
sub paragraph he.
Health care entity shall not for
bitter sanction a health care
provider provides aid in dying
off the premises not acting
within the normal course and
scope of employment and then
talks about the entity may
sanction that so on and so forth
my experience is merely for
doctor canning but maybe outside
his experience to win your
because we're talking about a
medical entity here I'm assuming
of medical health care entity
were talking as an example a
hospital would be a health care
entity and the issue here is
usually a doctor who works
within a hospital employment is
insured by the policy taken out
by the hospital.
And so here this language would
say the the hospital should not
come out for bid or sanction of
doctor who provides end of life
care off the premises and not
acting within the course and
scope of the providers
employment so this is puzzling
to me this thing a hospital
cannot for better drive from
doing this if the doctors doing
that on his time or off the
premises of the hospital.
But the doctor is still going to
be
insured by the hospital so the
hospital would be liable for the
doctor's actions but because the
doctor but that by the stature
the hospital cannot for business
after from doing this and and
the in simple maybe a religious
Hospital.
which here the by this statute
could not for better could not
prevent a doctor working at the
hospital from performing off
care premises or or end of life
issues.
And then then Senator FF goes on
to say health care entity may
passionate may passionate
provider for participating only
if the hospital were entities
given written notice and a
policy and that the provider
provides aid in dying on the
premises and within the scope of
the employment.
So so my concern here is was how
do we how do we deal with the
situation like we have in this
bill where we have the hospital
saying no you cannot and you
shall not but the statute is
saying the drive cannot be held
to that the doctor cannot be
bound by a hospital policy
prohibiting a doctor from
engaging in in these this type
of care.
How are you reconcile professor
at center that was of course the
consideration in drafting this
section of of the bill and the
compromise that was reached was
at the hospital can have their
rule the hospital can enforce
the rule when someone works at
the hospital the hospital can
enforce that rule on its
employees as long as those
employees are acting within the
school coping scope and course
of employment but if they have
at the hospital employs a doctor
and that doctor isn't at the
hospital and is an acting as an
employee of the hospital at that
moment then in fact that that
doctor gets to follow the
doctor's own conscience is not
bound by the hospital so the
hospital has absolute control of
what happens at the hospital the
hospital is control what but
what it's employees are doing
during their term of employment
during the course and scope of
the employment but when they're
outside of the employment
outside the hospital then in
fact the doctor gets to exercise
his own conscience.
I've never seen a manager's
policy for a drive in that way
and I see lots of insurance
policies written for doctors
associate with a hospital
hospital policy usually insurers
and doctors insurers really
effectively any medical care
performed in provided by the
doctor really without regard to
being performed on the premises
of the hospital or within the
course and scope of employment
the other otherwise doctors
would have to purchase their
policy of insurance for medical
malpractice at the hospital and
then purchased another policy of
insurance for any medical care
they perform outside are off the
hospital premises and my guess
is I'm looking at accounting but
my guess is most doctors don't
have a separate policy from
their policy with the hospital
policy where they insure
themselves for care outside the
hospital there could be
something you I guess maybe
doctors will start to do that
yes senator I think you're right
and I think that they would.
Yeah so the doctors would be
providing this care would be's
purchasing a separate policy of
insurance outside of their
hospital policy then if they
work for a hospital it otherwise
did for bit it yes.
In tell me about the though
immunity
the the language in here
immunizing civil liability
is that also language adopted
from all the other states and
then when what civil immunity
are we giving
doctors here and why where we
were very immunizing doctors
were perhaps negligence in
performing these duties and I'm
like any other duties a perform
Senator there is no immunity
that comes with a negligent act
the immunity is only for the
decision to participate in the
line or the percent the decision
to not participate in a nine
there is no immunity for
participating in a negligent way
or failing to participate in a
negligent way if you if you act
as a position and you act
negligently you are liable for
negligent negligence but for the
rear decision to act or the mere
decision not date participate
made and dying the decision to
participate or the decision not
to participate one is immune
from
any sanction.
Professor that's what the bill
says I would agree with you but
that's not with bills to be look
at section nine.
The person shall not be subject
to civil liability and then it
says for and it includes for
participating in medical aid in
dying so if the doctor
participates in medical aid in
dying to give submits
prescription or or fails in some
way in that procedure the
doctor's immunized by this
statute it says the doctor shall
not be subject to civil
liability for participating in
medical aid in dying it's not in
the decision to do it it's just
for participating medical aid in
dying which would be the
prescription of the medication
also have a doctor negligently
prescribes medication other
doctors immunized here for for
malpractice for many civil
liability which would be unlike
anything on custom to in in our
New Mexico all what was Senator
with them with all due respect I
disagree with the way that
you're reading the statute and
certainly the many lawyers I
sent it to
to get a reading on exactly this
would also I think disagree with
your reading on it that in fact
the immunity is for the decision
to participate or not to
participate they're not.
They can be liable for
participating that's what is
says they're not liable for
participating what they may be
liable for it taking a negligent
act because they're always
liable for engaging in
negligence so I think that that
was that is the intent is the
way others have read the statute
and I think that that's the way
that the courts would read the
statute.
Well I'll try to clarify that my
having an amendment the draft
for the floor to clarify that
but but again I'm looking at it
that's not what it says it all
profession there can't be any
disagreement about it it doesn't
say anything about making the
decision it says a person shall
be not subject to civil
liability for participating in
medical aid in dying there's no
other way to read that well
Senator I and I disagree with
your with everything but the
that's what makes interesting
cases I I guess it is and
certainly a doctor who did this
negligently would invoke this
language in state the language
says here's as I shall not be
subject to civil liability for
participating in medical aid in
dying what is that
then so don't say anything about
negligence being reserves or
anything else it just says as
long as I'm in good faith.
if I participate in medical aid
in dying immunized from civil
liability
I just don't I don't know how
we.
We can take a survey of lawyers
but but I hope they're all UNM
graduates from your class
professor because the view
graduating good people but the.
But but but I I was one of them
so and then that was taught to
read things pretty carefully
after doing this for about
twenty years so there there's a
there's research that there I
don't see how there could be
another wave of interpreting.
so and
Let's see
I can finish up we'll try hard.
Yeah I'll look I know word when
we want to get to the floor and
I know we want to hear this
bill.
I'd like to do more work in this
committee rather than on the
floor
because of course always kind of
a little bit difficult to do.
But we're really I don't think
that there's a way for me to do
that in this committee without
substantially more time.
So.
I will finish up.
My question there and really
one four two two going a little
bit more detail we have a little
bit more time and I appreciate
the Sanchez I appreciate all the
advocates I think this is
important I am certainly
appreciate the concept very much
and I appreciate the need and
support all of those things I'm
I'm very concerned about making
bad law in the process of that
so Senator Duhigg are you want
to be recognized the Nancy
center Stewart also.
Senator Brandt is just very
quickly at all state a few days
ago we did pass through at the
spaceport bill giving the space
for immunity with almost zero
discussion on that point I would
think hand and while I am
certainly not someone who is
prone to.
Look favorably upon immunity in
general if it is important for
the economic development of the
space port I would think it it
is at least as important if not
far and if not much more so when
we're dealing with terminally
ill patients have a and I
day dignity in dying
with that I will yield I believe
that ask Senator Stewart wanted
to make a motion.
Sure sure I move to pass.
A second there was a motion and
second Purdue past other
discussion.
Members of the committee such to
motion to table.
But.
There's a motion to table.
Most of the tables non debatable
we'll go to roll call the motion
to table.
Thank
Senator Duhigg now.
Senator Lopez.
No.
Senator Morris yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart now.
Senator.
No.
The motion to table fails.
The chairs vote on the.
And also note we'll go back to
committee discussion but I would
like to respond Senator give you
look at the spaceport bill very
carefully and I trust you will
when we're done you'll see the
spaceport bill retains an
immunity for a better retains a
specific center for negligence
and reasonableness so there's
immunization as long as you meet
a negligence standard this bill
does not have that it would
grant immunity far beyond
anything we've ever done in here
in the New Mexico legislature in
the years I've been here.
other members of the committee.
Discussion.
All right we had a we had a
preceding do pass motion before
the motion to table I'll go back
to the do passed motion.
Emily will call role on a do
pass motion.
Thank.
No.
Yes.
Senator Lopez yes.
Course.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart yes.
Center.
Yes.
This.
Yes you have a do pass five to
three in the committee thank you
for a good discussion drive your
particular professor Schwartz
for taking all my questions I
look forward to the debate on
the floor should be very
interesting.
Care members of the committee
thank you give.
I haven't gotten anything very
much for your help or not seen.
let's see.
I'm not saying Representative
Eli and I'm not seeing senator
Candelaria and then there there.
Not seen them.
All right we will see all of you
on Monday.
I will try to start a little
early because I know that our
Republican colleagues have a a
commitment Monday evening and we
have a lot of work to do there
are some
significant bills that I'm told
are coming to our committee or
are in our committee they're
going to take some work so thank
you all have a nice evening.
