The actor Division for own good
experience with law enforcement
issues the pharmacist issues
use of course all has a very.
I have advised her to log State.
I will choose wrong so I.
The.
So and then the other half of
the city thank you bye and we
will for the.
If you all want to.
This is us to the best of the
land all right
this.
Terms of rattus thanks for
having me so I don't a lot of
you on the on the committee I
have been a lawyer for over four
decades now and for for decades
have been pursuing justice not
on just one side but on both
sides I started life as a
violence crimes prosecutor in
Albuquerque have done in
criminal defense work have
represented police officers and
have prosecuted police officers
including of the the first
prosecution of two police
officers for the shooting of
James Boyd in Albuquerque as a
special prosecutor and I think
the chairman providers and
invited me because I don't have
an agenda I have represented
both sides I'm not here to blame
anybody for the crime problem
but to talk to you about what
I've seen over the last four
decades and what I think works
and what doesn't work and so
they said if you can pull up
that first slide there you've
got it up there there you go I I
am concerned that whenever there
is a surge in crime the
immediate response.
If they hit it with a bigger
hammer and for those of you who
do carpentry you know using a
bigger hammer doesn't always
work to accomplish what you want
to accomplish and and when I was
in law school I was told that
justice in America means that we
let ten guilty people go free to
protect one innocent person
that's how our system is set up
that's why there are so many
protections for the accused.
And I'm afraid that some of the
things that are being proposed
in this legislature are the
exact opposite that you want ten
innocent people to go to jail to
make sure you catch the one
dangerous are guilty person and
I think of it as anything if you
could advance that I please.
It's sort of red queen Justice
Offit that'll it would you say
officer off with their heads in
Alice in Wonderland but she said
we'll have the punishment first
and then the trial and my
biggest concern is that we are
doing the same thing over and
over again without really
stopping crime and even if you
can advance again please
I actually already even with the
McClinton acted doctor the
McClinton case and the movement
in settlement incarcerate more
people than on average the
entire United States that as we
put it put in prison seven
hundred and thirty three people
out of at a hundred thousand
person population the median in
the United States is six hundred
and sixty four
people per one hundred thousand
incarcerated and these numbers
are from last year
and compare that to the rest of
the world we incarcerate more
people in the United States than
any other country in the world
except any of I should say any
other democracy some of the
countries that that we don't we
don't like as much that that
dictatorships.
Put more people in jail than we
do but look at the numbers we're
we're six times the United
Kingdom seven times Portugal
seven times Canada and despite
doing this it has made a
difference in the primary and
the crime rate is sort of a
vague thing that happens either
we don't know nobody's analyzed
yet the effect of the pandemic
on our crime rate going up if
you could advance that again and
and that brings me to the two
bills that I know our house
bill's not Senate bills but I
expect maybe coming over here.
and I think of them as house
bill four and house bill twenty
seven as the presumption of
guilt.
Bills that instead of the thing
that protects innocent people in
in this accused people in the
United States.
Assumption of innocence that
these bills propose that we
presume that people are
dangerous and presume I I
frankly if they are guilty and I
think if you could advance that
again Nathan that it is spending
money for something.
That doesn't really work.
So we can go one more make a
please.
I know you've gotten the LFC
report
That.
This bill if either of these
bills are passed and we start
folding people in custody in
presenting their innocent for a
series of crimes that that will
add three thousand more citizens
in our geo you can hit that
again please
and
that last.
This thirteen point eight
million dollars.
and if you have one more time
and and what they propose doing
is dropping all of that money.
into.
R. J. offsets the metropolitan
detention center for those of
you who haven't ever been out
there to see that
That thirteen point eight
million dollars does not
include.
if you hit it.
It does talk about hiring more
jail guards.
But I don't know if any of you
read anything about what's going
on in DC right now they can't
find enough people to come out
there and be guards particularly
the pandemic when it's not only
the prisoners are exposed to the
virus but all the guards are and
so you're going to have to raise
money to get more guards into
the facility and you may not be
able to find enough guards to
staff the prisons and jails
around New Mexico for another
three thousand inmates can go to
the next one it doesn't include
prosecutors more money for
prosecutors it doesn't include
more money for public defenders
and that thirteen point eight
million dollars doesn't include
more money for judges
What other problems are there
with this bill
if you can hit the next one
in addition to not including
other costs in the thirteen
point eight million dollars it
doesn't really talk at all about
this societal cost of locking up
innocent people
and over forty years of being
being involved the criminal
justice system when you hold
somebody in jail when they
haven't been convicted of a
crime.
It has huge effects ripple a
fax.
Beyond.
This one person being held in
jail if you hold somebody in
jail for a month or more they
lose their job.
and and they often if you hold
longer than that lose their
family and you subject yourself
to lawsuits as well for holding
people wrongfully and so not
only do have the cost the extra
cost huge cost to the criminal
justice system but you have the
societal cost of of people that
you're not going to have to
support on welfare for families
that you're gonna have to
support or lawsuits if you're
gonna have to pay finally it it
violates the nineteen that that
for a new in Albuquerque I
suspect either one of these
bills would violate the twenty
seventeen Clinton settlement
which and and Mr chairman I
don't know if from the committee
is familiar with McClinton or if
I should do will talk a little
bit about that.
Okay.
You welcome your reps with
respect all right well it was it
was filed by a person who was
held wrongfully in the detention
center inmate and complain
because of mental problems and
complained and filed a lawsuit
over the fact that the jail was
overcrowded that time in DC was
three three hundred budget over
its capacity and since that time
the city agreed in the
settlement to to start locking
people up to stop putting people
in jail for minor offenses and
have gotten it down last year to
fifty four percent capacity
about twelve hundred the the
hundred ninety six or something
about the Middle for the last
numbers that were available at
the metropolitan detention
center.
If you pass these bills that now
presume people guilty and hold
them in in in jail they are
going to easily double double
the number of people at the
metropolitan detention center.
This Ingle like that if if if
there is a presumption that you
are dangerous and you're going
to get.
At or near capacity numbers
again and violate the McClinton
settlement
We go to the next slide please
Nathan.
That's just showing the ripples
of the ripple effect of all of
this
one more please.
One more thanks one more the
last thing I just want to touch
on and that could this could be
a hold a seminar I think it's
probably unconstitutional given
the current way that our
constitution is raised about who
should get bonded to should not
and judges are allowed to hold
people in jail if they if the
government gives the due process
of proving if they are dangerous
to the community that's the way
it's stated now and I'm not sure
the legislature on its own has
the ability to say I'm gonna
change the constitutional
guarantees and now say one must
presume certain categories of
crimes to be dangerous and so I
think I think it's got some
constitutional problems
but it's going to the next one.
It is always easy to pass bills
when you think.
That it won't happen to you.
And I think all of the senators
here.
The state we find believe that
they will not ever be arrested
for a violent felony
and face being held without bond
but want to have that particular
picture up there.
Is you are incorrect if you were
in your house.
And someone breaks in your house
at night and you shoot them and
it turns out to be the neighbor
kid.
You can be prosecuted for one of
the crimes on the list which is
voluntary manslaughter which is
a violent crime and because you
used a felony another one of
these if you can go to the next
slide please this is the list
that's not in the bill this is
the list that they refer to the
state we're going to find
serious violent offence based on
this list of things in the
probation and parole statement
and that includes a lot of
things that you probably I know
these two little.
To blow it up but it is things
like.
Voluntary manslaughter for your
to you're doing self defense and
and and I've got to tell my
Republican friends over here on
the left that my favorite people
to represent a Republican to get
charged with crimes in federal
court because what they always
say to me is what happened to my
constitutional rights in federal
court they come in here they
have have sentencing guidelines
they keep people in jail what
happened what people kept
hitting things with a bigger
hammer and that's why in federal
court you don't have any rights
and what this would do is take
away rights that all of us
assume you so wait a second I
was acting in self defense the
same sorry I have to keep you in
jail you're presumed dangerous
because you're being charged
with voluntary manslaughter as
far as our kids are concerned
that they are at great danger
under this act being held
without bond if you shoot at a
dwelling or occupied building.
Issue and there's it's
unoccupied building that is
presumed to be a dangerous
felony in your held without bond
shooting at or from a motor
vehicle presumed to be a serious
violent offence and you were
held without bond and I don't
think any of you all will be
doing that but you can see your
kids out with people being
involved in something like this
where they get held without bond
and they end up staying in jail
until their charges are
dismissed or until they go to
trial and that can be six months
to a year and that's what this
bill is proposing.
Okay what does make a
difference.
It is not.
The funding the police.
That was a gift the Republican
senator who came up with that
but it scared the tar other for
everybody that is using that
phrase to fund the police that
cares about safety in the
community at this ridiculous
idea.
The the truth is we need to
reimagine policing and that can
make a difference in crime and
I'm glad the city is here and
Damon is here because I think
the City of Albuquerque is doing
some incredible things that can
actually make a difference in
the crime rate one is the amount
Albuquerque community safety
program which is.
Helping support the police you
know I forty percent of all
police calls for closer you
don't need somebody with a gun
show up they are social a
problem call where somebody is
intoxicated or just having if a
domestic fight our having mental
health problems and in fact this
is Pat and I think after the
hoops program in Eugene Oregon
we're the police force now
contains a whole group of people
who are people that show up with
actions but who are trained in
social work
and dealing with mental health
problems and those people then
help take those things off the
police the the the uniformed
been officers with guns plate so
that those warrior caps can
dedicate their time to the
things where you need somebody
to show up with again it is a
remarkable program and I hope
you will have Mr Martinez or
somebody health for the city
come back and tell you have
successful it's being and how
much the police officers
appreciate it because these are
the calls that take up their
time when they when really what
they want to do is is to be more
your caps and we have protecting
people the other program that
the city is doing is a violence
intervention program again at
some point I'm hoping to have
somebody for the City of
Albuquerque tell you.
B. that is working and I think
that the rate of preventing
violence is up over ninety
percent of all right about that
team yes maybe it's just it's
just the most incredible program
and it's programs like that they
can make a difference really in
prime and then things like this
just simple things like.
Fixing income monitoring I mean
what's happening is they're
releasing his folks to ankle
monitor monitors and they're not
really monitoring them and
that's how
we have the the things that are
sort of push this bill is the
outrageous thing where they let
somebody going to go that it's
another crime because somebody
really isn't monitoring with the
ankle monitor and that's that's
how you fix it and certainly we
can we can do that and finally
if you're gonna if you're gonna.
Spend thirteen point eight
million dollars.
You can spend it for the
temporary lock up or you're
holding some hand jail until
their trial or to dismiss the
charges or you can spend the
money on actually getting them
convicted and held in prison if
they've actually committed a
crime it's accused people verses
really guilty people and so here
are some numbers AP DO and I
know Albuquerque better APD
arrests about ten thousand.
Full year.
The dust in the public defenders
have the capacity for about
three thousand prosecutions a
year or so one third of the
arrests.
But even worse the court system.
Can only handle one thousand
cases a year.
That's in Albuquerque.
And you want to know why prime
is continuing that is why and so
if you want to spend thirteen
point eight million dollars.
I would say you put it here
in the courts in the dust and
the public defenders in the
Albuquerque police department
that's where you put it and you
put more of it at the bottom
where the log jam is happening
in the current system where they
can only do a thousand cases a
year
and that can make a difference.
A real difference in price so.
The problem with all these
things of course is.
You don't get headlines for
crimes that don't happen.
Things like they're doing the
violence intervention program.
The city isn't getting to
headlines because it's that
sense of crime when the state of
Maryland Act from happening
there's no story about that only
when there's a violent act do
you as legislators get pressure
and so what what does this do
and if you can just black it out
I think these bills don't really
do anything to stop crime and
all they do.
Is allow you to say that you're
doing something that everybody
can see.
We we look at for being on
prime.
And what it really means is that
you're making it just a
political decision.
To put three thousand people.
Not convicted people.
Q. citizens and hold them in
jail.
For the political cover that
you're doing something in the
cap tough you're being.
And that that to me just doesn't
seem right and that doesn't seem
dressed
when there are so many other
ways that you can help staff
from.
And that is my presentation Mr
Chairman for the entirely is the
same could be more perfect than
twenty minutes mostly uses yes
Sir I am an judges yelling at me
so.
The kind of exposure.
Good.
And then good suggestions to
make the of of the suggestions
as to the.
For more services.
it is one of the appropriation
very well for the frustrations
has been the fact that the so
called transaction refers to
your amendment if we are getting
very little fraction but support
A lot of reasons but not enough
to simply be valued on that a
little bit more proactive
opportunities for.
What they are they don't
Representative captain has.
Restaurant right but we're we're
gonna change of.
members if we had Center Bach I
think the it was also Senator
Stewart the start that senator
Graham Services.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for The presentation today no I
would point out the the some of
the some of the reporting from
the LFC
has been questioned in just
recent days by people such as
the Albuquerque district
attorney and so I'm a little bit
hesitant to rely on some of the
numbers produced from that
report at this time one thing I
just would like to address you
know that that was talked about
in the presentation is this
premise that
we're doing things based on
who's getting credit and and
what's what's reportable input
not a I would just I would just
note that I had the opportunity
this past week to speak to
of the lady and she was of the
mother of the base of the victim
and homicide Melba Committee.
Perpetrator who committed this
crime was on to make a bracelet
that was on monitor.
So I I I would beg to differ
with some of some of that
premise just because has this
person been locked up.
I can tell you that it certainly
would have made a difference to
her regardless of regardless of
who got the credit and for
political points were scored her
child would be alive so I think
that I would just avoid very
broad characterization
characterization such as those
you know I think that not
everybody is in it for the same
type of of result I guess for to
get credit I I don't think
that's what it's about I think
it's about making our streets
safer I think it's about
protecting chill children and
and preventing mothers such as
her from being produced from
based on the fact that you know
we're gonna.
We're gonna turn somebody loose
even though they've been
convicted several times before
which was the case with this
individual and then we do really
some on the call monitoring
we're not gonna track where they
are not only did not have person
on station to to track where
they are monitored or and so
then they do have the ability to
go out and commit further crimes
one of one of the other things
I'd like to addresses is that
incarceration has has one
benefit to it has it reduces it
reduces recidivism by keeping
people in jail when they would
be out committing crimes and I I
think that's oftentimes ignored
we we look at the after affect
many times but we don't look at
the immediate effect the crimes
that are committed when some
people are release that should
be released so I I am firmly in
the corner
as I think most attorneys are
that justice should be served in
should be served properly in
that we should identify the
proper people to be incarcerated
but just because you were
accused and not convicted does
not mean you are innocent.
And and and that's you know
that's just the way it is some
people who are out to be
convicted and turned out to be
guilty that should be the
presumption but we have to be
smart.
In looking at the individual and
who they are and the the heinous
nous of their crime for the for
how the line of crime is on the
other hand and deciding David
should we release them or should
we not release them and of
course look at their past
history but I think you know
just brought staff that
basically you know locking
people up for their waiting for
trial is certainly not the
right.
I don't want to go the other way
either on there somewhere in
between
obviously I have a a departure
from from some of the methods
that the you've of seem to
endorse here today but I I do
appreciate the information and
always appreciate the the
discussion on these types of
issues in a very difficult the
very partisan but they are very
important as well thank you
Senator Baca Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman at good to
see you Randy thanks so much for
your presentation so.
This is troubling to me thinking
about ten thousand arrests three
thousand cases and only a
thousand cases in the courts
could you talk a little bit more
about why the courts can only
handle thousand cases a year
it's it's they don't have enough
staff and they we don't have
enough judges and there's a lot
of money given to the courts
even though it is the third co
equal branch of government
supposedly they get a tiny tiny
bit of the state budget I think
it's two percent or three
percent it's not very much at
all and they are way down over
loaded and and it has only
gotten worse
Representative Stuart in the
pandemic because all of these
cases of net got backlog because
they can't try cases when COVID
researching and so it's gotten
even worse they process even
less over the last two years and
so they need serious financial
help in the quarters to be able
to have more judges and to
process more cases.
Mr chairman and and Randy.
So how do they prioritize what
what K. to take I mean I I know
I'm showing my ignorance here
but I just I don't understand
the whole mechanism I don't
understand how these numbers can
be this bad I mean we have we've
talked now for a couple of weeks
about this issue and you know
that the biggest thing that
stands out is that there's all
kinds of crimes that the police
are told well you don't arrest
people.
You know we're we're full jails
we have no money we have so
I just don't know how we get
around this idea that that to
this retail shoplifting which
really has come up recently in
Albuquerque that we're talking
about thank you can't you can't
arrest people that go into I
home depots in one day and take
out whatever and there it also
in their car and you can't
charge him with anything means
that's a syncing issue but I
just don't understand how the
point even prioritize so how did
they do it they have to work
with the dust is the dust have
to prioritize stick it into the
port out is that work Mister
chairman Senator Stewart that
that it all comes from it comes
from the the court can't pick a
K. K. K. the only case that can
come before to the ones that get
charged by the prosecutors
that's the three thousand they
get charged a lot of them get
played I mean that the system
would break Dennis if everybody
said I want my right to trial it
would just.
Collapse under its own weight
most of the cases get played out
because the public defender's
don't have enough money to to
represent all these folks dust
don't have enough staff to
protect take all these cases to
trial so it is it is a it is a
sphere they're seriously all
areas of the criminal justice
system are seriously underfunded
and and then the court once they
get a case they have to comply
with the that the management
order there for the core
management ordered about how
many help because they have to
move things of course that's all
been bombed because of the
pandemic because
of all the problems of the
pandemic is provided.
So Mr chairman I really would
like to hear at some point from
Mr Martinez because I think
Albuquerque did a really good
job of having these meetings
where they brought everyone
together including the public
they had over a period of time
and the whole purpose was to try
to come up with a solution and I
think they have good solutions
and so at some point I would
like to hear from the current
people working in Albuquerque on
this issue if we could do that
thank you thank you so much for
being here thank you Sir Sir
we're going to certainly do that
and we're gonna extend the
invitation we look forward to
all of.
When we and we really have tried
from the beginning of of the
last the last couple weeks to to
try and get a very broad
perspective from from
prosecution we've heard from of
the district attorney and and
others of proctor's defense we
really wanna hear all sides I
think Senator brings up a good
of a good point the like to
emphasize.
Which is for the for to long
this committee and the
legislature has not recognized
the problem the that that we
have with the judiciary is a
branch of government and under
funded earlier Mr again referred
to the the need for funding for
the judges Wade described it but
let me expand on that it's not
really money just for judges
it's the their staff and all of
them hundreds of people that are
involved in processing the cases
the clerks the court personnel
we've heard from the judiciary
this year there there employees
are underpaid in comparison to
other state employees and
Senator you raise a good point
in the day that that also
applies to teachers as well do
but but court personnel are
underpaid statistically compared
to other state employees so
we're we've underfunded the
judiciary we under fund the
legislature as a branch of
government but but this this is
the committee and I'm new to the
chairmanship thank you no not a
present for give me the
opportunity but I'm determined
to talk about it the
underfunding of the judiciary
and New Mexicans given us some
really great statistics we have
a we have a funnel and and
everything gets the compressed
at the end of the final and and
we can't try to basis then what
are we doing by.
Zooming people should sit in
jail
ends and Senator you you put you
point out the fact that we have
these committees at a meeting of
the doing good work in the city
and get in so the city for doing
that with the one thing that I
pointed out on Wednesday was in
all of their meetings and all of
the discussions and all their
work thus far not one of those
groups and organizations thought
the solution was to presume
detention on the number of
crimes that that's never been
thought to be a good idea by
anybody
previously in those groups and
organizations and so I thought
that was important for the
presentations impact.
So Mister chairman I
understanding that that actually
just passed the one a committee
in the house yet still got a
couple.
I think it's got one over here I
think it's got one more in the
house and and it's got a couple
over here and the I think my my
thoughts is in pretty clear
about what I think about that as
a proposal so I think I sure
miss McGinn's attitude toward
the.
Simple overly simplistic
solutions right so thank you
Michelle Senator is so for.
Well I I just think that we we
we should I personally think we
should have started with current
Albuquerque people coming and
telling us and specially Mr
Martinez so I am looking forward
to us writing with that that we
did not have been hearing from
what's happening right now then
they took a they've taken a
half the year with these
meetings and they've been all
over the city I think Senator
Duhigg actually went to one of
them so I tried to go to them I
just couldn't go to any of them
so I just think it's important
that we listened to solutions
and if it's just money my gosh I
mean this is the year yeah we've
got money this year the staff to
be staying.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator.
Thank you Mr thank you for being
here
you know I have a concern I know
the the funding is is just money
but
you know I have a concern that
maybe the judiciary in some of
their procedures and the way
they do things is very
inefficient there's a lot of
wasted time for council for
people that are coming in for
So I can update of how
everything's going status cancer
just step right so there's a lot
of things that I saw being a lay
person we're I feel like the
deputies time for bringing
inmates in and all types of
situations and people involved
that we could be a lot more
efficient and then could
increase the number of cases of
work done in a year it's not
always just money that I would
like to see maybe a study or a
report on a how can we become
more efficient what can we do
better where can we improve
enough just always fall back on
the classic if we only had more
money
because the issue now doesn't
matter how much money you have
it's hard to find employees to
do the show up for work to
perform work so I'm just hiring
more staff is it if you can find
so that's a concern that I have
is is becoming more efficient
with our time and and Mister
chairman Senator Pirtle one of
the silver linings of the
pandemic is the use of zoom in
in some of these things were you
having part of it they finally
figured out you actually can do
a lot of this on zoom and that
is help save a lot of time this
first transferring people back
and forth and and there there's
some constitutional Faisal over
with that but if the accused has
to be there in person but zoom
has the pandemic has made it
possible for us to see how wells
in works and doing some of these
things so.
The server anyone else okay.
So as I mentioned we got started
I invited ms begin to give a
theme to her talk issues she of
has it on the agenda you all see
that reference to a bigger
hammer
as we get my theme for this
session has been from cool hand
Luke the committee on those of I
know I've repeated what we have
here is a failure to communicate
in the last several months and
certainly during this session I
will talk to law enforcement
officers on the streets and they
will tell me all kinds of
fascinating information but they
won't come forward and talk
about it here publicly.
I'll talk to judges who have a
lot of insight into the break
in our criminal justice system
but they're not going to come
talk to us publicly.
all talk to people in
corrections County city
government many of them have a
lot to share but they won't come
talk publicly.
And a lot of it is finger
pointing a lot of it is see YA
race trying to cover their ****
and and that's the system right
now and we get all gets back to
this failure to communicate from
my perspective so I appreciate
you being here today
and Senator Stewart is right we
need to make sure we get this
many voices and perspectives on
this as people will talk about
but I'll just give an example.
I had the law enforcement
officers tell me that in
background that they
purposefully response slowly to
events in Albuquerque infants
because they do not want to risk
a use of force
and we have department of
justice oversight so forth so
the purposefully delay
responding to calls to avoid
coming to a situation where
there's an active incident where
use of force has a greater
potential.
And we have what we have police
officers maybe rightfully so
we're not I'm not going to form
judgments on every case we have
law enforcement officers or not
be prosecuted and sometimes
getting life sentences for their
use of force maybe justifiably.
we have people losing their jobs
to require you prosecuted
officers for use of force of the
shooting of arguably on armed
individual
near point blank range these are
all very complicated issues and
I can understand it but I but
I'm shocked to believe that the
police will not respond or we
heard maybe the phone rings
fifty times on a nine one one
call nobody answers the these
are all incredibly troubling
things that we need to talk
about
and communicate about so I
appreciate you doing that Mr
Chairman at I agree and I I
think the huge problem with the
police department is they don't
feel supported right
they they feel like they're
damned if they do and damned if
they don't and and and whatever
this committee can do and the
whole thing is everybody points
the finger BLC pointed dust
before the judges are letting
him go they're not enforcing
their I think what everybody
needs to realize we're all in
this together and and we have to
work together to make a safe
community and with this
committees help hopefully we can
do that thank you any any part
of that today because might not
doing what solution I can come
up with is to provide those good
solutions is there starts
talking about and you pretend
you put up here too but more
important what I try to use the
session is an opportunity to put
the stuff out there the top
because we don't really have
that opportunity but we have we
have an audience and and I think
that's important opportunity to
to let the police officers and
we need to find a way to to get
their back I learned about the
Clinton for the first time this
year it's been in place for at
least five five years I think
that's the most recent iteration
of the plan I think it goes back
to you before that and it's
amazing because McClinton we've
talked about here reforming
Clinton was enacted and
essentially says there are a
number of of fences in
Albuquerque but you will not be
arrested for that matters to me
because we can pass all the laws
we want we're going to have
several bills here today to pass
additional penalties for
criminal enhancements and I
passed things like red flag laws
and other things of back.
No loopholes in gun laws gun
safety what difference does it
make if nobody's going to force
those nobody does nobody forces
a red flag law the past year
nobody so we're spinning our
wheels if we don't have the
enforcement alright for the
certainty of arrests or the
certainty of conviction so the
the idea of just passing more
more laws to committee this kind
of spinning our wheels sometimes
so the
Yes there was a mention about
the LFC report we we have the
LFC report we of the district
attorney I was given the full
opportunity to
dispute the findings and to
submit his own written
challenges to that and I asked
him and he agreed and the and
LESC agree to revisit those
numbers this this committee
deserves accuracy and if you
have the information they are
not accurate then we need to get
that updated and corrected gonna
and I had asked about LFC report
this summer and I appreciate
them doing so but I you make a
good point we have a very going
to talk about funding the public
defenders in the district
attorneys in the criminal
justice system apart from just
the judges so if it's a systemic
problem but but McClinton I hope
if nothing else this session
will start talking about the
Clinton because because the
Senator brings up a good point
you can we've the chief the
other day said that lows doesn't
even report theft crime anymore
because they just don't see any
point in doing so and and you
can go into Best Buy home depot
and steal things and you're not
going to be arrested for it
you're not likely to be stopped
for it and then some people
fault me for even talking about
this is Joe we doing your teller
but signal still things and
there are numerous fort and I
said you really think they don't
know that do you think you were
doing this don't know that
Albuquerque's of of free free by
at the apple right and maybe
multiple free bites at the
apple.
I I think we're kidding
ourselves if we think that the
the bigger the folks who are are
lawless I don't know about the
about the internal procedures.
And
So I appreciate the statistics
they're they're passing we
continue to learn more more
about it hi I did I did one of
of also in jump around a little
bit but I did want to emphasize
the point that I think Senator
Baca was making about ankle
bracelets I think those are your
comments Senator Baca but
Yeah we need to we need to
recognize where we had a problem
and the courts have addressed it
but but you're actually right
now here's what we've all
learned in the last six months
is that we have people being
released with maybe good
intentions with ankle bracelets
the idea you can you have to
stay home you can't be on the
street you County are not you
can be in bars we put echo
bracelets with all those
conditions but nobody was
monitoring the information from
the ankle bracelets on the
twenty four seven basis so the
information market report on
Friday nobody would look at it
until Monday and if anything
happened it also I think the
court the previous record
deserves some credit for
recognizing that problem and
changing that.
So what they've done of course
they've adopted a good procedure
and and and personnel and budget
for doing a better job of
monitoring this in real time in
Albuquerque.
But what we haven't done is
donating the rest the state so
we still have twelve other
judicial districts were putting
ankle bracelets on people and
there may not be anybody
monitoring those in real time or
not so these are opportunities
Senator doing and I and others
are trying to come up with
positive affirmative things that
we can do to try and make some
progress as opposed to maybe
some of the gimmicks of the the
politicians will fall back on
I'm glad it's in your hand Mr Mr
chair and centers and I know
what working together we can
probably make some progress on.
All right revenue will will take
Senator suggestion and anyone
else is on the committee for
people that we should hear from
you want to hear from my goal is
to to try and make this place
for committee.
Thank you so.
All right Senator Cervantes the
the relocate of Albuquerque has
to derive fifth meeting which
you can do welcome I saw you
earlier one of the other.
Long day with thanks for the
price of.
Thank you for being here and we
look for the opportunity.
about the about your job so all
right of the work ready get to
the bills for those of you that
have joined us I I told the
committee we have a hard stop
tonight is more.
Sure that with the roads that
everybody gets a good start home
and we have some other
commitments I know this evening
so we've got five bills to here
in about three hours and I think
we can do it on all try and make
sure we manager time to do that
I I'd like to hear Senate bill
one sixty four first from Santo
souls he's here thank there's a
little and we can hear him
first.
in in large parts I think this
will be a relatively quick
hearing.
Expecting as much so Center soul
sent one sixty four.
Thank you Mr chairman whatever
reputation for being short
assistant in my part I said
that's not what I federal.
I think your bill should be
short thank you of actually this
bill of the idea for it came
last week and I was listening to
national radio show on our
courts in the problems with them
and one of the things they
indicated is everybody tries to
get out of jury duty often
because they actually complement
the New Mexico we're one of the
few states that pays our jurors
at least minimum wage but anyone
who served on a jury use it many
long hours you have to leave
your normal place of employment
and it's often a hardship and so
this bill very simply sets the
prevailing compensation for
jurors at a hundred for fifty
percent of the state minimum
wage so that it is less of a
financial hardship to serve on a
jury.
Thank you senator on and is
there anyone in the audience who
is here.
and and and I don't know if
you're aware of our procedure
here's.
Hi do you have anyone who would
like to have you can support I
don't directly have and the one
as an expert witness or anything
of that sort it's a fairly clean
and straightforward bill.
And is there any organized
opposition.
Orders are.
Well.
Is here and Senate Judiciary.
All right
There is
Sir if you could please come to
the front and state your name
and and we're with.
Yes Representative minister also
point revert to pagers we were
aware of this bill for the
session nothing ventures more
that's great our lives here
because as a senator said of my
were like to come up with
eighteen dollars an hour very
important element of the
committee where we have the
funded.
We have we used to have a
chronic shortage New Jersey
farmers bank in the legislature
emergency funding we've got a
lot of fishing season actually
develop the fund balance so that
we can deal with the ups and
downs of no comment yet futures
program workers recovered waste
we checked the catching up we
have a have a very trustworthy
voted that
if we're spending about five
hundred thousand dollars from
balance this year creatures and
we expect will exhaust the fund
balance the fiscal twenty three
we certainly worth if this bill
passes so we coming back the
fiscal twenty four by the state
okay now we need about eight
hundred thousand dollars because
we have pagers election no
there's a fiscal impact that's
great as long as we get the
funding we can we're going back
to the old days we used to come
the legislature the state to
have the money to pay for
services
three years when we were
directed to not follow the
stature to pay the minimum wage
because of our appropriation
short that's very appropriate
position in so I appreciate the
effort we'd be happy to pay the
for the function of the after
next year.
will be from the finance folks
the fund the fund the bill
that's off and I can answer
questions about jury service
but.
it's greatly appreciated her
very much and if they're happy
to the.
We do have to about the.
Thank you have.
But I don't think anyone has
indicated they were here for
opposition but if one check one
more time now all right
Discuss credit.
Senator Moores.
I'm sure of what is the highest
really stated that the highest
rate in the state of the state
right there he says.
Madam chair and senator it's
what the requirement is that the
state minimum wage so I think
it's at this point is it twelve
and it's got escalators where it
goes up with the DTI and some
other things of that sort so I
this would.
Yes this would not be affected
for instance education is
talking about having an
education anymore within that
field of fifteen this is not
following under that the the
official state minimum wage.
Shares of so in state of Santa
Fe our motivations are pure and
alternatives what would the rate
be what Santa Fe set support
what we said as a legislature.
Madam chair and senator my
understanding and as I came up
with this it would again be the
state would be on the twelve
dollar what the state we need is
not if some communities I would
have a minimum wage for a ski
resort we're gonna raise our
minimum in town the twenty
dollars that now it's gonna be
thirty everywhere in the state
that is not the purpose or point
of this at all.
Okay things are.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator I know the the part that
I'm gonna bring up physics
because this thing language but
it just doesn't make sense to
use the minimum wage as one we
have the highest prevailing
because there's only one
state minimum wage and and so I
I think that language probably
should be stricken so that there
is a confusion as to
what is the minimum wage but I
was reading that it was a that's
our staff I don't remember madam
chair center when was just put
in the statute.
Madam chair it I've I don't know
I mean I I I believe Mr have in
my hand.
I was just we've always
understood that language to mean
the higher of the federal or
state minimum wage and there
were years when the.
Federal minimum wage of fifty
cents to a dollar higher and
that's what we paid so that's I
think that's why the legislature
put the highest prevailing but
it's a statewide minimum wage or
through the federal minimum wage
which applies statewide for the
state minimum wage is a Senator
sign.
I should also note and.
I know you have the for from
your analysts there are two
statutes are covered and paid
for jurors one that you're
talking about this bill
addresses those in District
Court the felony.
Basis or big civil cases we also
have jury trials and match
records and that's a separate
statute that has the same
language as well virtually the
same language in it we pay them
the highest prevailing minimum
wage but that's not affected by
this bill so you'd be adopting.
A much higher payment rate in
District Court in New Mexico
just want to make sure you're
aware of that I'm sure the
senator that because you see in
the analysis from the LFC so you
might want to address as opposed
to having to.
It's a state they do the same
exact service just different
point.
Richard pay the same map that
and I'm sure that's a great
point I didn't see that until
the FIR which is just before
this meeting the way outside my
normal area of expertise as far
as you know whether there were
other areas certainly I think
that that should be for both
areas and I know this committee
regularly does amendments in
committee and so your there
needs to be clarification or
changes to to incorporate that
I'm perfectly happy with doing
that if it's better you want me
to go back and come with the
committee said that fixes that
on be happy to do that also that
it was not on purpose that's I
just.
It's my ignorance of this whole
field in their.
Representative from our appoint
the product wasn't what
measurable.
sorry Senator did you just say
here's all the questions you're
gonna have the answers nominees
are going to get in trouble for
the support of that we haven't
taken a position on but I would
be happy to answer questions my
experts so there is not managers
or did you just been an expert
Senator
please don't tell much public
work but in the long term care
match record today would be.
So.
That's how that works.
Any other special.
Senator.
It is to me that RT that you you
said you picked the highest of
the state or federal minimum
wage but that's not what the
statute sets.
Mr Stewart that's how we always
reddit it hasn't been a problem
for a while situated up to the
tiered increase in the state
minimum wage but if the facts
about the fifteen dollar minimum
wage are understanding of this
language would be to pay the
federal way you could tell me
differently but that's how we
read it.
So.
Madam chair I mean it says.
Without the new language persons
summoned for jury Services shall
be compensated for their time in
attendance and service at the
highest prevailing state minimum
wage rate.
Then I do want to know when we
did this because it you know
it's a throwing prevailing
that's you know that's kinda
iffy I mean because I think of
prevailing wages something very
different from a minimum wage
rate.
And.
So I just don't even understand
this language but is currently
employed so remember your
as a representative of it's hard
to say what the language means
just Senator race before if
we're not forced to choose
between at least two choices
right otherwise which is the
state minimum wage
so I just have the same thing
about federal in their that's
what you.
So all right well let's chair so
we make mistakes.
Senator Pirtle madam chair I
don't know if you want to hold
the the committee if they're
gonna bring this back to the
committee so as to striking
language it's it's not needed
it's confusing
our our minimum wage is higher
so it should just say a hundred
percent of the state minimum
wage rate I think that is why
the squishy language that we're
you see in front of us Madam
chair representative following
that same it might say the
higher of federal or state
minimum wage because if the feds
don't pass the state one that
would that be the.
And but and madam chair Senator
the the way that it's been here
to stand up that ever happens
but you know that might be a.
So the.
At the center of this and and
senator it it sounds like this
is something very amenable to it
sounds like perhaps we should
roll this today come back with
the some of the addresses both
of those statutes that Mr have
been identified
and perhaps addresses that issue
as well
you madam chair that would have
made sure that I understand is
that it addresses both district
and magistrate court and
addresses the.
The the wage issue at center I'm
assuming that that was your
intent is to mean that your
attention with this bill was not
forced to only apply to District
Court was wanted to the snow
comprehensive approach sent that
yes I think I think that would
be appropriate I would be happy
to do so particularly
if I can get in quickly at the
beginning of one of your
meetings.
Senator after that I don't know
that I've but Senator.
At.
Please work with Mr Papp and.
And I I've been working with him
on many years on your issue this
and access language issues he he
knows what he's doing so that I
think you would have had a very
very different bill had to call
him up first is that I want to
increase it had no idea who
knows but but we know we do have
a chance to change this weird
language so I'm all for that
this is confusing.
Thank you thank you dean.
Thank you.
next up we have SB forty one.
All these.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
I have with me as my expert
witness today Shane use that
tourney that focuses for the
most part on labor law but does
a lot of other things.
So you have before you a bills
that deals with the with with
labor issues that we have in our
state right now.
We have a statue called pizza
for short a university research
park Economic Development Act
that we put into place about
nineteen eighty nine.
At that time we did not have a
collective bargaining statute in
the state so several years after
we put pizza into place we have
now a collective bargaining
statutes several years after.
so we believe that for pizza has
sort of been in but only a cost
issues and problems with our
labor law because we have a
public employee bargaining Act
that specifies public entities
with public employees are under
the public employee bargaining
Act so we have a situation right
now for we have that Sandoval
Medical Center that was.
Developed under pizza with six
hundred nurses at least two
hundred of which are trying to
unionize and they've been told
no because they the Medical
Center was organized under for
pizza so we have conflicting
statutes and conflicting issue
and so the unfortunate thing
that happens when we decide that
some people can organize a some
people can't is that we allow
those people who don't fall
under people to strike so when
we set up our public employee
bargaining Act and we had this
bill on the floor a few years
You very
On
Committee Josh just to look
after the fourteenth did just
want to stand up in support of
this measure echo the comments
of our you know I I.
I want to thank god for ten
Stewart Representative Chandler
for bringing this forward and
order to the committee support
thank you.
Gentleman was the committee
officials to Parker I am a
registered lobbyist but I'm
speaking here not as a register
of this but as a patient
nurses and the other workers and
Santa regional Medical Center as
one more primary position is
located they do incredible work
there there deserve the dignity
and respect collective
bargaining rights report.
Is there anyone else here in the
room.
Well you still have about five
minutes left to have supporters
on soon nine percent I don't
know Senator don't know what's
on the.
I.
Adrian.
Ankle injury and ankles view it
and meet yourself and go ahead I
believe I believe in my muted I
don't know if you can hear me I
am on a quick break and taking
care of COVID patients and I
have my and ninety five.
can you hear me we can hear you.
Okay so good afternoon chairman
John Montes in the committee
members and really appreciate
you taking the time to share
comments on Senate bill forty
one my colleagues and I hear it
in the federal regional for us
to to support this measure and
you know.
It is a huge surprise to us that
anyone believes that we are not
public employees as we have
stood by people Santo during
this time during the pandemic
and we we want to organize the
you eighty percent of us find
cards
Senator Sanchez and we've many
of them call you office
yesterday because we knew that
we could not be in person or on
the phone today.
But
I'm asking you to pass this bill
and send a clear message to
health care workers public
employees workers specifically
that you stand with that that
you believe we deserve to have.
And that we should be recognized
as public employees under people
up thank you for your time as
the training home today.
This is.
Laura Representative and
support.
My name is Laura rector and the
nurse at Santa regional Medical
Center
and I'm just asking you guys to
pass this bill
we're I thank you I've been
working on this for awhile we
should have the right to
unionize
it's.
You know it seems to me that
it's kind of a loophole that
we're not allowed to unionize
and.
I just we should be afforded
that right we try to give
everything we can to the
community and.
we would like to see that given
back to us thank you for your
time.
Thank you and then there's no
one else in support online we
will go to organize opposition
which I understand there two
people here with us and to on
soon
I will start with Nathan bush.
And and just so you all know you
have about two and a half
minutes each.
Thank you madam chair the
money's being bush I am
interested government relations
officer at the university of New
Mexico.
I would like to speak to be
unintended consequences of the
bill in regards to our research
and innovation park.
But if I may first please note
that the if the issue here is
the right employees to organize
at the end of our regional
Medical Center we want to be
clear that employees of our
pizza corporations already have
the right to organize and
bargain collectively under the
national labor relations act as
non governmental employees.
But if we focus on the fact that
you would also the research
parks.
Critical freezers part
ice on your computer
corporations.
Since its amendment in two
thousand seven including local
development corporation yeah
a report on the global energy.
That's a each of the major
provider of direct service.
But also economic engines in
their own right as these
research and innovation parks
your people statute increases
goals of promoting partnerships
between New Mexico's educational
business and industry committees
communities I reclassify
research parks estate employers
really three parts for
intellectual property and other
flexibility that allows repeated
corporations to be competitive
in the marketplace.
A truly innovative businesses
have unfortunately little if any
interest in working and
partnering with research parks.
If we are not in full control of
our own information and related
operations that would be damaged
again as an unintended
consequence of the bill so we
respectfully this proposed bill
thank you again to madam chair
and the committee hearing our
concerns thank you for.
Thank you Jennifer Weber.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
and committee members my name is
Jennifer whatever and I am here
on behalf of the New Mexico
chamber of commerce.
The chamber opposes Senate bill
forty one because of what I will
be Mexico's ability to innovate
and minimally to bring
innovative ideas to market.
In twenty twenty one the chamber
published driving New Mexico's
future and economic
competitiveness competitiveness
analysis of the state an action
plan to jump start our economy
close pandemic.
One of the four key factors we
found in our study think that
Mexico must do to build a more
equitable and diverse economy is
to continue to grow and
strengthen our state innovation
capacity meaningful of
partnership.
Innovation hub research and
build a lawyer Capital.
Corporations formed under appear
to have contributed to this
needed innovation.
By removing their ability to be
flexible and nimble increasing
intellectual property address.
Forty one I will be Mexico's
economic development.
The chamber understands that
employees of organizations
formed under pita like we have
the right to organize under the
NLRB.
Maybe not all employees in these
organizations effectively state
employees could have unintended
consequences.
We ask for you not to the bill
have.
Thank you.
Thank you and I understand that
G. people into those on the soon
to go ahead and.
Under yourself and proceed.
Thank you madam chair this is JD
Bullington and I am representing
the greater greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce and speaking
in opposition to Senate bill
forty one some time at the
appropriate slot.
The greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce opposes Senate bill
forty one spec to play.
Because New Mexico employers
need our community colleges and
higher education institutions to
continue to be as responsive
agile and innovative as possible
when it comes to creating
workforce training programs and
professional skill building
opportunities these programs
help us support current industry
wants new ones and overcome
workforce shortages we also need
our colleges and universities to
manage intellectual property and
turn today's local research and
invention into tomorrow's very
successful local companies.
All of these are economic
development efforts that this
legislation as broadly as it's
constructed what I necessarily
hindered by making them less
competitive affecting how
they're structured and staff and
increasing the cost to manage
them there are important reasons
why our research parks don't
operate as traditional state
agency as currently drafted the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce respectfully opposes
this bill because of the
unintended consequences it would
have on our local economies
thank you.
Thank you and Tracy Hartzler on
soon please and yourself and go
ahead.
Yes
you madam chair members of the
committee and Tracy Hartzler
president of central New Mexico
community college I'm a board
member of scene and ingenuity
which is the colleges economic
development entity formed under
the university research park act
I scene opposes SB forty one for
many reasons CNN has been using
the research park act for the
exact reasons the legislature
created it to start or local
businesses particularly in the
science and tech industries and
start I'm sorry and to develop
and provide high quality
workforce and upskilling
programs to serve these
businesses and industries.
Our successes in doing this a
pretty well known including our
recent recognition as a finalist
with the space Valley coalition
for a hundred million dollar
federal build back better grant
and I work with local leading
companies like Intel and the
acts are just twenty one
another's and that technology
and data analytics space I'm
concerned that the application
of people up to the research
project in state particularly
seen an ingenuity as this is
written will delay the
development and offering a
critical workforce programs in
high demand areas and
particularly as far skilled
trades and R. I. T. can't it
will limit our competitiveness
competitiveness in providing
workforce training and
upskilling programs to employers
it will raise costs for such
programs to students and adult
learners who don't have access
to financially to pay for them
so madam chair no one wants us
to make it more costly for New
Mexicans to need quick valuable
programs to help them find good
jobs and I know no one wants to
add to the burden of New Mexico
businesses our national labs and
others who need ingenuity to
turn our workforce so for these
reasons madam chair seen
respectfully opposes State
Senate bill forty one extracted.
Thank you very much we'll go to
the committee Senator Moores who
referred entire we would like to
respond to a couple of days we
have a we have stated that the
committee needs to know that
first.
All right go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee that there's a
misstatement of law here and and
it has created some misplaced
concerns and I want to make that
clear the question is whether or
not these employees who are
employees of arms of the state
are allowed to organize under
the national labor relations act
the private sector law which
governs private sector
corporations the answer to that
question is no they are not the
answer to that question was
resolved by the United States
Supreme Court fifty one years
ago the name of the case was in
our bureau C. utility district
of Hopkins county that United
States Supreme Court decision
was applied here in New Mexico
by the national labor relations
board when the state bar center
of New Mexico attempted to
organize under the national
labor relations act and I have a
copy of that case here and I can
find members of the committee
with a copy that K. but this
United States Supreme Court
decision was applied to the
state bar center employees who
tried to organize under the
national labor relations act the
national labor relations board
applying the president of the
United States Supreme Court said
that agencies which are an arm
of the state of the state of New
Mexico cannot organized under
the laws of the national labor
relations act and they set out
to standards if an organization
is created by the state for if
an organization is eight
ministered by individuals who
are responsible to public
officials each one of these
repeated corporations are
organized by a state agency
central New Mexico University of
New Mexico so they do not
qualified to organize under the
national labor relations act and
what the legislature has
accidentally done it has created
a small sliver of employees pita
employees who cannot organize
under the public employees
bargaining Act and neither can
the organized under the national
labor relations act.
The hospital care workers who
are working at Santa regional
Medical Center are the only
hospital workers in the state of
New Mexico who don't have
recourse to representation in
the workplace at the notion that
allowing those employees the
right to organize is going to
stifle innovation I just it does
not make any sense to me to be
clear pizza already
characterizes repeated employees
as public employees for the
purposes of the tort claims
immunity act we are simply
seeking to extend that
definition two one additional
law which the legislature has
made explicitly clear is a
guaranteed to all public
employees great thank you madam
chair right thank you Senator
Moores thank you madam chair
thank you Metrotown on both give
you a heart attack on my friend
I'm not sure voted on this.
and what explained that I'm
gonna get some background I have
a couple questions.
Madam pro time it's because of
things personally in our
industry some of the tangled
webs that these university
businesses create amazing
example tricor telephone by the
university of New Mexico and how
important as Presbyterians
posted nonprofit.
But in the create a for profit
subsidiary that goes out and
is Gruss of Lee and competes in
the market places and and use
the advantage of being when they
want to be University associated
group they're University
associate I want to be a
nonprofit they act like a
nonprofit but under needs at all
is a very very aggressive.
A marketing business operation
that goes out there in the
marketplace and competes against
private sectors with all the
advantages of organizations and
across all nations of boards.
There are nonprofit is a half
controlled under their own
language by the university
Mexico but then respond if rose
then respond to questions and so
I've seen in the market place
that very aggressive
convolution of these quote
unquote University owned
businesses and my industry so I
don't have a lot of sympathy
because I know that happens in
these other areas too so that's
for I don't know how.
Proton so I guess the question
is Committee example I just use
I'm sorry I got your name from
she needs thank you
Madam chair representative so K.
like I just talked about where
they create these shadow some
Senator really is a for profit
but then they create these
before nonprofit and a
courageous for profit
organizations under the
parliament with other cortical
nonprofits with that would be
subject to this could you talk
about a hundred fifty to two
hundred million dollar
organization that's half owned
by a government entity would
they be covered under this type
and you talk about huge medical
complex right off the freeway
what the footprint around the
state with hundreds of
employees.
Madam chair Senator Stewart at
center Morris at.
They don't want to lose your
vote but I don't know that try
core laboratories would be
covered under this but I think a
Republican vote is justified in
this bill and it let me tell you
why we're in the middle of the
pandemic
the state have New Mexico has
determined that its health care
workers cannot strike because we
have to provide services because
of this anomaly the employees of
the university of New Mexico
Santa regional Medical Center
can go on strike and that is one
of the provisions of the public
employees bargaining Act that
was strongly supported by
Republicans we don't want our
public employees to go out on
strike but because of this
historical air those employees
can now go out on strike and
into your point senator Morris
let me make one more point there
is a is something of a strange
behavior you with these
corporations in in S. T. C. U.
N. M. versus quest diagnostics
S. T. U. N. M. is it and Peter
corporation in that case the
University of New Mexico told a
federal District Court that they
are an arm of the state and
they're entitled to immunity as
an arm of the state and then
they come back to the nurses at
the university of New Mexico
Santa regional center is it
we're not an arm of the State
your private employees they're
playing both sides of the coin
and this legislation fixes that
problem and it starts down the
road to I think where you want
to go which is there are other
problems that need to be fixed
with this law but this one needs
to be fixed first chair.
Sorry had a laugh at the quest
reference to sector you're
talking about yeah we're doing
we try court the the guys that
so that's what I was referring
to the legislator UNM one moment
Senator profit but we really all
know what they really are
underneath it so.
R. O. from realist to this
debate but I would like to talk
more the university's not all
this bill and a Pappy.
The I see this in real life what
they do in these organizations
that create and it puts New
Mexico small businesses and
rural businesses act under very
hard competitive disadvantage
and we're basically workers
there's two independent medical
I've talked a lot point before
the pandemic started are the
only one the other one structure
of our business
because they could do COVID yes
we were able to on the other one
our business and will be a
business to if it hadn't been
for COVID yes
and I would want.
The company left in the state of
New Mexico we're excited
monopoly right now but uses
these shells to try to control
it so I'm I'm really goes into
this debate so I appreciate it
and I just wanted to give my
personal perspective from our
industry what I see from the
university Mexico in their
business operations thank you
thank you.
The members.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
So I'm.
If was several people about this
bill.
And.
Some of the other.
Well but.
I didn't realize.
There was also active litigation
on behalf of the president.
And so I just I'm wondering.
Hello is constitutionally.
We do this hello to.
Vitiate.
I'm just part of.
Or.
Madam chair offer.
Mr chairman I'll have a chance
of that.
Madam chair Senator Ivey Soto I
I assume what you're referring
to is article four section
thirty four of the New Mexico
constitution which states no act
of the legislature shall affect
the right or remedy of either
party or change the rules of
evidence for procedure in any
pending case this legislation
does not do that the legal
question raised in the
litigation that is currently
before the Supreme Court before
the New Mexico Supreme Court
answers the question of what
happens to a petition for
bargaining unit under the
current standing of the of your
feet a lot if the legislature
decides to change the law then
if we you desires after that
they have the ability and
opportunity to file a new
petition under the new law but
this legislation will have no
effect whatsoever on the case
that is currently pending before
the Supreme Court because the
Supreme Court will only evaluate
the legal question of whether or
not for PDF precludes coverage
under P. but as it is currently
right and so there is no concern
or possibility that this
legislation could affect that
litigation I a guess another
example in my mind is that we
have tort claims act claims in
litigation all the time that
doesn't mean we can't change the
tort claims act in the
legislature those claims that
are filed under the old tort
claims act proceed under the old
tort claims act those claims
that proceed under the new
proceed under the new and that
situation is exactly analogous
to what we have here the current
litigation would proceed under
the previous law.
I.
The process
online the
Also I I apologize.
Committee and I have this
presentation whether
requirements from find out here.
Persimmons what we can bring an
amendment.
Not that off that this is a hi
So that the I a.
Of the people who are working
than what I thought was public
hospital.
Currently there is a recall.
The president will have.
Follow up and make a lot of
public funds but I guess not
hospital.
Some of that to that I am
concerned about the unintended
consequence that could.
Right.
from from simply doing a
wholesale.
change to.
That would affect all.
All of the up over
All of the various different
research parks.
Operon the state really that.
But also for that we had a bill
that would.
For ever having a healthcare
corporation is being our
reserves parking.
Force them to
Actually be whoever but I think
there are lots of all help.
But it right the the the.
Well as broad an.
I think it's a little more
brought.
if it were limited to.
Health care facilities
That is something that we have
the we have to support.
But without knowing the full
from all different.
Research for corporations that
this.
I don't I don't really feel like
I know what all the implications
are.
While everybody keeps talking
about one situation.
thank you for.
Other members of the committee.
Also asking.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator for your explanation
of the bill as you mentioned
earlier can you describe it Mr
Hughes you too.
As a.
It is very close to having
trouble hearing it is on.
Thank.
so you mentioned earlier the the
number and you you've described
it as a sliver of employees can
can you tell us what that exact
number is of for close to the
exact number of the number of
employees that this would affect
statewide.
Madam chair Senator Baca at I
believe that number to be in the
one thousand to two thousand
employee range we actually have
a list of every year PED
corporation in New Mexico the
dominant corporation that is
interpreted Corporation is unit
part of University of New Mexico
health system and that is the
UNM Sandoval regional Medical
Center that would make up the
majority of those employees
there are other small repeated
corporations UNM has several New
Mexico state has won New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology has won New Mexico
highlands has one but these are
generally speaking speaking
smaller P. to corporations and
and and I don't expect that this
will affect any of them but it
is consistent with the already
established policy of the state
of New Mexico that public
employees even if those types of
corporations it should have the
right to organize buddy the
short answer your question I
would say it's a lot closer to a
thousand and certainly below two
thousand.
Thank you thank you thank that
clears it up we we are also Mr
chair given the list of of
agencies and but I just have no
idea really how many people work
there how many people are each
agency so you're saying a
thousand to two thousand it's
quite a span honestly but a
thousand to two thousand we said
gives us something to look at
what we're looking at here I did
want to point out one
distinction though there's been
a lot of
discussion about the health of
the tort claims act hello how
we're treated as public how
they're treated as public
employees under the tort claims
act yet for collective
bargaining purposes like that
they're not tree like public
employees but the distinction
that I want to make is that
really the the purpose of the
tort claims act is to protect
public treasuries it's not
necessarily to envelop the
entity or a body or individual
and protect them with community
because of.
because they are a public
employee the deeper purpose is
to collect is to protect public
treasury aware of people's tax
dollars are out there and that's
why we in the law at least in my
opinion we distinguish between
private sector and public due to
that so I I just wanted to flush
out that that distinguishing
characteristic characteristic a
bit more so that you know we
understand that maybe yeah it's
it's not really enveloping Hey
now you're a public employee the
reason you're covered by tort
claims act is to protect a
financial institution that is
held by the government so those
are two things and I I I think
with that
you can kind of flush out that
in that sense if they're not a
public employee and it's
actually the neglect to protect
the public treasury then for the
purposes of collective
bargaining I I'm not saying that
maybe they don't belong there
but I'm just saying that that
comparison to me is a bit
inaccurate and so all just close
with that thank you.
Under the chair.
Thank you yes Representative
chair Senator about I I.
Thank you very angry with your
assessment with regard to a
characterization of the public
employees at I feel compelled to
point out that.
I think you you noted that it's
designed to protect the the
public monies that is another
important reason to vote yes on
this bill the public employees
bargaining Act provides
protections to the citizens of
the state of New Mexico it
protects the citizens of the
state of New Mexico from a
straight it also protects the
citizens of the state of New
Mexico from negotiations
economic negotiations because it
limits the ability of unions to
negotiate on financial lives and
we the what I disagree with that
I do or not I guess is not
relevant for purposes of these
discussions but Piva is designed
to protect public from those
types of dangers and and and
that's exactly what the proposed
legislation does IT it supports
the premise of the point that
you made.
Thank you for the that after
cruciate that I
protects you use the term of
projects the public from strikes
but you know I I don't see under
the incredible string that we've
had with health care workers lay
the strike has yet to take
place.
And without you know I guess
aside from individuals walking
off the job because they just
had too much
too much the bad enough they're
they're gonna leave I I we
haven't seen that sort of issue
in front of us but I do
appreciate the explanation for
that and your thorough coverage
of the topic.
Thanks Senator other members of
the committee.
All right I'm cert Galasso so
asked the couple of questions.
I'm trying to understand because
we're we're hearing from thank
you Mr bush you can.
They that they could otherwise
you as you're saying that under
this Supreme Court case they
cannot is this.
Is this a a difference of legal
interpretation or where where
that and and I might ask Mr
bush's if you would what what is
your basis for saying that
because of that folks can
otherwise you do not.
If you're after
For.
Of the university council is on
the line today very first we
questions to them is that it's.
I I I don't know if that will.
Earlier
I don't know if that's because.
Training.
If there there go head ma'am you
and and feel free to answer if
not if you could just do your
tier your best at that.
I don't see anyone jumping on
stuff.
They replace more resilient as
we were years I apologize that
Loretta Martinez okay miss
Martinez what what what is what
is UNM's basis for saying that
folks can otherwise you us.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me yes.
Okay so I wanted to point out
that window bamsey who is the
attorney for the S. R. M. C. of
corporation has submitted
testimony she's from the road
the law firm I hope the members
have receive that and I think
would be appropriate for you to
consider that testimony given
that the union's lawyer on the
S. R. M. C. K. has been present
in testifying or speaking with
the committee so I did want to
point that out first and I know
that this committee meeting this
is not a courtroom I think where
you would normally entertain
legal arguments but it is S. R.
M. C.'s position and I'm
speaking in their stead at the
moment because news vans is
unavailable to comment at this
committee that it has been
clearly represented by S. R. M.
C. throughout the proceeding
that really initiated this
legislation that not only was
the national labor relations act
relevant here that is the
appropriate forum for employees
such as S. R. N. C. in place who
are deemed to not be public
employees under the Arpita and
that in fact S. R. M. C. would
consent to jurisdiction under of
that
national wall of the of the
unions of refuse to accept that
overture by S. R. M. C..
in the case that again I know
this is a form of legal
arguments in the case that Mr
units is referring to is in fact
as I understand it and hasn't
been raised previously in any of
the pleadings case involving
public employees and.
Here is that these are not
public employees thank you yeah
and and you know I I.
To me whether whether it's been
raised in whatever underlying
basis or not if there's a pretty
tort law that is dispositive on
this issue then that is
significant to me and and I'm
not hearing.
I'm not hearing anyone say well
that's on the wall for just
very.
We don't think it should apply
to us and so that.
That is a different situation
and and one that I'm I'm not
inclined to be terribly
sympathetic to to be honest.
Even assuming that these folks
could unionize under some other
mechanism.
For doesn't make sense to me I
here we heard this kind of
laundry list of issues this
would create with I. P. and
economic development.
But also Senator don't think
they can so you as of the last
and it doesn't make any sense to
me why simply unionizing under
P. box would create this laundry
list of problems
It it it makes that a bit of a
of speeches argument to me if
you're saying you communities
otherwise but but the only way
we avoid all these problems his
by not letting folks unionize
under people.
so.
And I'm very sympathetic to what
senator Morris was saying in
that I think that.
This looks like a situation
I want my wanting your cake and
eating it too
we are we are a public body for
the benefit of the tort claims
act for the benefit of the
community but.
But once they're having been a
public body puts obligations
upon us we are no longer
published by.
and so I would I think that this
bill creates consistency
and and.
Closes a loophole that I don't
think it was intended by leaving
this narrow.
category of folks without any
any other mechanisms it sounds
like editors to print port Law
and our current statutes on to
you.
So that is all I have Mister
chair thank you and I don't know
if there were other members of
the committee or if you like to
respond to that.
Madam chair members if we I just
I've been handed at an email
from road at the rodeo offered
at it I I think two important
points should be made here and.
Senator regional Medical Center
University of New Mexico
Sandoval regional Medical Center
as second case law in support of
the notion that the employees
can you is that unionize under
the national labor relations
act.
Spring court decided it's the
United States Supreme Court
decided this fifty years ago and
this is ultimately a question of
state jurisdiction which is
people or federal jurisdiction
which is the national labor
relations act the national labor
relations act has within it a
procedure which would be
effectively change of venue
motion it's called an R. M.
petition and it is a petition
that an employer can file where
they want to seek an election
where you has asserted
representation so in August and
September even through today the
University of New Mexico could
have filed in our invitation
with the national labor
relations board to support their
assertion that they are covered
under the national labor
relations act they have not done
so.
Thank you and and and I think
that is a significant point
I appreciate having that
information.
before we go to the chair of the
other members of the committee.
Mr chair.
So thank you.
Yes I want to join the.
The colleagues who have some
real concerns about this entity
and I'm and I'm I'm sympathetic
to U. N. M. C. N. M. I'm
surprised the NM issues not here
today they have research park
and and so forth I'm
unsympathetic to the entire
structure of this because again.
You've heard the expression cake
and eat it too that's that's the
easy way to explain it but let's
let's get beyond tort claims act
just for questions I don't know
the university my understanding
is the these entities are not
subject open meetings act is
that right.
Madam chair Senators about this
effect questions for me the
answers they are not yeah I'm
I'm looking to more the
university Representative is
here but in my right the these
these groups claim that they're
not subject to with me is that
right.
Chair Mister chair of that my
understanding of us my
university council still online
I do Department them on
renewable constructs a thank
if I may correct hope somebody
will point that out but that's
my understanding is they they
exempt themselves from open
meetings and likewise they
exempt themselves from
inspection public records.
and and then but at the same
time that invoke the status
under the tort claims act which
is particularly important here
with the hospital organization
because that means in their
damages are capped by the tort
claims act
you know maybe for the seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
for malpractice case which we
talked a lot about here of late
last month amount thank
malpractice so they're they're
invoking privileges entity.
But then rejected the
responsibilities of a state
entity and and you can't have
both ways so I'm very
unsympathetic to the
institutions of higher education
when they're invoking those
things.
and and that makes this bill
difficult because I would want
assurances absolute assurances
that these employees could
always organize themselves and
I'm I'm like Center doing I'm
hearing two different versions
of that I I
I have been up let me apologize
the committee members of you
didn't receive it one of the
rules that I've adopted for this
committee is to encourage people
to give us written comments as
opposed to having to feel they
have to appear here in the
committee part of the reason I'm
encouraged written comments in
advance from individuals by
email we set up a mailbox for
that is that you all would be
passed out that email before
each committees you can read
that
and and do some with some time
to help prepare for the
committee in the past and it
also helps the staff prepared
and identify issues and and
think more thoughtfully about
bills before we get here so the
the email from.
Former DFA judge fanzine.
Has been passed out it should
pass that will the other email
we received on this issue
although I'll tell you I think
they're only three fifteen three
emails we received on the issue
also the committee I want to
point out all the my goal is
going to get you all those
emails in lieu of of having a
folks feel have to come speak
here.
A sense of of that exam to the
institutions of higher education
however I I I'm still
Most tribal in support by
article four section thirty four
and I had a chance to very
briefly talk with the Sanchez
expert.
A section thirty four but it's
on page forty two of your
constitution.
And the let me put in a plug at
this juncture for the need for a
constitutional revision
commission.
Your you all have heard me
talking about this before but
the not gonna happen this
session of course but but this
this section are you all have it
regional act of the legislature
show affect the right remedy the
the party goes on for change
rules of evidence a procedure so
I'm not so concerned about this
being a change of evidence a
procedure in a pending case but
No actualization affect the rate
of remedy of either party it's
it's very hard for me to not
feel that this legislation is
affecting the right or remedy of
of the employees of Santa
And I don't I I can't think of
any other way to avoid that and
it caused me a lot of concern
principally because if we if we
do not honor the spirit and
intent of this section then
we're going to be asked to pass
legislation to affect a lot of
litigation that's ongoing and
and causes a lot of problems I
think.
so madam chair the that's this
is the sticking point but I have
right now but I certainly want
to reaffirm my desire to see
these employees are assured of a
right to organize and bargain
it's really hard I haven't heard
one comment from anybody on this
committee to suggest otherwise
that that we want to prohibit
these individuals from from
bargaining.
And I I think the institutions
of higher education need to be
sent a message today pretty loud
and clear that come sixty days
we're gonna revisit I think this
status they've got all the state
the way it works from what I've
seen is look.
If you want to grease the
contractor you want to get a
land deal or something else like
that you go through these
institutions because no open
meetings no inspection of public
records no accountability no
oversight whatsoever.
and so that's how you get it
that's that's right that's right
well that's right that's how you
get a sweet contract right
that's how you get a nice piece
of property that's how you get a
development deal or that's how
you of influence you outcome
agree Senator I agree
and so what I hope will take
that upon ourselves as a clear
unified message that we should
be asking a lot of questions
about these groups that are that
are that really have
accountability and nobody.
so determined yeah we respond to
that you weren't here when when
chain responded earlier I have.
And I'll be happy to hear the
response but I I do want you to
be assured Senator although it
may not be in the room I'm
watching everything that goes on
this committee health.
so as you well know we're
broadcast all over the place and
the I'm hearing every electronic
device necessary to make sure
that I I don't miss things so I
I did here's response earlier
but I've been invited to respond
again.
Madam chair Senators about this
at the this situation is much
like the tort claims act from
time to time the legislature
changes the tort claims act if
there is pending litigation the
pending litigation operates
under the tort claims act as the
tort claims act existed when it
was filed it is exactly the same
with the pending litigation that
pending litigation addresses the
question of whether or not
PDA as presently written
interferes with public employees
right to bargain under the
public employees bargaining Act
that litigation.
Probably won't continue if this
if this legislature passes the
law but if it did continue it
would address what Peter means
in the context of its historical
perspective employees not just
at the University of New Mexico
Santa regional Medical Center
but at other facilities in the
future would have the right to
file a new petition a new
petition for recognition and
that new petition would be
evaluated under the law is
changed by the New Mexico
legislature but I agree with you
that depending what it
legislation that pending
litigation would not be affected
in any respect by what this
legislature does this session
with regard to paid for with
regard to Pete.
Yeah and I respectfully disagree
with that last statement that
would influence that because I
think you it knowledge as much
when you said that if this was
to pass that litigation would go
away which probably with and so
to say that this doesn't
influence are effective pending
litigation and then at the same
time say that we passes that
litigation away I you can't
reconcile those two in my mind I
am aware of the case that you
referred to I will tell you that
we've got an incredible team of
lawyers on this committee I hope
everybody knows that and I can't
say enough and I hope you'll use
them I I had a full briefing on
the litigation every petition
every rip every quash a motion
up and down the deal our staff
has done an incredible job of
briefing me on that entire
litigation history.
I'm more of a court case that
you're relying upon to suggest
that a court has said that under
the tort claims analogy in this
language that would only have a
prospective application and not
a retroactive applicators which
is I think what you're saying
exactly and and I.
If you look at this language
that's a court reading a lot
into this language that's a
court interpreting this language
to essentially say that that all
this language means is that it
has only of a prospective
application.
I respect the court to reach
that decision but they're
they're making up the law
they're they're they're reading
things in their interpreting
things in their their of their
limiting the constitutional I
was somebody give it a plan
reading.
counseling members here and and
that's my until we get a
constitution revision commission
start getting of some of the
financial data written what it
says what it says to me it says
no action is legislature that's
what this would be shall affect
the rate a remedy of either
party.
I can't reach a different
conclusion that that this bill
would affect the right remedy of
a party in that litigation so
madam chair those are my
concerns with a bill before us
thank you.
Thank you what is the will of
the.
Thank you.
I move it to pass on thank you.
The
public center.
Part of our process it on.
Mr uses comment about the the
Given the color that the
program's Act is that the
program's Act there are.
status limitation and notice
provisions where.
When you say that certain.
Other cases would.
Proceed.
For the all all the new things
of proceed under the new law.
But there's a clear
differentiation I think for the
most part between the two.
Representative the answer here
is will we'll just go back and.
And then do it again under the
new law.
an amendment if I may.
I etcetera
Senator Stewart
