Thank you for the work
broadcast.
I do not see it on the webcast
yet so whatever you want to go
ahead I believe we are starting.
And we are now broadcasting.
More yeah that's a good idea
would you start with our opens.
Senator Baca.
Here.
Photo.
Yes.
Senator Lopez.
Course.
Pirtle.
There.
Thank you.
Senator service yes we do have a
quorum for your.
Senator Wirth said ability.
Thank you Mr chair I am happy to
present Senate Bill
appropriates.
there are a couple of amendments
that we can do to the right
point of all been I think
delivered to your committee with
me to make today's is Charles to
say one an attorney with the
environmental law center he'll
be the expert witness and we
yield to him at the appropriate
time Senate Bill Gates would
allow.
the state of New Mexico through
the New Mexico environment
improvement board and local air
quality boards to adopt
regulations to protect our air
and.
Air land and water that are more
stringent regulations adopted by
the federal government.
Currently.
We have.
Preempted ourselves and we fight
ourselves to federal regulations
and we said that that federal
regulation.
Is our ceiling and it's our
floor we can never deviate from
those federal regulations except
with a couple tiny exceptions
that we've made to that I think
as you can all understand what
that means is that when we have
an administration at the federal
level like we did in the past
administration where there was
an all out effort to undo air
and hazardous waste regulations
we end up following those
regulations to the T. R. what
this bill will do is allow us to
have the federal regulations
always be the floor so we can
never go below the federal
regulations what we can
interviews regulations that are
more stringent than the federal
regulations are we had an
interesting discussion in
Senator Ivy Soto this committee
this morning about the
constitution had a provision.
In our constitution article
twenty section twenty one
Senator Sedillo Lopez often
reads this on the floor of the
Senate and it was interesting
because one of the arguments
being made by those opposed to a
proposal to have a new green
amendments was that it would
take away the legislature's
ability to control.
Air and hazardous waste
pollution issues and they say
that is the second sentence of
our article twenty section
twenty one I'll read it the
legislature shall provide for
control of pollution control of
disbelieve this fully meant of
the air water and other natural
resources of the state
consistent with the use and
development of these resources
for the maximum benefit of the
people.
This caused me to think a lot
about this bill because that's
all we're doing in this bill is
just saying let's let the
legislature do exactly what the
constitution said I actually
think there's an argument that
could be made that the current
law is unconstitutional as we
are taking away we are tying our
hands and basically saying as
the Legislature we cannot do
anything in these areas of walk
on air regulation and hazardous
regulates waste regulation
that's more stringent than the
federal regulations so in effect
we are taking away our ability
to do exactly that so This act
basically gives back to the
state the ability to enact air
quality hazardous waste
regulations that are more
stringent after going through
the due process that's built
into the environmental
improvement board
process and and if it's
determined if that makes sense
that's what this bill allows we
also do have one a local airport
in Albuquerque that has the
ability to enact regulations
that would be impacted by this
they've suggested one of the two
amendments that we can discuss
at the right time and so with
that Mr chair ideal to Mr to
sailing just to fill in the
blanks and kind of maybe give an
example of exactly why this bill
is so important.
Thank you need on mute.
You hear me yeah thank you
senator Wirth Mr chairman
members of the committee of
created the opportunity to talk
to you today my name is Charles
to sail in and I am a staff
attorney with the New Mexico
environmental law center so just
elaborate a little bit on what
senator Wirth this that
said Senate bill eight allows
for greater state and local
control
in protect in the protection of
our natural resources here in
New Mexico it means lost control
from the federal government
Senate bill eight would allow
the New Mexico environmental
improvement board and the
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
air quality board to adopt
regulations to protect our land
our air and our water that are
more stringent than the
regulations adopted by the
federal government.
New Mexico air quality control
act requires the environmental
improvement board or the local
local board in the case of of
early Albuquerque in Albuquerque
to adopt regulations to protect
our air quality and similarly
the The New Mexico hazardous
waste act requires the
environmental improvement board
to adopt regulations to protect
our land and our water from the
mismanagement of hazardous waste
but both of those those laws as
currently written mandate that
the board's regulations must be
no more stringent than the
federal right.
I'm sorry.
I'm and so it was in addition if
the federal EPA repeals or
weakens the federal regulations
the board is obligated to follow
suit and repeal or weaken the
state regulations in effect the
federal regulations pre and more
stringent state regulations this
is particularly problematic is
is senator Wirth alluded to
given that over the last several
years the federal EPA has rolled
back many environmental
regulations particularly those
designed to protect air quality.
And there are several of these
examples where these limitations
have created problems.
For example the limitation in
the air quality control act has
made it difficult for the
environment department to
propose regulations to address
methane emissions from oil and
gas production methane is a
potent greenhouse gas in the
short term methane is eighty six
times more potent in and
trapping solar radiation that is
carbon dioxide.
Methane from oil and gas
production is the primary source
of greenhouse gases in New
Mexico.
but the federal EPA recently cut
back and essentially a repeal of
the federal regulations of of
methane emissions from oil and
gas in so the environmental
improvement board is unable to
adopt regulations to regulate
methane so instead what they've
had to do is is regulate other
pollutants
they and they're proposing to
regulate
emissions of volatile organic
compounds and nitrogen oxides
with the intent of by regulating
these pollutants it will reduce
the emissions of other
pollutants it but it's it's an
indirect regulation and it's and
it's very inefficient.
the bullet the limitation their
quality control act also made it
more difficult for the City of
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county to regulate concentrated
sources of air pollution in in
the south valley and the
Mountain View communities of and
and in these these are both
communities in Albuquerque
they're mostly low income and
ethnically diverse communities
and they suffer
disproportionately from the
effects of of air pollution.
The limitation in the hazardous
waste act has made it difficult
for the environment department
to to regulate per and
polyfluoroalkyl substances or
PFAS as you probably know that
the there is considerable amount
of he first contamination coming
from both Holloman Air Force
base in canton airforce base in
is contaminated the the
surrounding groundwater and
contaminated the water supply
for several local dairies
actually put one of those
dairies out of business but the
environment department is not
excuse me the EPA the federal
EPA does not regulate the faces
as a hazardous waste so our
state laws cannot regulate
pieces either.
So this bill would remove from
both the air quality control act
and the hazardous waste that the
prohibition on the adoption of
regulations that are more
stringent than the federal
regulations the bill would free
the board of both the the
environment improvement board in
the local board to adopt more
stringent regulations that are
more appropriate for New Mexico
in some cases
now in addition an amendment to
the bill would allow the City of
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county to require vehicle
inspections of diesel powered
motor vehicles no diesel diesel
engines emit relatively high
levels of nitrogen oxides and
particulate matter and we know
that of several manufacturers
European manufacturers of diesel
engines have have had cheated on
their mission tests on vehicles
diesel powered vehicles sold in
the United States
Now the air quality control act
currently allows
well local authority searches
Albuquerque Bernalillo county to
require vehicle emission testing
of vehicles that are on gasoline
power but not vehicles that are
diesel power so this this
amendment to the bill would
allow the vehicle testing for
diesel powered vehicles and
therefore again it would allow
greater local control.
The final note that I would
mention that Senate bill eight
will not require any probation
and will not affect the state's
budget of so thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and I'd be happy to
answer or or help to answer any
questions you may have.
Thank you for the presentation.
We've also sure we have to begin
join whether members may welcome
everyone just so that everyone
can vote for president Senator
Lopez asked we roll over Senate
bill ninety two also on the
first matter of business Senate
bill eight right now
thank you senator Wirth.
all right so now this is where I
need help getting trained up
because of your chair on the
committee
we we have a number of people
that are showing participating
but I don't know what what we
have in terms of a request to
speak.
do I get that from you.
Yes we have quite a few people
who have signed up to speak on
Senate bill eight.
It looks like we have just about
twenty people who signed up to
speak for the bill and we have I
will spend the to speak against.
The west so.
We'll
take a reasonable effort to have
some public input before you get
to committee members
I will.
Trying get through the number of
components in the ten minutes
there's about twenty of you so
we're gonna try to everyone who
are going to my list C. as far
as we get.
I for one minute starting in the
order that we receive them in
this case
The Sierra Club.
Senator can you let me know the
name just so that I can about
the correct person yes Camilla.
Thank you Mr she is coming in
thank you then that would be
followed by the Miller you have
are you working off the same is
that I am gonna.
You have a written list.
Yes I do right so the world will
be.
the C. will then
Ms Miller very full will
recognize each one of you for
one minute beginning now please
be ready to go if I call for you
you're not ready in the skip
over your on.
So I've unmuted myself because
you said my name shall I proceed
or yes please proceed okay very
good well this is Camilla I
woman I'm the director of the
Rio Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club I am representing over
thirty five thousand members and
supporters I thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee for the opportunity to
speak in favor of at S. B. eight
this is a key issue for our
chapter especially with the way
that it relates to the New
Mexico environment department's
ability to regulate methane they
should have the authority to
directly regulate methane from
oil and gas operations methane
as a powerful green cat house
guests that's eighty times more
powerful than carbon dioxide
over a twenty year period right
now rules to address leaks and
emissions under consideration
address the smog forming
volatile organic compounds and
only address at Thane
incidentally as a co pollutants
so.
We think that giving the agency
the ability to look at this
issue statewide to regulate in a
way that's good for our state
and our for our communities is
key thanks for the opportunity.
Ms Miller next.
Good afternoon thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Amy Miller
I'm calling in from Albuquerque
on behalf of environmental
defense fund we also strongly
encourage you to support Senate
bill eight really at the end of
the day this bill is about
protecting New Mexicans health
and our state deserves to be in
charge of protecting its
citizens health and its natural
environment.
Our recent experience with COVID
nineteen has shown us the
underserved communities in our
state are some of the most
vulnerable to the impacts of air
pollution and water
contamination let's not be
subject to the unpredictable
whims of Washington such as the
more than one hundred and Bayern
mental regulations setbacks that
occurred in the last four years
but let support Senate bill
eight and protect New Mexicans
health by giving our state and
local air quality boards the
authority to adopt regulations
that are stronger than the
federal thank you thank you.
Followed by John Brown followed
by Judy count.
Mr chair members of the
committee can you hear me.
Yes okay thank my name is Mary
Feldblum and I represent the oil
and gas accountability project
of earthworks and this change is
long overdue it has really tied
the hands of our state and the
intent of the federal laws and
the displaced Act near quality
control act I've never been to
static that would allow states
to be flexible based on
circumstances certainly New
Mexico is not New York or
California in and what we do
here in our state is very
important the rule making
process because this doesn't
mandate that there be rules but
should there be rules that are
more stringent they the board
has to take into consideration
the cost and some for would seem
to be impacted industry and the
community and I think that's a
they are all process in addition
the purpose of the no more
removing a more stringent is to
protect not only our land and
our water but our health care
and just recently in the
Albuquerque journal there was a
report of made by nurses who did
a collected data for New Mexico
Colorado and Montana.
And this is their pope
communities located next to oil
and gas fields refineries and
other polluting industries are
examples of communities that
they are disproportionate burden
of health impacts from
contamination thank you Mr.
Yes thank you chair and members
of the committee my name is a
sister Joan brown Franciscan and
I'm the executive director New
Mexico interfaith power and
light and faith communities all
over the state believe that this
is a very important a bill to
support SB eight and we work all
the state knife and talk with
people kind of and pastoral ways
especially the southeast part of
the state we're very concerned
about their health and they feel
that they've been our sacrifice
zone actually in our state this
bill would help address that
some of the people don't even
you know they have a voice like
folks in Artesia who know a lot
of cancer from the Navajo
refinery and yet they're afraid
to speak up in our face terms
pope Francis is called Sliq part
of the throwaway culture and
none of our people should be
throwaway people nor should our
land water and air be throw away
people and so I ask your support
at this it is caring for our
lands are sacred water land and
air but also our human
communities and they have a
human rights to have their
health protected and this would
do a great deal to move in that
direction so thank you very much
for your hard work thank you
Judy Coleman followed by Krista
senior Christian who followed by
bill Metcalfe one minute please.
G. John.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my
name's Judy Calman and while
most of you know me as the New
Mexico policy director for the
Audubon society I'm speaking to
you today up from under a
different hat I also sit on the
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
air quality control board I'm
and I'm here as a member of that
board although I'm not speaking
for the board as a whole and so
Eric quality New Mexico is
regulated by the state's
environmental improvement board
except in Bernalillo county
where it's regulated by us at
the our quality control board as
senator Wirth noted in his
opening comments I'm sure we all
have not so distant memories of
federal regulations being
drastically and dangerously
rolled back because the current
statutes says the state can't be
more stringent than federal
standards Senate bill it would
ensure that state and local
regulators could still protect
New Mexico from things like
increased ozone even if federal
regulations are diminished and
as Charlie mentioned in his
opening comments Albuquerque
specifically faces some unique
issues S. largest urban area in
the state but we're actually
unable to adequately addressed a
lot of those because of the way
the current language is so
passing this bill would allow us
to at least consider possible
solutions which are not
currently available to us and I
strongly urge you to support it
thank you.
Captain I'm representing
recommends farmers union thank
you consultation the rest of the
committee for allowing me to
speak today in favor of Senate
bill eight.
Farmers and ranchers are the
very definition of
conservation Senator mostly
about the Bonner.
They rely on clean air and clean
water to raise across the fetus
close us and yes some even put
gas in our cars.
The last four years our federal
government is let us down a very
dangerous passes a lot of
companies to emit cancerous
toxins such as methane and
mercury into our air.
Options like the fast into our
streams and groundwater.
Additionally chemicals exist in
produced water from the oil and
gas industry.
With the viral Department should
have the authority to direct
for.
To directly regulate pollutants
to protect our air our water and
the environment in which we live
Senate bill eight would allow
New Mexicans to decide our what
our environment will look
feature not Washington urged you
to pass this bill and I want to
thank senator Wirth for bringing
this legislation forward thank
you senators for everything you
do and please stay safe and
healthy what we have going
should.
Maker.
Anna Hansen Rosalyn fry to have
either one of you.
Entering the chairman Mr chair.
And so followed by Ross on
fry
bailable.
Thank.
You.
Yes you will recognize okay
thank you I thank you so Mr
chair and senator Wirth and
members of the committee.
Also for our one of your I was
speaking Mr chair.
We can hear you others others
please mute we're yes it is Mr
chair she just needs to turn off
the web streaming because it's
delayed and that's what's
causing the confusion.
Thank you I'm Senator Wirth.
I'm still on mute.
No you're not.
We.
Can you hear me yes we can okay
thank you very much thank you Mr
chair and members of the
committee of Santa Fe County
supports this bill hi this is
part of our list and we think
this is incredibly important
legislation we also just passed
a resolution requesting a site
wide environmental impact
statement by land all because
they are third they are three
years past due they're supposed
to do is twice every ten years I
and New Mexico has a lot of has
a tremendous amount of waste on
the hill that is from of the
Cold War era and that the
Environment Department Capt
always
use their all the rules to clean
it up so I'm I would really
encourage you to pass this
bill it is really important for
our communities I'm New Mexico
cannot simply rely on the
federal government to make the
right decision I am should
Authority to a drop adopt
stronger environmental
protections now for our
communities and future
generations to come I strongly
strongly support more regulation
anyway that we can to protect
our air quality for all of our
children and specially in the
future so thank you very much Mr
chair for the opportunity to
speak.
All Rosalyn fry I think I ask
for you I see you on.
Would you Judy recognize.
Your I'm sure you muted.
This from.
We are here on thank you okay
yes this is Rosalyn fry and from
as tech New Mexico and I'm here
speaking for myself of all the
information that I have just
previously heard is items that I
also support because I support
Senate bill eight and urge the
committee to adopt the
legislation of for too long New
Mexico's health and environment
has been subject to of
Washington influences and we
must provide the state of New
Mexico and local air quality
boards the authority to adopt
regulations under New Mexico's
air quality control act and the
New Mexico.
Part of hazardous waste act
of that are stronger than
federal regulations as been
previously mentioned to her this
up past four years we've seen
nearly one hundred of the
nation's environmental laws such
as mercury regulations from coal
fired power plants vehicle
emissions standards oil and gas
methane regulations toxic air
standards of protection from
hazardous mining waste
groundwater protections for
uranium mining waste and more.
So I'll just concluded by saying
of I I sincerely feel like this
is a great opportunity for New
Mexico to have more control over
our own state and to improve the
quality of life of for ourselves
for our children and
grandchildren thank you thank
you
more so while jurors just not
about a little over ten minutes
of support well there are a
number of other individuals who
asked to speak my apologies for
the time limitations but will
recognize a
one of our for the center for
civic Policy Willie Annika CEO
for CV you Oscar Simpson New
Mexico sportsman Alison swing
human resources information
on the New Mexico wildlife
federation been shown for
conservation voters I appreciate
your interest and desire to
speak today we'll we'll turn to
those who asked to speak in
opposition
while up to ten minutes for that
there are fewer I have.
well we allow a minute to minute
and a half for the following
individuals in this order I'm
gonna Rio Gallo
Ashley Wagner.
fiery and Joanne Chester in that
order.
Afternoon chair serve on days
and committee members this is
Gabrielle Care Holtz with COG
operating I am the registered
lobbyist and I am
And.
I hold senator Wirth and the
greatest theme and I have no joy
in opposing this bill today yet
the intent according to the
proponents this to unfettered
the environmental improvement
board and the environment
department from any limitations
on how and what they regulate as
it relates to air.
I'm I'm not here to even debate
the removal of the no more
stringent than language but I
would like to draw your
attention to.
Page three and the deletions on
page lines twenty two and twenty
three what this does is.
Opens up regulation beyond those
that have been identified by the
federal government is criteria
pollutants so it would as I've
heard people talk about today
would allow the environment to
regulate methane directly from
oil and gas yet it's not just
limited to oil and gas it could
be opened up to transportation
Ag landfills
how we fight forest fires so
that is concerning I'd also like
to draw your attention to the
bottom of page two in the top of
page three so that language was
paragraph Hey and section
seventy four to five point three
only paragraph a was brought
over the rest of it has been
repealed paragraphs B. and C.
are incredibly important because
this does allow for the
environmental improvement board
to issue regulations for VOCs in
Knox that are more stringent
than but without bringing over
being see those parameters that
were placed on it in regards to
technological and economic
feasibility are not anywhere
within the regulate within the
statute excuse me and that
equipment commercially be
available is also not right over
as well as other considerations
that the IV we need to make this
can lead to our own pendulum
swing here in the state you know
I have full faith in our current
administration and our current
cabinet secretary what about the
next administration and how does
that lead in and for us to
provide consistency to other
businesses and for future
economic development of our
state these are the and Maria
the concerned thank you for the
time thank you.
Ms Wagner for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I am Ashley Wagner
the director of public policy
for the New Mexico chamber of
commerce I represent businesses
all over New Mexico and in every
industry and we understand the
concerns that the bill sponsor
has but we must respectfully
stand in opposition to this bill
because it will create
significant regulatory patchwork
and uncertainty in a state where
we have a hard time bringing in
and retaining industry such as
intelligent manufacturing or in
any industry that is regulated
by the air quality control act
and the hazardous waste act like
the previous speaker just that.
There is a lot of talk about
ways that New Mexico can
diversify its economy especially
given the economic situation the
COVID has presented but this
legislation first the state's
ability to do just that because
it sends a message to current
industry and potential new
industries that New Mexico does
not have a predictable
regulatory environments and that
was actually one of the very top
concerns from industry and
business leaders across New
Mexico twenty twenty twenty the
state chamber of commerce held
multiple sector based focus
groups and hosted a statewide
survey about the ways New
Mexico's current business
climate is detrimental but also
about ways that can be improved
the bottom line is that
businesses need regulatory
predictability in order for them
to try this bill exacerbate our
current economic downturn and
keep New Mexico behind our
neighboring states thank you so
much for listening to our
concerns thank you.
Swirling gas.
Yes good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
Senate Judiciary Committee my
name is Amy therapy and I am the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico oil and gas association
on behalf of memo this members
and echoing the utmost respect
for leader Wirth New Moga
strongly opposes Senate bill
eight as you well now New
Mexico's natural resources are
considered the very most
valuable in the world and our
state coffers are evidence of
that value our member companies
experts and business leaders
dedicate years to planning when
making decisions about where to
invest capital into real wealth
one of the primary factors in
their decision making process
the analyzing the regulatory
environment of the state in
which they are looking to invest
specifically if there regulatory
certainty in the state in New
Mexico being that are landscape
includes approximately fifty
percent federal and tribal lands
thirty five percent state lands
and fifteen percent privately
owned lands combined with the
fact the oil and gas industry
strives to be the gold standard
of all businesses operating in
New Mexico with their
conscientious approach to
working collaborative Lee with
state agencies at the implement
policies and complying with
regulations on all New Mexico
eight it's unclear do know Moga
why is Senate bill eight is
necessary our members have
worked tirelessly with state
agencies the rule making process
sees to ensure the goals set
forth by law workers are
achieved with fidelity with
regard to the environmental
improvement board and they'll
get and its members companies
actively participate baited the
methane advisory panel and
provided testimony to the oil
conservation commission
regarding operators willingness
to comply with the nation's most
ambitious regulations on methane
capture Moga and its members
plan to work in the same spirit
with the environment department
in advance of their rule making
process before that
environmental improvement board
this legislation from poses.
To get overly broad authority to
one regulatory body of
government and creates great
uncertainty for operators
looking to continue their
investments in New Mexico it's
for these reasons that we oppose
the legislation before you today
thank you very much last June
Winchester.
And Mr chair members of the
committee as well as a Senate
Majority Leader Peter Wirth
thank you for giving me the
opportunity today to to talk on
this bill my name is Jim
Winchester and the executive
director of the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico Representative three
hundred fifty members who are
proud intended to operate in the
state of New Mexico I want to
start off by very much
respectfully disagreeing with
some of the comments that we
heard earlier
our members very much believe
that the existing federal
environmental regulations are
very protective of human health
of water in the environment I've
heard the term roll back a lot
here over the can of course the
last couple minutes and our
operators one interpret that
were rolled back really to be
workable in other words they do
protect the environment at the
same time allow us to operate
here in the state.
well the point I want to make
your was that industry in the
state has just completed a long
two year collaborative process
to formulate new methane rules
and the passage of this bill
would essentially circumvent
that collaborative work which we
very much appreciate on the part
of the state it would give
unilateral authority to the E.
I. B. when it comes to regulate
methane and we would fear that
that would be a sad statement on
everything and all the work
that's been done over the course
of the past two years in good
faith.
finally just want to mention I
PM does have some concerns
regarding separate regulations
for state and federal lands in
New Mexico frankly it's very
burdensome for operators when
there are two sets of rules to
follow and even more frankly it
discourages development
especially at a time when we're
seeing operators already
shifting their capital and
leaving New Mexico due to the
current actions that are going
on at the federal level so with
that I respectfully propose on
behalf of members by PNM Senate
bill eight thank you very much
miss Winchester
you Mr Senator Wirth you had
some opposed to amendments I do
there are two amendments and I
also just want to alert the
chair that Sandra Ely is here
from the New Mexico environment
department secretary Kenny could
not be here but she's on so if
we have specific questions for
her as well we can jump into
that what I'd like to do first
is start with the amendment that
Mister to sail and referenced
which which basically deals with
diesel for local the local board
which currently is Albuquerque
it's point two one nine five
three five point one.
And it looks like a three three
page amendment but actually it's
just one strikeout and three new
words if you'll take it down
that this is all existing
language if we could go down to
the page two second page.
Keep going yeah right there so
the change is is there an
paragraph the on page two.
As Mister to sail and mentioned
currently local authority is
limited to regulation of spark
it needed.
Internal combustion engines and
it also had this stringency.
Floor there couldn't be any more
stringent than as required in
the federal act so what this
amendment does is strike a spark
ignited so that would allow for
regulation of diesel motors as
well and then it does the same
thing it basically uses the the
federal rack regulation as the
floor and takes out the
restriction on stringency and
that's the extent of what the
amendment does happy to answer
questions.
Remembers this communication by
sure it's probably works well
thank.
We want to address the questions
to the amendment.
Questions to the moment anyone.
Senator Stewart on the amendment
I'm not sure the amendment Mr
chairman more motion.
Generally the option Senator
Lopez amendment.
Sure you have some people raised
their hands okay Senator Lopez
your Senator Lopez you are muted
okay you see committee members.
When we recognize on them.
Okay Moores Pirtle.
Senator all right the others.
Senator Lopez Graeser Lopez and
seven more sensitive personal.
Thank you Mr chairman I was just
barely seconding the motion for
Senator Stewart thank you
Senator Moores.
Senator Pirtle actually resent
for so often for to my good
friend from Travis county we do
as long as he's still part of
the state.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm glad
to hear this a tune of local
control it really gives me hope
but being a diesel vehicle owner
I'm curious as a resident of
Travis county
with this amendment would there
be anything where they could
require me whatever I'm just
passing through Albuquerque to
you know get a permit or check
my emissions and if I'm just
driving through if it doesn't
meet their requirements somehow
get a penalty.
Mr chair Mr chair center per my
understanding is nail
and certainly we can jump in
this is this is just applicable
for the local authority that
needs as you notice on page one
of the amendment existing
language accounting municipality
meeting the qualifications set
forth in paragraph one or two of
subsection J. of section seventy
four dash to dash to so I went
camping we're not changing that
but it's the definition of local
authority so and it's and it's
defined in the statute means any
of the following political
subdivisions the state that have
by following the procedures set
forth in section a of seventy
four two dash four assume
jurisdiction for local
administration has to be a
county that was a classe county
as of January first nineteen
eighty four a municipality with
a population greater than one
hundred thousand located within
a county that was a classic
County as of January first
nineteen eighty so currently
Albuquerque has it as exercise
that jurisdiction and when you
drive to Albuquerque.
Not being a resident of
Albuquerque or Bernalillo my
understanding is that you are
not subject to their care
requirements and anyone can jump
in and correct me if I'm wrong
on that but that is my
understanding.
Thank you Mr chair
representative but there's
nothing explicitly preventing
them from from doing that so I
maybe get a little bit more
clarification I'll do a little
bit of research on my own to
look into that but that is a
concern of mine that I know
they're not doing it currently
but that something that maybe
they could possibly do all I'll
do like I said a look look it up
a little bit more research
referenced you referenced a few
sections so all pull those up
quickly.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you etcetera I also think
you're wonderful guy who are in
the mood and.
Your bill but I think you're
wonderful.
A quick question Senator this
seems to be a the version I know
still dealing with sort of air
quality but now you're
regulating automobiles
That seems to be that you're
throwing and other issues with
this amendment after it's
already gone through a couple of
at least one Canadian up for K..
So Mr chair your your wonderful
city came to me and raise this
issue as something that is a
long exactly the same lines what
we're doing strands language and
did indicate a willingness to or
a desire to be able to to
regulate diesel vehicles in the
same way they currently can
regulate spark ignited
combustion engines and self
you're correct we didn't present
this in Senator asset
conservation it wasn't so I
didn't have it at that time but
I do think it's consistent with
what we're doing here and and
again propose it for the
committee to consider and
certainly and willing to abide
by whatever the committee
decides with respect amended by
coming from the City of
Albuquerque they request it.
And thank you of course would
you say the City of Albuquerque
this is who is the City of
Albuquerque today passes city
resolution asking for this or
did you have one of elector
official call you and said this
is what he wants who City of
Albuquerque gets attacked issues
before with one elected official
claim to speak for the city
without any other authority Mr
chair I'm not sure beats on if
you want to hear from him again
Army L. as the restaurant lobby
for this lobbyist for the City
of Albuquerque he is the one
that asked me to.
Move for with this I don't know
exactly.
You know what their procedure is
and and and he may be on
listening and I'm not sure if
you want to get into that but
that's that he's the registered
lobbyists for City of
Albuquerque who came to me with
the member.
I'll talk to David
separately you know so you'll
make but
we wanna make sure it's actually
the city out very much as well
as professional secondly we you
were scrolling the amendment up
here I noticed the my favorite
word in statute not withstanding
what we not withstanding and
section do page two.
Mr chair first of all that's all
existing language and I I
appreciate your focus on not
withstanding because we are
trying to address that so so it
basically is not was saying the
provisions of subsection Hey.
So subsection Hey delegates
authority to the local
government of very limited
delegation that meets the
qualifications that I referenced
so basically what this is saying
is that despite that delegation
of duty so it's not you know
it's despite the delegation duty
the environment of approve board
and secretary retain
jurisdiction and control over
the administration enforcement
of the air quality act as
determined in that act with
respect to any deprivations
failure to act governmental a
proprietary of any local
authority that causes or
contributes to air pollution.
So basically it's it's retaining
jurisdiction
To administer and controlled air
quality accents not giving all
of the authority away and so
it's just a limitation on the
authority being granted to
counties.
So my question with that not
withstanding your explanation is
that if we're drug try to do
limited or give authority to the
locals
your you were passing a bill
here that gives authority to
locals not withstanding the
story we don't want to give to
the locals so personal Mr chair
this is existing language so
you're not doing any this
already exists this is a law
right now.
That exists and so when it comes
to an administration and
enforcement of the act that's
what the state's so that is
what.
I'm I'm sure I'm sure I know
it's existing law but must be
passed by senator was not as be
loved and respected by all sides
of the aisle it industry
environmental groups like you
are so maybe this is something
that we could fix it this is
what we're trying to do us and
so admiration for you extends
across the state that we could
maybe fix this part to say
something we should actually be
not withstanding this language
in here thank you Mr chair thank
you of the audible Osama from
Santa Fe County thank you know
is there anyone else on the
amendment.
Senator Ivey Soto.
So you so you're muted.
Yes I have to
thank you Mr so are.
On the issue that Senator Pirtle
raised.
And I make a suggestion if I may
on a subsection P..
All of this section since we're
here and it's in front of us.
And then let me just read it to
you this would be in the second
line of subsection do the work
vehicles.
What made to inserts registered
at an address within the
jurisdiction of the local
authority and.
So what did you know what states
are and that is located within
transportation related pollutant
non attainment area or
maintenance area may provide
funding vehicle inspection and
maintenance program what
vehicles registered an address
within the jurisdiction of local
authority and under twenty six
thousand pounds gross vehicle
weight power by yeah yeah yeah.
and and I it it seems to me that
we would know that that would
that would just simply clarify.
Jennifer was concerned that
we're talking about with the
regulations for those vehicles
that are that are then Charles
with jurisdiction somebody who
would be true of traveling
through that area.
would not be subject to it I
think I think that's been the
understanding all along I don't
know that we're not so twenty
something new but I do think
that that would provide
rectification.
Also be part of this time I
would I would doubt.
With that amendment.
So we asked remember to the.
So is there anyone on
considerably so this proposed
change sure we will.
My concerns are seeing what else
we concerns directly Soto is
there is been doing so that you
actually jeopardize the intent
here by seven people register
their vehicle in an address
other than Bernalillo county by
doing that you thereby exempt
yourself from the program
requirement register my car it
gets out my cousin's house.
Maybe.
If I do that do I exact
everybody.
As Mr chairman.
Those of us who early in county
every other year when we
register our vehicles we have to
get a smog emissions test I
don't believe that is an
approval to the rest of the
state.
And on and in fact the way that
that has been administered is
you have to do that if your car
is registered at an address in
really account and and and so we
already have that such which
works right Senator Wirth.
What do you feel about the of
those.
But if I might I might yields of
this you live from the
Environment Department just to
make sure again I we don't I
don't think that anyone from the
City of Albuquerque's on and I
just again as you say I want to
make sure I mean it makes
logical sense to me for sure I
just want to make sure that
we're not is not unintended
effect that we do that.
Chair Senator my name is Sandra
Ely and the environmental
protection division director
with the New Mexico environment
department
your quality bureau is one of
the bureau's within my division
so I do have some air quality
expertise the state does not
have a vehicle maintenance
program as a whole because we
have not have to do so because
we've been able to maintain our
Max requirements so this would
only apply to Bernalillo county
and the city of Albuquerque they
are the ones that are required
by the act to set up the vehicle
emissions inspection and
maintenance programs to it only
applies to to them.
So I guess not miss the miss you
it is there is there a problem
putting in this specific.
This clarification that Senator
Ivy Soto is proposing I just
think and I think that's right
only applies to Albuquerque and
Bernalillo county I just want to
make sure that the language
that's being proposed isn't
gonna have an unintended
consequence somehow and it may
be a question for for really the
city and and and the county but
that that's my concern.
Senator Wirth that I I don't
believe it would have
consequence all the vehicles
registered within that county
are already required to have a
certificate of the in order to
control emissions to keep the
air quality say I don't see it
that would be a problem I also
not certain it's absolutely
necessary but I don't think it
would be a problem.
The agency Mr chair based on
that statement again I think
that this is in effect codified
the practice in the
understanding so I don't have an
objection to the amendment.
Bring him on.
Emily I'm assuming wish you well
your rising tracking Senator
Ivey Soto this proposed change
the amendment I don't see any
other members what's your
to address the that.
Mr chair.
If I may quickly just now that
we're in the paragraph I did
notice the section that we're
amending where it says twenty
six thousand pounds gross
vehicle weight I think that's
intended to say gross vehicle
weight rating that's usually how
that terminology is used
throughout all the commercial
trucking
this would pick up a commercial
truck that maybe would be
carrying anything it would be
empty and that's not the intent
the intent is any vehicle that
has the capability or is of
doing that the terminology used
throughout the commercial
trucking industries co come
gross vehicle weight rating so
we might want to add that
quickly as we're in the section.
Senator Perdue is that
About clarification on what part
of senator Wirth amendment.
It would be part of a I guess
amending the amendment of the
amendment
and then we can do this
separately if we need to but
it's just that same paragraph
that we're working in this
paragraph the
we're says gross vehicle weight
and it should say gross vehicle
weight rating.
Senator Wirth the objection
recreation so again Mr chair I I
don't know I I soon certainly
what Senator Pirtle is
representing is correct but I
just don't know I can't really
weigh in either way as to
whether or not that changes
needed I would just note this is
all existing statutory language
that we're now you know amending
which we certainly can do I just
don't know the answer to.
You know if there's to the exact
you know categorization that
you're using there so I just
don't want to.
You know flat out agree to
something I'm just not sure
about unless someone else and
someone else has an answer that
I mean it makes logical sense
certainly
so I just I'm hesitant though
because I just don't know if
that if that's the correct term
and and you know we're not
putting someone in or taking
someone out that's what I worry
about by.
Okay.
Mr chair all I'll just with
withdrawal that and and we can
work on that as we move forward
and and we can reach out to I'm
not sure who is the commercial
vehicle director within
Tax Rev now used to be a fifty
Evans I believe
But we'll get with with her and
and or whoever we need to do it
and figure that one out thank
you Mr chairman very good
approach increase your customer
portal all right Senator Wirth
Robert amendment on the Senator
Stewart Mr.
Yes thank you Mr chairman you
know this this bill if we pass
it has to go to another
committee I suggest that we
don't do these two amendments on
the fly Senator Pirtle has
already graciously said let's
work on it going forward I would
like to hear the City of
Albuquerque weigh in on the
other amendment that Senator Ivy
Soto offered because I think at
least one of the suggested that
this might not be something that
that they would want to do so
Senator Wirth is amenable he's
got to ideas if he hears from
the City of Albuquerque and
other people about these issues
Madam he could amended for the
next committee.
So if I could Mr chair I did
just get a tax from the lobbyist
for the City of Albuquerque
basically indicating that it's
not an issue because they all
they don't give.
Emissions tickets for anyone
outside of the jurisdiction so
it really is this is consistent
with center I was out of the
proposing I'm being told
Is.
Is consistent with what the
practice is so it does not upset
that's coming from the City of
Albuquerque this I appreciate I
appreciate though what you're
you're suggesting but I did just
get that.
Eckley from the City of
Albuquerque this Senator.
Well Mr chair where we doing
something that we don't have to
do is the question I mean what
are we missing something that
does not have to be amended if
the City of Albuquerque says
this is their normal ammo.
Not totally up to the wishes of
the committee and and whatever
however you want to proceed I
mean I certainly as senator
portal just the indicated I am
more than happy also to work on
any of these things as this
thing moves forward and you know
it's got another committee and
then it's got a floor and and
I'm happy to get I want to get
it right but again I yield to
the will of the committee for
sure Representative is there to
be two issues.
Right now we begin with the
national by Senator Wirth that
would effectively adopt the
amendment that applies to
vehicle emissions forty so this
that's the that's the
fundamental workgroup
development center Ivey Soto
posted on that to clarify that
as well we to close Richard
Bermuda County.
Our our I'd like to make work.
Many
small with our best effort so it
goes to amendments to in order
our first of all let me check
Senator Wirth because of this
amendment fails sorry Soto says
no.
No indication so Senator Wirth.
Is to have the original proposal
to to capture vehicle emissions
tests must be what's the weather
committee right now any further
discussion question about the
amendment that that we have.
Mr objection to adoption of
automated.
Your of your hand raised.
Wasser Moore's thank you I don't
want to.
One of your last of course I
don't see it on screen no I'm
sorry Center Bach as races hand
on the resume icon if you look
to the top left are one you'll
see when someone raised their
hands yet his hand raised sure.
Senator Baca make sure get
creature Jewish.
Based on the some of the.
Thank you Mr chair had one quick
question I'm so a previously
from what I gather from this is
a we're just changing the spark
ignited to an internal
combustion which would.
Envelop of the diesel engine as
well my question I guess would
be how what a hybrid vehicle
what about a vehicle that is
electric electric power
part of the time and then
sometimes runs on gas because as
I understand it that's how they
were.
I do understand it because I
have one
and Mr chair I might yield the
Senator Stewart on this one
because she has one as well I
assume she goes to the the
normal process
So.
Senate wants yes the ical
mission and I do and I passes so
I don't I mean I think so I have
what's called a plug in hybrid
so it's a hybrid when I'm
driving it and it generates
mileage when I break and then of
course it only will generate
about eighteen miles for any two
or three hour plug in so it's
not really not electric vehicle
but I get it and they sent us
the same way everyone else and I
think it's considered an
internal combustion engine even
though it's a plug in hybrid.
Thank you Mr chair is it a
simpler in right now.
I believe it is actually yes
about I can plug it in two days
a week and that's all I need to
get all over Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr chair I guess so
that answered my question we're
doing all right the committee
clear on the motion is now is
the moment that is submitted by
Senator world without
consideration of Senator Ivy
Soto is proposed change will
take that part Senator Wirth
proposed amendment prevail is
there objection Marshall plans
to
Optional.
Senator Wirth so so Center
Bacchus course I'm already in
opposition any others.
All right.
Senator.
So we're will opposition Burt
all of the members.
Forty voted in favor of the
amendment.
As a doctor the next order with
a Canadian modification
development Senator Ivey Soto.
Which would limit the
application of the preceding a
moment to vehicles registered in
Birmingham county your need for
any further questions to be
answered or discussion.
All right on that Ivy Soto
modification the moment is there
an objection Marshall.
Senator Stewart.
Well there's the record will
show that that that thank you so
what a projection was adopted
family dressing your.
Let me know if you don't have a
quorum I think we are very about
the the application all right.
Center were did you have another
moment I do Mr chair
it's point two one nine five
five one point one if kat could
put that up on the screen.
So this is just a clarification
On page five of line it's in
section.
ET the new section a lines
twelve through fourteen it
currently
reads any with the change will
be any role adopted pursuant to
this section shall be
consistent with federal law this
was a suggestion that Mister to
sail and had to change
consistent with to at least as
stringent as and I certainly
would yield to Mister to sail
and if you want to provide any
explanation for why that's why
that's needed.
Thank you find it's second find
the mute button thank you
senator Wirth Mr chairman
members of the committee this is
this is a fairly ma modest
change the the intent is
that at least some people
thought that that the worst
considered consistent with
mean identical to
and so it the the words
at least as stringent as is more
consistent with the other
provisions of the law and a
little bit less ambiguous.
So we were that's what it does
Mr chair thank you questions of
the committee on the proposed
amendment.
What.
For many of you remember.
Would you pass on the amendment
sure sure sure.
Discussion so Lopez with the
second is there any objection
to the adoption of one another.
Jerseys jerseys are walking.
Sir Moores.
So what exist.
Mr chair trying to find the
button there we go res tent.
I'm gonna make it easier for
everybody Health Service right
which I'm quite screen.
Well get that disease is almost
ready but districts.
Scroll all that stuff and I can
see pretty good all right so
server was at.
Positions of the amendment all
right so it shows that course
blocked out our position all
members in support Senator Wirth
second amendment is adopted
Senator Wirth David we're.
I have no other amendments all
right we're going to the
committee with the bill us
vented we've got a really good
discussion generally but on the
chair has sometimes rainy other
remaining questions before we
take a vote on the bill
we we with us about fifteen
minutes.
About this I just received
another amendment from Senator
Pirtle.
Well.
Okay we'll put up on the screen
because I didn't have time to
send it to anyone.
Senator Pirtle explain your
movie.
Thank you Mr chairman in the
spirit of local control this
would essentially allow counties
to exempt themselves from the
more stringent rules back to the
federal regulations and rules by
resolution.
Which clarification over.
Anyone have a.
Desperate need for.
Explanation of that.
Why should we use those
In opposition to the proposed.
So sure Senator Lopez Senator
Robbins.
Senator o'neill Center and sort
of Senator Stewart in opposition
to this proposed amendment
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chair
you know I'm just concerned and
that's that was the purpose of
the amendment
to ensure that you know a lot of
the counties that are going to
be impacted by these are in
you're more rural states and and
so we'll have a board made up
mostly of people that don't live
in the communities don't breathe
the air don't drink the water
don't really understand the the
the rural lifestyle and
What it means to those those
communities so I do have an
issue with that that they'll be
able to go above and beyond and
there is a potential to really
negatively impact those areas
and in their way of life and so
it just gives me concern
whatever we do things like this
that we
want to implement something from
from the state centralized and
then put it out it just
small areas so it does give me
concern in that area that was
the point of the amendment thank
you Mr chair will work I see
this center this noted you wish
to recognize this bill.
Yes.
So I think those present her
hand up just before mine yours
and will thank you.
Thank you Senator Ivy Soto thank
you Mr chairman I just want to
stand sit as we're sitting of
course in favor of this measure
you know the.
Here the City of Albuquerque
county of Bernalillo on the
south side of the city when you
drive down south Broadway you're
going to see what I call the
huge tanks that do hold you know
some of the products of our oil
and gas industry
we have the railroad that runs
right through the heart of
downtown it goes further south
Broadway and of course further
on down but when you talk to the
different communities which is
east San Jose community as well
as Mountain View
there's a lot of equality issues
that exists there I've attended
a meeting a couple of years ago
a secretary Katie we invited him
to come down and actually sit
down in the backyard of a home
one of the community leaders so
that he could see exactly where
and what the community deals
with Mr chair when you drive
through from the west side of
Albuquerque crossing bridge the
river and looking as to the air
quality that exists in that
particular area of our city and
county you know there's always
some concerns about health
issues if you look at the
prevalence of asthma and some of
the other so you know health
determinants as I call we have
them.
this this issue on air quality
fact just a couple nights ago
one of our the update those who
are strong leaders in that
particular area of of our self
alley are again even us just for
a wall on the help to protect
from some of the noise and other
issues that at the railroad does
and has brought over many many
in decades to the community so I
I support this it's an
opportunity for us to do right
by different communities if you
live up the hill you are going
to see it when you're down where
we are we get and you can see
the way the inversion happens
with regards to the pollution
it's my communities that do
receive that so I stand in
support and again thank you
working with senator Wirth as
well as the City of Albuquerque
to bring this forward thank you
is there any sort of.
instrument I do all the a few
questions on this I do plan in
the in the vote for but I
there's a there's a couple of
structural issues that.
Our our pre existence but but
but that these changes are
causing us to double down on
that I want to get to be before
I do that however I do want to
take a look at the bottom page
two top of page three of the
instructional subsection C..
And our and I on.
Two questions on that the the
the first question following up
on on this very is comments
Senator of work them and Mr
Salem.
Is why why did report over
subsectors out this subsection
which was subsection Hey.
In the section that we are
repealing.
Ninety four dash two to five
point three but not subsections
BMC what it does not come out.
Awesome Mr chair if I could I'd
like to have Mister to sail and
address that question.
Thank you Senator Wirth Mr chair
Senator Ivey Soto the
the.
The intent of
section five point three which
has three sub sections a B. and
C. is to allow the the board
under certain circumstances to
adopt regulations that are more
stringent than the federal
regulations that the
circumstances are limited to
regulations in areas that are.
Addressing non attainment with
the ozone standards
so what it does is it allows the
board to adopt regulations but
places strings on those
regulations
and the whole purpose of this
bill is to
women a the restrictions on the
the the board in in in adopting
regulations that are that are
more stringent than the federal
regulations
so it it to to put B. and C.
which are sort of the the
strings as as I'm referring to
them
back into the bill
would really wouldn't make any
sense because of the whole idea
is to to eliminate those
restrictions and would
potentially have the perverse
consequence of making it more
difficult for the board to adopt
regulations that are applicable
to non attainment areas that is
areas that are not in compliance
with the with the air quality
standards make it more difficult
in those areas in in in any
other areas so it would kind of
turn that that provision on its
head now as far as subsection is
concerned that was
that was capped because it does
require the environment
department when the a
the county is out of compliance
are very near to being out of
compliance with the ambient air
quality standards the
environment department has to
come up with a plan for
addressing and and and come up
with regulations to for dressing
and the high and that is a good
thing
and that doesn't have the same
sort of perverse consequences so
it is true we retained section
subsection a of from the from
the section.
That was deleted but we did not
retain section B. and C. but
they're very good reasons for.
Okay the R. I mean it does seem
to be able to I'll just simply
say I'm gonna commit motion this
month but I.
It does seem to me that the that
the last sentence of the
existing subsection be in
seventy four dash to dash five
one three with repealing.
while is is a is a standard more
than a string.
In that it's as the standards of
performance may be more
stringent than our local federal
standards for us if the board
determines.
Voters do not reflect the degree
of emission limitation
achievable through the
application of control
technology that is reasonable
available miserably available
concerning technological and
economic feasibility and that
methods to further reduce
emissions are commercially
available and will result in
substantially greater reductions
in emissions the federal
standards for such so source I
mean it does seem to me that
that does provide.
Without really being
limitation certainly some
garments upon the standards that
are that are adopted.
So so I would I would just
simply
suggests that of rescue and
senator Wirth between here and
finance take a look at that and
see if that might be appropriate
to to re insert maybe at the
bottom of the up of the proposed
subsection C. might
Mr chair center with my bigger.
A structural issue that I have
with this and it's not and it's
a problem that was.
Thank you.
It's our it's it's a problem
that that appears to have been
created I'm trying to see where.
When these were adopted are back
in the.
Late sixties or sometime after
that but with the local work.
Is that we have got the results
we have the little red adopting
rules.
Right what we have here is.
The
board which is port.
What
shall promulgate publish amend
and repeal rules and standards
with their quality control and
and that's fine.
Our
work because they were bored
under chapter fourteen article
for the state rules Act
Indonesians qualifies as an
agency.
What governments do not have the
authority in New Mexico to
promulgate rules under the state
rules that and and the use of
the term wool in statute here
such a robot and it means a
rural pursuant to the state
rules that.
And so and so are my my concern
with this.
Is is that.
It it seems to me that that that
these.
Our work is done by the local
board.
Should be our process importance
adopted more in the municipality
or county or both depending upon
whether it's Miss Pollock County
or joints Medical Board.
As as permitted in seventy four
dash to dash to
so that so that would have the
force of law by doing it when
it's.
Alright but the problem is is
that is that is that right now
we have them we have been
promulgating rules that they
don't have the legal authority
to promulgate its.
And and so
And
you know you want to talk about
this but beforehand I I I had
not.
that and I'll jump out at me on
the page until we were I take a
look at that hearing committee
and and and and whatnot and so I
don't.
Our.
Mr I mean there's there's a
couple ways that we could that
we could I play in and out
What what overall.
Well adding forward says after
the work rules
some of that might involve some
other surgery and and certainly
I'm happy to work with you on
this but it but it does seem to
be problematic that we're no I'm
calling a local broker to do
something for Americanism that
local where does not have the
power to do.
Max.
Yes thank you Mr chair I
certainly.
Here that's and I'm happy to
look at that I want to make sure
that I I guess my preference
would not be to do it on the fly
but instead let's get that let's
get the City of Albuquerque you
know involved and I'm happy to
look at that moving forward to
see if we can fix it without you
know I want one thing I do you
know because the local board
section were only pulling back
in section seventy four two dash
for some curious you know we
have to pull out a whole bunch
more sections to get that if
it's in other places that's what
I just don't know but I'm happy
to look I mean the point you
make is valid I mean it's
certainly City of Albuquerque
needs to.
Have you know that we need to
give them the the correct
authority to be able to act for
their local board and if you
ever just giving up rulemaking
authority and they need
ordinance Authority than that
doesn't and the point you make
is valid.
Yes I actually interviewed also
pressed a number been doing up
until now.
And.
You're on it if they need to we
do everything that's done since
our existence I'm not sure what
I'm Mr chair and etcetera thank
I do have just a couple of read
through this our own.
A couple of other questions so
in the reported over subsection
a which you have a subsection C.
here you have our concerns to I
was on.
Concentrations in excess of
ninety five percent of the
national in get air quality
standards for ozone that seems
somewhat amorphous.
This national.
In our polity standard come from
and how do we know that it comes
from that Mr chair if you could
please clarify what page and
section but page and line number
you on certainly page general
I'm twenty five page three line
one okay and that is not
repeated on page three lines are
eight nine yeah again Mr
chairman Mr the sale and.
Mentioned this this is so what
what we've done here is left in.
This was an exception to the
stringency law that was in
sections.
You know this is this is the
piece that's being repealed
seventy four P. dash five point
three that's that those other
two sections I think that you
referenced and the problem is
you know we're keeping section a
so it does have that limitation
in there which was a again we
were going away from stringency
in a very tiny area and if I
could I think Mr the sailing can
can.
Get into exactly why that's
there and why that still makes
sense to be in there because
again the other option is just
to be this is to strike this
section C..
And that that and and you know
the reporting that Mister to
sail and brought up is gone but
we don't get into this weird
situation of trying to keep in
pieces of the prior exemption to
the to the rule of quite frankly
were undermining that we're now
changing.
Telling me just if I may Mister
chairman server Legisla- from a
question though yeah what what
we're starting to see on that
one what I'm questioning as we
say national.
Ambient air quality standards
for ozone correct what does that
mean and the national air
quality standard.
And one of the standards
problems of Mister to sail and
again that's existing language
but if you could just yet
Senator Ivy Soto.
I'm.
Mr chairman members of the
committee center I Ivy Soto
national ambient air quality
standards or standards that are
set by EPA under the federal
clean air act and they apply
nation wide we heard earlier
that the that the state of New
Mexico
is is delegated to implement the
Their quality program in the
state and Bernalillo county in
the City of Albuquerque within
within Bernalillo county but
never the less these standards
apply nationwide and every state
is required to put together a
state implementation plan this
is a requirement of the federal
clean air act that explains and
and demonstrates how the
national ambient air quality
standards are going to be sat
the and and that the actually
been air quality standards are
set forth in federal regulations
and in CFR and they're they're
very easy to find their and very
very well understood among the
people that deal in this area
this is the the standards are
basically the heart of the
federal clean air act.
Mr chairman and senator Wirth
may I suggest them that that so
that we know which natural
ambient air quality standards
for ozone we're talking about
that on page two one twenty
five.
That we struck the article eight
and and and certain little
they're all the articles are.
Page three line one just before
the comma.
Are we insert promulgated.
Under the federal clean air act.
And then we know which ones
brought about.
Mr chair by could I think it
makes sense to yield to miss
U. E. again with the environment
department just want to make
sure there's not an unintended
consequence by I I get we're
going center Ivy Soto it just
does that make actually certain
that that doesn't have.
An impact we think it through.
Senator right I see the
confusion around an article a
versus an article the eighty
there actually may be more than
one ambient air quality
standards for ozone there's
often a primary standard which
is the health the standard
secondary standard which refers
to the impact of elevated
concentration on things like
cracks buildings in this case
and we have interpreted this to
mean the.
Primary standard which is facts
are the health impacts of the
citizens of New Mexico.
And I'm I've been told that
actually often
These snacks are identical the
primary secondary knack in in
this case the ozone.
primary and secondary standards
are the same at seventy parts
per billion.
So Mr.
Yeah I miss you a so so is that
so is what center Ivy Soto is
proposing that a friendly
amendment to change the date to
to the and add the promulgated.
Clarification.
The article be fine I don't
think that would be a problem.
Well we are really I think I
think the big question is is is
the problem get it under the
federal clean air act really
based on what Miss images sent
in my instructions the eighty
two there are.
it might be more to say and
local Google.
Right ninety five percent of
unprofitable national ambient.
The quality standards for ozone
promulgated under the federal
clean air act.
Sure yes that would work yeah
and you could probably get it
under the federal clean air act
except these are our national
standards their national ambient
air quality standards and in our
world it's clear that it's of
federal standard and not a state
standard.
Okay so I would I would I am at
thank you Mr the sale and
raising his hand.
I'm thank you Mr chairman
Senator Ivey Soto I want to
point out that the term
national ambient air quality
standards is very likely used at
several places in the air
quality control act and you know
it's just trying to to see
Check it real quick I I don't
have the time right now but it's
very likely that it's used
someplace before this section
because like I said it's a very
important
term very important concept
under both the federal clean air
act and the New Mexico air
quality control act the other
point that I would make Mr
chairman Senator Ivey Soto is
that all of the national ambient
air quality standards are
applicable in New Mexico and
nationwide so I don't know if
the word act applicable adds
anything it seems to me that it
does not.
And and and Mr chairman and
senator Wirth Mr Salem the the
always on suggests that
applicable was just the HSD
white was was pointing out there
there may be different ones in
different search circumstances
and that way they can always
apply the correct one if under
the federal clean air act making
more than one.
I'm Mr chairman and members the
committee senator Iverson Ivy
Soto
they're applicable in.
It's not so much that they're
applicable in different
circumstances they're applicable
across the board but the primary
standard is designed to address
certain
certain problem certain issues
in the secondary mostly human
health and the secondary
standard is designed to address
other issues which are
more like things like its
aesthetics and visibility
so they're all applicable.
it's just that that certain ones
Our.
I guess more important in
certain certain circumstances.
Senator if I may if the intent
of this is to address public
health concerns health based on
ambient concentrations.
Rather than saying the
applicable standards you could
say the primary national ambient
air quality standards which may
be the same as a secondary but
if your intent is to get out
health.
That would be a friendly.
Other than include the secondary
standards not at not and and and
and.
And.
Incentives action incentives to
have not specificity that that
if the if the national autism
society decides to come out with
a standard.
right this nonfederal society
this is not part of the
government but but will do and
they come up with a standard
right I want to make sure that
somebody doesn't mean that is
being as as being with them
that's because when we say a
national in our current standard
for ozone there's nothing that
in the sense that the federal
government what's that's that's
actually what I'm headed towards
is making sure that we know.
Setting it and and and and and
whatnot and so.
I I think I think that I
appreciate very much.
Brent that suggestion and I
think that was what we would be
of the on page two instead of
the article a and sort of the
primary and then top of page
three hundred for the comp
promulgated under the federal
clean air act I think that takes
care of of it and it makes it
makes really clear what we're
talking about.
And
So I would I would need that as
amendment at this time.
Mr chairman.
Senator Wirth.
Also Mr chair based on on the
work done by the two experts I
have it sounds like that's
being considered a friendly
amendment so I have no objection
to that.
We members on the whim of.
Remember it's consider friendly
I see no wish to be recognized
the amendment is there objection
to adoption of the amendment.
Restored.
Junction and all others in
support president the amendments
adopted so you sort of thank you
Mr Senator Wirth I'm I am
curious I'm working on page four
I'm just I'm just curious where
we exempt our programs I'm
looking at the lines fifty to
seventy five power plants except
my power plants construction
generating electrical power and
energy before July one thousand
seven what we're deprecating
those who still have an eight
in existence.
Sen Mr chair ideal to miss miss
easily on that again it's
existing.
Language.
Which is an effort to get at
mercury emissions
and excluded certain of power
plants older power plants from
that it would it require mandate
that all new power plants that
were constructed had to have a
certain type of emission control
so it it does not include the
current generating stations at
it at San Juan witcher scheduled
to be closed in the next few
years.
Okay so there still because
that's that's all okay I'm not.
Six one eight.
It seems to me that we're
building in a complex and this
happens in a couple of places
and that is on page six eight
eight nine one seven of these
are.
On the management of hazardous
waste that are equivalent to and
at least as stringent as federal
regulations.
To make cannot deviate from.
And I believe the intent of at
least as stringent is that the
federal regulations on the
floor.
And that those are there is
there is the ability to move and
and so it just seems to me that
we should strike the words
increments to them.
Mr chair members the committee
Senator Ivy Soto I yeah I
understand your point on that
the reason that the word
equivalent is retained there is
because that is in the federal
law
and we need to be following the
federal law here however that
the wording equivalency does not
mean equal it doesn't mean
identical it it it has been
interpreted in EPA interprets
the term as allowing states as
you said to adopt more stringent
regulations so the federal
regulations are the floor but
states are free to adopt more
stringent regulations.
Well I appreciate that that
saves you from having to go to
page thirteen line
eighteen nineteen so I won't
have to go through that.
I
am yes.
Page four hundred is existing
law on page four.
When we when we require members
of the parliament or local
agency of the intent to
introduce as a permit the
introduction of an air
contaminants into the air.
When I can I can I can of the
houses with the offline between
between committees as I so thank
you Mr chairman our.
That's that's alright from the
for now I would like I said the
center work to do I do think you
being here at the sewing though
the balance forward
I I do think we need to address
the issue of local work address
diction to.
Right thank you thank you center
Ivy Soto you the members wrote
Senate bill eight with the two
and ended up adopting
amendments.
Any further discussion of the
committee Senate Bill
appropriates about.
we do have the past motion as
amended.
Senator Stewart.
It says Amanda thank you.
All right roll call please
grant is amended am going we're.
Recall okay Senator Baca.
Senator okay yes.
Thank you.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
Course.
Well.
Pirtle.
No.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Revenue pass
we're thank you were going back
to Judiciary thank you Mr chair.
the demo did you get Senator
Baca so these are here but I'm
here in.
I called him twice and no
response.
You know okay thank you senator.
You'll.
All right Senators the next on
the Senate bill
The chair will take a five
minute recess the time is now
three fifteen will reconvene at
three twenty the next to Senate
bill ten all right.
I mean it right.
So.
Thank you all for the great I'm
sure of really appreciate the
staff as well.
We're on the Senate bill ten.
Recognizing the public interest
that we've seen on the issue of
abortion this particular
legislation emails and calls a
doctor some.
Procedures specific to this bill
one of them is that we publish
to starting two days ago will
you mail address in the name of
the committee and encourage
people to send us three hundred
words in writing with the
published comments that we would
make available to the committee
members so I trust that all
committee members are aware of
that have access to that and can
be reviewing those those written
comments during our presentation
and and consideration of this
bill today my purpose in doing
that is to give all New Mexicans
insurance that.
You may wish to participate they
they can do so so long as of
course they have means of access
to email but some of that to be
true we've we've gathered and
compiled all those all those
emails and comments for all of
this is just another way to try
and make sure that we're we're
hearing from everyone.
The
The other procedures that I
drive it is I've spoken with the
sponsor.
and ask
sponsor to.
Allow for ten minutes a
presentation of the legislation.
Allowing in that ten minutes for
the sponsor to reserve any part
of that for revival those of us
that the press one of this
process and procedures pretty
common the courts were of one
party gets up makes an argument
in the reserve something for
revival the other party gets up
and makes them an opposing
argument and the judge usually
decides going through that
sequence so we'll hear ten
minutes of proponents and
advocacy organized act it had
received conducted by the
sponsor is the sponsor wishes to
directed sponsoring have one
speaker or is the speakers as
they wish with tenants and I'm
interrupted by the chair.
Will be followed by an
invitation that I made to allow
for ten minutes of we're gonna
ice opposition.
On to to try and sure the
greatest opportunity for that
I've had good conversations with
Senator Pirtle center Baca I
encourage them to
Let people know that if they
want to organize opposition that
I will that I would hear ten
minutes uninterrupted by an
organized opposition to the
legislation my goal is doing
this is to have some kind of a
format where we don't have to
live everybody to one minute I
know that.
that everyone loves to have more
time to do everything we do here
but but sometimes we have to dig
into the issues a little bit
more than just these one minute
things will allow so so I've
I've
Invited ten minutes of an
organized opposition once again
that could be one speaker what
the opponents defer to or we're
not
then third component will be ten
minutes for public input that
that I will recognize people for
the last bill based on those who
have contacted us and asked to
speak.
and so we have about twenty
people.
Most of the representing
organizations who asked to
speak.
and we have about ten in
opposition those thirty
presentations would have to be
consumed in that last ten
minutes so that would not allow
very much time but but I'll try.
Given the greatest opportunity
for everyone to do this at the
same time we recognize the
importance of the committee
having time to discuss things
amongst ourselves and not not
well over Committee eight to
turn into really just a on
dominated by my public input so
that's the procedure that have
adopted let me first of all ask
Senator Lopez are you the
spokesperson for the our
legislation.
Mr chairman yes.
Senator Lopez.
You have ten minutes
uninterrupted do you wish to
reserve a part that were re
bottle.
Mr chairman I do believe that
those who are will be presenting
after me will be tiny so we will
go ahead let them use the full
ten.
Okay all right so so you of ten
minutes.
Minutes I will terminate
whatever presentation is being
made.
One year we have is the sponsor.
And then I will leave it to
those to you Senator Lopez to
conduct those people allow them
as much time as you wish as a
sponsor for them to speak our.
Is there is there Senate
colleagues is there an organized
Group speaking in opposition
legislation as opposed to
general public comment.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Pirtle
submitted a list of people that
you would like to testify in
opposition and I assume although
I'm not sure that that is the
argument that this and other
portal could you clarify for
that.
Are you are muted federal.
Sorry to disappoint but I can be
myself.
Mr chair and cat so there is a
list that was provided to me for
the organized opposition I've
sent that I can send you a copy
also Mr chair that's what I was
doing or attempting to do is
find that email and send that
list over to you as well I have
it will have a individuals I
there the when I when I talk
about an organized a
presentation thank you is this
my my natural reaction would be
Senator to go through that list
just recognized people in order
which they appear but you can
have the first persons to
project manage nobody else gets
to speak some are relying upon
you and up to decide how much of
that time anyone else you we
just got some more.
And Mr chair send you the the
list it's five people with the
time divvied up that to add to
ten minutes and some have a
minute to have some kind of two
and a half and that's been
divided I'll get that exact over
to work or cat if you have that
if you could make sure that the
chair has that in front of him.
What I have a lot more.
Wash your your premium David
John Richard Gonzalez I have
them associated with your name
so that's that's your we'll hear
from the opposition with those
comments are.
Thank you Mr chair.
All right Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I sit here in
front of you along with my co
sponsor Senator Wirth and
Representative make I look out
into she is not here with us
this afternoon her father passed
away last evening so I would ask
please that we all keep her in
our prayers but with that Mr
chair on behalf of Senate bill
ten I do have some presenters
who are ready to present and we
can start with the if you wish
did you wish to announce who to
recognize your plan center how
how we wish whatever order you
wish.
Representative okay thank you Mr
chairman we'll start with
crystal currently.
Thank you Senator Lopez.
Chair and members of the
committee that's the H. Cate
coach and JV acaso curly inicia
can be on the National Committee
me pushes chain my fighting this
chain hundred that the
nationality.
My name is crystal currently I'm
from shuttle top and that's here
in McKinley county and I'm here
to speak on behalf of my
daughters and the generations
before me I'm here because so
many women before you have
suffered from patriarchal
policies and bills that taking
away our bodily Attorney.
We have been murdered right sex
trafficked sexually assaulted
murdered our children have been
forcibly taken away from us and
we spend for sterilized by the
US government and I H. S. and
many have died or suffered
because they have access to safe
and legal abortion or
reproductive health care.
If we continue to live in
nineteen sixty nine and have
built from that era we will
never continue to grow and the
suffering will continue lives
will be at risk it's time to
protect our families and ensure
they continue to have access to
safe and legal abortion.
A recent twenty twenty study of
note native American adults
conducted by Latino decisions
southwest women's law center and
for together action found that
eighty one percent of native
Americans in New Mexico agreed
with this following statement.
Women and families deserve to
make their own health care
decisions without government
interference.
And in my culture our way of
life is the supreme law of the
land it is the essence of our
survival we are matriarchal
society that highly values the
decision making power of our
grandmothers and our mothers and
we inherently believe that our
women are capable of making
complex decisions for themselves
for their family and for the
community.
I and so many people across New
Mexico know that we can hold our
own moral values about abortion
and still trust others to make
their own decisions for
themselves and for their
families.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee for your time if
you have.
Thank you Mr chairman the nexus
Dr heather Breslin.
Thank you can you hear me OK.
Thank you senator Mr chair and
committee members my name's
heather present I'm a primary
care doctor in Albuquerque and
also the governor for the
American college of physicians
for our state and I served on
the governing council The New
Mexico Medical Society for about
fifteen years today I'm speaking
to the position of the New
Mexico Medical Society in
support of SB ten.
The decision members of the
medical society are more than
two thousand doctors across New
Mexico and our members hold
positions across the spectrum
when it comes to abortion still
this is IT supports repeal
because we stand together
against criminal charges being
levied against colleagues who
practice within established
standards we're also strongly
opposed to government
interference in the patient
physician relationship.
Also my most important point I
want to make today is that the
New Mexico Medical Society
recognizes several other
conscience protections outside
of the old statute these are
solid legal protections for
physicians who might wish to opt
out of abortion Care the medical
society would never put it's all
members in a position that would
compromise their values on such
an important issue.
It's been very disappointing to
see that scaremongering and
misinformation has been so
effective and falsely alarming
some of my own health care
colleagues around the state the
idea that someone might be
forced to take part in abortion
care against their conscience is
just frankly false I assure you
we can repeal this outdated law
and at the same time stand in
support of our precious
healthcare workforce practicing
in line with their own values
again the New Mexico Medical
Society supports repeal all
thank you.
Thank you next to Charlene
Banco.
Thank you Senator Lopez Mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is Shelly Man como um I'm
the executive director of both
features I'm also coming to
today as the southern New
Mexican mexicana another
survivor of the actual all.
I I bodily Agency is everything
to me the right to autonomy is
one that should be afforded to
all of us in all cases not only
when we are victims of the of
the Google it disturbed me to
know that from decision makers
only provide me capable of
making my own health care
decisions if I've been violated.
Survivors of sexual assault
already know what it is like to
have their decision making
powers taken from them.
And we can do better than that
that is why this bill also has
the full support of the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault program.
No one should have to endure
violence to be deemed worthy of
respect.
Today I ask you all to protect
abortion access in New Mexico
now by voting yes on at the had
abortion care should be much
more than the exception thank
you all so much for your time.
Thank you an nexus Dr Lisa
Hoffler.
Thank you Senator Lopez Mr chair
and committee members my name is
Li fosler I'm a board certified
OBGYN and executive officer of
the New Mexico section of the
American college of
obstetricians and gynecologists.
Eight point B. and to get rid of
the more than fifty year old law
medicine has changed a lot in
the last fifty years and modern
abortion care is extremely
thank.
More than a decade I've never
met a health providers within
forced to provide care they
propose not even a certain
vision.
People from all walks of life
during all stages of pregnancy
Care in all circumstances.
The court reliable pregnancy
suddenly left her with serious
health complications.
I work in HR strangers not the
core of doctors decide house
next you need to be used for
allowing her the heartbreaking
choice to save her life by
ending her pregnancy.
These unique we should provide a
one size fits all approach to
any aspect of healthcare
including abortion care we
should respect New Mexico women
and family the American college
of the land part at the time
thank you.
Thank you doctor Mr chairman
we're done.
Thank you.
I have the following individuals
please make sure the list I have
these wait.
More.
Faster Christina Freeman David
Chalmers insurance all of that
water is there anyone else who I
should recognize with our next.
Mr chair believe that the that
group is the complete group that
that they wanted very good we'll
hear from those we'll go to
others to the public so that
order please be prepared to join
the call with the host.
We're with the doctor more.
This faster level thank you.
Thank you for.
Were you want to call.
I see your name here you go.
sorry about that.
Mr chair person Senators maybe
our my name is Dr we more I'm a
practicing OBGYN in Clovis New
Mexico since nineteen ninety
five I'm here to discuss an
issue important all of us access
to quality healthcare for all
New Mexicans especially those
reside in rural rural and
underserved areas it's vital to
know that passing SB ten will
markedly reduce access to
medical care and not to improve
access to health care.
Stripping the right of
conscience protection for New
Mexico's medical professionals
by the passage of SB ten will
result in a massive out
migration of health care
personnel and essential workers
from areas already devastated by
health care workers shortages
COVID nineteen and economic
depression.
How one can believe passage of
SB to improve access to care if
with no medical care providers
will be present to provide it.
Based on my firsthand
discussions with colleagues in
our areas of health care I
believe our local hospital OBGYN
clinic would be shattered by the
loss of the state's rights of
conscience protection.
Ninety percent of labor and
delivery nurses a hundred
percent of and that's that this
and most of the scenographer
isn't surgical person told me
they will leave our hospital and
New Mexico rather than be forced
to participate in abortions.
A number person working in other
departments of our local
hospital would also leave rather
than work at the facility that
performs abortions.
Do the demographics of the those
improperly road New Mexico you
can anticipate a similar out
migration and collapse of access
to care in most if not all of
the rural areas of the state.
Additionally how many hospital
clinic personnel we lose from
urban areas of Santa Fe and
Albuquerque.
Many patients have told me they
were refused to get care at a
facility that performs abortions
much less late term abortions
many will travel out of state to
get care they will take their
health care dollars out of state
with them.
When I last testified before
this committee in twenty
nineteen women's health care
women's Medical Center Clovis
New Mexico and I will be two
lands delivering women's health
care and now there are only
three.
We're the only OBGYN doctors
providing care for a population
of around seventy thousand and
the geographic area of
approximately twenty five
thousand square miles including
a large Air Force base.
I'm currently working more hours
than at any time in my career
since my residency training.
We've been aggressively
attempting to recruit for the
last eight months but I've
experienced something we've
known as leader last that we've
never had happened before we're
not even receiving applications
the number of OBGYN chair now
forty practicing in New Mexico
due in part to the tenuous
nature of our right of
conscience protections cannot be
quantified easily but can we
afford even cut off one Dr.
If attracting retraining and
retaining physicians was that
that crisis point in rural New
Mexico before COVID nineteen and
the current statewide economic
downturn.
We'll be doing even considering
making the shortages worse.
Since eighty six percent of the
nation's OBGYN so choose to not
perform abortions how in the
area of the state recruit you
will be two rounds.
In conclusion passage of SB ten
that the law would drastically
worsen access to medical care in
New Mexico and its passage would
be particularly devastating to
rural New Mexico I urge you to
stop SB ten thank you thank you.
Catherine one fostered both by
Christina Ramon.
This lawsuit.
When foster president and CEO of
Americans United for life I'm a
constitutional attorney a mother
and a post abortive woman SB ten
would repeal three sections of
the New Mexico statutes two of
them are substantive.
First section three sorry thirty
five to a clear common sense law
that strongly protects
institutional and individual
rights of conscience a critical
component of living in a
pluralistic society that
respects differing views now
elsewhere section twenty four
seventy seven does provide
limited conscience protections
but not nearly as well or as
clearly as thirty five two
hundred twenty four seventy
seven providers can personally
opt out the must provide
information on abortion and
assist with transfer many good
providers cannot facilitate an
abortion in any way in good
conscience twenty four seventy
seven is not enough.
Likewise federal conscience
protections are insufficient
they only apply to federal
funding and are subject to the
whims of Congress out of the
hands of New Mexicans New Mexico
should not repeal of the law and
leave providers without clear
protections people of faith
could so one of the religious
freedom restoration act and
probably what but that would
leave atheists and those with
moral objections unprotected
litigation would take years and
and her high personal and
financial costs.
Second SB ten would repeal
section thirty five three which
provides justice for women who
were misled or coerced into
having an abortion and for women
who are victims of an unlicensed
position we know this happens
all too often from all the
government reports tallied up in
a you will resources and say
women must be able to seek
justice if they are harmed in
the process of getting an
abortion as I was New Mexico
already ranks forty second
Americans United for life twenty
twenty one life list ranking
states on life affirming laws if
these laws are repealed New
Mexico women and providers will
have virtually no protection
regardless of your position on
abortion no one should be forced
to participate to violate her
most deeply held principles are
the reason she entered the
medical field to save lives New
Mexico lawmakers have held this
position for nearly fifty years
and should not change the line
now.
Thank you thank you.
X. Christmas we followed by
David jobs.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Christina Freeman and I'm are
critical care registered nurse
serving New Mexico I do not
believe women should be
criminalized for abortion and as
a nurse I believe more strides
are needed to improve women's
health care however appealing
this abortion ban in its
entirety will only limit women
even more as it will drive away
great health care providers
statute thirty dash I dash to
offers a much clearer definition
of parameter for conscience
protections The New Mexico
uniformed health care decisions
act the uniform health care
decisions act still requires a
practitioner to quote
immediately make all reasonable
efforts to assist in the
transfer of a patient to in
another health care practitioner
health care institution that is
willing to comply with the
individual instruction or
decision New Mexico
practitioners can still be
forced to violate their rights
of conscience by providing
referrals are transfers for a
patient to obtain a medical
procedure that is against that
practitioners beliefs and it
does not protect practitioners
from adverse employment action
or discrimination based upon
their fusel to comply statute
thirty dash I dash to insurers
conscience rights of all persons
are protected unlike that of the
uniformed health care decisions
act it has already been
confirmed that repealing this
law does not impact current
abortion practices an abortion
access every even more there's
no lack of abortion providers as
over one million abortions occur
every year by replacing statute
thirty dash I dash to with the
informed health care decisions
act you were making conscious
protections Wirth New York apple
string the confidence of
thousands of people working in
health care in our state we all
see that our employment is
unsafe if the conscience clause
is repealed we will lose
desperately needed health care
workers I am asking you today to
keep the statute thirty dash I
dash to as law and to vote no on
SB ten thank you for your time
thank you.
Representative which are I'm
here to address the
constitutional issues involving
this legislation second thirty
dash I dash to revise the
conscientious objection to
provide abortion services repeal
of this section without
preserving it within section
twenty four seven eight dash
seven results in a clear
infringement of health care
workers who now will not be able
to exercise their right to
conscience simply object it's a
violation of the equal
protection clause we're you have
women's right to choose verses
that are being forwarded to this
saying to those health care
providers without thirty dash I
dash to is a first amendment
violation would which protects
the free exercise of one's
religion which allows for
conscientious objection without
section thirty dash I dash to a
doctor's also would be
prohibited from exercising their
Hippocratic well when you look
at the definition of twenty four
seven eight one healthcare
provider that will include
schedulers housekeepers staff
members those who assist with
pre and post operation support
it's very broad language you go
to twenty four seven a seven the
bears qualified immunity only if
it says if you have a policy if
there's reasons for the
conscientious and the policy was
timely communicated that is a
come up a clear infringement
it's very it's arbitrate in
capricious and if you go to
section G. two which provides
that a health care provider
shall mandatory language Mr Mr
chair provide continuing care to
the patient until a transfer can
be effected waited so that means
when I on when and when a person
says they want to portion that
is on call you can not provide
continuing care and failure to
comply results in several
penalties five thousand in
actual damages and then do.
Damages associated.
Under the law including civil
criminal law and law providing
for disciplinary procedures the
federal statutes do not provide
the protection under the church
amendments the coastal snowmen's
the Weldon amendment those do
not protect healthcare providers
and it does not protect the vast
majority of health care
providers I would strongly urge
this
body to keep section thirty dash
I dash to substitute that for
twenty four seven eight the and
then repealed twenty four seven
a seven G. two thank you thank
you Senate president R. Pirtle
sure Gonzales with vitamin a
half let in the organized
opposition minimap reasons all.
Mr chair sure you can call us is
not in the waiting room I did
send her an email asking if she
was going to join the call but I
have not received a response.
Very good one we will now take a
ten minutes general public
participation.
I have far more people than we
can here in ten minutes but I'll
try to hear from these people
and I will also try to be for
about one back and forth between
the parties so I have one on the
list here on the software.
The software are you present.
SB.
Sure I'll just but missed SB
into the dim okay this SB will
be recognized for one minute
sure why Wendy
Basco.
One minute then they will be
followed by the end of Derrick.
Rebecca Lucero each for one
minute.
Back to this SB one minute
please.
Hi is the is this can you hear
me.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is eve SB I'm
the legislative chair for the
New Mexico section of the
American college of
obstetricians and gynecologists
a cog I'm and I'm also an OBGYN
physician practicing in New
Mexico I've been here for the
last thirty years and I'm
speaking and very strong support
of repealing the abortion ban I
and my colleagues have cared for
thousands of women and people in
the state caring for women
throughout their lifespan
including their complex and
always unique reproductive
health decisions what I've seen
over thirty years of practice is
that women and people need to
make choices about continuing or
ending a pregnancy with their
trusted health care provider
because everyone's situation is
unique and individual and that
is why I and our from year
women's Health Organization
economy more knowledge about of
obstetricians and gynecologists
so strongly support repealing
this band to ensure that all
people have access to high
quality patient centered care
and it's not just a cog our
other national women's health
organizations including for
example the society of
physicians who care for women
with high risk pregnancies
strongly support access to
comprehensive reproductive
health care including abortion
care that's because
circumstances arise in women's
lives that you make them have to
have to make these and difficult
choices.
Recognition one for one minute
please.
Would be best for.
Thank you.
Did share Senator Lopez and
committee members I'm Wendy
Basco staff attorney to the
southwest women's Law Center our
mission at the law center is to
raise New Mexico's girls and
women up so they can reach their
full potential whatever that may
be.
Including when and if to parent
New Mexico's abortion ban Law
relates back to a time when
women were regularly robbed of
their bodily autonomy physicians
refusing to perform tubal
ligation on younger women who
requested it the implication
being that she could not
possibly know what her own money
wanted.
And married women required to
get their husband's permission
to have this procedure I
guarantee that then seeking
vasectomy we're not similarly
required to get their wives
permission.
New Mexico's unconstitutional
portion band takes us back to
those times robbing pregnant
people of their agency forcing
them to go before strangers holy
and connected to them to seek
permission to obtain an abortion
care under severely limited
circumstances we will not go
back to those times thank you
for the opportunity to speak
today in favor of SB ten.
You which is the default
position we have Bandra Derek
well by Cerro
the end of their queue
recognized for one minute.
I thank you chairman my name's
Lee on the Derrick Thomas Edison
of Albuquerque and I would like
action packed I'm also at a I'm
not sure that to move of
abortion unable to tell my story
very quickly it was against I
didn't get good counseling and
result I faced a great emotional
and mental health trauma but I'm
also speaking against this
within at games this bill
because I believe that forcing
people against a more conscience
will result in a less doctors
and healthcare providers I seen
myself how it's very difficult
to get appointments to get seen
and more rural areas that's
going to open up the the back
door for barbaric back
Back door backroom abortions and
I believe that that's something
that we can't do I don't agree
because this is part of what I
goes against my faith I'm a
Christian I'm a mother I stand
up for the rights of the unborn
and I think that what that this
bill in its entirety that is not
sound it out it completely
negates the people who believe
as I do and I represent a large
group of people to believe that
I do that I do and I just want
to say that that's important
I've not heard one person talk
about god I have not heard one
person talk about the sanctity
of life I have not heard one
person talk about the humanity
of what this bill robs us as New
Mexicans from and it takes it
takes it takes please don't take
anymore when you.
Vote for this bill thank you
you.
Zero.
One.
this is not in the general I did
admit always Martinez who also
submitted for public comment in
opposition.
We'll hear from is working is.
Hi Mr chair I'm members of the
committee Lisa Martinez here in
the executive director New
Mexico Alliance for life
representing over twenty four
thousand New Mexicans who stand
in opposition of this bill in
addition to the seventy percent
of Americans who want to see
more protections for abortion
not last SB ten does nothing to
protect the innocent unborn nor
women from dangerous elective
late term abortions are Kerry
seventy percent greater risk of
death for women than earlier
abortions according to the
American college of obstetrics
and gynecology and this includes
a family the lakisha Adkins who
died during an elective taxpayer
funded late term abortion at six
months in Albuquerque the death
of kisha has not been brought up
by any of the sponsors or
supporters of this bill who
wrongly claim it keeps abortion
safe for women it's that's
patently false one over twenty
one women including kisha have
been injured by one business
alone that advertises abortions
up to thirty two weeks which is
eight months and a case by case
there after with no have yet
another portion of dark doctors
are criticized under
investigation by the medical
board for botched procedure
sponsor senator Wirth admitted
S. pack testimony that this bill
will allow non physicians to
perform abortions and that this
may already be happening lastly
the same version of this bill
was amended in twenty nineteen
by the honorable Senator Ivy
Soto in order to preserve the
conscience protections and
thirty five five dash to us
citing that it seems fair that
we would also equally protect
medical provider for that
medical providers own conscience
or faith or hospitals to decide
if they want to or not
participate in a medical
termination by leading in the
statute seems to me that we also
affirm the ability of medical
professionals to be able to make
their own decisions that medical
professionals may also feel safe
in order to decide for
themselves our own course any
closing he stated our Senate
respected each person's choices
conscience and values allowing
women and medical professionals
both to make those decisions and
for the this reason Mr chairman.
I'm encouraged members of the
committee to vote no on this
because.
Thank you very much hello a
repeat of that we have gathered
a great deal of email from
people all over the state of New
Mexico we've tried to centralize
that make it easy for folks to
have a mailbox drop to get rid
comments to us so I'm
encouraging members during our
debate this afternoon to
access that distinguish between
patients they are this vote
continues the other committees
on the floor that completes our
presentations and public input
of the chair will now begin to
recognize members wishing to be
recognized and I'll ask that to
raise your hand all right down
its yes you Rep which we
recognize.
Member center lotus.
Mr chair if I could I'd like to
ask I think inadvertently miss
Ellie rush forth and crystal
were removed from the zoom if
they could please be AT Act
added back in thank you.
There's others on the committee
comments or questions.
Who gave our public comments.
it.
Just about things this chair and
David and then would actually
like to
I'll ask a couple questions of
the of the expert witnesses so
agency our Martinez.
The stated that the two years
ago I made the appointment in
this committee to
to present.
Section.
To in in the statute.
Our and then respond to do so in
order to maintain some of the
language.
That was in there that I thought
was importance to do based on
some of the.
Are so many issues that come up
related to the bill at that time
the bill as it was introduced
well as was as this bill is I'm.
Under the under the heading of
but no good deed goes unpunished
I I suppose
after after doing that we had a
number of people who criticized
that section two was now out of
context there is language in
sections one and three that was
necessary for section two to be
able to exist our our with so
many it it also lacked.
Our conscience provision.
In in the
But the conscience pricks out
provisions because it in New
Mexico.
Absent any any criminal statute.
And so and so from compilation
perspective it also was was
misplaced.
And so and so for that reason
as the as as the bill was was
working its way through this
bill is working its way through
during the session
and as I take a look at
acknowledging that that the two
years ago I did make that
amendment in this committee.
That's not what I'm gonna make
at this time
frankly it's it's it's not
something it didn't are the it
it appears not have given
anybody any comforts by doing
that.
And the and the calls were to to
to meet left in.
I would not seem to be over but
all to be honest because because
there was there's no recognition
of the work that we did on that
issue in this committee two
years.
And so consequently wants
Senator Lopez is our workers
have brought before us and this
committee is a is a is a
straight repeal.
It is
it is repealing of health care
reference in the criminal code.
So the health care matters are
regulated by scope of practice
and
are regulated by the by laws
related to health care which I
think is appropriate.
Personally.
I do also want to address the
issues of life in the issues of
god and of spirituality.
you guys are you know I want.
Those of those of you who are a
lot of them and who are
listening to know that that
we're number of us whether
expressed or not.
We can do this from a place of.
Well it.
From a place
understanding.
Our.
That that.
Police and recognizing other
people's beliefs.
Respecting that as well.
Are you know and and I have
discussed this in the past.
In this committee and as well as
in the Senate Public Affairs
Committee.
When I was when I was
A young person.
Our I was.
In relationship.
Actually the formulation by the
time given issue.
Where we haven't met where we
have to address matters of an
unexpected.
Our pregnant.
I'm distribute form not going to
go through and tell the whole
story right now other than to
say that that in the end we
decided to do an option.
And for us that was the correct
choice.
That was that that is where we
are we Phelps.
The right decision what's.
As as two people who have
previously been in a
relationship but we were no
longer in a relationship.
In terms of of how to deal with
that situation but practicing
two things about that that's.
That's not the right choice for
everybody.
And and what was important was
that we're able to make that's
what's.
To to to decide whether.
Whether it's people who are no
longer relationship we should
nonetheless get married.
Because the child is going to be
born what are.
The the pregnancy should be
charming.
and and ask god to to wait until
better times in our lives to be
able to care for the child I
want to do up in the in an
option which is ultimately what
we do.
There is not an easy.
Situation it was not an easy
decision.
And and it were as
but the need for us it was the
right decision.
The second thing that are common
about that.
Is that.
Having done an adoption.
Are having.
Our to use the language of many
of the files of test I haven't
chosen what.
Resulted.
We publicly honest in many years
of depression.
Many years of depression that I
had to suffer through but I do
not have to.
Our our work because because of
the.
the fact that the.
That there are consequences to
the decisions.
Our that would have been made at
that point.
And and and so one of the
consequences that happen in our
case because it was initially
intended to be an open adoption.
And and as parents decided after
a couple of years not to honor
the open market option.
Was that it like I said it
resulted in in in in
significant.
Are depression and so there are
there are behavioral health and
mental health consequences.
Regardless of what one chooses
to do.
Our.
And and so and so these are
issues complex select with
lights.
The people have to struggle
with.
And what I know is that when I
was in that situation a lot of
people only what they thought I
should do.
And almost universally what they
told me was not the right thing
or not the right way we're not
for the right reasons.
That I needed to make the
decision that I made in
consultation and cooperation.
With at that point my spoke.
And so and so you know these are
this is this is not something.
I know for me and I know for
four or must my colleagues.
As as we discussed this.
This is not something that is.
Which I believe early.
But it is approached with the
with the recognition that that
that each situation is unique in
that and that is inappropriate
for the state to make the
decision on behalf of others.
When when when confronted.
The stress.
I.
Is is must watch for.
Act yes you okay very good.
Mr chairman and Senator Lopez
supply I can ask the next
witness though
a couple of questions are and
and these are questions actually
that that derives from.
from emails that I've gotten on
this issue.
Our emails that.
That scene you are.
Seem to indicate an
understanding of the of of what
is in this.
Are
What is in this legislation.
Our that that I'm not understood
as being in this legislation and
and so thus I wanted to.
To inquire.
If if I had misunderstood.
If if are or if there were
instead.
some some other
misunderstandings that are.
That.
This about this legislation
question.
I'm reading one of these emails
that that that we all receive
that the talks about this being
out
I hastily drafted a piece of
legislation this is one of the
shortest most we've we've we've
got with the times the life I'm
not on the page
is with this resist something
that was.
Was this what what was the what
was the process of.
All of us of of deciding the
scope of this legislation
Mr chairman Senator percent and
this report.
I'm Mr chairman of the special
force if you would please.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
First of all.
Thank you so much for sharing
your story you know you and I
have talked about about that
decision that you made and you
shared it and public
in committee multiple times and
I just
I just want to express my
gratitude for everybody that
shares their personal story of
reproductive health rights and
justice in the spaces yeah these
are certainly
sometimes fraught issues and and
I'm just I'm grateful for
everybody who puts themselves
out there on this.
to answer your question no
absolutely not this is not a
hastily drafted piece of
legislation it's it's
and as you noted it's a very
short piece of legislation it
repeals three sections in our
criminal code
this bill has been heard and
debated in committee before it's
been heard and debated in
numerous committees and on the
floor for the last several years
and many experts in that
reproductive health rights and
justice and constitutional law
community have weighed in on on
the scope of this piece of
legislation.
I appreciate that I think of
that's and that's important
as we as we as we address this
one of the other things in in.
In this email which I got I
think I don't know several
hundred copies of the same
email.
Is that is that somehow that
this that this bill will allow
sex traffickers and child
abusers to take a pregnant minor
in one of more options.
Is that is that it is now that I
miss that.
Do we need to.
Protection against us.
Mr chair and and senator
That is that is not in it within
the scope of this bill and and
health care providers
at as many of you know already
have robust protections in place
for the patients that they see
at screening social clinical
medical I'm indicators including
whether or not somebody is a
victim or survivor of abuse and
and so so now that is that is
absolutely not what this bill
would allow.
And I'm.
In the same email it this refers
to Senator time as the abortion
up to birth and infanticide
Bill.
proposed by the Sanchez our
districts that are Lopez agency
rush forth.
is this.
Is that is that our property
characterization of this bill as
being an abortion up to birth
impacts side bill.
Mr chair Senator I appreciate
the question and and I would be
remiss if I didn't quite plainly
and respectfully to the to those
folks who believe that's what
this is about is just rejects
the promise of that assertion
and reject the premise of that
question comes up.
You know the claims about
abortion later in pregnancy that
we so often hear and that you
heard in this email absolutely
do not reflect the reality of
what abortion care later in
pregnancy looks like you know
we've heard we heard earlier
about the I'm cert I'm fallible
possibilities in myriad
possibilities that somebody can
face in a pregnancy and
throughout their life right
within their medical care
and this is exactly does
circumstances the unique
circumstances of the patient is
exactly why we don't have you
know medically unnecessary and
arbitrary bans on abortion care
in the state no New Mexico a lot
of demands the practice of good
and ethical medicine but
response to the unique patients
needs and you know so I feel
particularly compelled to
clarify again that the
misinformation that we hear
about abortion later in
pregnancy
is is patently false and
ultimately dangerous because
what it what those claims end up
doing is vilifying the families
the women who are making highly
complex decisions in
consultation with their highly
trained doctors
and and those decisions must be
led with health care with
medical decision make medical
judgment standard of care.
Shared decision making not
politics.
And so to answer your question
plainly no that's not what this
bill is about and nor is that
what this bill would allow.
Thank you very much and I do
appreciate that all of the
simply close by saying that you
know
When I had my experience as a as
a young person.
You know then in you references
in your answer just now.
One of the issues that was that
was that was very much aware of.
Is that while one Mexico from
the shop to me and while I
remained involved.
Up front the entire process.
That we were and discussed a
variety of options including
restoring our relationship.
I also recognize them and I'm
recognizes more so now.
That the weight of these
decisions.
Malls.
Grossly disproportionately on
women.
And on that.
And this is something that that
is it's important to me.
That as the state's.
We respect.
Women.
To make the correct decision for
themselves and for their
families.
And know that they're doing the
right thing regardless which
that decisions.
Thank you very much.
Mr chairman you are muted.
Thank you Senator Ivy Soto cry
CEO show hands those who wish to
be recognized so I can allocate
our time accordingly Senator
Stewart.
Sure to speak.
The other space Senator Stewart.
All right Sir story you
recognize for ten minutes.
Mr chairman I just moved that to
pass on Senate bill ten.
Second.
Sure seeing no other member
equity recognized Mister
chairman of Senator Baca
resistant will survive thank you
thank you for recognize that.
Senator Baca thank you recognize
you for ten minutes or.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
actually jump back in here from
the.
Presentation in of our new
health and public affairs
committee and so I apologize of
fun repetitive or if I missed
something
and this is on the bill correct
no no amendment or anything like
that right that's correct.
so you know we have we're we're
sitting on Judiciary Mr Mr chair
and we have a
Senator attorneys here and so
you know I'm gonna talk talk
about this from really just the
that point of view for to start
with and that's that we have in
the law we have parties it's
adversarial you have a you have
a the plaintiff and the
defendant petitioner responded
or what have you and you know.
When you bring a case for you
develop faxing you pure before
judging and the and you plead
your case and it requires all
parties to be there these are
called indispensable parties and
so you know what I ten when I
look at this you know it comes
back to is very sensitive topic
understand the well I related to
an indispensible party because
all the parties are not present
when these decisions are made
we're lacking one very important
party one very important opinion
and that important party an
important opinion comes from of
the individual who is in the
quips to speak or isn't equipped
to plead their case and a really
has nobody there to plead that
case and so so it's difficult
these decisions and you know
what I will pretend I understand
it you know and first of all.
Hi I'm not a female and I I
haven't been pregnant myself we
have kids and I have a wife and
I understand it from that point
of view but you know without
that voice to be heard how then
can a decision be made and and
and so that's so the real
trouble I have with this is that
that voice.
Is just muted in silence and so
you know there's there's no one
no one expressing that where are
these people to argue for
themselves that that would be
here of but for you know but for
let's face it let's call it what
it is an abortion you know
where would they be what would
they say what any of us see that
we're sitting here you know is
are they ever at some point
themselves given some choice or
do they have a choice Mr chair
to to to say Hey I'm gonna I'm
when I when I grow up I'm going
to cure cancer and going to the
I'm going to be a doctor lawyer
legislator or any number of
things they could be farmers and
in the construction and the
nurses and what have you that
they don't they don't have that
they don't have that ability so
I I feel like in the law except
in this area we always err on
the conservative we always err
on the protection except in this
case in this case our our laws
don't recognize the the
conservative approach to this
which would be basically.
Though wait and see you know we
talk about
we we talk about making
decisions and choices.
But we're not yet at a point
where everyone can be involved
in those we all have choices and
and I feel for the people who
put in these in these positions
well we're given a choice at the
onset
and not all cases but let's face
it most of them.
Whether to have sex at all
whether to use contraception.
those are two choices there if
you chose not to use it then you
you become of pregnant or you
pregnant female and then at that
point you're faced with you know
of what we call the third and
final choice and I understand
there are exceptions to that and
they're brought up frequently
those exceptions but I think
it's and it's intellectually
dishonest to not discuss the
vast majority which is the
situation that I described and
what should we do in those cases
and when should it be done
what we're looking at repealing
this law now.
You know the Senator before a
of the spoken Center Ivy Soto he
spoke you know when I I felt for
story and and and and what the
question was brought up was this
hastily drafted no it it wasn't
a hastily drafted but its repeal
so really wasn't drafted at all
would just knocking law out of
the books that we don't why when
we could actually go in and
correct some of these issues and
I are speaking broadly here but
we've heard this bill before you
know the conscience clause we
could work on that we could work
on keeping them we could talk
about solutions that the public
really endorses unlike looking
at late term how how how late is
too late how long do you have to
make this decision you know we
could talk about fixing the the
current statutes to align with
what are are public considers
acceptable you know some of us
and all be honest with you here
it's unacceptable to me but
there are some improvements that
could be date maybe and I know
that you know each of us
together could do that but it
takes compromise and these types
of issues are on our issues
where you know there is many
times no compromise but I think
it's deserving of just
contemplating that you know and
and contemplating the the
missing argument in here of the
indispensable party the party
that couldn't be here today the
party that never could be here
the party because they can't
speak and the anyway all I think
we kind of know where this is
going will you know take our
votes here in a moment but I
think it's important to the a
pause in the.
Of the nearly seventy million
that are not here with us of in
this country for one reason or
another a would be Americans
that are missing
anyway with that and with
respect to all those watching
via webcast and the to to R.
Sanchez all just close with that
so thank you for the time Mr
chairman and I think you members
of this is sting Committee for
for listening.
Welcome to committee members.
Questions or comments.
Senator Morris.
Thank you Mr how much time is
left I'll be brief what five
minutes without okay thank you
so Mr chair thank you members of
the committee of course this is
my years legislation is always
the toughest our conversation we
have for good reason and I think
that's where the frustration
Senator Ivey Soto mention about
the emails has come along with
this is up to birth abortion
bill comes from because there
has been no dialogue in New
Mexico on these issues in the
legislative process for years
and years and years that
actually our tracks what would
people New Mexico actually feel
many do understand the US
Supreme Court rulings that women
have the right to us for privacy
as a as laid out in the other
rulings they've also said that
the state has an interest in
protecting the life of the baby
at a certain point but there's
no been no conversation and the
fact is in New Mexico there is
the is are all.
Time frame that one second that
is a decision Troyer's to abort
a baby the next second it is a
human life that if you can kill
it is murder one second
millisecond separates that I
don't even know when that middle
section happens everyone in this
this call is been are part of a
burst of myself as a father
those you from other children
wonder that one does that baby
come out of it what is that life
start.
And I think most people New
Mexico realize it's not just the
ones secretary before the baby
fully emerges from its mother's
I think that's where the concern
is about this building up to
birth abortion in because
there's no conversation about
that very notion that one second
separates the choice from a
life.
There's no work and no
conversation about involved
parents it's the the the
conversation product center Baca
product the health care
providers of there's no
conversation about is it really
appropriate in the state to
force taxpayers to pay for
abortion when they have moral
objections to it no no
conversation at all about these
very very important issues that
we never have a conversation
about so it is up to up to last
second portion in New Mexico
because we don't have any
conversation about this that's
where we are next with the
frustration is heart wrenching
decisions for all of us on and
those who have to go through
this my heart goes out to
everyone
but the the conversation needs
to happen and we're not gonna
have it because this is about
political will political we are
dynamic
Follow which schools actually
having a conversation about what
is right what is that one second
between life and death
and we owe it to ourselves to
actually have that conversation
but we refuse to have it here in
New Mexico we're just gonna have
repeal this law which is been
out of date for my lifetime I'm
not a young man and others this
law was passed before I was even
born
and it saddens me that we're not
going to actually have a real
conversation about how we gonna
stop late term abortions the
last second abortion how we're
gonna start off talk about
taxpayer funded abortions
parental involvement in this
very critical decision it's just
sad that there's no will will
power to actually have those
conversations Mexico try to do
what's right so I think are you
all know how I vote on this
issue and it's are rich in both.
But I really appreciate the
times securement the destructor
one on the spot call books
besides our political
differences
and thank you Mr.
You want.
Many of you all for a long time.
Our process about twenty years
we've we've had discussions a
great one we've been
challenging.
for many years one one remember
discussions about Ronald
notifications off her three
daughters.
For stem cell research work
practice.
These are these are tough issues
numbers I I I I would just add
your comments I think that.
Well you based on this late
we're not having those
conversations I think we're
going to have them.
In the future.
We should be clear what this
bill does right now our existing
what has some this makes it a
crime.
We're we're talking about sure
you are makes the crime a woman.
What makes the corn will drive
next in thousands.
President.
For these these procedures and
that just seems so.
So contrary to what.
I believe our criminal justice
system is supposed to be about.
Which is about.
You walk the streets.
Or rehabilitating people who
need help.
Work in any of the many good
goals objectives we have with
our criminal justice system one
of those Sir.
I thank you.
Prosecutors.
So so we're not for all the
misinformation soccer we're
we're taking away.
The only crime.
By this bill.
This is not alter all of those
many other discussions we're
gonna have.
The center where he'd like to
have my respect others want to
hear.
And so we're we're.
We turn the page but we're
certainly not possible.
On this issue.
So with that family will take or
do passed most.
Senator Baca.
No.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Morris.
No.
Senator Pirtle.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Yes.
We have to pass.
Representative would grant.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Your own meal with our last
item of business that we have
thirty minutes let's take a stab
at trying to get it done.
Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair I was curious
I was looking and I didn't
realize we had the updated
agenda until this morning what
time was the agenda changed in
this bill added to the agenda Mr
chair for now.
At what time.
About three o'clock.
Well our our rural say within
twenty four hours I think you
know I think that's something
for the public we need to to
honor if we can get that out
twenty four hours at that is our
our our rural
and it's for for reason and so I
know and rules this morning we
had this brought up and it was
posted twenty four hours and
three minutes so I don't know Mr
chair if your address that but
if if if we're gonna have
changes I think we should at
least follow our own rules thank
you Mr.
Your argument really point out
I'm gonna try to do the job for
us I hope people feel that I've
been fair today I'm always going
continue funding for our.
That means being part of the
public give them as much notice
as we can.
Research we certainly have the
time right now you're not the
there were there was one bill
that was scheduled earlier today
sponsor us so what was the roll
over that means I'll be changing
your gender
your accommodate that and
sometimes when something opens
up it makes sense to maybe slots
of the good right now that's
what I do I miss with Emily and
I would go with them I'm sorry
what what can we do the
efficient with our time
respectful of the members to try
here is maybe not as major so
candidly I I make that
assessment based on what I
expect to be the level of
opposition or controversy
involved.
But I work eight R. Pirtle would
if you ever feel that.
The notice is such the public
there's something unfair
increasing on a particular
amount of operating margins.
Thank you Mr.
You are you for that.
Senate bill one twenty.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for
listening to Senate bill one
twenty this afternoon now what
Senate bill one twenty is right
and to do is to amend NMSA
nineteen seventy eight section
thirteen dash one dash nine
eight of the procurement code to
accept contracts and the
procurement of services for
projects enacted into the New
Mexico youth conservation corps
Commission pursuant to the New
Mexico youth conservation corps
Act both YCC and the General
Services Department expect SB
one twenty to resulted agency
cost savings now SB one twenty
will reduce the administrative
burden of the YCC by decreasing
the amount of time that is
required to prepare issue and
process some artists P. to the
state purchasing division now
the general service department
and state purchasing division
have reviewed Senate bill one
twenty and are in agreement with
the request for exemption now a
copy of a joint YCC exception
support letter signed by both Mr
Ken Ortiz the cabinet secretary
of general service department
and Mr my Kate and director and
state purchasing agent for the
state purchasing division GSD
should have been sent to you
prior to this meeting for your
review now it's my hope that
secretary or tease us on today
to help serve as an expert
witness but I'd like to read
part of his letter in the
instance of the cap join us now
from his letter there's three
main points I'd like to bring up
to the first one is the
procurements performed by the
YCC do not easily lend
themselves to any current method
of procurement under the code in
fact with the secretary says is
YCC have been forced to
cooperate to shoe horn the
procurement center existing
methods which do not always
effectively achieve the and set
forth for the commission in
statute that was second point he
makes is the YCC has its own non
reverting fund for such.
X. and it appears that funds
could be more effectively
utilized through that pre
offered exemption to the
procurement code that was third
and final point on that letter
talked about the bill how it
reduces the burden on both the
state purchasing division and
the YCC to create a procurement
for administering grants while
greatly increasing the YCC
operational.
Capacity and helping more youth
to be hired and invest in New
Mexico now with me today are a
few expert witnesses one is miss
Senator would who is the
executive director of the youth
conversation court along with
YCC commissioner miss Alicia
little better and I'm hoping
cabinet secretary Mr can Ortiz
is with us and with that Mr
chairman I would like for agency
would to speak a little bit on
behalf of Senate bill one twenty
this what thank you senator and
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the Senate Judiciary
Committee or fitting us in today
and just a few updates I do
believe that marchesa and will
be joining us secretary Ortiz is
unable to and our commissioner
says she's in the work the
waiting room so
anyway yes we are the youth
conservation corps I'm the
director of been the director
about a year and a half now.
And what we do is we provide
funds for tribes local
government units and non profits
to hire and train used to carry
out projects of lasting value so
some of the projects in and
around your districts this year
were a trail crew in Otero
county I'm here is creating and
water conservation crew in Los
crucis and accrue at that worked
on restoration in Bernalillo
county and Albuquerque city open
space so as senator Hermio said
this bill does request an
exemption from the state
procurement code for issuing
licenses these contracts and
procurement of services for
projects this is a narrow
exemption that will allow us to
issue our our peace through our
own agency.
Prior to twenty twelve we did
just that in twenty twelve our
scope of work was determined to
be General Services not
professional services that as it
had previously been and
therefore are R. F. P. must be
issued through S. PED.
To our peace through state
purchasing more designed to
procure well to provide goods
and services and select one or
two proposals for the award
where is YCC projects are open
ended so it's really the offers
who decide what goods and
services are needed to carry out
the project and Furthermore it
is why cece's intent with
getting these proposals that we
provide as many of them as
possible as funding allows and
those that conform to the R. F.
P. so per year this is about
thirty to forty projects.
There are similar programs in
the state that issue are peas
through their own agencies such
as the healthy soils program
outdoor infrastructure outdoor
equity fund and keeping New
Mexico true so I understand that
there may be a concern we're
setting up a precedent for
peeling away the procurement
code but I feel like we're just
trying to to join the club that
can issue there are F. P.
through their own needs and
eight.
some of the things I feel like
we'll be able to do that will
really help serve our
constituents are potential
applicants better if we get this
exemption is that.
We'll be able to re allocate
funds that are not Spence within
the same fiscal year because
will easily be able to issue a
smaller R. F. P. currently about
twenty five percent of funding
is reverted and it is really
great to have a reverting fund
but I don't like it when that
balance builds up
again will be able to re issue
the request for proposals on our
website and that will help
applicants
Fine where we are find out what
our program is about it is kind
of confusing for them to go
through state purchasing now and
I realize that is not the main
driver of it but it does help
help them find out what we're
all about and then we'll be able
to use software either
develop from software get third
party software that can take us
from application to project
management and budget tracking
and really that would.
The affected that would really
be like hiring another person I
I feel sometimes like I walked
into a job in the nineties
so it would also really help
streamlined application make it
more accessible and reduce those
errors now that we're seeing
with these R. F. peas for
instance a lot of applicants
their applications are
disqualified for minor errors
such as not checking a box we
can use technology that says
you've got to check that box
that would eliminate those
errors thank you to the
summarized so we have time
receive that I'm done the bill
is supported by state purchasing
and I hope that it will result
in more use hired and better
development of our young
workforce thank.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee we can now stand for
questions or from for community
comment.
Zoom zoom interpretation good
understanding of the bill
we don't have to gather a list
for public input on this issue
can can you tell me what we have
with anyone terms of a public.
Request.
Yes Mister chairman committee we
have three people who have
submitted for public comment all
of them in support of the bill
of the fifty which is Greg
Peters followed by Christy to
four under Michael that.
That we're those three
individuals are each recognized
for one minute Mister Peters.
Mr chairman and members the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to provide comment
today my name is Greg Peters on
the public lands wildlife
advocate for conservation voters
New Mexico your stand in support
of the youth conservation corps
and impact what is the season
funding youth centered projects
and communities about public
lands across New Mexico.
Ninety two hundred views engage
in meaningful work experiences
that improve the state's natural
cultural historical agricultural
resources will developing
ethical Department stewardship
and civic responsibility for
members of bill trails improve
wildfire resiliency control the
pollution created an install
public art improve senior and
community centers preserve
cultural resources and unified
naturally reason public parks
YCC projects are visible
tangible and meaningful New
Mexico to fund YCC program
through gross receipts taxes
deserve a more efficient and
accessible youth conservation
corps this bill will deliver
that.
Order bill will reduce the
administrative burden on YCC by
decreasing the amount of time
and resources that are currently
required to prepare issue in
process the are key to the state
purchasing division thank you.
Along.
Access to the program as well as
Y. C. C.'s operating efficiency.
Since the wind from the Mexicans
does not have act makes our
government more efficient.
All right.
The next speaker caplets.
Our next speaker is Christy to
for a.
One minute.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for having
me today I'm Christy to foil and
the director of New Mexico state
parks and I'm also here to
Representative energy minerals
and natural resources department
I stand in support of this bill
we've had multiple YCC projects
on our state parks and I and we
feel that this streamlined
method for.
Session of these YCC projects
will help our use and will also
help our state parks thank you.
What was once.
What speaker is Mr Michael back
I.
The net for hand but it seems
that his and that is taking a
second it's going quite slow.
And this is which is dropped off
the call so.
Committee members on the bill a
history.
Moores.
Senator pro Sir more center for.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members thank you expert
witnesses and Senator are we
know what the Senate's Judiciary
Committee I think I won't speak
for everyone on the committee
this is that this bill is about
the the benefits of the youth
conservation corps for New
Mexico and what we're talking
about the mission of the court
this bill is about procurement
to protecting taxpayers money
and so this.
Senator meal so the first part
of this be honest with you know
it's going to talk to me about
this and I would be very
extremely wary of
Granting exemptions to the
procurement code without having
of research and known about this
this go through the insurance
committee process Senator.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I do believe so and so
who first carried this bill was
Senator Stefanics who then I
joined in the bill with later on
and then took over the bill and
so I believe that yes it was
senator.
Senator New Mexico I was going
to pontificate for a little bit
because I can't go for this
because I don't know anything
about it no one's no one's
reached out to me to talk to me
why the court's needs to not be
under the same rigor of
protecting taxpayer money than
any of that other agencies that
are out there we have a long
history primo of of corruption
in New Mexico we have a lot of
people in jail we're gonna jail
who served in this body and all
other bodies
for corrupt public corruptions
which are pro terms you've got a
job because of court corruptions
would have governor's treasurers
everything else and so to recode
is a safeguard from the
corruption it is an efficient by
design but is there to protect
the taxpayer so often to much of
the New Mexico corruption that
happens so exempting anyone no
matter what good to good use
good projects that do on behalf
of the people New Mexico gives
me a lot of us reputation and
you would have to go further
extra mile to to get me to test
on something like this because
if there's ever a case in the
future where there were some
corruption and one of these
constructs was given to a friend
or family member or a political
supporter which I guarantee you
Senator will happen is when
you're not watching that's what
happens on my you all of us and
so someday in the future might
be a year might be five years
like ten years will be so
politically connected member of
hall gets a political
significant contract to do this
work and then they're going to
be wondering why did those
legislators are exempt so member
August say all Senator army
someone told us to do it so be
careful what you ask for Senator
so you have to get me you you
better further
of burden of proof for your part
to get me to a test on something
like this.
That has the potential to
backfire on all of us.
Most specially the taxpayers in
Mexico so I appreciate grant
four I just can't support
something like this but a lot
our research so thank you Mr
chairman senator thank you for
those comments duly noted thank
you R. Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chairman and I want
to they were the point you know
that's why I'd raise my hand to
sitting in rules dealing with
all the people that get
appointed to boards and
commissions we're able to ask
the questions you know ensuring
that they're gonna hold the
public trust here with the no we
don't know who who's going to
contracts what we're gonna do
what are we gonna require for
the work the contract to to do
some clearing our watershed
restoration it's just one guy
with the chainsaw they gets a
million dollar contract you know
there's a lot that's not here
that we don't see that that
gives me concern I think.
You know the argument of of what
the youth conservation corps
does you know noted we hear it
but but we are in charge of
protecting the public street
trust and the public's trust in
the spending of the public
dollars so I'm gonna have to
also today this is bill thank
you Mr.
chairman and senator thank you
for those comments thank you the
committee members questions or
comments Senator Ivey Soto
Senator Stewart.
Thank you very much.
Mr chairman
So as I'm looking at the bill.
Thanks contracts and the
chairman of services.
Representative to bite the
masking conservation commission
presents these conservation or
not.
All right and I try to read the
act which I find in chapter nine
article five B..
I'm trying to figure out what
contracts are entered into or
what.
Services.
Installed building conservation
our mission underneath
conservation corps Act gives out
it's.
So
Mr chair meal ones that's been
prepared here.
Mr chairman Senator Ivey Soto
I'm gonna rely on my expert
witness to help with answering
this question was what.
Yes thank you Mr chair Senator
Ivy Soto and and members of the
G. Judiciary Committee I suppose
that is that the the crux of the
route the reason I'm asking for
this exemption is it's the not a
procurement we're providing
funds for hiring and training
used to carry out projects of
lasting value.
Right so we're providing funds.
Requests right.
I'm sorry the Mr chair Senator
Ivey disorder could not hear you
some some here are providing
grants is that correct
essentially yes Mr chair.
The legislative branch directors
on the permanent.
Mr chair and senator Ivey Soto
that that is my understanding.
So requests don't have to.
Bill under the current code
number I don't understand why
you need an exemption from the
calico if you're not subject to
the procurement code red message
part about.
Mr chair Senator Ivy Soto I I
guess I feel like that is the
conundrum where in.
Mr chair and senator so that's
one of the but one of the points
that the cabinet secretary
brought up is that they're being
shoe horned into this
procurement code when in fact
they don't need to be in the
procurement code and I don't
know if Mr Mike more Tate and
zoom who would also like to help
answer this question and so
trying to get them away from
this shoe horned piece that
they're in to help them the best
Mr Hayden.
Yes thank you senator element
and chairman and members of the
committee the answer the
question is it's really not the
the grant distribution is being
procured it's the services and
the services have been dean
General Services not
professional services so they go
through state purchasing the
funding is really secondary it
doesn't matter what is funding
the services the procurement of
the services is where we come in
and I have to admit that YCC is
struggled with this procurement
for about eight years and offer
Sir the offers are not very
sophisticated and as a result
they miss things they don't
answer questions correctly and
they wind up being rejected I
think the program that the
agency would has reference that
for Grantchester Putian maybe a
solution of that so that the
offers no longer miss the
requirements and and they are
have a better chance of
succeeding.
But Mr chairman Senator mail our
Mr Edmund M. as work I've I
guess what I'm struggling with
though is that as I read the
statute.
And and so the objectives I'm
sorry about the powers.
And other commission I'm looking
at nine dash five the best sex.
So the commission he expects
they can accept test devices
grants and donations from others
well that's not the procurement
code.
A request assistance and staff
support from the department
that's not the pandemic of.
Thank you employees such person
is necessary provisions.
Thank you all right such person
as necessary to carry out
provisions of the New Mexico
country use conservation act
that's not your income.
Our responsibility for the
administration plantation
conservation projects.
That's not your income.
What happens in long term
residential facilities that
house the members are
supervisors that's not your
Nico.
One thing is they can contact
I'm not not not not act.
Sanchez and funding sources for
support not not that we can help
some planes we are in part of
the majorities of the
prevention.
Yeah I
terms of.
Better understanding of what
your products.
Mr chairman Senator Ivey Soto
miss what.
Yes thank you Senator Ivy Soto
and Mr chair members of the
committee I believe that is
covered under the first
paragraph where it states that
the New Mexico YCC Commission
will provide a process to hire
you.
Hire and train use.
I'm sorry I don't transaction
are you referring to that I
don't see that that is in the
first paragraph I believe I'm
going to bring it up on my end.
I think what I do see is that
there are Sanchez will apply to
the commission for project
approval.
Right but but.
When you're approving rejecting
a projects.
It seems to me that which
ultimately doing is giving a
grant for them to carry out the
objectives of the project but
also sponsor.
Is it.
In government that's a
procurement.
State agency best opportune
federal agency that's document.
Recognize.
recognized in American of this
opportunity you've got nonprofit
organization what products will
be chair but it.
You know it really meant that
I'm I'm I'm really struggling to
find out where the of the
procurement code comes in with
what you did.
So Mr chairman Senator Ivey Soto
I think what I hear you
correctly you're wondering what
goods and services would be
procured that would exempt them
with this bill am I correct yes
exactly what we're ones
representing words ending of
this planet on insurance I can't
vote for a bill I don't know
what what's happening.
And so this one of my corrected
with the procurement of goods
and services we do would be the
website maintenance or or
bringing up a new website in
addition to forms for hiring is
something that could be sent out
for goods and services.
Is to my understanding agency
what.
Yes Hermio
So and Mr chairman members of
the committee that would be
considered procurement.
To be considered procurement
something that everybody else
has to follow right and they do
a website.
This will be procurement
something everybody else has to
follow when they when they do
that.
I am still struggling to find
out why this is such a burden
money and and not everybody
else.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto
I guess those are questions I
have to.
Well it seems that one of this
is this is not a well conceived
thank you very much.
Many questions the missing one.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So I am looking at the letter to
us from can Ortiz Garcia is our
campus secretary for general
services.
what as a secretary Ortiz is
saying that both himself the
General Services Department and
the state procurement division
are in agreement that for this
particular organization up there
saying that the procurements
performed by YCC do not lend
themselves to any current method
of procurement under the co.
In fact the state.
General Services Department and
the state purchasing division
have been forced to cooperate to
shoehorn their procurements into
existing methods which do not
always achieved and set for.
So they have their own non
reverting fund YCC for such
projects and it appears this
fund could be more effectively
utilize through the property
exemption for the procurement.
So of this bill reduces the
burden on both the state
purchasing division and YCC to
create a procurement for
administering grants while
greatly increasing YCC
operational capacity and helping
more used to be hired and
invested in New Mexico so I I'm
not sure that we have.
I I know etcetera secretary
Ortiz is not able to be here I
think we heard from mark Payton
but I believe there are other
organizations or other
situations like this where we
have exempted them from the
procurement code for reasons
that sounds quite reasonable to
me so if market rate can mention
other organizations where
they've.
Are there exempt from the
procurement code perhaps the
committee would understand
better what this request is I
certainly support we have
trouble enough getting are used
to work getting them to a work
for the state of this
organization is a great
organization I want to help them
succeed not continue to put
government regulations in front
of them I'm just surprised that
so many of us want to do that Mr
chair if I could ask mark Payton
if you can shed more light on
this.
Mr Mr chairman of Senator
Stewart thank you for letting me
Madam on this first of all let
me apologize on behalf of
secretary Ortiz who had a
conflict with legislative
session couldn't attend today I
am attending on his behalf this
is an anomaly this particular
type of procurement I don't know
of others that are similar I
have not run across them
I have not researched whether or
not this particular procurement.
Who is outside the procurement
code in fact what I'm willing to
do if if that's okay with the
committee and with YCC is
research the question of whether
this grant programs outside the
procurement code and the if it
is then we don't need the
exception.
Etcetera etcetera economy of
this is Joe's Estrada center
Stewart you still have the floor
I I just want to recognize the
times I clock and if there is
consideration
Mr Hayden's question to roll
over to the next hearing perhaps
allow the sponsor to gather more
information because there seem
to be right around may questions
but I I'm not so cutting off the
right center store you have
before well you know I'm ready
to do a do pass but if that's
going to that's not going to
work then well let's roll it
over and get some more answers I
just think it's kind of
outrageous that we you know
her romps we want all the
government regulations we want
to stop something for making it
easier for a group of youth and
yet you know we're trying to
undo regulations in other ways
you know we just have everyone
blocking it so I'm disappointed
stay in the committee and it's
fine for us to roll it over I'm
sure Senator Hotmail can come
back with the more arrows in his
quiver.
Senator Stewart anyone else on
the committee on this issue
before the chair retains a
motion reasons.
We're seeing the committees in
recess we'll see Mr chair thank
you Mr chairman thank you thank
you very much.
