Enrollment two please let me
know that there were some good
market value Chief Justice in
your remarks yesterday this is
sherry some of those or there is
also important to note that this
committee a lot of work last
session I was recognized in our
on this bill will be with the
other in the final days of the
pandemic.
The majority is we're I think
our appreciate very much
recognize a lot of that was a
project we're hearing that we
have
they came together so you the
interesting part for me there's
there's a number of things one
is when we were those hearings
of Clarence right now over the
last year we had this meeting
then there is the the the
murders in Albuquerque that
resulted in the rest of the
percentage of clearance dollars
he was somewhere in the fifty
high fifties low sixty percent
hi I'm a.
At the time of
the fact that Los crucis pers
right was in the nineties and
issue today K. twelve these
hearings the fact that the
status quo for up to ninety
percent in the third point there
that I was like maintenance then
take a change in the law of for
us to do that too often times
are problems this committee of
us we need to pass a law to do
this we will pass on this year's
is exposing discussing and
perhaps creating that
environment with this change
happens where the laws are in
place the new so it was good
press conference with the the
this committee got a lot of
credit for.
All up there sure we're going to
send this tell you maybe not the
topic this is what it shows is
also was the topic gay of Sears
governor's criticism on down the
dust of the.
That may not be more about
presentation but the reason
we're talking about the issues.
There are more so all right we
can get started with workforce
David Abbey two thousand
thirteen this is free for the
first of the bills that you all
here today are all built in the
past three seasons Committee
they were all built into our
back here for reasons that.
Because the distance of burn of
the usual salary increase for
but what you're doing briefly I
know that the the president
said.
I.
All the discovery I.
What time of of little get the
recipe out here I do hope you
feel are important because of
Chief Justice of course remote
sensibility to all present from
here by simply because of this a
much of anything from your side
to Senate over to is intended to
increase salaries.
Passed last session.
Possible.
And the.
We have a better insurance
issues on it this time around
but
The issue that I regular they
and always will serve as a
symbol of
federal the.
We often times have fifty sixty
applicants for federal agencies.
Here in New Mexico.
Get some of the five years I I.
When we get a state that allows
crews were looking for two or
three hours recently we have I.
That is because we reasons job
loss and room for those who get
six hours of federal salaries.
Good qualified workers need
issue but once of arsenal of
legislation and has over.
Thank you so much chairman and
members of the committee.
As the sponsor and the chair
indicated we spent a lot of time
with this bill last year and
things haven't changed
remarkably I think there is some
progress as the chair indicated
for example in Los crucis they
were up slightly larger number
of applicants in the latest
vacancy but as chief I sit on a
number of the nominating
commissions as does senior
justice Vigil and I have been on
nominating commissions that
still only have one or two
applicants and that's where the
real challenge lies here is that
we need to figure out how to in
a multitude of ways encourage
people from civil private
practice in particular to take
the bench we often have district
attorneys and public defenders
who
you know kind of step up to the
call but drawing people from the
civil practices particularly
complicated and if you think
about the kinds above the laws
of the state of New Mexico and I
can say this to the to the
members that are here to serve
you're all lawyers if you think
of the orange box.
which are all of our statutes.
That's right not lawyers are
just so.
The orange books our staff did
you act like you you do yeah.
The statutes are these orange
box in its in its yeah the what
the is being Vanna white for me.
We have a multitude of those
books one chapter is criminal
law.
One chapter less than a minute
one chapter very very small is
children's.
And another very small pieces
family law and the rest is this
broad category of civil.
And that's where we're really
missing pieces of the puzzle to
have a really diverse broadly
representative judiciary that
can take on all manner of cases
oil and gas water business
dissolution complex injury and
litigation and those are the
folks that were really missing
right now in this recruitment
process and the reason I think
frankly we're missing them is
based on a twenty seventeen
study by the state bar where the
survey that lawyers across the
state about what their salaries
were and solo practitioners in
twenty seventeen we're making
more annually than the Chief
Justice of the New Mexico
Supreme Court much less somebody
who is inclined to become a
trial court judge and that
hasn't changed over time even
with the increase that was
provided for us last year and
house bill two we are still
behind the curve for solo
practitioners much less partners
in in bigger law firms or
plaintiffs attorneys the the gap
is still market so we strongly
believe as as you all know that
increasing salaries is one of
the pieces of the puzzle to have
a much more diverse judiciary in
the state of New Mexico that can
bring all kinds of skill sets
not only to the bench but also
in training other judges which
we think you having judges who
have real expertise in a
particular area being able to
leverage their expertise to
teach other judges is also a
really good practice.
On Senate bill two this year
you'll know it is center.
It is much.
is because last year we had a
bunch of retirement language in
the bill as well we were trying
to improve judicial retirement
the J. R. A. and the mRNA.
The the legislature went a long
way to helping to improve the J.
R. A. there is still work to do
on the magistrate retirement it
is not a feature of the bill
this year we want to kind of let
the dust settle and see what the
investments are doing to improve
those retirements but that is
the the main reason that this
bill is much smaller than that
of last year.
just briefly to walk through
what the numbers look like.
And
The federal magistrate salary
which we are asking to be
tethered to magistrates being
the lowest level trial judge in
the federal system for us that
you take the highest court in
the state and pair those
together so I I feel like that's
a good way for us to wait you
know being accused of over reach
but the salary for the federal
magistrates has gone up in the
last years and so we're trying
to make up for that gap this
year in this particular bill and
house bill two.
that the Supreme Court salary
for the at the justice would go
to two hundred and thirteen
thousand nine hundred ninety two
dollars and then it's a
percentage for each quarter
below that importantly taking
the District Court judge two
hundred ninety three thousand
one hundred and twenty seven
dollars and seventy eight cents.
that number will still will put
New Mexico in the middle of the
pack nationally does not put us
at the top of puts us right into
the middle because as time
passes all of the other states
that typically appropriately
compensate their Judiciary
continue to move those numbers
north for to account for cost of
living so put to sea in in the
middle of the pack but we
believe that that number then
puts us closer to being on par
with solar practitioners in the
state of New Mexico and
hopefully will afford us the
opportunity to have really
diverse judges with broad
experience join the judiciary.
with that Mr chair and sponsor
I'm happy to answer any and all
questions that I can but I did
want to keep things brief
because this committee has heard
the bills for.
With the with the vote last year
the.
For.
The
welcome to point out the bill
also the really.
Highs six hours so we comparable
to those hours invention but out
we are highest judges at the
lowest.
Federal system.
For years we always compare
ourselves to other states and
always as a business person.
Judges of the settlement of
those why because I got a better
salaries and work that way you
can move the state to state
gesture.
Six of the sense what does make
sense to very within our own
state that we will be with us as
a competition they are so this
by zoom
is the second thing we both like
to point out this is the problem
yes and that is what what are
the issues well to the where are
structured is always working.
So she just recorded but it is a
proportion of percent reduction
from that so that this is
something less than the where
does this.
And offices all the way down and
we've always got to start with
the masses.
Ladders our of.
Of four years of.
What we call the help of the
mattresses very.
The seller structures this
portion of the staff and.
Legislative perspective the
governor's vetoes last year
maybe that problem more from the
what is one of our.
Mr chair just under a hundred
and seventeen thousand dollars.
and as well as the like all the
other judicial decisions and
actions are are
these are required really any
formal education whatever
assignment in a research project
but I always tell you that I
will always school clothes are
very the the like always all of
best reluctance recent state
fusion sellers because what is.
And the the nationals are we
getting to a live.
And then I think it matches up
ought to recognize that when
you're getting salaries a
hundred seventy thousand dollars
a year for matches you are
lawyers that that that that is
going to stop.
People score is gonna have
lawyers.
At the end so we talked about
salary survey I would be
surprised by the fact that right
this is our what lawyers
communities I will retire.
Your words and actions judges
and we will do so this the house
at the expo so.
The quickly that is because you
showgrounds those reserves for
bill your support I quite a few
I don't
know that there's really going
to all of you the odds but I do
think it's important to
recognize just I'll just be able
to just be able to access all
the services.
Mr chairman thank thank you for
much for the opportunity I I'll
sorry she's comments and she's
an excellent presentation and
also see for she said thank you
yep.
is our oppositions are in
opposition all right yes so if.
Chairman members all right as
permitted schools.
Hi tech it's not as of the Los
Alamos and I'm speaking as a
private citizen with the strong
knowledge of the judiciary this
bill as part of this unique
unified judiciary budget which
is planned vetted and presented
to the legislature's but is not
unified if it the couples the
magistrates from the pay package
I understand the merits of the
bill and I agree and I admire
all my cough former colleagues
here in the District Court and I
understand that we do need good
candidates but the coupling the
magistrate is an injustice to
the sixty seven magistrate
judges hardworking magistrate
judges I know you will be
considering magistrate
qualifications and making our
records the the magistrate
courts courts of records please
consider keeping the magistrates
as part of the pandemic.
Thank you that would be a
with us anyone else in
opposition.
All right three questions this.
so those are so just
Representative committees of
roster we we drive over very
very.
I will.
Operated by
we ask that those who refuse to
sign the Vance we don't this
will ensure that we don't put
our members of the audience
who's being Representative that
we don't have time that it takes
the time we have that is really
important for us to work on this
committee which is oftentimes
intending providing.
Bills.
Have that
we have this as a public.
So we're encouraging.
and comments we have an email.
Addresses for sure that the.
Comments.
Do that we also just the size we
can coordinate The presentation.
Anticipated time considered part
of the legislation all of the
Caribbean islands in I know it's
early in the session.
Overview for rural parts of
strictly today with increasing
that will just sure I centers
of.
I thank very much Mr chairman
thank you chief justice for
being here and for your
presentation thank you a senior
justice the for the work that
you did.
prior to
the legislation in the Senate.
to the Chief Justice of it
So what the the effect of this
bill as I as I understand it
first of all is that the.
The Supreme Court and social
justice would make twenty
thirteen thousand dollars a
change.
The Chief Justice fixed two
thousand dollars more than that
so it be put fifteen thousand.
They will.
Yes yes.
The.
Court of appeals in would make
about two hundred two thousand.
Two hundred and three thousand
project and District Court would
make about a hundred ninety two
thousand or less.
New Mexico for a hundred eighty
two thousand with us and in
metal court they are required to
the judges they have the
attorneys correct correct Mr
chair Senator and
and so the and and by the way I
I I believe a federal district
judge.
So far messages mixed with
thirteen thousand I believe
federal district judge makes to
around two hundred thirty one
thousand.
which.
Candidly would be my preference
of where we would go.
And I and I appreciate that you
don't want to over reach up
madam
justice but but you know we.
I would like to think that our
Our highest level.
Judges
should not be compared to the
lowest level in the federal
system.
And and you know it's it's up I
can't believe we're trying to
we're trying to not just attract
so practitioners right but also
people who have a similar
practice.
in a and so this from the do
complex litigation.
That's really.
Out of where we should be
looking at hi I personally
believe the up.
I will come into there's I think
one of the things that.
Will be making a difference the
strip on on people apply for
judgeships.
And that is a constitutional
amendment of those passes last
year constitution minute that
the chairman of this committee.
Worked on for defied as we
correctly around fifteen years.
Slower.
Here are you
Well certainly you you've got
given up and and we got.
Ultimately and you know that
right and that's a
constitutional amendment that
provides that people will serve
on the bench for at least a
year.
Prior to facing potential our us
our private facing their their
partisan election.
Right because because a lot of
the vacancies that happen.
for water is another tend to
happen in the last year of a
term there are well just prior
to the election.
right and so so you're asking
someone it makes it very easy
for public defender or
prosecutor who are generally
fungible in their positions.
To step out of the role.
To go on the bench and if they
if they don't make it they go
back to their old job and pick
up whatever stack of files is
sitting on their desk and
whereas where someone private
practice has to find someone
else to.
take a fax right then and so.
Right so so we've got we've got
multiple things happening.
Of what we're trying to address
this issue and I do think
that they're all listening.
I don't think it's one in
instead the other in and I I was
very pleased that that
customer passed by word that for
many years and
I believe I want what what I
was.
Associate deputy secretary of
state and.
The bill came up in a Senate
committee and and the
representative survive just was
busy in his own committee and I
presented the bill for
whether or not you know the
right because of session for the
so so that's I think I think
that helps I'd I do have a.
Apple.
Questions though on the Google
New Mexico.
And the first is
Are we providing any guidance on
what the administrative
salaries.
Shell be or or is it just simply
set of the budget every year at
this point Mr Chairman just.
Mister chairman Senator first
thank you for your your comments
and I understand exactly your
perspective on the District
Court judges you know we we
negotiate we figure out our past
and so I don't disagree but I
also understand where we are.
on the decoupling and where
magistrates are so magistrates
salaries last were set last year
by a function of both house bill
two and some other items that
were passed by the legislature.
And there is a constitutional
requirement that this body can
not reduce the salary of
magistrate judges.
So they are very much protected
at the salary range that they
have now shall not go backwards
so those two things couple
together or give
Make it very sure what the
magistrate salaries are going
forward.
And one of the things that I
have to I've talked to
magistrate judges about this
idea of decoupling all year.
And you know I've made I've
given my word to the magistrates
when the time comes that there
is a need for raises which there
isn't a need right now we we
don't struggle to find people to
run for magistrate court we
simply don't it's a very
different landscape than the
District Court but when that
need arises I will come to this
body and stand in full support
of them and their need for a
raise through house bill two and
having conversations like the
these with the Senate and house.
UP Mr chairman Ajit just I look
at it but I I recall correctly
it's actually you can't reduce
their salary during their term
for several at that that's a
fair that is a Mr chair Senator
that is fair and and so that's
four years without a reduction
yes and they are and they are on
the presidential cycle.
the good for a second.
Good for okay all of it so I
just had to think about where we
were last September Mister
chairman Senator.
in order to so I do have a
question the lower.
Well I understand that we don't
we don't run the state we don't
generally have problems finding
people to run for magistrate
there's usually a sufficient
supply of retired police
officers and other people who
would like to run for that
position.
but we do have one magistrate
court.
With the judges are required to
Beatrix.
And and I'm wondering if if.
It that maybe should be.
I there are paired with the
metro court if they are required
to be attorneys.
Right or or if there is or or or
maybe they should be kept
somewhere in that in that in
that scale Mr chairman in fact
if you're seventy Mr.
Mr chairman and senator the
chairman I spent sometime this
summer talking about that very
issue I don't think that the
answer to the question is trying
to figure out who's a lawyer
who's a magistrate and then
having them tethered to that
descending order of Hey because
we also have lawyers in
magistrates courts where they're
not required to be years so that
becomes a bit money I have
discussed with the chairman that
I think maybe the time has come
for the Los crucis magistrate
court to become a metropolitan
court they're required to be
lawyers at this point in the
those that were grandfathered in
our cycling out of that.
the way that the statute is
written right now for
metropolitan courts I think the
idea was when there was a a
statute passed that said we lost
we in a municipality reaches X.
population it will become a
metro court and that's what we
all thought the population in
New Mexico was expanding and we
know it is contracting yeah I
need who knew it's contracting
and so I think it's as an
adjustment to that particular
requirement that would then
capture Los crucis and make it a
metropolitan court so that's
something that the chairman I've
talked about and I've also
talked to the magistrate judges
in Los crucis about that it is
not part of our our package this
year it came about I think too
late from the judiciary's
process in the way that we've
that and address bills but I
think that's a conversation to
be had.
Yeah and and and this gentleman.
Matches up to two thousand seven
I do think I do think that that
there are there are some
benefits
with that being a a false
report.
that would force have the
ancillary impact of of
the polishing the fiscal point
within that county.
Eight thousand part of what
creative about that that's part
of what distinguished much
product worked.
I created an invalid.
That is a.
Mr chair Senator I think that's
up for and the the legislature
to determine is whether that
that would been in capsule eight
in the municipal court on our.
and navigating all of the home
rule issues this is something
that we haven't thought through
compel daily at the particulars
of Insurance much of us there
and and billion accounting they
are the.
Wrong wrong I.
This report is.
and and so yes would be would
be.
Right those would have that
impact as well
but the.
But certainly given that they
have their own rules that you
wouldn't have a roll that
focused on building.
Which is not always the of help
for having perspective.
On the rules maybe that the
table personal sometimes.
But it's in one building for one
of the.
And.
I'm not I'm not sure Mr chair
Senator I'm not I'm not sure
what you're alluding to at at
this about one little set okay.
Of the public right so to do
that you've got will serve
seven.
Which is specific to the to the
left I.
And and we have one building
that's my fault yes okay I now
follow what you're saying yes
yeah so something happens that
building.
And also we have a rule change.
The court rules.
Right where is I think you get
more you can get better
perspective that there were
there at least two.
Right to be more policy covers.
Mr chair Senator fair
observation yeah right so it was
it's but but I
thank you very much for for for
sticking with this and
Hopefully we will we will get
the set forth for this year
thank you Mr here's Senator
Senator Wirth.
Thank you Mr chairman I mean if
I was on one of the four no
votes.
So you really want to know.
I was thinking.
It's not surprising and chance
to fix all Maez.
We will like it this go round
you never know you never know.
It
was Stephanie long here maybe
something changed will see what
happens
Mr chair and and justice I
appreciate you coming for this I
do have have concerns you know
it's been laid out that somehow
you know pay is is one of the
major factors here and I just I
wonder you know there's a lot of
things that that play into this
but I do I do wonder is somehow
raising rate is the judiciary
the judicial branch gonna become
more efficient we're gonna be
able to get some of the backlog
chip away at some of that
backlog do we see that as being
a benefit of doing this.
Mr chair Senator in my state of
the judiciary yesterday I I walk
through lots of numbers related
to what some people would call
backlog the District Court the
metropolitan court and the
magistrate courts are clearing
more than a hundred percent of
cases each year so this idea
that there is a significant
backlog that is continuing to
grow I think is belied by the
numbers if we are clearing a
greater rate in the that the
numbers of of new filings so I
think that's an important bit of
information to add to this
conversation but certainly if
you have a a judiciary that has
all of the representation that
it needs in terms of K. type.
if you get caught that complex
litigation that comes in the
door you have somebody that's
fully prepared to handle that
and can move it in a more
expedited way than somebody that
is wholly unfamiliar with that
kind of litigation and that
those are the pieces that we are
missing now
it's it's challenging I think
when you have a particular our
judges that have general
jurisdiction docket said they're
hearing.
Children's court cases juvenile
detention criminal and then all
of civil all of the the orange
box.
it's it's it's challenging to
have individuals who don't have
experience in those things that
are just much bigger and much
more complicated so the smaller
things get addressed in in a
timely fashion but those big
complex issues can can language
a bit because it's hard to to
gain that expertise and so we're
looking to bring people in that
already have the expertise and
then we also have a companion
bill this year that focuses on
judicial education to help lift
everybody up in the judiciary so
that we provide those tools to
everyone that's already in the
judiciary and and Mr chair and
justice are more cases being
played out by the A. offices and
and that's how some of the
backlog is prevented I mean is
that something that's being done
now
to help with some of that I mean
is that something that we're
we're seeing orders is that not
the case Mister chairman Senator
it depends every DA is
independent and independently
elected so we we don't it's it's
very different than the public
defenders that are very unified
system in every day and has a
different philosophy about
please there are counties in New
Mexico I can think of chief
judge Angie Schneider who is
here where the DA there really
doesn't engage in clean to go
she Asians at all and as a
result chief judge nighters one
of the busiest trial court
judges in the state if not the
country she's in Prague all of
the time.
In other counties you have days
that are more amenable to please
and so that can help speed
things along but often times
where they're engaging in please
there also district attorneys
have much bigger dockets as well
they're bringing forward a lot
more cases
but it Bernalillo county which
is the largest number of cases
no matter how you kind of slice
and dice numbers in New Mexico
Albuquerque is going to have the
largest number we have engaged
this year in a pilot program
that requires the defendant in
the in the state the district
attorney to meet before very
very early in the case it's
mandatory so that there could be
a discussion of either a plea
resolution or dismissal
dismissal of charges and
Bernalillo county that is reduce
the number of cases going to
trial by forty nine percent so
there is some benefit to that if
you can get the parties together
early to talk about those kinds
of resolutions and Mr chair
justice you you mentioned
caseload is there any way to
also tie pay to case of the
judges that are doing more of
the work is that something
that's been explored
Mister chairman Senator no every
every judge has on their own
particular challenges we have
more variety of case closed
across the state and if we were
suddenly to say because you have
twelve hundred basis instead of
twenty three hundred cases that
you're going to be paid less we
would not be able to recruit
anybody to do to to do that that
work judges that have oftentimes
smaller dogs because they're in
a very rural community they're
the ones who take the overflow
we and we are needing to take a
case from a court that has
caught the judges have conflicts
and so we supplemented their
dockets by way of orders often
signed by me transferring those
case the judges said that
everybody is doing and mentor
even.
Out of work and thank you Mr
chair thank you justice and I I
do have just more of a COVID
here
you know I think being a judges
is not much different than than
what we do I mean most of us
volunteer quite a bit of our
time for per diem and it's just
about civil service you know
sitting in the seat there's no
telling I mean I couldn't put a
monetary value to it on how much
money it actually cost me to do
this and it's it's an important
job it's something that many of
us here to very serious and we
we take great pride in doing so
that you know I think it's kind
of disappointing.
Into the into a little bit to me
that you know we don't say that
more that he might take a pay
cut to be a judge but it's about
so services about getting back
to your community and and that
may be something that you just
have to figure stepped up and go
do it because that's something
that you've been called to
refill that's important for your
community so you know I I think
that's great we should
compensate judges maybe we
should cap the salaries that
trial attorneys making we'll get
more from signing up to the
judges.
But.
But you know and that's just
that's just something that I've
thought of for a long time that
it is a service of I wish more
judges with would sign it just
with that being in mind because
almost every single person here
goes up quite a bit to be thank
you Mr chair thank you.
Eight thousand is.
No one that point.
Number thank you Mr chair I
thought you had a moving towards
possibly voting for the bill but
just a couple comments I
appreciate what you what you're
saying Center personal about I
rigorous public service and I
told our judges on the first
judicial district when I've
spoken to them.
It is a huge public service what
they get to deal with I will
assure you the the case is that
the end up on the civil side is
where I practice those and
judges have to decide you know
are ones that you know lawyers
can't sit down data resolved
very challenging parties and
there's a huge public service
component to it
I have a former law partner
who's now the chief judge's
first initial act was.
The chat.
you know what I will tell you I
mean it is there was a big for
him to do that and I think he's
the kind of jobs that
have someone who's practiced
twenty years or so to come in
but I do think public service.
I am.
The wide that finally we are
again we've been talking about
this I've been here nineteen
years and we've been talking
about it forever.
Right and there's been studies
that all tell us and we don't do
anything and so I think this is
an example of the judicial
branch needing to us needing to
help them have the tools to do
the job they need to do one of
the constitution lifelines we
need to do a better job for the
legislative branch I think
judiciary's less than three
percent of the total budget were
less than one half of one of the
total budget I think that's
finally starting to happen and
so my comment is this I just
want to stress the importance of
holding the tied to the federal
rates on this bill is a native
forward I heard pushback to that
from some of the finance
committee and I just think that
would be a huge mistake because
it's gonna be for off you guys
with all the back again
trying to make adjustments were
as if we have that time to the
federal right I just think this
issue once and for all other
full yeah goes away so that was
the first thing the other thing
I just like to I appreciate
judge cocido said he's here
representing yourself I'm
curious of the magistrates taken
a position on this legislation
as a magistrates association and
the reason I ask is the the
chair alluded to this I I was a
program number magistrates were
very concerned about this bill
including the magistrates
because of the salary going up
dramatically and very much
changing those who will run for
those positions some security if
the magistrates associations
taken access Mr chair Senator
good question I have been in
regular communication with the
president of the magistrates
association judge foster for the
last.
Nine months and they do not have
a unified position on on this
bill because there are those
that have shared the concerns of
of object Senator and there are
those who have the concern that
they will be out of a job
eventually if the salary for the
magistrate judge's keeps going
up so there there is not a
unified position from the
magistrate court judges
association on this bill Mr I'd
appreciate hearing that also
just want to say I appreciate
just because Saddam's comic and
just expressing you know your
position again it allows us to
have the conversation of the
automatic notes here on behalf
of magistrate Association and we
don't really know other than
this hearing from you so again I
think this is a important I
really from then the chair and I
think we're going to do
everything we can to we're gonna
get across the line of questions
that get signed so we're gonna
do everything we can thank you
need the most legislative chime
in a little bit to myself let's
just be Frank about what
happened at the end of last
session we had passed this bill
and then we have passed some
other judicial increases that
were in the budget
because the governor's veto this
but didn't veto others that for
we had a really we had an
unintended result I'm sure the
governor did intended and it was
a strange kind of veto to have
put it was a half pregnant kind
of deal so she she we don't have
and didn't be to the whole thing
so the measures got a pretty
sizeable increase last year
and Justice you know if you have
a specific numbers on that it
was it was a it was a very large
increase because we didn't do
Google right right Mr chairman
and look at it already happened
here but I think it was on the
order of thirteen percent
seventeen percent seventeen
those measures are seventy
percent increase last year yeah
you're looking shocked Senator
but but the reason that happens
because governor didn't veto the
decoupling part right so so it's
a massive increase last year and
and that's not what we intended
all frankly.
We intend to the opposite and we
should be Frank about that so
that was the.
unfortunately not good
communication between this
branch of the executive branch
on this issue but but to have an
unintended result.
I share a sense of questions
Senator Pirtle is not here I
share his concern and I just let
all of you know of and I've
shared with all of the very
directly and I appreciate having
very candid conversations with
you Chief Justice seven before
you
Justice now the help she judges
about the issue of a backlog.
I have to I have to rely upon my
own experience you although I I
use my own recent case example
of a case that took seven years
to get from a judgment through
the appellate process.
that's the heartbreaking when
the judgment for the shots at
the travelers to care a little
bit ago it's heartbreaking when
your client is an injured child
who needs medical attention
and and needs care and pain of
profound ways and that child's
gonna wait seven years.
Of all just tell all the candy
with all of you I hired Senator
were to be a guardian Adlai item
for that child who when he was
injured was three years old and
you know seven years later is
now ten he missed an opportunity
to have a lot of care and a lot
of education Lara needs met and
so you know that that backlog
has profound consequences to
people's lives as much as
travelers may take it on the
chin from time to time but it
it's it's it's my reality so I I
I and I bring it up I talk with
you and I appreciate you
allowing me to do so with with
all the respect in the world
that we've got to get these
these cases resolved sooner and
we talk about ways to do that
I'll give some examples but when
we when we say that we're.
Clearing a hundred percent as I
understand that achieve that
just means we say you're clearly
hopes that means that that
you're disposing of cases as
quickly as are being filed but
that's not going to address the
backlog the list we get all of
our representatives that
represent a fair way to think
about it not exactly Mr chairman
and in fact we're clearing more
than a hundred percent it's it's
more along the lines of a
hundred and eighty percent.
and and that's the national
standard we and you have judges
in the second judicial district
for example I have twenty three
hundred cases.
You can only do so many things
in an entire day with twenty
three hundred cases.
The judges in the first having
very similar docket sizes and so
you can only move things so
quickly into the goal is always
to clear more than what is
coming in.
the the length of time it gets
to trial I'll be devil's
advocate because I think I can
have that conversation with you
Mr chairman the length of time
it gets to trial is often
dictated by the lawyers it is
not dictated by the judge it's a
that passage of time is you know
certainly judges can be meaner
we talked about sanctions
earlier today while we were
waiting for the members to to
show up and so we judges can be
more strident about no you're
you're going to trial but that
doesn't really in deer Isle
judges in the eyes of of the
lawyers
on the appellate process side
that is a slow process and we're
looking with for ways to improve
that performance by the time
those cases get to the New
Mexico Supreme Court and they
are the most complex legal
issues you can think of and so I
don't think we want to sacrifice
speed.
For accuracy for speed and
thoughtfulness for speed but it
doesn't mean there isn't room
for improvement in in all areas
but when you have you know trial
court judges with dockets that
are that big
it's it's not as though we can
move things more quickly and
frankly you know we don't have
the building space and we don't
have that the that kind of the
political will to suddenly
double the size of our judiciary
either so we have to there's
there's tension there between
processing cases and getting to
resolution but we're doing more
than a hundred percent which
does chip away at whatever
anybody defines as as backlog.
Backlog I think it's something
that is a little bit ill defined
because if in case you know for
example a case in in the trial
court was filed in.
twenty fifteen it may still be
there it's not backlog it's it's
getting the case to trial and
there's too many moving parts to
simply say the judges are doing
their job.
And I I'm I'm please were
rejoined by center program I I
was following up on your
questions about that the time it
takes to get cases resolved and
I appreciate your state right to
try to travelers our response
for getting case trial by the
example I gave you know that's
that's a judgment from the
judgment the resolution seven
years that's too long and and
and I gave the example of a
personal injury case but before
I did personal injury work I
used to do a lot of business
work if you have a business to
speak you're trying to fight
with your partner and get a
contract resolver of vendor or
you try to dissolve the
corporation you know they would
this flows business to to a
crawl right so the implication
Water written Peter the state
Senate worth and I working very
hard many of all the water
issues how do you so of land
without crystal how to use how
you sell land and farmland
without on page water rights are
right in the values of the the
delay that takes to get the
process resolved this's has
profound implications throughout
the process and I I I'd like
something you said but we should
talk about this we up maybe we
need to re think the structure
so there's not a political will
but I imagine other states have
maybe more judges maybe they
create panels that have maybe
more judges in here your panels
on different things the the
possibilities are endless I
would think that you know
they're limited only by our
creativity and our vision and
and yet I've talked about this
for all all give you all the
teas on the committee of I'm
gonna work this session to
emanate the statewide election
of appellate judges because very
candidly in the last five six
seven years we've had I don't
know how many court appeals
judges appointed new we've had
deadline what what's that line
Mr line court appeals judges
we've had what three judges on
the Supreme Court at least I all
five of the five of us doing to
the court in the last four years
and two months yeah so you got
the entire service for a spring
court in that nine out of the
Scorpios who appointed in the
last several years who are bent
up.
Waited in running statewide
elections and the guy who's done
that maybe alone the rooms are
all to it's a it's an enormous
half you've done it you've done
it you're going to every duck
race every balloon fiesta and
every inch allotted dinner and
can when you're doing that
you're not hearing cases and
you're not deciding cases and
you're not writing briefs and I
think it's absurd
and so I'll be the session
working up to eliminate the
statewide election I've given
you all some idea that the
judges when they're appointed
should be judges and sitting on
the bench for hearing cases and
making them politicians for a
year or two years or three years
is really inexcusable in our
system so that that's that's
another way to get a backlog of
results that are poorly we just
need to be thinking about ways
we can do that I'll just tell
you you all here too much about
my daughter's but my daughter
clerk with the federal courts
last couple years.
The federal courts published a
list and and and my my daughter
made a point that heard judge
was never to be on the list the
list is a list that's published
a Congress that talks about
judges who are slowing the
disposition of cases and and
that's that's part of an
oversight of the legislative
body the national level I will
tell you that
I've I've learned from listening
to heard about that that's a
pretty effective way to make
sure that things get done and
what we should note is this
there really is no oversight of
the judiciary except this
committee.
you may disagree with that thank
you Mr chairman you know that I
disagree I I I know you and and
and and you're right we have
judicial standards in judicial
performance evaluation
commission and those are much
scarier bodies frankly for
judges and Senate Judiciary show
me the way they they give you do
you.
Yes.
No but I mean we we you have an
incredibly robust oversight of
of your judges you're right they
take the job very seriously we
get vetted by folks in the gets
published in the newspaper
before every election cycle we
are the only group who gets
vetted by an independent body
and it's published in the
newspaper about whether we're
doing our jobs I should be more
careful where were that although
we'll talk about that vetting
process well too because I know
there's criticism of JPEG and
what it is and and how effective
that is to seventy coming up I
promise decision but what I
should be more clear is other
than within the judiciary
policing itself this committee
and is this is our charge where
the judiciary committee our job
is to provide that oversight and
and we're the ones that should
be saying with the we need to do
what we can to give you the
resources in the the rules in
the procedure to make cases move
and and I don't really believe
that the executive it's very
involved I I serve with for
governors and I don't know that
many governors really care too
much about what happened at the
districts of when they get
students you all decide there
where decide against that right
then they care quite a bit but
but other than so
the there was a I want to
reinforce with Senator Wirth
said there has been pushback
I've been working at this for a
couple of years now two three
years I've tied to the photo
right because I I realize that
you all looking around the room
here center Ivey Soto and I
just you and I was in the room
us to the governor for what we
thought was a separation of
powers issue you all rules for
the legislative branch against
the executive branch and I don't
I I do I do that simply point
out that we I don't want to make
the year salaries to be holding
to the executive branch sent and
the land like wise you might
have ruled against us and we
will rule for the executive and
you wouldn't want to have to
have US than controlling your
salaries that way too I think
tied to the federal rate is a
very nice way.
To do what I know Senator Ivy
Soto in trying to do which is
how do we how do you get
salaries structure in a way that
doesn't have a dog in the fight
right.
The salary structure and I think
time to the federal rate is a
good way to do that so that you
don't have a punitive governor
you don't have a punitive
Legislature messing with your
salaries give you also a greater
level of independence I believe
so I think that's a good thing I
bring it up because Senator
Wirth was right we've had pushed
back from the the finance
committee Eric and I understand
they have a reasonable
perspective which is they do not
want to have their hands tied or
have anybody's budget tied to
some process or procedure that
they don't control entirely
themselves and it's not an
illegitimate position but but I
hope that will encouraging our
sense of finances stick to in
this case I think that it's
important to do so so I want to
reinforce Center were on that.
The Center pearl made a point
about time salary to caseload I
think it's important to note
that that that have actually
gonna reinforce what you said
that's that's impossible and I'd
like to help illustrate that'll
but you know center pirtle it we
even when they did the court
does the unified budget again
this is going to probably get a
little resistance here but but
when you look at the unified
budget some of the budgeting is
done based on caseload and how
you assign a case low to
something like that water cases
is Dona ana county where there's
three thousand water claimants
in in one case really is that
one basis that three thousand
cases.
How do you give the judge credit
for that number of cases that
have you assigned the resources
all all do all do medical
malpractice case Senator Wirth
March with that for to spend
those we'll have a roomful of
lawyers fifteen twenty lawyers
on a complex case that's one
case if you have a credit card
that and you have a pro se
litigants who's coming in to
fight their two hundred dollars
credit card bills that's one
case so to say you need to type
case load to resources and been
loitering effort this is
probably I think you said it
just is probably impossible so I
would discourage the notion of
trying to tie K. love K. salary
so
And I just think the the last
thing to is that we I hope this
committee will really make it
our mission this session to.
Put together the best issue we
can as a branch in that in that
salaries is gonna be one part of
it we're gonna talk about any
number of different things and I
hope you'll feel those things
too I I I hope that when
I I know that every judge I know
has that same sense of public
service I I hope that although
that's true I also want to seize
the judges who have years of
experience to have the breadth
of all these at all those orange
wives all that law and and
having our judiciary these days
which is point principally
district attorney's dust and
PED's let's just call it what it
is they're they're forty year
old of lawyers fresh out of
school who were making fifty
sixty seventy thousand dollars a
year now in those positions and
if they can get a District Court
position and earn a hundred
twenty thousand dollars that's a
very nice increase in its
retracted and pointed out if
they lose they just go right
back to the office and pick up
the files again if you're in
private practice you not only
you said you got to be where the
false you got a lot of things
you gotta lay off your staff you
got a closure officer gonna
notify your clients and
withdrawal you'll find some
ridiculous because it's an
enormous undertaking to think
about doing and you're not gonna
do that unless you feel like
you've got some job security in
doing that who built a business
and a career and a law practice
over decades and this as of I'll
give it up and take the chance
that I might get reelected Raul
and and start all over again
so we're doing the right thing
is and it's a good step but I'm
I'm really.
Really encouraging very
confident that at the end of the
session we're gonna have a
better life.
Putting together a judicial
branch so thank you Senator
Stewart.
Are you ready for a motion Mr
chair after pontificating for
just a little better I can
recover the phone of the two
passed Senate bill two thank you
there's a motion for the past
Center every so do you have
something more that you had to
get in there.
You do go.
Thanks for showing up just two
things one is.
What do these just what I want
to clarify was actually Senator
Baca whose to the governor you
an identity through I forgot
welcome yes all all all due
credit.
You you and I attempted to be
friends of the court and we in
that work.
Very valid point.
The court of this and it's just
been decided that that we should
be parties instead of friends
and I.
The the the less.
The other thing is and I'm I'm
not going to make a motion right
now this is the first committee
your put in another committee
but I but I do want to want to
consider
on page three
Lines thirteen through eighteen.
Right that that link was there
for small I don't know that we
need to the nineteen ninety five
language remain in there but it
does say that
I guess having taken care of the
the rest of the of the chain I
personally like to see that to
be exclusive to the magistrates
simply by striking.
of the language on state of mind
thirteen line fourteen the words
fiscal years.
And then striking from justices
on line fourteen.
To the word and on line sixteen.
So that it would simply read the
annual salary for magistrates
Shelby it and then we may want
to go back to step by the
legislature and appropriations
act and then that would that
would simply.
clarified the how it is that the
magistrates would have their
salary the everything has to go
through the appropriation act I
think that's actually one of the
things that
Senator Baca is super clarified
everything just go through the
appropriation act but but it
would it would establish the
methodology for for their south.
And so anyways I just I think
that would make it clear in
terms of magistrates and.
Take out some of his for college
appreciate the suggestion work
within a moment for the five
absolutely yes Sir Stewart as a
motion for to pass a second is
there any objection to do past
motion Senator Pirtle.
No and all other members present
voting yes you do have.
Justice thank you for being here
today.
Thank you everyone and thanks
for the good questions will
convince you eventually Senate
bill forty seven.
Senator Wirth.
The diamond I think you're here
on this.
Hi
Yeah.
We're gonna of we're gonna start
and get a vote to Senate bill
forty so before we lose Senator
Stewart here for clock so of hi
I have a brief opportunity to
visit with one of the sponsors
Center diamond this morning on
this bill kind of understand
this is her first bill in Senate
Judiciary Committee so I see the
eyebrows raise of my colleagues
of please be mindful of that
opportunity.
Your Senate bill forty seven.
Thank you Mr chair on happy to
present Senate bill forty seven
which is you mentioned is a
repeat from two years ago Senate
bill seven bill that passed the
Senate thirty four to six and
went through House Judiciary
just ran out of time on the
floor at the end of the COVID
sessions so we're back I'll just
state.
Quickly what the bill does kind
of like Senator Diamond to kind
of outlined why it's important
and why she's agreed to sign on
to it currently under our law
the department of motor vehicles
has the option and the ability
to suspend driver's licenses for
non payment of penalty
assessments or for someone who
misses a court hearing
on in twenty nineteen to twenty
twenty one New Mexico suspended
over a hundred and eighty three
thousand drivers licenses for
that reason of this bill
basically eliminates that option
I want to be really clear it's
limited to penalty assessments
for missing a court hearing on
page three of the bill are all
the other reasons that a
driver's license can be
suspended
and I'm gonna let Senator
diamonds discussed the policy
reasons for this and what
happens when you know someone is
faced with a driver's license
suspension and then again would
be able to morning calls whose
with fines and fees who can also
talk about some of the policy
thank you thank you Mr chairman
for the opportunity to join you
members and and the opportunity
to sign on to this bill senator
Wirth of this really is a very
narrow focus bill and all it is
doing is removing the language
that allows for the suspension
of driver's licenses under two
conditions failure to appear in
court for failure to pay as we
know with a lot of legislations
equally important as as what it
does is really what it doesn't
do I do want to run through that
it does not change the driver's
obligation to comply with the
original citation it does not
eliminate suspensions for
dangerous drivers so do you why
basis or the in the in the event
of a accrued points on your
driver's license and it does not
limit a court's decision to
impose.
Was those sanctions should they
deem that it's necessary in a
particular case
I think that is a legislator we
have collectively expressed an
interest to push back on
Mexico's rising crime right into
hold our criminals accountable
one thing I hope we could all
agree on is that those with
traffic citations do not fit in
that criminal population that we
need to address and so
really what we're doing is to
making sure that their problems
are not compounded and that we
don't create the cycle but is
simply hard to break out of so I
will let Monica kind of the with
the specifics and thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm so
pleased to be here today I think
that both Senator Wirth and
Senator Diamond did a wonderful
job all I will add it is that
this really puts drivers in a
very difficult position
the you either continue to
drive.
And risk more fines and fees
incarceration
For.
You stop driving you lose access
to basic necessities taking care
of your family going to work the
key is that if somebody can't
drive they can't go to work and
they can't pay their debts so
it's a very sort of round about
way to try and hold people
accountable the court still has
the ability to issue bench
warrants in these cases which we
know from doing an overview of
you know multiple cases in both
but well in three different
counties Dona Ana Santa Fe and
burn a Leo that courts always
issue bench warrants and a
notice to suspend a driver's
license at the same time well
this doesn't get rid of the
bench warrant it gets rid of the
suspended license and it gives
people an opportunity to drive
to court to quash that warrant
so I'm happy to answer any
additional questions if I can
thank you one final thing Mr
chair that I think it's
important that is in this bill
which is the work of this
committee on page two not only
are we making this proactive we
are making it retroactive so
that for those that are out
there was suspended licenses
based on a penalty assessment
section be on page two lines
nine through eighteen allows
them to come in and have their
driver's license reinstated
without paying a reinstatement
fee and again I just want to say
that to carry over from the work
done in this committee two years
ago.
And with that we stand for
questions if you members the
committee question.
Ivey Soto.
I think very much Mr chairman of
Senator Diamond I'm curious six
two one eleven.
Maybe.
The person this this.
Mister chairman Senator Ivy Soto
what would you propose.
But Mr Senator if we want this
to happen so which of you shall.
Senator Wirth says that as a
friendly amendment.
To Senator Ivy Soto language in
two years ago.
Sometimes I approve what.
You know you're not a lot of
these.
The conservation of the day Mr
Chairman around here a long time
you're able to do some of that
that are driving is not the
practices committee to be a
phone a friend
Your question first so what will
allow in this case but Senator
Ivey Soto did you have a motion
or if it was at a question of
the seven I it was a question
but I I do have most of the
stuff that's on page two line
level straightforward mains for
the workshop.
The further discussion this
Sanchez guarded to the friendly
amendment.
He does Mr chairman.
Baca on the on the amendment my
question would be for the
sponsor of the amendment on page
two eleven for we're inserting
shall instead of may with that
run or ride a of of the judge
actually ordered the suspension
of the license and now that
would be contradictory to that
so this gentleman perhaps are
not just a.
Mr Chairman.
That are the settlement and
actually Senator Baca I I would
I'm not a lawyer but there's
plenty of them in here and so I
could think in the cases in
which and we had gone over this
where it was up to report to
have the discretion to go ahead
and impose a suspension of
driver's license that would
still need to be some
flexibility I soon to allow them
to impose that suspension.
Chairman and so I have the
answer is that it does not
because this is not a
traditionally imposed a
suspension the suspension is
administrative suspension
imposed by the department
when they get a record of
somebody's filler to peer for
for non payment and the so
therefore it is and
administrative action to remove
it the the traditional action
the sevens are back up is that
for example of issuing the
network to the center drive in
after the in our particular
league stated that would this
would not change that
it's the question of the
administrative action by the
department not by the judge if
you go to page one line twenty
it starts off with the division
is authorized to suspend revoke
this is not a judicial action
that were interpreted.
Their Buck.
From the looks like a good
friend to have Mr chair.
Video phone and sometimes.
That a completely answered my
question I appreciate that thank
you if you don't
center and the motion to strike
the.
As with which shows are for the
discussion the objections
adoption that amendment.
There's none at the moment this
adopted further committee
discussions so that our citizens
are the more I also think the
other committee discussions that
are blocked thank you I do have
the one issue I I think
and
do you included both in here
Mister chair Senators of failure
to appear and
And also non payment but I I'm
just wondering how you came up
with that equivocation why would
you not to me it seems of
failure to appear as a directive
from the court you are violating
the directive from the court in
that matter of which is
different than non payment no
payments can have
other reasoning behind it you
know we've moved away from fees
a lot and things like that that
that harm certain individuals
and subject them to you know
just just our time and so they
can do not make the payment so
we kind of give them a break and
we look the other way sometimes
and it seems like the
legislature is went that
direction but here we a quick a
quick Kate the failure to appear
with that and I think there are
two different things and so I
guess a failure to appear gives
me a lot more Hardik than the
non payment so some explanation
would be terrific thank you Mr.
Yes in order.
The chairman and senator Bach I
think that's actually a really
good question and if if I may in
twenty eighteen the courts had a
rule change it's the same in
metro court magistrate court
and municipal court which is and
it's one of the rules of success
to seven point one what it did
is that before courts can issue
a bench warrant in a failure to
pay situation they first have to
issue a summons to appear to a
failure to pay hearing if that
individual that does not appear
to the hearing the court is then
the the court has a decision to
make they can either issue a
failure to appear bench warrant
they could issue a failure to
pay bench warrant because the
person fail to pay for they
could do would pool warrant
which is failure to pay or
failure to appear now I'm not
saying that any of this is best
practice we're just in this is
what we see with the data when
you look at the motor vehicle
division data they also in the
different categories and I
believe we included a one an
infographic that talks about
this a little bit for for all
the numbers
but if you look at those
different different sets of data
it also shows that that some
judges are issuing failure to
appears some are failure to pay
and somehow pool so the idea is
is that they're inextricably
linked and very difficult to
separate because was it because
of the failure to failure to pay
was a failure to appear so
they're very connected here in
New Mexico and they're connected
in other states as well.
So so Mister chair could this be
remedied by a rule change them
rather than putting that in
statute since you said that it's
in rural.
And Mister chairman Senator Baca
here's the thing I think that
there could potentially be a
rule change that would allow for
that a directive to judges that
under particular circumstances
they have to issue a particular
type of bench warrant but then
we would we would go through
rule changes that have to
collect that data and then we
would see you know what kind of
what kind of and toward and
notice should should actually
occur but right now we don't
work that we don't have that
capability to separated out so
it's very difficult to do so.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senators for bringing this I do
have a question nothing in this
bill is going to prevent the
judicial branch from suspending
licenses moving forward.
And.
So so nothing in this
legislation is going to prevent
judges from suspending licenses
moving forward.
So Mr chairman and senator
pirtle the court doesn't suspend
licenses the motor vehicle
division does with this we do is
it would stop them from setting
notice of the motor vehicle
division to suspend licenses for
those particular two reasons the
still be able to send notices to
MBT to suspend licenses for a
number of other reasons but not
for those two now there are a
couple of.
Other I mean I guess you could
potentially.
The interesting little piece of
data from the anti do that shows
you know some of the other
reasons why you might why the
NMED might actually suspend the
license like
and unsatisfied judgment still
here to be child support so to
comply with the financial
responsibility but these are
extremely small second this
doesn't happen very often but
there are.
These are other sort of debt
based areas that the court can
still notify and the need to
suspend licenses there's a
number of other reasons why you
could suspend the license Mr
chair Mike my question is why
why are we sending noticed then
what why not just put a halt to
that because this is essentially
what happens so budget for or
whatever failure to appear
licenses suspended K. C. gonna
drive your car to the court to
take care of that suspended
license and then you take care
that you drive to the MVD
suspended license and so I think
that creates a an interesting
issue that what are we going to
the backside of this if we
really wanted to cut it off just
don't suspend it if that's only
for these issues that what are
we allowing the the judicial
branch to go ahead and do that
and because these these problems
going ahead and forcing people
to take care of that because a
lot of times people aren't even
aware that there's been a bench
warmer that the license was
suspended then they get hit with
driving on a suspended license
because of the other issues that
you know I think you know this
is a an interesting idea and a
great point that you're bringing
forward but I think we might
even need to go further up the
the the latter two really solve
the problem that you've
identified or trying to solve.
Mr chairman and Senator Pirtle I
mean here's the thing is it's
always good to push these bills
to the to the limit if possible
and you know perhaps you have
suggestions that would be
amenable to we called the entire
judicial branch banking.
The agency go ahead Mr chairman
and senator pirtle a sort of
sister piece of legislation is
the field in the nation bill
that starting in the house we're
working with the courts if if we
are able to eliminate a lot of
the fees what will what will end
up happening is that suspensions
would also go down FTEs nifty
piece will go down because of
legal financial obligation will
be reduced.
And Mister chair I I think that
the bench work hard and I don't
have really any opinion on that
but I think if if we really are
wanting to solve the issue of
suspended licenses in the fix is
having on people and and
everything that you mentioned
that that may be really the
direction that we we would want
to go if we were going to attack
this issue thank you Mr chair.
Zero three.
Okay their Buck.
You Mr chair so I I didn't quite
get the answer to what senator
parole last moment ago Mr chair
if the judge sends an order of
the suspension.
Does this prevent it from
happening.
Meaning if Mister chairman
Senator Baca if the judge sends
notice to the and we do is there
anything stopping the NMED from
suspending the license yes so
you get your the judge orders
your license suspended for
failure to appear.
What happens to what happens
administratively at that point
because it stopped at that point
so the judge ordered it does
this stop it.
Mr chair I think at the top of
the page to the section that's
being deleted.
Which was the authorization for
the decision to suspend the
license
upon receiving notice of a
failure to appear or pay a
penalty assessment basically
with the deletion of that if the
court issues a notice for
exactly that reason I would
suggest that then the motor
vehicle division is not.
Authorized under that scenario
to suspend the license I think
what'll happen as a result of
this bill is the judges are
going to learn very quickly you
know that that's not a proper
reason to issue that order but I
think there's that's the time in
between the administrative
process and a court order.
Thank you Mr chair and and so.
And I guess that's what I was
getting at a moment ago with the
phone a friend is that.
The judge can issue that order
Mr chair and then we are
authorizing this
administratively to essentially
ignore that order we're just
saying up to the administration
we're not giving you the
mechanism to do that and so to
me what we should be doing that
is going into the call center
personal Pirtle suggested and
and eliminating the suspension
of a driver's license as a
penalty.
Because why would they be
authorized to do that and then
now administratively it can be
stopped here I I think that that
takes something away from the
judiciary to be honest with you
I I think it's a little
insulting to are I would be at
least insulted to send that and
the that we've taken away the
mechanism for for them to do
that so maybe you can clarify
that because that's exactly what
it looks like to me and that's
without going back that's why
what my questions based in to
the more the shell the that's
the difference if they may do it
they still can't suspend it if
the judge.
penalize them in that way but if
they did not penalize them in
that way yeah they don't have to
obviously so I don't I'm not I'm
not understanding that
connection.
Mr chair.
Mr Chairman Senator Pirtle also
on page four
Looking at I mean starting with
nine three sections.
It talks about win the division
can issue it administrative
suspension and then those
sections are also deleted lines
ten through seventeen
So they can't suspend for that
reason.
It's my understanding that when
the court does send their
sending a notice of failure to
appear failure to pay they're
not necessarily sending a notice
to suspend the license it's just
a notification that this
happened in the motor vehicle
division is the one that's
that's determined to do that
it's not that they're sending of
notice to suspend as part of
state some sort of penalty what
they do issue is the bench
warrant and then there's the
notice of either FTA or FTP or
the pool F. TFTP.
Thank you Mr chair so my my
question then is is there some
other mechanism by which a judge
or a court can notify in V. D.
administratively to suspend
somebody's license without this
notification we'll call it.
Or is that the only mechanism.
Mister chairman Senator mark I
don't believe so at because we'd
be eliminating the entity's
ability to do that so the
notices just of conduct not
necessarily to do a particular
act so then that's what I'm
getting at Mister chair is we've
administratively eliminated the
judges power to suspend a
license with this.
I would say and Mister chairman
Senator Baca at.
Judges if there's something
that's part of a sentence the
judge has the ability to do
particular things for example D.
W. why we're that's where it's a
relocation so and that's part of
the sense also is administrative
for suspended licenses there's a
narrow amount of reasons why you
could suspend the license
they have any other number of
sanctions we can impose for a
traffic offense but they would
not be able to direct to the
NMED to suspend the license
simply because somebody failed
to appear bill to pay so you're
correct in that so Mister chair
what are those other reasons
they could suspend a license
for.
So
your license can be suspended
and if I may I can go down the
list for driving while license
suspended failure to file
medical certification disability
information failure to show
proof of insurance misrepresent
misrepresentation of identity
manufacturer or make false this
is it's kind of weird make false
driver license improper use of a
driver's license violating
restrictions of a driver's
license miss representation of
identity or other facts on an
application failing to comply
with financial responsibility no
liability insurance filter posts
it security or obtain release
from liability an unsatisfied
judgments of failure to pay
child support speeding.
something that's called site
withdrawal code
anon ACD withdrawal and
accumulation of convictions or
points and failed
qualifications.
So Mister chair my point being
that exhaustive list that you
just read we've essentially
taken the penalty provision from
the judge to be able to do that
except we're not telling them
where would they can they can
they can suspend a license for
it but the the notice that gets
there is ignored
administratively is what it
sounds like which I think is the
opposite in all of those that
list they can do it okay okay I
was asking you the contrary what
which ones they could not.
Not is exclusive of that list
you said there was a narrow.
I'm sorry Mr chairman and
senator Baca did not understand
your question I apologize okay
is just the opposite of what you
answered it you said there were
limited provisions where they
could suspend the license yes
outside of those now I
understand which is the failure
to appear failure to pay them
that's it yes I am not all of
them okay okay that's all of.
So I think Mr protection just
like to clarify something.
That is in New Mexico no judge.
Can order the suspension or
revocation of subscribers
license under any circumstance.
In New Mexico a license is
suspended or revoked by the
motor vehicle division.
As as a consequence of things
that happen in court.
So for example agency called
referenced that your license can
be revoked.
For a driver's license
I would have for you that we
are.
But the judge does not revoke
your license.
In the D. revoke your license
when nvidia is notified of the
conviction.
And because it is a consequence
of the conviction the judge is
not empowered to choose that
your license will not be
revoked.
It is a consequence of the
action taken always buy in the
D. and a judge never makes that
determination.
So I think that's that's that's
an important understanding of
the structure of how this
operates and and and likewise
for example if if
if Iraq should be held
accountable for the way I drive
but most of the time and have
the points that I probably
deserve
might license might work very
well get revoked but no judge
would say that it would just
simply be as M. B. B. started
cutting up the points at some
point they would say oh look at
how many points he has as a
consequence of that we are going
to take this action.
Thank you Mr chairman again more
than have an understanding.
First on the motion to amend
rate the majority shelves that
were Representative.
That.
I'm still a very anyone else.
So you want to close.
No I think that Mr Chairman yes
and but members are left yeah I
think at the beginning when when
we're saying it really is a
narrow focus as complicated as
it seems that really comes back
to just removing language that
allows the ability to to suspend
the license for those two
reasons only failure to appear
and failure to pay it really
does nothing else.
Whether the past motion Sir.
Any objections to pass motion.
Senator Pirtle survive any
objections the defense motion.
On.
In the you have to do passed
motions.
I
seventy one.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee for the
opportunity.
To come before you once again
Sir to make this a habit though
that never want to get into
but this bill passed through
here unanimously last year
passed through the Senate
finance last year
I believe it's got stuck on the
house floor at the end of the
session what we're trying to
work through some other issues
no but the person that used to
run the house is no longer here
so maybe this year it'll go
through.
But this bill for bids
discrimination against persons
based on physical or mental
disabilities in all aspects of
organ transplant transplantation
process that's.
I think the FIR got a hundred
percent right so thought they
they do things sometimes simpler
than I do.
it's clear it's concise
Sir do Hey got a question
earlier about insurances that is
not a problem in the state of
New Mexico insurance companies
covering these it has been more
of a problem throughout the
country not really with the
insurance companies but with
doctors referring for
transplants with the transplant
donation registry and things
like that and not allowing
people with disabilities to
receive organ transplants this
first came up in Texas actually
with the young man named Daniel
who needs an organ transplant
had down syndrome and he died as
a result of the organ transplant
group down there not allowing
him to have the transplant.
Thank you senator for
clarification the the language
has not changed from last year's
passage no it has not but.
Members the committee we didn't
have anyone registered to speak
for the public Senator Duhigg.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for bringing us yeah my
my only.
There's there's a couple parts
in here this specifically talk
about some limitations on what
what insurance companies can.
I just note that I for anyone
with interest a policy that's
going to be preempted I think a
number of folks in New Mexico
have a rest of policies
but I just had one other
question.
On page six.
Nibert.
It refers specifically to
To an attending healthcare
provider.
And I I wonder why you want it
limited to attending I would
think that.
Any health care provider who.
Was is doing what is described
in this paragraph hi.
Which is limiting.
Owner I'm sorry this is for
reimbursement.
That you don't want them to be
able to penalize or otherwise
reduce or limit the
reimbursement or provide
monetary or non monetary
incentives to and attending
healthcare provider to induce
the provider not to provide
organ transplants I would just
suggest taking that we're
intending to have it be as broad
as possible okay.
Well as all make that as a
motion page six it would just be
incentive to in a health care
providers you need to and to a
yes the grammatically correct
one hundred center six state six
PM one.
Yes so Nibert.
State senator.
Just that again you need to
change into a grammatically
correct and then remove tending
yes I want to be very proud of
me for catching.
Twenty percent that's that's the
motion.
In centers of as we as we
consider this motion is that
there is that the only use of
that term.
What a new metro here's a new
track record at forward all
sorts of tricks so for example
if I see if there's another one
thousand seven.
and.
There's also online for on page
seven and attending.
Yes the.
So we're gonna reward careful
because on page seven one four
you're going to want to do with
other brexit fishing changed and
to a
on.
Seven one two.
You distracted with right yes.
Is the world.
Of page six I have.
The the.
It does not Mr chairman page I.
Line one right the right and
attending insert a line seven
strike attending.
Mr chairman of remiss in L. make
sure before the tax committee
that the I have a fixed.
I think that's.
We've got at the.
I appreciate the invitation
Hopefully understandably
resistant to much of that center
saying well we'll get it says on
the road I just mean if we miss
one of them I think we got him
all the.
You all have a computer program
actually look and see if there's
any work in the in their and for
resources benefit the proposed
motion of.
And in do is to be on.
Of the five stripes were and the
tending inserting their of the
word a.
On page five line seven second
we're depending.
Six.
One for striking the word and
the words and attending is a.
On page six line tents are
tending.
Of the seven straight and we're
and attending the word a.
For page seven line construction
spending that comes this does.
At the motion center do a
projection that amendment.
The amendments adopted Senator
extra for.
I'm sorry Mr.
Eight eight.
Fourteen seven.
Chris.
All right so on page eight line
eight strike the words and
attending insert the word a.
Page eight point fourteen second
where the pandemic yes I so the
motion is Senators modified
accordingly any objection
adoption of all those changes
all to address the.
No objections amendment adopted
senator you have full.
My only other.
and I'm not necessarily going to
offer a an amendment for it and
if that's what you're going for
would be to make make a
violation of the Salazar
automatic foundation of the
unfair insurance practices act
as does relates to and insurance
company.
But I know Mr chair you you
don't necessarily like stick and
DPA and I assume you ask PA.
Us because of actions throughout
our statutes that I'm not going
to offer that right now as an
amendment by.
Personally I like I like
Strickland throughout the area
of it'll change after we do it
for thirty years I trusted sure
Senator when you rising loan
from you look to find things
that looks in the simplest
direct predictable ways.
I appreciate the thought I
understand it it's a policy
suggestion and you probably have
to take a look at the.
On for insurance practices act
maybe taker some Senator to do
that.
That not being before the
committee anything else Center
do anyone else in the committee
the other prescription.
We have a due pass motion as
with as amended Senate bill
seventy one is our objection
there's none there right in the
past gentleman that we are in
recess I will of advise all of
you that Friday.
Well those are the joys of the
late senator Wirth and I were
upstairs with the governor's
with theirs interesting a lot of
