On Senate bill number one and a
due pass for this or a motion
for discussion on Senate
Judiciary Committee sub two
percent to one point two two
four six one four point two.
Junction.
I thank you Mr president Mr
president Mr chair with me today
is representative Susan K.
Herrera aroma Cerro we'll go
Morales pate both from rural
community assistance partnership
miss Morales page flew in from
DC they're gonna be here just
expert witnesses of this bill is
designed to allow two or more
entities that elect to
consolidate voluntarily to form
a regional utility authority by
doing so they can share
resources operate efficiently
and independently to private
provide water and wastewater
Services road improvements
infrastructure our renewable
energy projects related to the
entity or other projects
essential operate and maintain
the authorities facilities key
thing Mr chair and members about
this bill is it is a template
that is an option for entities
to consider it's not a mandate
telling any entity they need to
do this currently under our law
if two or more entities want to
former regional system they have
to come to the legislature and
Mr chair we have folks here from
lower Rio Grande regional water
authority which is one of those
authorities you created in two
thousand and nine and I'll
explain they'll they'll use up
most of the ten minutes that we
have to talk about what they've
done on down south which is a
great model
I'm gonna be brief because I
want to reserve the time for
a few folks that have signed up
to speak but I would like I
Representative had a to give the
committee a sense of of her
world up north of which is has
this issue on steroids multiple
small systems and with climate
change drought fire we're really
at a crisis moment where I think
the time is right for this bill
so ideal.
To Representative had at a and
then I'll outline just the those
that have signed up for the time
to speak and we have experts
here answer questions.
Thank you senator
Thank you madam chair serve on
to some members of this
committee this bill would be a
game changer for the north I'm
just gonna say it like that
I have probably over sixty
mutual domestic water
associations in my district most
of them serve less than a
hundred households okay they're
very small they're all run by
volunteers
and most of those volunteers I
used to say we're over sixty
five I think now it's reach
seventy
so these are volunteers that run
these water systems they take a
heavy burden of their their
their loans are maxed out it's
hard to raise the money and the
only answer really is to reach
analyzed if we can put you know
three or four systems together
I've found that if you can get
about three hundred households
three hundred to five hundred
households then you have an
economy of scale you can you
know bring in about three
hundred and fifty to five
hundred thousand dollars a year
where you can hire an an
executive director and
accountant and an operator and
that's really what you need you
need to create systems that are
unsustainable that work for the
for the people they represent
and just very quickly in the
little town of Dixon as on
highway sixty eight between
Espanola and tells as you drive
along they can in that little
town of five hundred households
has four different mutual
domestic water systems these
were all built in the fifties
they're aging infrastructure and
they're all maxed out on their
loans we have one really good
system to the left of the river
we have another system to the
right of the river and then
about the highly we have two
small systems so it's like two
fifty a hundred fifty and twenty
so for for assistance in a in a
in a really a community serving
five hundred households we have
planned to regional allies so
we're waiting till hopefully
this legislation is passed again
it will be a game changer and
I'll stop there and.
The other speaker.
Mr chair I think that's it what
I'd like to do is just give you
a road map on the on those
little yes provide support
Martine Lopez and Carol Nichols
Nichols are here from the lower
Rio Grande regional water
authority I think five minutes
to just hear what they've done
there for the members to here
and then very short in support
true center from just let up web
low bill Connor the rural water
association a Randy velvety from
cap core Louise go that are from
Sierra Club and I believe
Merioles Hidalgo three fifty New
Mexico dot org less than a
minute each I do think there's
one opponent who signed up so
that's how I propose we do this
Mr chair user were so you're yes
of.
The with the procedures for the
the
bridge would you or four.
Where is the location.
I.
Good afternoon Senator about
this
my name is Marty Lopez on the
general manager for the lower
Rio Grande public water works
authority
We are in a we are in a position
now but going back to two
thousand and nine we're in a
situation where we were I
smaller you to miss Singh close
proximity to each other
we were trying to figure out
ways to provide mutual aid to
each other some systems had
operator some did not some had
money in the bank others did not
others that had their audits
others had not
and actually the legislators in
our area at that time we met
with them and they wanted to us
to prioritize projects.
We had five different systems
with five different ideas five
different concepts and you know
would when we had that.
Representative Mary Helen had
Garcia and and at Senator Paypen
basically tell us prioritize
come up the Santa Fe come up
with the project that we can
find.
that was the kick off for our
entity to start working together
we decided to start putting of
the concept we looked at the
different types of legislation
different water sanitation
districts and other types of
regional entities that were
available and nothing seem to
quite fit in so we created our
own legislation with the help of
many experts
now we're at the point where
there are twelve water systems
serving over sixteen colonias
and done in a County we have
five
A separate service areas
down and around north of K.
Anthony between Anthony and and
let's see Los crucis to the east
of Los crucis and just recently
just south of of hatch in the
New Mexico and
we are able to have and higher
professional staff we comply
with all the requirements for
each one of the individual
systems we have had clean audits
this is the beginning of the of
the entities and just you know
the the the that was.
Opposition initially to to this
date you know we we've overcome
we've had transparency with all
of our board meetings
we've been quite honestly even
investigated by the state police
and they found no wrongdoing in
anything we did it was all
transparent all you know at one
time we had I need to domestic
board me meetings the we had an
umbrella entity and we had the
authority so we had to the total
seven eight meetings a month
where would they were open to
the public until we got our
legislation through with that Mr
chair like to defer to Karen on
down some of our other
successes.
I will be very brief I just
wanted to let you know that last
August I ran a tally of the
projects funding we've brought
we brought in since we merged
and it was a little over seventy
nine million dollars some of the
systems that merged like the one
I work for desert sands really
had their infrastructure
improved and had no money in the
bank at desert sands we were
facing arsenic treatment other
systems hadn't done any
improvements and years and years
and years and years but we have
as a regional in today been very
successful in bringing in
project funding and being able
to manage our projects more
hands on and not kind of leave
everything up to a an
engineering firm so with that
all expected.
So Mister chair I think we have
I'm not sure true setters.
Come up.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is drew Center
registered lobbyists for the
public has led a Santa Clara
okay then they simply pay and
soon public all five of my
client support the sub we
appreciate the Sanchez and
center Ivey Soto for working
with us in some language changes
we have to thank you make more
much more workable bill for my
clients work with a with a
different thanks very much.
And I think next a bill Connor.
He's here.
Yes No bill does not Phil's not
here okay so Randy fall Verity.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Randi
Valverde I'm a registered
lobbyist for of corn New Mexico
where a water utility serving
Edgewood in Clovis New Mexico
and we're in support of the
committee substitute we thank
the sponsors and the advocates
for working with us on some of
our concerns and thank you for
bringing the bill.
I think next up blue correct at
all.
Hi Louise thank.
good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee and was
gonna with the Serra club you're
in the chapter representing
thirty five thousand members in
New Mexico and West Texas Mexico
speaking on behalf of the
elderly agency are chair of
water chair who could not be
here today but our chapters from
supports SB one so many for
small rural community water
systems are extremely outdated
and in dire need of rebuilding
their water system
infrastructure the aging
infrastructure has been
compounded by throughout the
warming climate and of course
this year's devastating fires
and subsequent flooding SB one
provides a framework for those
small water systems to from
regional water authorities and
work together to provide safe
drinking water to their
communities in the future for
these reasons and also within
everybody else has said we asset
you'll vote yes thank you.
And finally I think Maryland
Hidalgo if here or on of one
soon maybe.
And if not that's the extent of
the proponents I do know there's
one opponent I think Mr chair
Paul Spencer.
On Senate is this makes
exhausted so every exhausted
miss Hidalgo not present she may
be on zoom on soon all right
she's recognized for one minute
Mister hello.
Thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Maryland Hidalgo in line
with percent three fifty New
Mexico or and I wanted to say I
supported speaking on.
Thank you Mr Dogo all right we
have one registered opponent.
Paul Spencer for you in the back
Mr Spencer you're recognized for
up to three minutes or.
Thank you chairman and members
the committee and Senator Wirth
for allowing me to speak today
my name is Paul Spencer from
Bluewater village New Mexico and
my concerns and issues with
Senate bill one is a Senate bill
one passes New Mexico Canadian
public water systems you choose
to retain their sovereignty will
be disproportionately
disadvantage with the current
point system that facilitates a
regionalization transfer of
ownership transfer
responsibility by providing ten
additional points for these new
entities one of collecting to
provide the same incentives for
communities who choose to retain
their sovereignty the need to
meet managerial secretarial and
operational capacity for these
essential services is at a
critical point in New Mexico
this is partly due to the
agencies who are responsible for
administering technical services
affordable funding that have
failed to meet their goals and
have felt to me to mission for
many many years eighty five
percent of New Mexico commute
public water systems fall under
the median household income
level making it difficult for
these committee public for
systems to afford the loan
portion of the grant funding
programs that are purpose for
small communities with all
populations in rural areas
Senate bill one will find a way
for committee public water
systems to disproportionately
gained access to grant funding
that was currently available but
difficult if not impossible to
attain due to affordability
issues Senate bill one will help
legislative tool for these
communities to four affordable
funding and technical assistance
and meet the managerial
secretarial and operational
essential services required to
provide capacity to meets to
meet state and federal
regulations.
But we will require these
Committee parkour systems to
transfer the ownership and the
responsibilities to a new
because a government a cost too
much to ask American citizens to
surrender their assets and the
responsibilities for affordable
funding is this what we have
come to in this point in time
most we promote local government
consolidation to meet the
capacity that the state and
federal regulations require.
I hope you will consider my
proposal to discuss the
possibility of building capacity
through a regionalization
collaboration task force program
that would provide the essential
services needed to provide
capacity to ensure local
community solar T. the American
way of life thank you thank you
Sir.
All right that concludes those
registered in support and
opposition legislation.
I just completed presentation
members the committee questions
s'mores.
Thank you Mr.
Work you will want I started
walking.
So to go back from our my
perspective Bernalillo county I
am assuming which try to do is
allow other regional areas to do
what earlier County Albuquerque
did back in late I guess was
twenty something.
So Mister chairman Senator
that's exactly right there's
already a system right now in
place for entities to come to
the legislature and I think
Senator Cervantes we have the
example that he created in two
thousand nine the example you
cite is one where the entities
didn't all necessarily come to
the Legislature singing the same
tune basically a certain Senator
made the decision that we were
moving in that direction and so
that was kind of forced on them
the good news about that is
today I think it's a very
efficient system
that's that's this championed is
as kind of an example of what
you can do when it's when it's
collaborative but yes you're
right Mr chair Senator that
wasn't a collaborative process
no go we all know what our our
our our we know what happened in
that situation the one the
artisanal.
and I would disagree because I
think the the water authority
Berlin county this probably is
less responsive to the people in
Albuquerque Berlin county than
it was before and I'm just use
an example there was a there was
of the I don't care where you
all stand on fluoride issue but
there was a there was a public
campaign to add fluoride in
Albuquerque where the water
authority in Albuquerque had of
both of the people that a
referendum which we don't have
statewide they the voters
decided in their wisdom to put
formation into the water system.
After the merger in the dark of
night.
Without any public notice
without any communications at
all with the people of
our group Bernalillo county the
board he really was a man that
decision coming up we do around
here they got rid of it with no
no import no thought so it
resonates with me what the
gentleman from blue water was
saying is that you're going to
have a last responsive body
that's not sovereign to the
people because that's what the
water is pastor of service of
the pond Mr chair but the waters
under the bridge growing county
Albuquerque so I would encourage
those who are promoting has to
be careful of what they're asked
for because of my experience
without pre Bernalillo county is
what the John was talking about
it's much less responsive to the
people.
and again that's just my
thoughts on this it's not going
to affect our area where I
Representative thank you to some
of the comments that were made
and I would urge those who
support is to be careful of what
they're asking for because what
you said there was a Senator
very powerful center at that
time I made the decision because
of personal relationships
against the then mayor former
senator that this is going to
happen and it happened I'm not
sure it's always it was for the
best because of two conflicting
powerful political of things
but.
This is also an operator as you
know our doesn't work for the
rest of state sometimes.
Zurcher.
Senator so you recognize for the
ten minutes and just so for
those of you just joined us
little bit to have a hard stop
time for five thirty this
evening if any time for all of
the business before the
committee the last two bills on
your agenda have been rolled
over the request Sanchez so we
do the first four bills on the
first bill Senator Ivey Soto.
And and I I don't know I.
I
but I will the gentleman for
twelve serve our.
Differences is that the ability.
as the one which was just as
pretty you don't have just the
electors work their elected
officials or something else.
Who also served on the water I
think that that a legal
response.
Thank you Representative I just
want to send them over this
there are there are very few
from.
Of the person on the line
of section seven.
That is we do have the.
That may pull into.
Of.
well this is what Ortiz.
It doesn't mean that they want
that at the end of this list and
of course if the focus of our.
This is a half as you may have.
On March.
Senator and so if you do that
the
if thirteen line please write
your.
The thirty eight sevens right
the Syrian survey some of all
the followed by your and then do
so session KA in according
created pursuant waters that.
The four workstations purposes
only for the purpose of this.
Mr chair Senator yes and from
this gentleman I would.
so the recipients of a was
following along and then all.
Some questions one more time
please enter the population of
thirteen.
Right those for.
Page thirteen line.
The end of the lines right areas
that service on the line follow
back.
The thirteen lines seven and
eight in service of session Hey.
And authority creative porcelain
to.
The regional water system that
is the fact.
So
Regional.
Our regional.
Water System resiliency Tax.
Yeah so discussion on the and
the other members start with.
So it is a little bit of time
heavy preps explain how that
works within the context of the
with the health centers to look
at this one look at section
seven.
K. twelve really director
question Senator Wirth for me on
the amendment.
Trying to understand what this
list is a Senator my research
proposing to add to so it's you
can starting section seven set
I'm gonna read verbatim all this
but subject to other session
requirements of thirty makes F.
transfer of assets and
liabilities a request that's the
fundamental issue here this is a
family legal dissolution.
So makes up the transfer of
assets of us and legal
dissolution of an entity that
provides water services and it
is.
So Mister chair I I think this
is designed to deal with.
And I think the situation the
these are the entities that are
potentially joining into the new
authority and so I'll just give
an example from Santa Fe if
Eldorado water and sanitation
district wants to join with
Santa Fe County this is the
provision that kind of would
allow the water sanitation
district comment and it wasn't
ready so those doing is making
sure that if we've created an
entity under this act it also
has the ability to bring in you
got to introduce created under
this act separately decide to
join and so that's why it would
work the.
For the discussion.
Committee objection reduction
enrollment has.
Madam dot.
Very much Mr chairman looking at
six six.
In section six you use the term.
That I'm looking.
On page ten.
Use the rules.
Representative Eli to the
Porsche promulgated rules
policies kind of.
And Representative rules is a
pro parks.
state rules act chapter fourteen
article four
and the local public bodies what
services don't have rule making
authority.
All the state agencies oral.
And what.
I think and so I think that
really would be
would lead to less confusion in
some is that shop promulgate and
it here to policies and
procedures point contact so
please write the rules.
And then likewise then on page
ten.
Twenty two.
Is instead of rules to see them
use policies are procedures and
strict rules is our procedures.
page eleven.
Nine ten.
Right rules.
It's our policies and
procedures.
Page eleven line sixteen.
Strict rules and certain
policies and procedures.
Mr chair that's those are
friendly.
Suggestions as part of that
amendment.
Many junction those members are
thank you Mr chairman.
You have the very quick question
the standard line for.
We have there that the fort
Meade disqualified director of
the Board from building on if
you wanna leave a a member is
responsible for their own
disqualification.
And so I don't want to spend too
much time on that right now I do
want to flag that will put me to
be able to go back to the couple
minutes.
On the at the end of the state.
No question about the election
first of all page eight line
seventeen.
You have that each director at
the time of the election shall
reside within the protester
Authority from with the
directors elected actually I
would suggest that you try to
the the the parenthetical at the
time of the election they should
be living there for other terms.
So Mr chairman the.
And then and then related to
that then we may be able to all
these and one is subsection a.
you I do not see we've we've
provides for how long the terms
of office will be.
Whether the a forty year or six
year term of office different
public bodies have different
terms.
And also whether or not they
should be staff or not what is
the Mr Chairman.
Representative center what is
the impact.
So many of to Mr Cerrone miss
moralis rate on that.
Good morning good morning Mr
chair Senator source close.
It would be staggered terms so
typically we start off with two
and four year terms at the
initial
creation of the authority then
it would be to a four year
staggered terms okay okay in
that case just suggestive and
and that the initial takes care
of itself.
To do this will be that at the.
On page eight line fourteen I'm
happy to hear it.
I directors shall serve four
year terms.
What shall be stacked.
And then they can figure that.
We've already got the staff was
one nineteen you okay that is
just simply director shall serve
four year terms.
And action actually I and I
apologize Emily the the part
which is the term of office for
directors the four years.
So.
So on page eight line fourteen
F. period the term of office for
directors of the four years and
aging line seventeen strike from
the comma to the next come on
strike in the words at the time
of the election in.
Thank you Mr those apparently
during the objection of those
moments for about.
On page nine very quickly.
Lines eighteen through twenty.
You have
and this is typical of of of
corporate language but it leads
to and we're interpretations.
Service providers subsection of
this section the boards on taken
action upon the formidable at
least implement a majority of a
quorum present.
So let's say you have.
Let's say you have
seven members of the board.
All quorum is for so does that
mean the majority is three.
What does that mean the majority
of the board president.
And so I would simply suggest on
page nine line twenty.
Striking a quorum and insert the
board.
Mr chair that's also a friendly
amendment one more time please
enter.
Certainly page nine line twenty.
Strike a quorum insert the
board.
Member is regarded by the
sponsor families are new
projection this Madam it's about
thank you and then finally this
gentleman on page five.
section be the first of the as
I'm reading this.
The device that's being used to
create a public body which is.
Not that.
the law it is acceptable I
suppose is is that they
incorporate.
They father articles of
incorporation Mister chairman
Senator Representative with the
secretary of state's office
because any other corporation
what.
And that that then is what
creates that as a public body.
Mr chairman of the service is
that correct.
Mr chair that is correct and we
did I will tell you Sen right so
that we had a discussion in the
conservation committee as to
whether this action was
necessary at all I will say
that.
The argument for putting this in
here is that it really does
provide guidance for those
entities that are setting this
up to be able to have a
direction as to where you go and
so well I think.
You know again we're gonna have
different systems with different
sophistication moving forward so
that was kind of the reason we
left the and I know the chair
brought this up as an issue
whether we should have it at all
I think we've left that in for
now but I think.
You know this discussion is is a
good one half point here and and
this from Senator I'm actually
not in the right that is however
the the issue that I want to
make sure that we avoid
especially given that we may
have different levels of
sophistication different levels
of staffing or volunteerism to
run these authorities is that
you don't want it up to the
situation where somebody forgets
to file it in corporate report
and that calls into question
whether or not they continue as
a political subdivisions state.
And so my suggestion if we're
going to use this as the device
for them to be created this
political subdivisions would be
on page five line twenty two.
Period.
Is to simply insert the words.
Once elected to.
No corporate reports.
Shall be required of the
authority.
So that would make them unique
among corporations but the thing
is there a lot of subdivisions
stand this is all really they're
responsible under DFA.
And so and and it just takes out
the potential not I like the of
not updating whatever.
So.
Mr chair I the I mean I see the
logic and it does make you pause
a little bit because again
you're right these are.
You know for reports of what
corporations have to file under
the statute but I see what
you're saying this is a
political subdivisions different
approach and so my experts are
saying that that's and a
friendly.
Amendments assuming that we stay
with the corporate section for
in the document we may have a
discussion about that some more
once we get to that point.
That is it Mr chairman of the in
the center with that I've had a
conversation and we're
Representative conversation up
about you know using at a
different process right somewhat
akin to like a GPA where the
other twenty bodies for this
all.
but you know this just as quick
as question which we would need
to go we we go the direction of
the of the corporations.
I'm not aware of other
corporations that end up as
political seven.
That makes the kind of anyway.
Six.
I.
So Mr Chairman just and miss
one.
Mr chair and Senator Ivy Soto
said the mutual domestics of
that we have and we have over
three hundred across the state
they do file with the secretary
of state in the like you said
they have to file Corporation
reports so I appreciate your
suggested language to know no
corporate reports shall be
required for for from the
authority because we do often
miss assistance providers we
often deal with me to domestics
that fail to pay their ten
dollar fee and then they get out
of good standing that happens
quite often.
So that Mr.
Representative David the
question is do we want to fix a
problem here or love recognize
that there are other
corporations are political
subdivisions and not.
In a Mr I think it's something
that states feels to me like
given what's been said it's a
good fax but I would suggest
again I'm gonna yield to the to
the chair because I know the
discussion we had in in the
conservation committees whether
we even keep the section at all
and so I just I want to do so
I'm so again I'm here to you Mr
chair what do you want to take
that amendment now or you've got
additional questions about
section for that we need to deal
with first so since questions
directly Mason were I think you
have to look at that subsection
we're looking at subsection B.
on page five in conjunction with
page three.
Subsection the.
Source so we're three subsection
enough lines thirteen to twenty.
Concerned about the the
redundancies are
inconsistencies.
Yep so is that the committee is
aware of the question
the subsection the reserve the
opponent option in the show
excuse your articles.
M. bylaws.
The show follows.
The show certify those I don't
think we have tell services to
do that secretary of state does
that anyway so so I don't think
that in this language is
necessary so Mister chair that
this goes back to the and the.
Putting language in the statute
to assist the smaller entities
walking through the process and
and I hear what you're saying
yes Representative is that work
with but this is not limited to
help communities this tells the
secretary of state what to do
when they file the articles and
by laws so the secretary of
state shall certify the we do
have tell sectors to do that
right here I agree with that so
that that said it seems
superfluous to me and then and
then everything goes on to get
to the articles are effective
upon I think that's also self
evident probably in this area it
seems to
Again you know as I reconcile
that with that subparagraph B.
with no page five so you know
you know we center where I just
get rid of all that I don't I
don't think any of that business
or your adds anything two things
understand Senator Ivy Soto
point that the if you're a
political seven you don't need
to file court reporter but I
also hear you sing probably
think it's a good idea here of
you know that that's what's
being done I can't think that
does any harm.
Staff member and potentially to
some good Mr Chairman obviously
you know we've come to this you
know through this process a
number of times part of the
process part of the reason why
that language remains has been
carried for all these years is.
The continued need to have some
accountability process the
accountability that it you know
that entities are asking to be
put in in place and so well the
language may not be perfect I
think that's the one thing that
that it continues to be ask for
and when I when I'm what I mean
by accountability is that if
this body votes to power moves
towards toward creating this
A law where is the what are
where the mechanics to register
to identify this introduce how
do we find them the ability to
either at a national entities
and.
Is your is your trust and is
there another process that could
be used another mechanic to to
make sure that whatever other
entities come in come in
voluntarily and that there is a
process that gets recorded
somewhere to to recognize that
they are now part of.
A bigger entity so it's all from
the original conversations that
have been a number of years ago
requesting accountability to the
process.
So the different subject so what
we're doing and so and we're the
representative may help you
present with your proposed
amendments you can judge was
seven years but you do so before
so so certainly not and the
chairman I'd actually
The majority of what what we
have been so page five
subsection what we have told
is introduce their articles
shall be submitted to secretary
of state for funding within
thirty days what and when we do
that and and what the
consequence of a doll.
So what.
And if there's no consequence
then why do it might with the
language and.
If you don't file in thirty days
what happens.
Thank.
Right so the midpoints means.
There's no consequence read more
well this is the entity would be
would be created if they don't
file it within thirty days and I
my guess is there's a.
Process the secretary of state
that deals with that but.
I hear what you're saying again
work I can't help but point out
we're dealing with some
Representative serve on this two
thousand nine language here so
from regional statue I I had it
I had to put that in the next.
The owner that with me over in
conservation rightfully so yes
with this is language that you
know is from the bill we dropped
in two thousand nine other thing
not Martine and Karen saying no
it's not so thank you for your.
you know what whether whether I
drafted poorly the twelve plus
whatever years ago or thirty to
fourteen thank you for Senate
you know all right those are
words I've got a little better
this maybe you have here so you
know it it without getting into
any of that the question really
to the substance use it on page
three choose the articles and
bylaws or effective upon filing
and then that that kind of
covers a.
and so I don't think you need to
save the article shall be
submitted for filing within
thirty days of signing because
again that was I mean and and
and how do you count the thirty
days those I I just it just
seems like the whole part of the
has really no Munic Senator Mr
might be that the the signs
Senator Ivy Soto want to put in
could be put in right at the end
on page three.
Paragraph the and then it just
all the problem with with the
intermission I Senator Baca was
join the conversation Senator
Baca the New Forest thank you Mr
chair a alternatively I really I
I.
Having articles of incorporation
effective upon the filing or or
the by laws you see many times
in these articles and by laws
that they designate their own
effective date sometime after
the filing and so I I don't know
how workable that is for this
and how it plays into this
discussion here but regularly
make the effective date starting
on a calendar year or whenever
it's more desirable not
necessarily when it's filed.
Mr chair I think that's a good
point and I mean and you may
need to say.
Are the articles of
incorporation bylaws or effect
and it still has to be filed all
right some point but you what
you're saying to be filed
effective six months later in
the document exactly.
Good point at five eight in
terms of what.
Which is what survivors
residents that if you are
looking at.
Dissolving assets and working
things I could see a situation
where they where they passed now
saying July one.
We're effective right I think
we'll have a report that and
then they start working in that
direction.
so
And in which case that could be
stated in in their house of
origin.
going back to to the transaction
would.
For the moment but we have an
office they I the one page
three.
And.
suggests the following on page
three lines seventeen through
nineteen.
Right after
the what state.
Straight from the COVID to the
period.
Then online twenty.
Not.
At the for the period.
In sort.
Unless the different date.
This legislative in the articles
of incorporation.
After the period ends for the
following two sentences.
Amendments.
For the articles of
incorporation.
Our by laws.
Are not effective.
Unless filed.
What the secretary of state.
No corporate reports.
Shall be required.
I'm gonna cooperated Authority.
I think that keeps the
disclosure of the amendments.
Right without the.
Forms.
If you got rid repeated what.
Make sure that for the the
secretary could simply.
It's three eight seventeen from
the come up through the parents
right.
It's three line twenty before
the period unless a different
date is provided in the articles
of Corporation after the period.
Amendments to the articles of
incorporation or bylaws.
Are not effective Fund less than
the five prices slightly
differently timing.
Percent are not affected less
filed with the secretary of
state.
No former reports period
purports shall be required of
incorporated for.
Reincorporated Authority.
We can.
So we're so Mister chairman I
think.
The.
Sentence about amendments only
being effect when they're filed.
Again I think given what we're
doing here
in kind of providing guidance
along those lines I think that
does help and it makes it clear
because you because you're not
filing corporate we mean what's
going to happen as the entities
can be created they're gonna
file and then basically they
don't have to do they don't have
to do their annual report
and file that because they're
separate political subdivisions
so I do think that in this case
putting that extra language in
is good guidance to make sure
that they don't make amendments
that that aren't that filed and
all of a sudden we've got a mess
on our hands.
So again my experts are saying
that they can but this is
friendly I think it does address
senator Baucus.
Point up there in the bottom of.
Paragraph the page three line
twenty adding that language gets
the effective date not just
about filing or upon the date
stated in their cell.
So we're on that I see lots of
agreement unibody so me the fly
in the ointment I I think you of
the eliminate having to put in
all that leverage but second
that last sentence which is sort
of this point which is when you
file we create articles of
incorporation you put effective
date
and so you don't have to put the
statute that the effective dates
upon filing less the article say
some other date in which case
the other day you say in the
articles is the effective date
so you know that to me it's all
unnecessary really but I am the
into the Sanchez okay with it
and you know maybe you guys I'm
trying to keep the things
tighten the statues of precise I
think this convoluted six but I
think there's seems to be some
unibody of the committee for the
event so all.
The on the on that point senator
you want in on the conversation
to.
Are not a whole lot of
incorporations for the last two
years is that the form of this
the bears are also about NAFTA's
intereses website actually it
doesn't let you pay the ticket
generation doesn't start for hi
you're you're awful so.
This is a nice academic
discussion probably the use
almost.
We've got a moment
And seem to be any.
Great heartburn for adding in
the Sanchez says it's okay with
and I don't think it changes
anything so Senator Wirth the
answer is there's any objection
of the moment.
Sentiments about the.
The chairman I guess we'll just
in a look at the five.
Session.
Every.
This is on page five.
Line one described the
designation of a.
Page five line I.
Frank one thing that subsection
eight
eight six record two things at
the right of free agency for the
I.
Six after and that was one of
the places we have with
up in the price of seventy.
So we're gonna talk about before
that's back to consistently
Alliance user confirmation and
that's that's a friendly
amendment yeah.
Follow along right okay with
that.
Yeah and for the conflict in the
city and all that stuff your
objection.
None that amendments adopted
another way for and we just
tractors registration subsection
B. and doing whatever number in
real quick all right what else.
Thank you very much other than
that I think it's a wonderful.
Did pretty well.
is there anyone else on the
committee with questions from.
Yes there are.
This is on page three of section
G..
I just and it's more of a
question maybe you intended this
or not but it looks like anybody
that is joined regardless of
what ends up happening to them
if they're in your area
so I the way match This Is Your
the the forty comes in and it
has it's authority in this
region what what happens if you
have a neighboring Authority
that dissolves Sir files
bankruptcy in and do you or
something of that nature does
that become.
This introduce responsibility
now.
So on the Mr chair and senator I
think the internet is no
I think it's interesting when
when when then Representative
serve on days created the that
down and the Dona Ana down in
two thousand and nine I think he
T. T. described in the in the
rules committee was it the city
of Anthony yeah that didn't want
to come in and was very
concerned about getting pulled
in I mean the the beauty of this
is that.
Again if if the entity.
Who doesn't want to come in they
don't get pulled in if an entity
truly went bankrupt you know in
the situated hypothetical you
and I I think it's the authority
could certainly look at that and
make that decision if there
board decided to move forward
and I can help those folks out
and bring them in that would be
an option for those those folks
to come in
and again I think.
As it would be if there was a
neighboring mutual domestic
quite frankly in that situation
happened they look at that and
figure out if they want to bring
them in or not but that would be
up to the authority to do it
there's no.
Condemnation or no authority to
to extend beyond any of the
members that have a elector to
join that's the key piece to it.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
section F. the issuance of the
certificate of incorporation by
the secretary state shall
establish the authority forty
actually established within this
act rather than this application
with already through a.
Sure enough by the secretary of
the state.
Beijing that certificate so Mr
chair Senator I think that that
the entities.
Created the document to put
together but until that action
happens when it's actually.
Taking to the secretary of state
and that process occurs the way
this is drafted that is the
triggering is so just so I
understand you could go through
this entire process and you if
it is not submitted to the
secretary of state at some point
it is not legitimate is that
correct Mr chair that's exactly
right and I'm just making sure
that's what you intended but
thank you Mr all of thank you
your bill's questions so.
Stories long long road we've
been down of the of.
It sounds self evident we should
be doing this and it's simple
and easy and it was very
complicated when we did it the
first time and I'm looking at a
lot of people and thank them for
all the care and nineteen
Your this before we went on the
record the committee but when we
did this before just a brief
explanation part of the problem
was with we had some very
serious arsenic problems in some
of the communities Karen's and
others and they were small
systems that couldn't really
afford to do wells we had other
smaller systems nearby that had
good water and we figured out
ways to incorporate the two
systems and avoid having to
drill new wells into a lot of
expensive treatment by really
consolidating these systems but
it was it was it was very
vigorously oppose city man today
and and that that was
problematic for me because see
Methodist the population center
my district with some largest
you have a very organize Water
System and it wasn't wasn't but
anything but this was about
money is everything else up here
tends to be Anthony waters
sensation district had a service
area and they do well
financially why the users of the
rates they charge for the
delivery water and they didn't
like the idea that anybody would
be competing with it's really
what will down to and current
school system and others they
want to keep your boxes really
what will them to.
and so they were concerned that
you would end up competing with
them from service territory were
the would be able to provide
services
That we can be with there's a
the we appointed Miss America so
there's something this has some
specific implications the
language here but that becomes a
big fight that's always been the
fight and sent and and you
County my district the five
twenty sue someone park in the
you Senator is a right who's
gonna find servicer because
there's money to be made by
delivering water vertically when
you're providing it to
industrial users manufactures
and dairies conception and
there's a lot of water going
through some of those meters and
and that that's where they make
their money they don't make
their money by treating the
sewage they do it by by water
rates so that was that was the
area that we're we're always
gonna end we did this remember
that and my colleagues who were
help me do this we're money they
were here for two three weeks at
a time day after day I met
flight travelling from Delhi in
the county agreed to make this
happen so worked out well and I
want to commend you would choose
Martinez seventy something
million dollars later right a
lot of water to the nineteen
Cologne is that no Sir.
Previous story of it and whether
we're gonna do this elsewhere in
the state of the that will be a
couple of things just real
specifically help you help make
sure we got this right into our
best job.
The US the page three
subparagraph G..
The first sentence there is
really the heart of what we did
and and I it's really bears
emphasizing when we consolidated
the systems we have system some
of them with substantial assets
a lot of water rights lot of
infrastructure lot of equipment
offices and stores some of the
introduce a came and had very
little of any those assets right
very little water rights very
very few assets for smaller
committees and the great thing
about it was there was none of
of the expected posturing were
one entity said we were bringing
in ten times the water rights
the the other entity is so we
should have ten times the
authority to members of both ten
times a representational board
none of that happened everybody
just because it will all get an
equal say
and and unequal participation
process so that that first
sentence says as as founding
joining show transfer all assets
and liabilities and that was a
really great thing everybody did
that.
But but then I that I get
confused or that's the sentence
after that says prior to
transferring any.
Compliance liability I don't
know that means in a moment
we'll come back to that part of
transferring the complies that
Billy the compliance schedule
show dress that addresses the
liability shall be developed and
approved by the authority a
little bit
state or federal agencies
Senator that means and I don't
know do we really want to make
the state and federal agencies
of and alternatives forty of
this because that's what we wish
to that's what I see that to
read a system for you doing this
we can transfer any.
Of compliance liability tell me
what that means in a moment but
before you do that you got to do
a compliance schedule I don't
know what that is either and I
don't think that's defined this
is the address the level and has
to be approved by the rules with
the state federal agencies what
I really get concerned when we
make something like doing this
subject to a federal agency
for doing something like the
subject of state agencies
because it we're gonna monkey
around at that point and so at
that we need to understand what
all that means why we want to do
that and why would be better to
take it all out.
Mr Chairman thank you that's a
very good question and it comes
from experience in other parts
of the country where I'm
assuming entity meaning and
thorny or regional entity ends
up being settled with the
financial fines as a result of
non compliance with federal
state or state regulation so
what this is saying we're
attempt to say is that before
Authority assumes liability
primarily financial liability
there needs to be compliance
compliance schedule worked out
that it's both approved by the
authority and the state
regulatory or federal regulatory
agency so it could be EPA for
example or could be NMED the in
California they call it the
state Harvard law to protect the
assuming entity from enquiring
from getting penalties from.
Adjoining entity.
Well I understand why you would
want that to happen but once
again you're you're subjecting
all this from happening to the
approval by the federal agency
and unnamed federal agencies so.
you know who which agencies and
how many agencies and all that I
I just I I understand why you
think this is a good idea to
make sure that the the authority
that's taking on the entity
knows what they're getting into
rate of.
And we should know the sure way
for that disclosure but but I
assume that the authorities
gonna.
The demand those disclosures in
of those disclosures and find
out that information in advance
before they're exercising any
kind of due diligence but it was
there where the given the given
that some thought for a moment I
I would I would hate to put.
The brakes on something like
this subject to federal approval
because god help us these days
the federal government you know
and some of what you chair for a
moment ago you something to
drink for second yeah address
that issue forty seven.
Was written so
the entities.
Compliances.
As this is that the.
Are you going.
One two seven.
So Mister chairman cutting Mr
Serra has it this with this
language came from the
environment department and so
let me just have him address
flyer was added here.
So Mister chairman members of
the committee so the environment
department was concerned that if
there was an entity that was
about to join the authority had
they had a compliance issue
let's say with arsenic again.
And they didn't have the
resources to address that unless
they became part of the larger
authority that was the concern
of the New Mexico environment
department that if we didn't
have language similar to what
we've written in here that no
there was no accountability to
addressing the compliance issue
from that entity that had this
in our speak issue.
And so that the language is
really intended to
to mitigate that concern for the
environment department.
So worth of take your guidance
on this subject you know
yeah and I understand why it's a
cautionary language it would be
good for the authority to.
After the know all of this
agreed to all this and redo it
settled financing liabilities
but that's what happens anytime
to corporate entities are in the
in the summers
and I'm just real concern about
that the the the transfer
doesn't take place until you get
these approvals
and approvals by who knows who.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee the idea here is that
the authority becomes a resource
potentially to.
Or or one of the resources to
become a solution to this
entities because a lot of this
entities are not going to get to
a resolution on their own unless
the joined a larger entity with
more capacity however that the.
Financial implications is the
danger how do we how do we
protect the authority but at the
same time how do we make sure
that the entities have the
ability to get to a solution and
sometimes it might be joining
the authority that that's how
they're going to get to a
resolution.
But there needs to be and then
it happens right now at the
front and different authority
like for example does our sense
when does our sense existed.
The thing encouraging a
compliance order they never got
to finance but if they would
have gone to finance than the
authority would have to resolve
that and sometimes like I said
the resolution it's really to
get them and to be to become
part of an authority to be able
to get into compliance.
There were twenty five.
So madam chair again I think
we would miss moralis pay come
from DC for a reason.
And she's certainly lives in
this Miss Universe I I will say
there's another side to this
which is you don't want entities
forming and and running into a
whole string of compliance
issues especially when they're
you know think about it if
you're if you got three entities
forming and.
This is laid out after you
formed it's all of a sudden and
you get notice that one of the
entities that just came and has
a whole string of issues I think
that might well change the
decision to move forward so I
hear what you're saying but I I
just think this is one of those
due diligence components giving
the entities as much information
as they need it and if there's a
compliance issue with the state
or federal government with one
of the entities I sure would
want to know if I was joining if
I was in a different entity so I
mean I I see the logic for for
keeping that in there I also
certainly understand what you're
saying I mean it could be
something that slows the process
down but if they trigger
something that actually is a
problem it's probably a good
thing and slowing it down versus
creating the entity all of a
sudden you're dissolving this
the on underlying entities and
then you find out of the federal
problem or state from well I
hear you suggesting that you'd
like to keep doing worse share I
think I will I think that makes
sense so you know what what I'll
do for you is the sponsor that
my point is taken care of so
good looking years.
And
good it becomes your problem I
think you're gonna have a
problem.
But but you know I understand
the reasons overly explanations
I was thinking when use would
you say that you can't do this
until you've got a schedule
for liability that is developed
and approved by the authority
and the relevant state or
federal agencies that is so
broad and ambiguous we're not
saying what's relevant what is
the state what is the federal
agency who has to develop this
schedule and approved the
schedule there's no doubt in my
mind said where they will slow
this down very sick
significantly potentially anyway
and we'll see we'll be able to
run and it works great if it
doesn't work will come back and
we'll take that out down the
road the problem but I would
expect to becomes a problem on a
different subject on page four
subsection J. this is the really
the heart of the problems we ran
into it is for the point I made
earlier in the and this is just
so obvious to me that is asking
for more of a fight there too
says in the event there is an
area adjacent to the authority
we had down there with Anthony
right if there's an area
adjacent Authority and existing
eight hundred but the areas not
served by either the area shall
be served by the authority or
the existing IT that can most
economically serve the area
that's me I might look at my
friends over there that's gonna
be a lawsuit
because was it me who can most
economically serve the area
that's the that's the fire
service areas at the five for
customers and so the this
language seems really strange if
there's an area adjacent is
already.
An existing entity.
But there is not served by
either the area shall be Sir.
So you've created a thorny.
as a service area but you've got
an area that's not in the
service area but it's adjacent
to that this is that our show me
Sir by the authority or by an
existing entity they can most
economically serve the area and
that may include even areas that
are not survive either thank you
to the authority for another
entity you're saying somebody
has to serve them.
In some cases.
Give the customers what we serve
by the.
And you're saying that they have
to survive.
Of and it's always have decided.
Who can most economically
service and and.
She which customers what service
areas you're you're asking for a
fight but you.
You can you can pick it.
And so Mister chair this was
this was one of the issues that
was flagged by epicor musical
artists here
I would suggest to the car about
taking that out entirely
etcetera.
First of all you're you're
requiring either the authority
that's created for the existing
any require them to serve
people.
Problem that maybe maybe maybe
in either their service area.
So making any any of thirty
serve customers that are not in
their service areas a challenge
and then and then if you're
gonna.
Not to provide that area.
And then if you're gonna say who
gets that servicers one of the
most economically service boy.
I think I'm gonna resolve that
too so I just I think that could
be a fight it certainly my
procedure I.
That are you guys in the north
all year long great I.
All the other representative of
her on that one.
I don't so we fight over service
area right
look at my friends or they'll
tell you that they fight over
servicer it's a big part of
fire.
So Mister chair I I think the
points you raised are valid and
we should take it out I just
think it's cleaner I'm I'm
looking at miss Florida to worst
part of the discussion but I
think what you're raising could
create real issues so I would
suggest we don't we.
Section J. wolf I'm not gonna
make that I could make the
motion it but only yeah I'm
go affects section J. the
further discussion on the issue
of certain objectionable.
Okay well the lawyers out of
business but of that that said
this is a good number Dona Ana
County member the fight over
billion mutual domestic and see
Los crucis when I am for fifteen
twenty years over service area
right.
The guy's name.
What if then my idea of the
number of with don't have the
usual domestic.
The business up there and I was
seventy.
All.
As you guys know that I right so
yeah all right off the point the
minutes adopted of I think
that's really that all I have
Senator let me just make sure
quick.
yeah hi addresses conservation
W. six subsection B. two.
The thirty may assess a one time
fee for the privilege of
connecting a property of thirty
service at a future date of a
property lies within three
hundred feet of the service
lines and that property was
located within the boundaries of
the authority I really don't
understand what all that means
and how that's gonna work
so what we know so with them is
the Authority may assess a one
time fee for the privilege of
connecting of property the
service at a future date.
If the property line three
hundred feet of the authority
service lines.
The property located.
Okay within the boundaries.
So we have a part of the
property line any part of a
properly with the authorities
boundaries.
That's what it reads if that
property owners will pay within
the boundaries.
Then somebody could ask to be
connected to the authority.
They would be charged a fee in
their property lines within
three hundred feet of the
service lines.
Mr chairman committee members
the logic behind this is that
there is a cost associated with
building infrastructure
obviously to to get to different
areas of of it service area
right.
The idea is that.
If someone is for example in a
private while at the time that
the infrastructure costs in
their not going to be charged a
fee obviously but if at a later
date later date they need to
become part of the authority
because they're well goes dry or
they have some well issues.
There will be a one time
assessment that will recover
some of that infrastructure
cost.
It goes beyond three hundred
feet then the cost would be
obviously different.
but if it's within three hundred
feet and it's basically the the
cost of the infrastructure.
Development of the
infrastructure.
Okay good enough on the anyone
else committee other questions.
to pass measures our worth close
to as amended will rule replaces
the committee subcommittee have
the proper motion centers to.
I move it do not pass the Senate
bill one do passed from Senate
Judiciary Committee sept two
for Senate bill one point three
version to incorporate all the
changes we've testament.
So well stated
there any further discussion is
there objection to that motion
scene that motion care of
etcetera etcetera pirtle
etcetera by imploding in
oppositional members putting
support mission carries.
Senate bill one committee
substitute do pass this
committee.
If you.
First.
Thank you for.
I want to appeal no.
No
votes we have with our New
Mexico are.
Community.
For.
We will consider.
Our our.
I'm gonna ask the.
I.
The census bureau.
Yes stop.
Personals.
R. after the.
Yeah.
The.
This is
so okay.
Good.
thank you Mr chair Senate bill
forty four relates to elections
and prohibits the carrying of a
firearm within a hundred feet of
a polling place during an
election with an exception for
peace officers the penalty for
violating this act as a petty
misdemeanor
Mr chair and members the reason
for this bill is pretty
straightforward I think
elections and firearms do not
mix on this idea came from a
constituents working as a poll
worker who this past cycle.
Reached a point where.
He's stopped in that position
because of threats he felt by
individuals coming to vote with
firearms and caring those
firearms so.
That's what the bill does I
think.
We had a good discussion and
rules about.
The issues I know there was a
discussion whether this should
go farther than a hundred feet
of the reason it's left a
hundred feet is that is the
currently established area where
folks can.
Election year and a hundred.
The final thing Mr chair and
members that's important this
bill simply creates a uniform
standard right now for polling
places that are in schools you
cannot bring a gun into that
polling place this simply will
apply the same rules for schools
to all other
going places in voting centers
that's what the bill does Mr
president Mr president I like
that Mr chair sorry madam
president.
All right thank you senator
Wirth Sen bill forty four there
were no registered experts for
proponents there's one
registered opponents may ask you
will hear from and they ask you
for two minutes you also being
passed out the proposed
amendment.
We'll have the.
The sponsor the moment in just a
moment I will be here from eight
us are you here present
yeah hi mistress the regulars
for up to two minutes in
opposition to Senate bill forty
four.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee give me one moment
I'm sorry seven yes.
I'm sure familiar with jokes
about long making within a
particular member of public area
of expertise damn part of that
job with central for for higher
living in the Albuquerque area I
ran on profit focused on
violence prevention and schools
working with schools and law
enforcement agencies prevent
actively responds Act funds
children.
Tell you that this bill makes
our polling places more
vulnerable last year's.
I.
Over ninety five percent of
national Kerry errors are on.
The average mass shooter kills
or injures one person every ten
seconds and another victims are
stopped or to stop of their own
for fifty four percent of the
time when confronted by police
measures will surrender commits
suicide media numbers over
ninety percent of the frontline
arms is.
Interviews mashers consistently
revealed the targeted areas for
firearms prohibited specifically
because they help for any murder
for an extended period of time
for the police rocked some
planned to shoot out police.
When they're confronted by an
intended victim turned up the
arm for shocks and stopped
killing one masters drive police
intervention the average time
correct over the next our system
is involved the averages of two
there is no simple and our
system ever misidentified
Representative one case.
First please do so honest and
the regular basis such as Nevada
want violent limited for further
when they're injured disarmed
helpless this bill will help us.
Our systems are not obviously
wishing for measures most we can
hope our healthiest feed.
They are however statistically
affected acting is that's people
I would urge you to be extremely
cautious expanding areas for the
carrying firearms for that was
thank you thank you Mr us thank
you for being right on time two
minutes all right.
Members of the committee
questions or comments from
members of the committee.
Anyone at all we we got a
proposed amendment we found nice
try their Senator could the.
Mr yep we've got a proposal from
his.
But some of the work.
We're trying to do.
Decision rules but Senator said
the session of Law and trying
his early develop as with our
pork is ready the papers as the
rules here every single gun bill
introduced in the session as of
March.
And this is an effort to
actually try to break a lot of
really cool the really service
what this members for the public
is that will create the Sanchez
like we're also work for those
who are still carried by these
training background checks it's
not in the public uses concealed
to avoid the issue with
interpretation of people worried
about having to go on there and
also address the issue we have
an album you have leader gone in
a car versus pole in place for
both personal purview redesigns.
Report on target.
My overall quality as well and
they're more of some other jobs
to the if you're going to one of
those jobs you want five point
of the issue that we remember
what this law if you are you can
concealed Kerry wanted to the
vets but it's store right there
viable employees very very.
So this will provide the
legislative session we have
concealed carry that can still
deal with going back and Mr
chair rotation it's very logical
would break this logjam of
of
of partisanship on the issues
for the session so that's my
question thank you so members of
the committee questions comments
on the proposed move this
rendition just Sanchez will
Center were so Mister chairman
we have had a good discussion
rules about this ammendment it's
not a friendly amendment again
what I'm trying to do here is
create the same rules that exist
for schools where the polling
places as exist for the other
polling locations I understand
certainly the argument and I
appreciate Senator Moores didn't
just come in the committee in
hand this to me came and had a
conversation and that's exactly
how it should work and again
this is one of those or we just
have a a difference of opinion
and this is up to the will of
the committee as to what
direction we go on this but I
would consider on from the
amendment on the proposed
amendment center doing then.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman hi as of
this moment.
You know we don't allow firearms
here and around.
I think in large part because
we're dealing with because
because politics can.
People get passionate about
politics is that we don't allow
concealed carry here I think we
I would like to give us a
consideration to voters when
they're at the polls and they're
just as passionate about what it
is they're voting on.
I also know that we don't even
allow booze within two hundred
feet of the polls the idea of
allowing firearms.
if they're concealed still in
the polls but but not alcohol
strikes me as as a little so.
That's what Mr chair so do we we
we could have a mascot in here
close to we do know about foods
we we don't allow alcohol we
don't allow alcohol within two
hundred feet of Paul I was
concerns that might be an
amendment to this bill.
For you and give you any idea
of the discussion Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman I I think
that there's a little bit more
of a
The process of acquiring a
concealed carry in then just a
person carrying around to go
through some training and some
recognition of your firearm and
you're actually register to have
that license in the state so we
know you have it you know I
would.
with respect disagree completely
with the fact that just because
we don't have firearms in this
building
for allow concealed carry in
this building that that is a
product of that's because we all
agree but more product of this
is a partisan discussion and the
fact is is that that decision
was made within eight council
that was a party line vote as
well this is simply an extension
of that so I would really
disagree with that but I think
this is a fair compromise it
sounds like senator Morris is
even offering a
by it bipartisan compromises
where where there would be some
agreement on this which is much
different than what we have on
the building here so and I would
tend to support them thank you
Mr thank you others.
Further discussion.
As usual the last of hi.
I hope like Senator Moores that
we'll find ourselves the session
not addressing gun safety issues
on a party line basis I think
that's a good place for you to
start appreciate that very much
I've I've tried to repeatedly
put up the fact that I'm gonna
Representative going on and I
I have more than one and as a
gun owner I think it's incumbent
on me to be part of the solution
to gun safety issues and then to
use really frankly the
experience of those of us that
are gun owners to address
suggestions the session for gun
safety because I think I.
Probably most knowledgeable on
the subject matter many of us
are so
I I would hope that we're going
to find that place where we're
not always lined up on on
partisan grounds.
That's all I have.
Thank you all right.
We're we're on we're on the
amendment
we're on we'll do is a roll call
Emily please on the men's.
Senator Baca yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Morris yes.
They're part of yes Senator
Stewart now.
Senator Wirth.
Senator do it now.
Senator serve on no that
amendment is not adopted back to
the committee.
For the past.
The discussion yes Senator
Pirtle interact just the
committee knows to I I don't
believe a second is required for
motion so I know many of you are
looking to jump in a second but
I I don't know the requirement
of a second so don't expect me
to have to wait on a second for
any motion also Center Perlin
Center Baca.
Chair thank you senator
it's not really questions it's
more of a COVID you know I I
think as we see.
Legislation like this moving you
know I I also don't want guns at
at polling places but the
problem is criminals to crime
and it's like expecting somebody
to put a quarter in the parking
meter in front of the bank
before they rob.
you know and and that's just
where I struggle with this and
and I think it might make some
people feel good that look
because of this
You know they're not going to
take firearms to to a polling
place and it's just it baffles
me why we can't do the conceal
carry I think that's an awesome
solution
so bipartisan pieces that that
would have made it a lot more
palatable but.
It's still.
That's where my
No votes comes from is what we
end up doing inevitably is
ensuring that the good people
with a gun don't have the gun to
stop the bad person with the gun
the shows up to do crime.
And it's been proven over and
over that that's an effective
way there's plenty of stories we
don't hear because the good
person with a gun put a stop to
something before was a tragedy.
What became a problem
So hopefully
the
and I'm not gonna convince
enough people on this committee
where for out number quite well
I think but that's just my
opinion and and that a that's
one voting no thank you.
You serve our.
Mr chair just quick question
that came to me here
polling place and we got some
people well versed on elections
here on this committee
Mr chair what is a polling place
I guess my worry is there's
different polling places for
different elections so how how
is it defined as for a specific
Alexion say we are a leading a
city council
how does that differ from
another election in us not
capturing all of the polling
places for any election I guess
would be my questions which.
Sewing Mr chair Senator Baca I'm
probably yield to one of our
election because I'm I'm sure
polling place branded defined
term in the code is not defined
term the code so Senator Ivey
Soto I'm gonna yield center Ivey
Soto to give you a specific
answer.
I think this gentleman sorry
about that and so forth so the
get focus is not on the defined
term however it is a a term that
is used throughout the.
The election code.
as a generic term more people
developed so so it's so.
It would be there are there are
some laws where we distinguish
between early voting.
where sometimes we call it
altered voting for all to the
location Google alternate
location.
election day in this particular
case I think the the intent of
the author is is to simply
established a
and non nuanced rules that would
apply across the board and in
that regard pulling place
is a is it understood term.
So Mr chair that I this you know
I I would point out that
obviously it's not understood a
hence the question on and so I
was wondering if if the sponsor
would be open to developing some
language to specify it to the
particular election in question
I'm just so that we're not
capturing polling places across
the city and thereby affecting
citizens that really are there
for election but it happens to
be a polling place since it's
not defined.
Yes some of Mister chairman
Senator Baca I think the
concerned with trying to do that
is that in word smithing we
actually could.
In New York in advert only.
Do something the other direction
I think the the reasons what
Senator Ivy Soto said.
The use of this term is
throughout the election code
so I can't I don't know exactly
what kind of language you're
thinking about but.
You know my inclination is to
leave this as simple as possible
and the fact that we have this
term throughout the code I think
it's going to not lead to.
Confusion but I don't have
specific language.
Thank you Mr chair let me see
here of trying to develop a
amendment here that maybe might
work
So.
I really don't have anything
that I could develop right here
on the spot that I feel
comfortable in the couple of
sections so all all leave that
at that except to to reiterate
in the think centre for the
purpose of put it really well
who will be affected here you're
gonna affect me you can affect
the other senators here gonna
affect law abiding citizens were
again I feel like putting in
place another restriction on law
abiding citizens
will follow with we're leaving
out the criminal is going to do
the thing they're gonna do and
you know I think you acknowledge
in the last committee and I tend
to agree we we just have a
different philosophical opinion
on on this matter so
unfortunately I won't be able to
support your bill today I will
however try to develop the
language prior to floor possibly
introduce that maybe would be
amenable to that that's all
thank you Mr.
That we.
Junction.
The
ability.
Of
course.
Baca all of the resilience for
Right so.
Along.
We also.
The.
About thirty.
Thank you those.
Have.
It knowledge the committee
procedures.
Senator Steinborn you'll have
fifteen minutes for advocacy you
have a number of.
Individuals identified
as.
Please we have
Berman Department.
Basil secretary pros secretary
Kenny county commissioner
mobile.
Executive director of the of the
chemical John Joseph Stacey
Cardona.
The owner Morgan who is Carrero
Senator that does not appear to
be there was not a request for
consolidated a block of time so
given the number of proponents
will rule out up to fifteen
minutes of our advocacy take
your time a presentation will
divide the remaining time
between the number of people
have signed up register to speak
in support we'll see what that
we've so Senator.
December thank you very much Mr
chairman committee on a transfer
is brief as possible because I
know your time is limited and
such an important subject Senate
bill fifty three Mr chair
basically does a few things it
asked members to the existing
radioactive consultation task
force.
That's a lot right now
that is our point executive
entity to deal with our federal
facility with.
And it and it adds to that that
we're we're tasking or executive
to also consider impacts of the
state of.
New private facilities.
In.
Furthermore it prohibits the
store to disposal of spent fuel
from high high level waste in a
disposal facility.
And it defines disposal facility
until the state has consented to
our concurred in the creation of
a disposal facility and.
A repository as an operations as
required by federal law in the
nuclear waste policy act.
thirdly it as you know it it it
really makes clear that we're
doing this to preserve the
state's economy.
We're doing this to preserve
of social justice attributes in
the state and water and that
those are you know are primarily
our main motivations in doing
this and so that Mr chair
calling centers on joined by
Bruce by cell who's the deputy
chief deputy chief counsel for
the New Mexico environment
department has my expert witness
and let me just close with this
Mr chair we did not ask for this
proposal
that we have a proposal right
now to store the entire
country's nuclear waste in New
Mexico in fact it's a proposal
the store twice the amount of
the nation's current supply of
spent fuel right now.
It's going to result in ten
thousand shipments of high level
waste coming in through all
parts of New Mexico by armed
guards including and the part
that maybe makes me the maddest
is every bit of it is going to
end up going through
southeastern New Mexico on the
final rules for through close
for Tallis Roswell.
That's not a future they asked
for that's not a teacher they're
being given a sent to take part
in
And that's really the efficiency
and federal law of which many in
Congress are trying to change is
all movement right now in
Congress to move to the consent
based system to our state's
actually that want this
the situation can apply for and
there's millions of dollars
being appropriated right now
they're taking applications and
Congress is spending money to
move a consent based process
forward so this is really a
radical relic of a broken
federal law and a loophole that
would allow for a few people to
trigger something on not just
the state but in fact the entire
nation.
Without actually having a
permanent repository in place.
So
definitely the tail wagging the
dog it's it's question a states
rights
But primarily it it you know
poses some significant threats
to the state so with that I'm
done Mr chair and in the.
And I will
For those of them anything you
want another okay work will
stand for questions from the
committee's request all right
and let's see.
We've got the in the fifth the
allow fifteen minutes for the
advocacies Senator so you will
use to at this point time five
minutes so we have ten minutes
for the remaining proponents in
all just take them in that order
given the number of people will
ask you to keep your comments to
one minute I secretary pros.
One minute please good afternoon
Mister chairman
if there are problems and
secretary of the rules natural
resources department to support
this bill I am the also the
chair by statute of the
radioactive waste consultations
have.
Noted in the bill of the
members.
For that these are agencies need
to be working right this makes
official and then our
administration's longstanding
policy has been that face
considering disposal.
That.
Thank you Secretary can.
That.
The question of the houses
researching.
I.
Our our.
And you're on a half of the.
G. like.
This process.
Thank you commissioner hello.
Just to speak.
turn video signal director off a
little council for you here.
Yes Representative your record
is up to one minute Sir okay
thank you good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee my name is for
commercial I am the chairman of
the awful council governors I
did send Mr via here to speak on
my behalf listen from the
billable your
support of this bill and we look
forward to approval on this
committee thank you thank you.
The technical John.
Thank.
Members of the committee but
John with conservation voters
New Mexico we strongly urge you
to support this bill and I would
point out that the purpose which
the sponsor mentioned for this.
For.
S. is expressed in page for the
bill because that bill for you
and this is.
I will all just.
Thank you thank you Joseph
Stacey.
Yes your recognize that one
minute Sir.
Good afternoon that there were
three ministers of state so.
Order was organized project
the status of order just to
fifty three also as a man but I
remember the removal of S. and
support as well we're on that
why.
That of this
proxy.
Yes Sir and so the phones were
because of the from.
Thank you Mr Stacey path.
Basis.
Part of.
We have I.
Sure we are publishing about
seventy individuals and
organizations are we support SB
fifty three stages of all
health care and for school.
What law.
Thank you.
The show was started for us.
Storage for the R..
There are.
If you want to do the math.
These ones are only short term.
Gathers act contaminated water
activities your policy.
And other interim storage places
and.
Asian nuclear power plants you
have friends you madam chair
that awaits Mexico has.
What what is.
You are under Stacy just.
All.
Your watch for.
As required by federal law thank
you Mr donation your time's
expired
Leona Morgan please up to one
minute.
Yes A. J. the organization which
that's in on the fifteen
doctors.
I am a student residents he's
been living in Albuquerque for
twenty years I live exactly half
a mile from
and I do not Representative
nation the government officials
chair and members of the
committee thank you for hearing
me I just want to say the Navajo
Nation has a log into uranium
mining because of the
devastation of radioactive
waste.
And we have a lot in the
transport of radioactive waste
which we hope the state of New
Mexico respect and so I kindly
urge you to support.
The.
We were Representative except
one minute Sir thank you good
afternoon members of the
committee.
Mr chair of the early chapter
I'm just gonna read out our
national service national health
I was releases should be stored
in the state for the cost of.
What sort of interim meeting
faces of the permanent location
for this the state is with the
full privacy to decide economic
impact that we are willing to
accept additionally without a
permanent storage and there's no
legal basis for storage thank
you thank you.
All right those are the
individuals who register to
speak in the in the committee we
have a number of individuals who
asked to speak in support of by
zoom will recognize those again
within the fifteen minutes a lot
for advocacy so zoom first of
all we'll hear from them more
and then James more and then
Joni Aaron's in that order and
will continue from there then
more are you on soon and if so
you're recognize for up to one.
More than our.
That and more is not on Tuesday
more however is James more your
recognize for up to one.
you Mr chair.
We have an awesome is joining us
our our I was greeted can I
start with my one minute yes.
Some way.
For yeah more items range entry
exploration in Midland Texas for
an independent family owned oil
and gas exploration development
company and I I strongly support
this legislation I I work
closely with us and got governor
abit and whatnot I guess this on
both of the Texas in the New
Mexico side
and and really supported project
just a little background back in
nineteen eighty two Congress U.
S. Congress passed the nuclear
waste policy act which charge
the federal government was
responsible the ability to
handle all this high level
nuclear waste and find a place
to store it safely deep
underground and underground that
is the work here this this
storage both for Texas and New
Mexico size to be stored at the
surface which is into a found a
loophole basically where they
don't have to to reduce
underground if it's called inter
what this is gonna be a long
term deal very bad idea right in
the heart of the biggest oil
fields in the United States it
puts everybody people businesses
and resources at tremendous risk
for a terrorist attack or just
from playing you know shoulder
fired missile aircraft of truck
bomb shelter and with the winds
the way they blow dust particles
attract new our nuclear New
Mexico particles are attracted
to dust particles imagine a dust
storm the Lucy's particles two
hundred miles or more thanks
committee thank you Mr mayor
thank you Mr mayor times expired
Joni Erin's followed by John
person from this that we have on
the job across that that Jonah
because the roof carrier
recognize the minutes or.
Yes.
Yes.
Mr.
Mr Constance good evening yes
let me let me begin good evening
chairman and members of the
committee because I'm here on
behalf of Care.
An environmental justice
organization in Santa Fe with
thousands of members.
Or to speak in support of SB
fifty three.
Yes please thank you the
governor.
As stated that she support this
bill we'll sign it into law in
choose what poll also shows a
maturity New Mexico voters
oppose the proposed Holtec
project also nineteen cities and
counties have passed resolutions
opposing the transport I am the
co radioactive waste through the
community community.
New Mexico does not have a
commercial nuclear power plants
the US should not be burdened
with all the nations spent
nuclear fuel thank you please
hold for the next.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Costa so there
there's one more individual I
thank you for to name is after
have you know.
The Mr how to me or your
recognize for up to one minute
Sir.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee I'm here to
speak on behalf of the United
the climate crisis actions yes
it is a new order organization
with thousands of members and
supporters in northern and
central New Mexico concerned
about are meant to justice we
stand strong support this bill
because we're greatly concerned
with the generation
transportation and handling of
radioactive waste all kinds
whether nuclear weapons nuclear
energy or practice we are
strongly opposed to the idea
that Mexico speed up the rounds
of this waste as a group led by
young indigenous people this
bill is particularly important
to us our people and plants
experience devastating effects
of nuclear happening we
appreciate this bill that will
protect our communities from
further more so thank you to the
sponsor you for ending the
practice of treating our
communities as sacrifice of
please vote support of SB fifty
three thank you thank you.
The chairman Dona ana county
commissions trying to get
recognized we had him on those
whom registration was Center
we've exceeded the fifteen
minutes a lot for the advocacy
so we'll turn out oppositional
out fifteen minutes for
opposition the proponents have
registered you have three
minutes to up here Onita might
pronounce that correctly of up
to three minutes for Mr Mr needs
a followed by
up to seven minutes for Mr
Silberg and then there's one
other broadened the cold
identified I believe in in the
of the opposition so Mister need
all recognized for those three
minutes you requested good thank
you Mr chairman Mr chairman and
members of the Senate Judiciary
Committee
that is the enemy of the chief
nuclear officer for Altec
international.
And I appreciate this
opportunity to speak to the
committee.
Our farmers the ad in the Energy
Alliance unless our oppose this
bill I'm here to be with you not
to move this bill to the floor.
The safety and security
transportation and storage of
spent nuclear fuel are without
reproach.
At all well documented by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
and supported by eleven
scientists from New Mexico this
letter here was a recent letter
from Gary came here is the
audience the government we shall
endorsed by eleven scientists
and PhD from Mexico I'm not like
to focus on the economic
benefits that Senate bill fifty
three will stop if passed.
In response to the Blue Ribbon
commission I received a call
from John he in twenty fifteen.
And I learned.
From John that the Elia
intention to bring economic
development to the area.
What's the balance the rise and
fall of oil and gas industry.
We first ensure the support to
the local cities and counties
that's what we did first.
Here's a recent letter.
And I can't imagine it could be
ignored sign like twenty seven
officials from the Eddy County
Lee County and the cities across
better.
Based and then after we ensure
local support.
We came to visit with the
governor and received very
strong support from the governor
at the time and her entire
cabinet.
Based on that strong support we
receded include faith to spend
eighteen years and over eighty
million dollars towards a
license which is imminent
according to the LFC.
And have been working hard on
financing to bring incredible
economic benefits as promised.
The projects will produce
billions of dollars.
In construction and incentives
five hundred and fifty full time
jobs.
And those are long term jobs in
for this was not just the
storage facility so the storage
facilities one manufacturing
facilities to research and
development center and a world
class training facility that
hold the connection problems the
storage facility is the first
step it's a down payment.
In the economic development the
overall benefit to New Mexicans
will for.
Outlast the life of the proposed
storage facility.
We are dedicated to follow
through on our promise to bring
economic diversity and stable
well paying jobs to the region
we want to work with the state
Mr chairman and members of the
Senate is set there is no.
Representative said Senate bill
fifty three thank you for you
Sir.
Mr sober your recognize from to
seven minutes or.
Thank you Mr chairman J. Solberg
of a partner Washington DC law
firm of Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw
Pittman on behalf of Holtec I'm
pleased to be here to discuss SB
fifty three and particularly the
federal preemption issues I've
been practicing law for more
than fifty years including a
wide variety of issues involving
spent nuclear fuel spent nuclear
fuel storage facilities these
include the proposed hi store
facility in New Mexico the
private fuel storage facility
planned in Utah the General
Electric facility in Barcelona
and dozens of individual spent
fuel storage facilities at power
plant sites among these issues
on which I provided legal advice
to see authority of states and
local governments over the
facilities.
But we focus on federal
preemption.
It's a topic I've spent
considerable time on since the
nineteen eighties.
One of my utility clients just
me to analyze what rights the
state that overview totally
spent fuel storage I've provided
similar advice but many subject
subsequent occasions including
Nevada's authority with respect
to yucca mountain and Utah's
authority with respect to
private fuel storage.
As you know the private fuel
storage facility is essentially
the same just hold.
But particular relevance to SB
fifty three is a successful
preemption challenge by private
fuel storage in the school
valley brand we go through this
to the Utah laws that attempted
to block the PFF's facility.
As you know private fuel storage
and school well in New.
Convince the federal District
Court in Utah and the U. S.
court of appeals for the tenth
circuit that the Utah laws were
preempted.
The US Supreme Court rejected
Utah's petition to challenge the
tenth circuit's decision.
The tenth circuit's decision is
of particular interest since so
sure you know the preemption
preemption challenged SB fifty
three would also actually be
heard on the field in that very
court.
Or first principles the
supremacy clause of the US
constitution says that federal
laws are the supreme law of the
land laws in the state to the
contrary notwithstanding.
A series of court cases have to
provide federal preemption were
nuclear facilities and
activities are involved I've
been involved in some of those
myself right right recent brief
to the Supreme Court in many
cases the most recent federal
preemption case on nuclear
issues.
The general principle for
federal preemption is clear is
not subject to debate.
The state has no right and I
repeat no right to enact laws
which relate to nuclear health
and safety.
That's the sole province the US
government and specifically the
US Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.
The key question then becomes
whether the particular state
laws come within the nuclear
health and safety.
The Utah laws prohibit a wide
range of activities and
attempted to block the of us
project.
These range from prohibited
counties for providing municipal
type services to PFOS.
Banning spent fuel storage and
transportation.
Imposing a ten billion dollar
cash bond and a five million
dollar non refundable
application fee.
Restricting PFOS ability to use
local roads.
Revitalizing contracts that were
entered into related to PFAS.
And revoking the limited
liability for stockholders
owners officers and directors
directors involved in that
project.
The funding the fellows to be
predicted the tenth circuit
applied the supreme court's
nuclear preemption decisions
including the Pacific gas K.
what's under you the film ladies
of consider.
The same analysis would apply to
SB fifty three.
With the president on all four
javascript SB fifty three.
I would find it most surprising
if the tenth circuit would reach
a different conclusion.
The District Court in New Mexico
or a judicial challenge to SB
fifty three would be files would
be bound to apply the tenth
circuit's precedent.
This call they always decision.
From the tenth circuit explained
why it found the Utah laws were
preempted.
Well the California laws
involved in the Pacific gas K.
we're not.
California's economic authority
over nuclear generating plants
is widely recognized including
an HR manager act and including
the power to determine whether
more generation was needed and
what for that generation would
take responsible nuclear
renewable or other forms.
California regulates the
economics of the third of our
generation not the NRC.
New Mexico on the other hand has
no such regulatory authority
over the holding facility.
It's only because of spent
nuclear fuel that would be
stored.
And transport the.
That SB fifty three is being
considered.
But for the fact that SB fifty
three seeks to provide storage
and transportation of this
radioactive material.
With such a bill that even been
introduced.
I think not.
SB fifty three does not apply to
other facilities or
transportation of other mature.
Therefore it can only be the
nuclear characteristics of the
materials.
That five or ten to justify SB
fifty three.
In other words SB fifty three is
directly related to nuclear
health and safety.
The poor health and safety
characteristics of the spent
fuel that would be transported
stored of the holding facility.
And those impacts are precisely
the radiological health and
safety issues that federal
preemption bars the state from
regular.
As a result it's my opinion that
SB fifty will be found to be
preempted when challenged
justice where the Utah laws
founded be free of the tenth
circuit still valid this is.
And I have system wide adopt the
bill that is illegal from the
very start.
Thank you for the opportunity to
yes so I'm not too pleased to
answer any questions thank you
very much again mute asked for
seven minutes here in a six
thirty seven so very good Sir
appreciate that too
rod McCall of.
Thank you very I'm calling on on
impact is that.
Give me just one second here
let's see we've heard.
I'm here run all yes Mr call my
can recognize you for up to
three minutes we've heard about
twelve minutes of opposition so
we're Mr McCollum up to three
minutes.
Thank you very much I run a call
of the nuclear energy institute
I speak in opposition to Senate
bill fifty three on behalf of
the nuclear industry the
providers of the majority of our
nation's carbon free energy in
recent times ongoing and right
before Christmas also
reliability of nuclear
Campos lights on this is a very
important national facility it
is a important part of our clean
energy infrastructure it is the
type of facility American needs
if we are to indeed overcome to
overcome the ravages of climate
change
just be in section three B. in
SB fifty three for reasons are
cited for banning this facility
for threats to the state hi wish
to point out that all four of
these things have been
specifically addressed in NRC's
environmental impact final
environmental impact statement
on this facility document it is
new right twenty two thirty
seven dated July twenty twenty
two first most importantly an
environmental justice the NRC
loaded construction operation
decommissioning and reclamation
facility as well as
transportation and found no
disproportionately high and
adverse impact on any
environmental justice
populations including minority
and low income populations
second on natural resources
again the inner city and in
partnership with the bureau of
land management looked at all
the impacts from all aspects
only on the resources of land
use VLT soil surface waters and
wetlands groundwater ecological
resources air quality visual and
scenic resources all impacts on
natural resources were found to
be small on water quality
the actor in our city and and up
the elements can looted that up
the impacts on groundwater the
small they specifically found
that the whole tech will
implement best practices and
National pollutant discharge
elimination system permit
requirements one other measures
that will offer tax groundwater
in shallow aquifer's and provide
controls and set limits on this
chart is that appropriate
finally and it's already been
discussed and I know that in the
conservation committee and
number of a local government
spoke and and and and Tierney
earlier mentioned the local
supporters has the environmental
impact statement found that
across the board the economic
impacts ocean and economic
impacts this facility would be
small to moderate and an
official so for all these
reasons this is not a threat to
the state of New Mexico but in
fact this is something of great
benefit to the nation as a whole
it that would be an important
addition to the portfolio of
nuclear facilities that already
exist in that corner of the
state the synergistic effect is
more than one plus one plus one
equals three as the nuclear
industry is is working a great
growth to again provide more
carbon free energy and and help
the nationwide right climate
change I thank the committee for
its thorough consideration of
the implications of this measure
and I urge you to vote against
SB fifty three thank you Mr
column we've heard now about
fourteen minutes of of speakers
in opposition
the chair is going to request
the ascent of the committee to
conclude the hearing tonight
allow the committee for
amendments a discussion as the
first order of business on
Monday I'd indicated would have
a hard stop time at five thirty
I know some members have some
commitments we've already lost
some members and I think we're
gonna blow up about to lose one
or two more I hate to not
complete the can committee
discussion the vote etcetera
Steinborn I appreciate your
consideration that but we we can
begin with the committee
discussion first order on Monday
and plan for a vote that time I
regret those of you that travel
all this way they maybe haven't
come back again but the majority
present.
We conclude all the input will
take from you so there would be
no reason for you to have to
come back again to I'll just
that you get in the chair is
going to need to do some of this
as the needs arise but I did
indicate would have a hard stop
time at five thirty today and
I'd like to encourage all
members I'm gonna do my best to
try and start on time that the
times of indicate today we had
an unusual day with a joint
session all encourage all
members to be here promptly we
we've waited about forty minutes
today with all the people the
audience here today to get a
quorum together it's not my my
wish to start with the
subcommittee because I think we
deprive all of us of good input
from all of you for being here
so we start on time for us to
make a more progress some of the
committees that help you
understand that the wishes of
the chair tonight but there's
that word hope you'll of allow
us to do so we're early in the
session I think this is not
going to do you any harm in the
long term so will resume Monday
on this topic thank you were in
recess.
