for how long then? Do you
understand?
OK. Uh, so we'll, we'll have 10
minutes. The opposition will
have 10 minutes of proponents.
So representative, you have the
10 minutes, you can use it as
you wish. You can defer to your
experts as much of that as you
want. You can reserve any part
of that as you want, OK?
Right, you've got 10 minutes. Go
ahead.
Mr. Chairman. So we're here to
discuss House Bill 36. The
purpose of the bill is to expand
the scope of practice for
optometrists and improve patient
access to several types of
in-office laser-based eye care?
Uh, it expands the scope of
practice for optometrists to
include laser applications to
the lens capsule of the eye and
the treatment of capsular
clouding or other defects, and
laser application, the
structures within the ocular
interior segment for the
prevention and treatment of
glaucoma.
Uh, HP 36 requires the optometry
board to develop and administer
credentialing requirements for
optometrists who want to perform
surgeries requiring a laser. And
with that, I want to introduce
uh my expert Mr. Chairman,
sitting to my left. This is
Doctor Sarahortz, and she may
have a statement.
Good evening, Mister Chair,
members of the committee. I am
Doctor Sarahortz and a past
president of the New Mexico
Optometric Association.
House Bill 36 would authorize
optometrists to perform in
office laser procedures in post
cataract care and the treatment
of glaucoma. These procedures
are taught at all schools and
colleges of optometry and our
training has been proven safe
and effective by both 146,000
laser procedures being performed
by optometrists, with only 2
adverse events and the fact that
medical malpractice rates have
not increased in the 12 states
that allow optometrists to do.
these procedures.
HB 36 aims to improve access to
care for New Mexico, including
decreased wait times, decreased
travel times and decrease
repetitive visits so that
patients can get care in their
communities. Thank you for your
time and I'll gladly answer any
questions.
Without Mr. Chair, we stand for
questions. OK, very good. We
don't have anyone else
registered to support your
presentation was relatively
brief, 4 minutes, but I had
indicated that I would at least
all the opponents a lot of the 8
minutes of, of rebuttal time.
Uh, for those of you, you said
you had a common spokesperson if
that person would come forward.
The people that I have
registered in opposition include
the following.
Rebecca, lean here, Vicky
Rutledge, Melissa Lobato.
Nathaniel Royal, uh, Hartley
Fillmore.
Nicholas Medica and Natasha
Dark, Elizabeth Cretara, are all
of you all here and all you part
of this common presentation?
These are some, some are on
Zoom. Yes, I understand, but are
they all part of your organized
opposition?
OK, yeah, the, the reason I ask
that is because um you, you'll
then be able to control how much
time you want to speak, but
you'll, the total group will
have 8 minutes so if you speak 8
minutes yourself to everybody
else is scratch. That makes
sense?
And the goal of that is just to
allow sometimes just one person
does a better job than 8 people
doing 1-minute presentations,
but in your case, and so if
you'd introduce yourself and I'm
gonna rely upon you to
recognize.
Question, do I just uh ask for
the person to be brought up on
Zoom because they are in order.
Bro we'll bring him up when you,
thank you.
So good evening uh chair
Cervantes and committee members.
My name is Doctor Rebecca Lane
here and I'm the president of
the New Mexico Academy of
Ophthalmology, and we oppose HB
36, which allows non-medical
doctors to perform laser
surgery. I respect optometrists
work, but there's a critical
difference in our training, just
as there's cardiologists and
heart surgeons, physical
therapists and orthopedic
surgeons. Uh, each person
maintains their roles. We think
of it like a sandwich. There's a
bread and meat that come
together to make a tasty meal,
but bread cannot become a meat
just by changing the rules. In
only 10 states that allow
optometrists to perform laser
surgeries, there have been a
number of complications
reported. And this isn't just
about optometrists versus
ophthalmologists, the Department
of Health and its FIR, that's an
exhibit number 2, page 4, number
9, has expressed serious
concerns over the patient's
safety, uh, with procedures
being performed by improperly
trained individuals.
s Now these procedures are not
simple or easy, and laser eye
procedures can lead to
complications that require
emergent surgery. An
ophthalmologists are trained to
handle these and optometrists do
not have the skills to handle
these emergent surgeries.
Examples include glaucoma lasers
can cause bleeding and extremely
high pressures when you need to
put a needle in the eye to drain
the fluid. Um, yeah, I
capsulotti, which treats the
corneal or the clouding after
cataract surgery can damage the
lens.
But it can also fall to the back
of the eye and need retina
surgery to pull it out of the
eye and need replacement and a
sewing lens, and any red laser
surgery has risks of retinal
detachments. In the states that
allow optometrists to do these
procedures. Most don't require
reporting when things go wrong.
So the optometrists say that
there have been two problems out
of 146,000, but our real world
experience, which is in our
exhibit 16 shows that 5% of
patients have complications.
So this means that optometrists
might not be recognized the
problems, they might be hiding
the problems or patients are
just getting help elsewhere. Now
this bill in front of you does
not require reporting, reporting
of complications. In exhibit 17,
it's a scientific study from
Oklahoma that compared these
laser procedures from
optometrists and eye surgeons,
and those treated by
optometrists were 3 times as
likely to have a second
procedures on their eyes.
And that's 1 89% more likely.
And researchers weren't in this
paper to avoid approving laser
privileges for optometrists. So
I myself, I'm a pediatric eye
surgeon. I take care of the most
vulnerable population and then
adults who have double vision,
so, uh, I don't prefer these
procedures myself, but, so this
isn't a turf war. It's not about
protecting my job. It's not
financial gain or loss, but it
simply is about protecting New
Mexicans' vision. It's about
keeping them safe, and I urge
you guys to keep your vows to
keep New Mexicans safe.
The next um uh person I'd like
to call up is Vicky Rutledge on
the Zoom.
It's really I don't know if you
can hear me, but you've been
recognized. We're waiting on
you.
You're, you're muted.
Good afternoon. I wanted to
thank the committee for the
opportunity to testify today.
My name is Dicky Rutledge. I'm
Native American and a proud
member of the COC Nation of
Oklahoma. I chose to testify in
a state that's not my own for
three reasons. One, to plead
with New Mexico lawmakers not to
make the same mistake as
Oklahoma.
2, I have an innate concern for
the Native American population,
as we already face
disproportionately high rates of
retinopathy, cataracts, visual
impairment, and blindness. In 3,
I continue to search for the
silver lining of my daily
struggle by raising awareness of
the preventable loss of vision
to others. I visited the Indian
Health Services clinic in Duran,
Oklahoma for what I thought and
was assured was a routine
procedure. The YAG would be
performed by a licensed.
common interest. The doctor
reiterated that it would be
quick and easy. It was not.
I left that day with an eye
patch and a disability.
Due to her laser placement, my
central vision was permanently
destroyed. I am living proof
that lack of knowledge and
proper training in our vision
healthcare providers is both
dangerous and preventable.
Do the brief time limits, please
read in more detailed synopsis
of my case, which is included in
my recent op ed to the
Albuquerque Journal. Again,
thank you for taking the time to
listen to me, and I urge you to
protect New Mexico patients by
voting no on House Bill 36.
Thank you.
Miss Lovato.
Thank you
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
distinguished members of the
committee. My name is Melissa
Lobato, and I am the executive
director of the New Mexico
Academy of Ophthalmology. Um, I
also work for Project Echo in my
day job and as some of you know,
Project Echo is a proven model
that improves access to
healthcare for individuals and
rural communities, and if this
bill, Bill 36, was to do that
for New Mexicans, I would not be
standing here opposing this bill
right now.
But this bill will not do that,
as claimed. Uh, we have research
uh exhibit 15 and our opposition
packet. It's an article from a
major medical journal that
looked at access to care if it
had improved in 5 separate
states were these procedures are
allowed, and it found that
It was a study over 4 years,
there was absolutely no improved
access to care. In Medicare Part
B claims data from 2013 to 2022
shows a 9% decline of rural
optometrists in our state, and
that same time frame, there was
a 47% increase of primary eye
care claims. So lower number of
optometrists, higher number of
patients that they need to see
in primary.
m ary eye care which they are
trained to do extensively and do
very well.
So, these overburned rural
optometrists will be.
I guess trading one for the
other, we need primary eye care
in rural areas, not these
procedures. There are so few
that get to need these
procedures. And this is
patient's vision. It's too
important, as Vicky Rutledge
said, and I just hope that you
will protect the people who
elected you to protect them and
vote no. Thank you.
Thank you. I have next um
Nathaniel Royal and the
remaining people you have about.
I really admit it, but I that a
minute or two so.
And you really well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity to speak.
Nathaniel Royal, I'm a retina
surgeon, born and raised New
Mexican. I'm here strongly
opposed to House Bill 36, and
here we are in the final week in
the final hours of this 2025
session, and I think this is the
most important.
And the most appropriate
committee to make our final
stand on House Bill 36 because
Senate Judiciary has often been
the place that takes patient
safety to heart, and you all do
that not just here in this
committee, but in your
professional lives, and I think
that it's the most important
place for us to talk about
patient safety. And so I ask you
to think about the safety of
this bill today.
91% of our optometrists, even
though they say they're trained
to do these procedures are
trained on models. When I
trained to do these procedures,
I trained to do them on people
with an experienced
ophthalmologist overlooking my
shoulder, helping me avoid
trouble.
They don't do that. Surgery
should not be learned in a
conference room. Surgery cannot
be learned on YouTube. Surgery
is learned by
Having a very experienced doctor
over your shoulder and taking
care of a lot of pathology. So
when it comes to this bill, I
ask you to please vote no today
because surgery is not a learn
as you go.
specialty.
Surgery should only be done by
surgeons, and I really think uh
Vicky Rutledge for speaking
today. Those of you who know,
who have dealt with victims know
how difficult it is for somebody
to have the courage to get up
and speak, and she did that for
us today because she's trying to
protect New Mexicans, and I ask
you if uh there's one question I
could ask all of my optometry
colleagues who I consider great
friends would be how many human
beings have you done this laser
on?
If the answer is 0, that means
that one of our unsuspecting New
Mexico patrons is going to be
the first person that they
actually vaporized tissue on,
and I think that's unfair to New
Mexicans, and it's certainly
unsafe. Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much. We've
exceeded the time for opponents,
but I want to recognize there
were 4 individuals who were
left, and I asked that the group
was coordinated, so my
understanding, uh, we would have
heard from Harley Fillmore,
Nicholas.
Me
Natasha Dark and listening.
Reta.
opposition.
And um
That completes those who
registered in the time we've set
aside for supporters are not.
So we'll go next to members of
the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Thank you, uh, Representative,
um, expert.
I will say I, I agree with the
folks who spoke in opposition.
Um, this is
is an invasive procedure.
All right, that's.
I, I, I like the, the gentleman
who said, uh, surgery is not a
learn as you go.
Whenever we have folks who are
providing invasive procedures uh
to patients. We wanna make sure
that they have
the appropriate training to
those patients uh are safe.
I was kind of looking up here.
find the difference in hours of
training optometrists,
ophthalmologist.
That's why this is a little
little outdated because this is
stuff from 2005.
Talking about studies for uh
that said,
The optometrist had about 1,768
hours.
That's a clinical experience and
that is.
to
17,000.
280 hours of training.
Uh, and clinical experience that
was the average for the.
I have someone doing surgery on
my eye.
I want that person to be.
have had a lot of
more training that my um.
My, my niece is a, a surgical
cardiac physician.
She is brilliant. She is really
good at her job.
And I am getting heart surgery.
I want the cardiologist
being the one doing the surgery
and her there be there assisting
him and, and I, and
I
No.
Critical role.
But when we are talking about
surgery.
All right.
I don't think that's something.
That we should mess around.
Um
I
I find compelling the fact that
in the 10 states that have done
this, there's an increase in
complications. I found I, I,
the, the package that was
referred to by the folks who
spoke, I, I don't have that
package. I'm sure it was emailed
to me and I
It was lost in in the next, uh,
But I am finding stuff on stuff
just with a quick Google search
about the repeat, the increased
repeat procedures.
When they are done by by uh
optometrist rather.
Um,
And so, and I, I am curious to
hear more about this training
on.
Uh, so representative how
How often
The optometrist who, who do this
often are they training models
versus
On, on patients with
supervision.
Of a
Trained
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Duha. um, I'm gonna
defer to my expert who's going
to talk at length about the
training that both
ophthalmologists and
optometrists receive as relates
to these procedures and um also
the time on models versus real
human beings and the difference
in training and also the
credentialing that goes along
with that training as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
After completing undergraduate
education, optometrists go on to
study in optometry school for
full years where it's dedicated
to eye care. We are primary and
secondary eye care specialists.
That means our training includes
the diagnosis and treatment of
all the eye diseases, including
using orals, topicals, and
minimally invasive procedures.
And that's right.
I really, I have a very
specific.
Which is how much of the
training is done the
optometrists who are doing this
now.
How much of their training is
done, model versus on a live
patient.
The supervision.
oven off.
Mr. Chair, Senator.
This is taught in all schools
and colleges of optometry, which
we don't always know what that
training might be at the
individual schools, which is why
the New Mexico Board of
Optometry, whose sole purpose is
to protect the public will be
developing a credentialing
process for the optometrist who
want to perform these procedures
in New Mexico and a public rule
hearing will be held during that
process where all stakeholders
can make comment.
Mr. Chair, when I'm, I'm not
hearing and an answer to my
question.
Certainly not one.
Would
Resolved my concerns. Um,
About that, that, that extending
this authority.
optometrist.
Safe
And.
Thank Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you guys for your time for
being here.
I have sat on this committee
judiciary for 59 days.
And while I have expressed many
opinions.
On proposed laws.
I have no business giving legal
opinions.
Outside of here. And so my
concern is, is what was
expressed during public comment
is that this is such a specialty
surgery, is that, is that
expanding this over to those
that have not had the training,
the liability is so great when
it comes to someone's vision.
But I do want to say that I
appreciate your uh comments when
it comes to access for New
Mexicans because I do believe
that there is a void. I don't
believe, however, that this is
the solution now.
I think there are many steps
that the legislator can take.
Um, to expand and to support uh
um our healthcare providers, um,
by, by recruiting and retention
of our medical doctors and how
we get them to come to New
Mexico. There are many things
that we've done that I believe
have pushed out of New Mexico.
There are many steps that we can
take uh to encourage
incentivize. I don't think this
is one. I do not think that this
is an access issue, but I very
much appreciate your, you coming
forward and hoping to fill a
void that I agree is, is there
in New Mexico.
What else?
Paul, you look like you were
ready to get there. No.
Anyone else?
Uh, in the years that I've been
here, Sir Bradley, this
committee frequently sees and I
over at Senator Stewart. She's
been here on these types of
committees with me for a long
time. We always see the scope of
practice bills oh you, you're
the most troubling for me and we
see whether it's engineers and
architects or.
are all
number of specialties and
I agree with the, the thinking
that we're ill-equipped.
Because
You think they don't have enough
hours, how do we have powers to
judge any one of you all.
On, on these things. So these,
these are really very tough
decisions and I would always
hope that those in the
professions could resolve these
themselves.
Because essentially it almost
feel like I'm being asked to
pick.
A
Competitive providers and
businesses and I, and I was the
auditors of financial component
to this.
And and there's a marketplace.
I, uh
Um, this won't, this won't
always be with the
Brantley and others subscribed
too, but.
Well, we look at patient care,
some of us find the, the scope
of practice determined by our
own professional judgment. I,
you asked me to do.
Mergers and acquisition case
today.
I, I'd tell you absolutely not
because I would be competent to
do that, no better to stay in,
in my later practice. If you ask
me to do aviation uh law. I'd
tell you absolutely not because
I would be out of my scope of
practice, although it's in
yours, so, so I, we as a, as a
profession, I, I like to think
that we place ourselves.
And um so in in my mind that
almost bodes for your bill in my
mind, which is the practitioner
should know they're very
proficiency, their scope of
practice and not exceed it, and,
and if they choose to do so,
they take those risks and the
risks are substantial not only
to the patient but also to the
provider.
And sometimes.
Some folks come in and find
justice for patients who are
injured from time to time when
people exceed the scope of their
practice and care, and that's
sometimes what the rest of us
do.
Uh, so I'm, I'm challenged by,
by this particular bill, but I
thought it was important for us
to hear it.
Um, I'm
Although I appreciate you being
here and and so forth. I'm kind
of surprised that we don't have
others from your practice and
your profession here today to
advocate for this. Well, OK,
well, we got a whole bunch of.
Oh, OK, all right. Well, then I
said correctly. We didn't, we
didn't see you all signed up and
registered, so I appreciate you
and you're all standing behind
her, so that's good. I
appreciate that too, and I
appreciate you raising your
hands because I wanted to
understand that too.
So, um, I, I would hope that you
all would be able to do this
within your professions, you
know, yourselves, but
We're, we're here in in the
moment.
Anyone else
On the proposed bill.
they're doing.
moved the table.
Motion is to table its
non-debatable.
We'll do a roll call for all of
these votes.
And
I do.
Ben Stewart. No.
Senator, Senator Cervantes
motion fails.
Any other motions.
Remove Dupin.
courses of new pass motion we'll
do the same roll call.
Brantley.
to here.
In
Stewart, yes.
or worse
Cervantes, yes.
Du best representative.
Thank you all.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
House Bill 131.
Um
There's somebody here to present
that? Oh, there you are.
in their
Lopez.
Thank you.
We have only one registered
opponent, Jacob Smith.
Uh, senator, so given the time
and the demands of the floor
coming up shortly. I'm gonna ask
you to keep your presentation at
5 minutes. Is that gonna work
for you?
I
Right, we'll make sure the
opposition has no more than
that. Go ahead, Senator C Lopez,
131. Thank you. HB 131 caregiver
background checks is an
amendment to the statute 2917-5,
and it builds on work that that
occurred in 2005 that permitted
the division of Health
Improvement previously was with
New Mexico DOH, the Department
of Health, and now it's with the
healthcare authority, but
basically they administer the
background check program for
paid caregivers and hospital
caregivers. This bill
felony convictions to disqualify
applicants, and those are
outlined on page 4, section D,
numbers 9 through 12. It's human
trafficking, assault of a peace
officer, identity theft, and
cruelty to animals.
This bill also permits the
department to apply an
unreasonable risk standard to
disqualify applicants. This is
outlined on page 4, Section E
and subsection A and B. Lastly,
a judicial review for
disqualified applicants was
added on page 5, section E,
subsection 2, in the house
process. I will now turn it over
to the, to our deputy secretary,
um, for the health, for the
healthcare authority, Alex
Castillo Smith for additional
comments on this bill.
Uh chair Cervantes, ranking
member Grantly, members of the
committee. Thank you. My name is
Alex Castillo Smith and I'm a
deputy cabinet secretary for the
Healthcare Authority. I'd like
to thank you all for taking the
time to hear this important
agency bill. I'm joined by my
colleagues Dan Linari, the
division of Health Improvement
Director Mark Reynolds, our
general counsel, and of course,
Sorry. OK. And uh my boss,
secretary Carrier me home
In launching the new healthcare
authority last July, Governor
Lihong Grisham charged Secretary
Arneo, the healthcare authority
leadership team and myself, um,
to build New Mexico where
everyone thrives, um, this bill
does just that. House Bill 131.
Um, there's been a 117% increase
in severe abuse of like
exploitation since this year 22,
and we're comparing states
across the country, New Mexico
currently only has 10% of the
amount of disqualifying
convictions as other states.
Um, as you may have heard in the
news recently, there is a couple
in Farmington charged uh 14
counts of felony child abuse,
um, the one of the parents in
that case was allowed to be a
paid caregiver for another child
with a disability because of the
gaps in these bills.
Um, we
And we're here to stand for
questions. Thank you.
Uh, Dan Lear, the director of
the division of Health
Improvement and Mark Reynolds,
general counsel, are here to
answer questions.
That concludes our presentation.
Very good, thank you much.
That looked
Brentley.
Look.
Mr. Chairman, if there's no, I
need to pass.
Take the motion before us, so we
don't want to cut off any
discussion or debate.
Any questions, they do.
make uh make one.
Well
Um
Have him here.
Language that says that they
have the right to be judicial
review on any final decision by
the healthcare.
Subs.
There's a very specific um
statute.
That provides for
An appeal to the district court
from
And it and it says it has to say
that they have that right to
pursuant to this statue of the
statue right now.
Uh, we
Usually whenever we put this
language in, we always reference
that statute because the statute
itself.
Say
You have, it has to be pursuant.
You have to say in the statue
that you have that right
pursuant to.
Interesting time I'd be happy to
to take that.
Oh.
Actually, we do have a a
response from Mark who is Mark
Reynolds, general counsel. Mr.
Chair and, and Senator, they
will have the statutory right to
appeal, even if that statute
that you're referring 3911, I
think it is, isn't referred to
it as long as the statute itself
provides a statutory right to
appeal, which this bill does,
then Supreme Court Rule 1074
kicks in, and that gives them
the right to appeal. So that
particular statute that you're
referring to has specific
Provisions for an appeal, but
that statute doesn't need to be
into this bill for them to have
the right to appeal from this
administrative proceeding.
OK, what what
what's the Supreme Court 1074.
And that is the right to an
appeal when there is a statutory
right to do so.
It's
Administrative.
And I'm looking.
Which you where was the language
in the bill that was of concern
to you?
Was it something in the bill or?
No, no, it's, it's language in
the bill. It's on page 57
through 10.
Um, but if there is, if this
rule allows it without
referencing that statute that
Mr. I'll double check, check it
if it's necessary, I can make
that on the floor.
that was the wrong answer.
That was the wrong answer, OK.
Well if it's necessary to make
the amendment, I, I, I agree
it's probably not.
But I'm very hesitant to ever
say anything out of here with
the problems we're gonna fix it
on
OK, I'm used to that in another
committee, but
I, I, I haven't, the reason I'm
hesitant to uh
To say it's necessary is because
I haven't looked into it, but uh
we have general counsel who is
100% sure and I trust him.
Thank you. And I, I you neglect.
to recognize in opposition Jacob
Smith, who is
Do
Mr. Smith present.
Yes, I'm here.
Thank you, I'm sorry I neglected
to get you, but I'm coming back
to you, sir. So I'll recognize
you for up to 3 minutes, Mr.
Smith. You're the only opponent.
Registered in opposition. Go
ahead, sir.
Thank you, sir, Chair, and
Senate Judiciary Committee, Jake
Smith, Sandoval, Governor to
Change Project, former teen
compliance graduate clinical
program coordinator for all APRM
practitioner programs at the
University of New Mexico. I hope
you all received my supplemental
submission. Here in opposition
of HB 131 due to lack of
accountability in the transfer
process from the New Mexico
Department of Health to the New
Mexico Health Care Authority,
which has already occurred,
contrary to what you stated in
sections 2 and 3 starting on
page 9. This bill is an attempt
to conceal an overstep of the
executive branch.
An attempt to cover up a breach
in the database system for the
New Mexico Department of Health
in January of 2024, I reported
this breach to the New Mexico
Department of Health. It has
compromised all healthcare
heroes personal identification
information across our state.
This process has yet been
changed since it has already
been moved to the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority. However,
the healthcare heroes still have
not been made aware of the
original breach of exposure to
identity theft, the CCHSP
handles approximately 55,000
background checks a year.
year.
This hard, it's hard enough to
keep healthcare providers across
the state of New Mexico, but
it's even harder when we expose
our Social Security numbers,
driver's licenses, and personal
addresses to identity theft. I
am asking this committee to do
proper oversight regarding this
overstep and ask the questions
that need to be asked to ensure
accountability for all of our
exposed healthcare professionals
across the state of New Mexico.
Thank you, sir, Chair, for your
time and committee members. I
hope you all have a wonderful
evening.
Back to back to committee
members.
Mm
Mr. Chair, is anyone will
respond to what we just heard
from the particular member.
Um
Chairen Thornton, the Healthcare
Authority launched in July and
I'm not aware of any data breach
that the commoner.
Mentioned related specifically
to the caregiver screening
program.
Did we have a new pass?
Move to
Thank you.
Any other discussion
there any objection to the due
pass motion.
See I would do best.
Sure.
284.
Volume 3.
Except
Mayor Stewart, thank you for
filling in.
I sponsors, I know in other
committees.
We're meeting at an irregular
time and place, so I appreciate
you stepping in.
I you probably deferred others
to present for you, but go ahead
and get started. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Uh, we do have a
list of supporters that might
not have signed up, uh,
choicespara or Catherine
Crociado, Mexico Association of
Counties, Mike and Pamela
resident Placitas and onoom
Peggy Roberts from Lasitas and
Belinda Garland, who is the
director of the New Mexico
Livestock Board.
So briefly, uh, I'm joined, uh,
I will let my uh expert uh talk
after I give brief opening
statements. So we have an
overpopulation.
With free roaming horses.
This bill seeks to reduce the
population of free roaming horse
herds by providing a mechanism
for adoption or relocation and
providing a mechanism for
providing fertility control.
This also prohibits the
slaughter of free roaming horses
once they are adopted or
relocated.
So the livestock board would
create rules for free roaming
horse experts, public entities
can enter into contracts with
the experts.
Through those contracts with
landowner approval.
Experts will assess range
conditions over sea fertility
control, and when available,
arrange for adoption and
relocation.
Uh there's no work on this
without the permission of the
landowner.
So I would like my expert to
introduce herself and comment
more.
Good afternoon, uh, Mr. Chair
and committee members. My name
is Nina Edelman. I'm uh the
equine program director at
Animal Protection New Mexico.
Uh, I've worked on issues
affecting free roaming horses
through collaboration with
state, federal, and tribal
agencies.
Uh, this bill has broad support
from uh a wide variety of
stakeholders, including the
Coronado Soil and Water
Conservation District, uh, from
uh Sandoval County Commissioner
Brooke from the Mexico counties
from San Felipe Pueblo, um, from
Sky Mountain World Horse
Sanctuary in Mount Taylor
Mustangs, as well as um
Neutral but on board uh support
from the New Mexico livestock
Board who are are central to
this belt as well.
Uh, this book provides a
framework for the humane and
science based management, a free
roaming courses using all the
necessary tools, including the
relocation of horses when needed
for their well-being and for the
health of the land while
providing firm protections for
horses against mistreatment and
slaughter. I, uh, asked humbly
ask for your support for this
bill.
Thank you very much, we had uh
Have a, have a
Registration and support from
the New Mexican Association of
Counties. They see a couple of
you all here. I don't know
whether you're gonna speak to
this and then Catherine Bruch.
Peggy Roberts, Mike, and Pam and
Sabrina Pache
with the time we've got, I can
recognize each one of you all
for a minute, minute.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, join us parson,
executive director for New
Mexico Counties. This is an
issue we've been working on for
about 10 years. The reality is
both Sandoval County and Lincoln
County, um, are doing their very
best to deal with the situation,
but horses, not only are they
destructive, they can be a
public safety issue, and they
breed and these two different
herds have grown to over 100 and
200 respectively, and the
reality is counties are
struggling with how to handle
this. So having this buy in and
agreement with the livestock
Bureau to have an expert who can
determine
whether or not the range can
support the size of the herds
and help us mitigate when those
herds are too large or when we
have a problem. The reality is
many of these were previously
domestic animals. If that's the
case, they approach people in a
1200 pound animal who's hungry
will come in, destroy your
property, come up to people,
small children, a little too
close. This is a growing issue
and so we are really grateful.
This is the closest this has
gotten to the finish line. This
would be the first time it would
go down to the floor for a vote
in its 2nd house. We strongly
support this bill and hope that
you will too. Thank you.
She's on Zoom, Mister Chairman.
brunch, if you can hear me
you're recognized for up to a
minute.
Crunch your microphone looks
like it's muted.
Uh
Let's try that one more time.
Thank you, uh, Chairman
Cervantes and committee members.
I appreciate you hearing me uh
via Zoom this evening. Uh, we
have worked hard in Sandoval
County to address the public
safety issues as well as um the
fertil fertility control uh for
4 years now. We have been able
to stabilize the population, but
we still are looking for other
options and resources, um, that
we can legally uh use to
protect both human and animal
life. Uh, we are in an urban
rural uh interface with um
Obviously many opportunities for
conflict where animals have been
killed and human life has been a
threat. I urge you to support
this with a due pass. Thank you,
sir. And
Thank you. Next on my list is
Peggy Roberts, who I also
understand that Zoom.
Roberts, are you present? so,
would you make sure your
microphones on and I'm
recognizing you, Roberts.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, my name is Peggy
Roberts, and I live in a small
ranch in Placitas with my
horses. The neighborhood where I
live no longer has grasses for
the free roaming horses or
wildlife to eat, nor is there
water to drink because of the
limited vegetation in the area,
some residents try to keep the
horses from starving by feeding
them. I've seen up to 50 horses
that a feeding location at a
minimum that's $80 a feed daily,
as well as a financial burden,
feeding locations cause food
aggression between the bands and
semi-domestic.
the horses, which increases
their desire to interact with
people. The horses caused major
conflicts between neighbors,
destroy the landscape, frighten
people and cause property and
vehicle damage. I ask you to
please support this bill so we
can relocate some of these
horses. Thank you.
Thank you, Mike Neese.
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
senators Mike Neese from
Placidus, I think I'm up here
for uh over 15 years on horse
issues alone. Um, this is a much
needed management plan in
Placidus, we have 175 free
roaming, feral, unmanaged
horses, 175.
Dogs or cows would be managed in
the past 13 years, 30 horses
have died on Placidus roads
alone. The Riodoso town council
passed a resolution asking the
New Mexico livestock Board to
remove horses from their roots.
New Mexico Livestock Board has
no jurisdiction. NMD DOT has no
jurisdiction. The county
commissioners and the county
sheriffs have no jurisdiction.
In 1994, 31 years ago, Attorney
General Tom Udall wrote No state
agency has the express or
implied statutory authority
under current law to regulate
the treatment and disposition of
wild horses. However, the
legislature has the power to
enact legislation vesting estate
agency with such authority. No
management is bad management.
Please give us a tool. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr.
You two married?
You know, I wondered when I saw
both your names on the list, I
wondered, you know, we could get
people with lots of extra time
and they all brought their
spouses.
Um, but
find him but.
Well that's pretty presumptuous
of me to think both of you have
the same opinion.
We have the same opinion, but we
have more too, so, um, I'm just
gonna say uh chairperson
Cervantes, uh.
Miss Stewart Protem, thank you.
Um, the feral free roaming
trespass abandoned horses,
impliccidas are beautiful, but
what they have done to our
landscape is not beautiful.
No land rest for a period of
Over 20 years, no
revitalization. We have extreme
uh overgrazing extreme of
grazing.
Today in Placidus 175 free
roaming horses on land with a
concurring capacity, not enough
for one horse.
Close to 2/3 of the Placita's
watershed has been destroyed.
extreme
over grazing.
This is not a partisan issue,
it's not a perfect bill.
But it is a start.
And perhaps for the Placidus
watershed, it's not too late.
Thank you. Last to have.
Sabrina Pacha.
She ain't right on Zoom.
She's not joining us today,
Mister Chair, very good. Have I
got everyone? I think I believe
is registered in support. We'll
turn next to those who signed up
in opposition.
of the following individuals
Cheryl Gibson on Zoom, Patience
O'Dowd, I showed you here.
Um, the Late Gonzalez on Zoom
and Georgin Inc.
Oh, OK. Just Gonzalez.
OK, so Ms. Gibson, uh, I'll
recognize each of you all, so
you have equal time up to 2
minutes, Ms. Gibson.
That's why one of you all have
some coordination.
You'll each have up to 2
minutes.
Be a total presentation of 8
minutes the other other side
had.
I'll have to skip quite a bit.
Um, patients are down with
president of Woe, and uh I just
wanna say that this is a
deceptive bill. It's a legal
pariah. I wrote that out to you.
I'll tell you right off that it
will, uh, violate the felony
extreme animal cruelty to
animals law and it must say
30-18-1, because these will no
longer be considered state's
wildlife and these horses roam
on B.
and 4 Service lands also. This
will give the BLM and the Forest
Service, the right to round them
up as trespass livestock, so
they will be they will be gone
quite quickly.
Uh, the USDA Forest Service did
the same thing to the alpine
horses and publicly auctioned
them, the BLM did this to the
Placitas horses and tried to
publicly auction them. Of
course, we'll file suit. The
current bill and I must say
77185 allows for uh
As we understand, has stabilized
the population with
birth control and same thing we
could do, but we have 3 people
that have been disal for people
in Lincoln County who has been
disallowed, they could start
shortly and uh contracepting we
tried last year.
Um, this is a wipeout bill. Uh,
there's no preservation in this
bill. There's no stopping point.
There's no follow up. These are
being put in the hands of an
agency that has uh an extreme
conflict of interest, and
there's nothing but sabotage the
wildlife corridor built of 2022
action plan showed 11,400 deer
heads in 17 years, over 3000
elkkits over 1000 cattle hits
and
600 dog hits and less and in
about 200 horse hits. Horses
aren't the issue here, and why,
if they're an issue, why aren't
they, why aren't our county
commissioners allowing us to
have a cattle guard at I-25
where we have many deer heads.
And we have deer heads up in
Placidas, and we have some horse
heads.
Ms. Gibson, you're on Zoom?
No.
Ms. Gonzalez, you're here.
Recognized for up to 2 minutes.
Thank you for your time, uh,
chairman.
This bill has no statutory basis
under the law and is unconst
unconstitutional, obviously to
pass this would require the
conspiratorial HARO3 to pass. SB
471 would have put this natural
resource, as does HB 284 into
the hands of an agency,
political subdivision of the
state within an extreme conflict
of interest, and no expertise.
Um,
If there is anyone here that is
familiar, there are 4 almost 5
states with a Green amendment.
Our New Mexico is one of them,
and this very bill goes against
our very own Green amendment.
This bills for nothing but
millionaires, developers and
realtors to take over our lands,
our heritage, and our way of
life and our wildlife. As an
heir to the Canon de la Gua San
Pedro land grant, I find it
abhorrent, shameful that our own
New Mexico legislature uses our
land grants against each other.
And against our natural
resources and pays them off by
keeping them poor while sending
them money every year. His
bribery scheme is not going to
work anymore, like the bill you
all heard on the floor regarding
lobbyists. About 2 nights ago,
uh, yes, we were here, we've
been here for this bill. Well,
this bill bill here is worse
than that. It's allowing our
people who were democratic
enough to trust and vote for.
I'm a Democrat and through, so
are my parents, uh, to advocate
for
wildlife be bought by corporate
real estate attorneys, we have
to ask ourselves what is, what
is a corporate real estate
attorney doing doing in charge
of our natural resources. It's
against his own agenda and a
conflict of interest as a
developer. It's allowing an
actual corporate lawyer to pass
this corrupt bill. It's allowing
people in high places going to
desperate and dangerous measures
to keep water away from our
wildlife and threatening us and
our lives of the people in the
East Mountain area.
who are trying to stop them. I
would like for everybody to
understand water sources for
these animals are being.
events, they're being cemented,
the, the animals are being kept
away from the water sources,
that's why they're going to the
people that are providing water
sources for them. So we have to
Understand why these animals are
in this situation. Thank you
very much
Georg Georgin Is.
And soon
Um, we, we, we have any
technical difficulties?
We're not sharing any technical.
OK, yeah, right. We can, we can
have a debate, so we have to
rely on the technical people to
tell us that you're talking
about Miss Gibson.
I'm actually calling for
Georgin.
Oh, I, I'll, I'll recognize you
for two minutes.
This is from Georgine Inks of
San Pedro Creek Estates.
I live in San Pedro Creek
Estates in Sandia Park. Two
years ago, there were 14 wild
horses in the estates, and today
there are they are all healthy
and free, still living in San
Pedro Creek Estates. However,
only 2 years ago, they were all
scheduled for capture and
transport to Milan to a quote
unquote horse facility that
specializes in auction and
slaughter. Advertising, averting
this disaster was imperative, so
the media was notified as well
as woe, and then our HOAOD
quickly ceased their action to
remove the horses. The
discovered it was illegal to
capture and transport wild
horses. Now, if HB 284 had been
in place, these horses would
have been removed and sent to a
certain slaughter because this
is what groups of people will do
to wild horses, given the
chance, and HB 284 gives them
that chance. The New Mexico
Constitution, however, gives
some protection, and they need
it. Opposed is harmful approach
to our iconic and beautiful wild
horses, they provide
biodiversity. They are our last
pericodactyl.
And it is devastating to plan
and undermine all constitutional
protections for them.
Uh, hold on.
Uh this POD shoot, I gotta
scroll down. Uh, oppose this
harmful approach to our iconic
and beautiful wild horses, and
it devastating plan to undermine
all constitutional protections
for them. The laws in place and
for a very good reason, people
don't change. We did try and
pass the equine board and and
and uh like uh wild horse
livestock, uh, a wild horse.
Um
A wild for, uh,
I can't even think. I can't even
read it. I didn't read license
plate and the legislature does
not allow for any good
alternatives.
period is sabotage.
Thank you very much.
A few minutes. All right, that
completes the uh people that
have registered and supported
opposition, so we go to members
of the committee.
OK.
Jordan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Senator, could you help me
out with this, this, does this
bill allow, it seems like it
does allow for the transport.
Does it allow for that?
Transport and slaughter of
horses.
Mr. Chairman it is not, it
prohibits the slaughter of free
roaming horses.
It also ensures the very first
definition, although we're
asking for the New Mexico
Livestock Board to help
promulgate rules. It, it, it
defines animals or livestock is
It also ensures the very first
definition, although we're
asking for the New Mexico
Livestock Board to help
promulgate rules. It, it, it
defines animals or livestock
does not include free roaming
horses, so they can't be treated
like the livestock for it has to
deal with other animals. It's
not part of, of that definition.
It's, it's on the first page.
Thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Schwarzenegger was, so I
apologies I presenting a bill,
but anyway, I didn't hear your
original presentation. I just
heard the opposition.
And I'm reading a different
bill.
Then, then, then, then the
opposition portrayed.
I mean, this just says that the
county, state, or municipal
government can can enter an
agreement with an expert.
And that, um,
And that
You know, upon the approval of
the appropriate landowner.
The humane capture to relocate,
humane captured.
place on different land, uh,
that, that a person shall not.
Knowingly slaughter, self for
slaughter, or caused to be
allowed slaughtered a free
roaming horses.
So I'm reading stuff in the bill
that's not currently in state
statute, so I don't
I don't understand it, but I
But I think that uh we need to
definitely deal with this
situation so that landowners who
Want free roaming horses can
have them. They can, there's,
there's provisions in here to do
a study to see if, if the land
has capacity for those horses
and maybe get
10 or 12 off to a different
beautiful piece of land, so
That's what I'm getting from the
bill.
and I'm just, I'm reading the
words on the page with all due
respect to the folks. I know
there's a lot of fear, um.
There's a lot of beauty in these
horses.
And I think that this bill,
believe it or not, will um will
allow that beauty to continue.
Of
I don't see anyone else at this
point in time, but we wanted to
recognize we're joined by Woods.
You want to add anything to your
ability or
Aesthetic colleagues done a fine
job so far, but good for you to
join us, Mr. Chair.
This bill, I don't know how many
years I've carried a bill trying
to get it through here.
Um,
not through your committee in
particular, but just trying to
get something on the books
because what's on the books is
not workable.
And, and I'm trying to
Through a representative to
McQueen actually drafted this
bill and, and is the main
drafter of this bill. I agreed
to co-sponsor this bill with him
because of the change in
definitions.
That makes it a realistically
working law.
So, that's where I'm at on this.
Uh, I would answer any questions
you have, but that's, I didn't
have a hell of a lot to do with
drafting of it, but
When I looked at it and saw the
change of definitions, the
change of structure.
It's a more workable law than
we've ever had before.
Thank you, Senator.
committee members. Any other
questions?
Promotions in
this is a roll call boat.
Duin
Henry Duhe
And
Stewart.
Ben Thornton.
Yes.
Then
Yes.
Senator Cervantes yes.
If we do pass there with Senator
Stewart, thank you for, thank
you all for being here. Uh, that
completes our agenda for the
evening.
We may be back in here tomorrow.
I expect we probably will,
although probably not in this
room. So we're back in our usual
time and place tomorrow. That'll
all depend on the floor session.
So thank you all. We're done for
today.
