Thank you madam chair and
members this is a bill that I'm
sure you're familiar with sings
has been floating around in this
round has since Jerry king.
Apparently it's a bill that I
sponsored ten years ago when I
was in the house and it you know
it's just this it's relatively
straight for less.
Independents voting in primaries
que this is what the bill is
Senate bill seventy three
sentiments election code to
allow voters to select the
majority.
Party ballot and vote in primary
elections even if the voters
unaffiliated with the majority
party without having to change
our registration status.
Okay twenty five percent twenty
five percent was it turned out
in our last primary election.
That bothers me.
You know I am sure many of you
know independence I know so many
independents that are engage
they care they they they want to
participate in the political
process especially if they're
younger where they don't
necessarily automatically
identify with I'm a Republican
I'm a Democrat I think
participation is a good thing
and I would point out that
Alexis primary elections given
our the the way these districts
are are in a really often times
the the important election being
that it often times is not a
competitive C. so I'm here was
silent have Jill.
And she's with open elections
and she can briefly explain the
reason for this bill and you
know I'm really curious well we
just had a great discussion and
rules and I'm I'm really curious
about I'm looking forward to our
discussion here today so thank
you.
The honor the chairs to be
members I just wanted to
highlight some of the issues our
voters are facing due to having
to change their registration the
current law New Mexico prohibits
the change their voter
registration in the past two
years.
Thank you so current law New
Mexico prohibits those who have
changed their voter registration
the past two years from
participating in the electoral
process SO two quick examples
are such as becoming a poll
worker or an election judge for
serving on the citizens
redistricting committee so I
telling New Mexicans to choose a
party prior to voting in a
primary for basically asking
them whether they want to vote
and make their voices heard or
to serve their communities
currently New Mexico there's
more than three hundred thousand
independent voters which is one
fourth of our voting population.
Additionally primary elections
are publicly financed and not
financed by the parties
therefore it's crucial that we
take this small step into
allowing those who pay the same
amount as anyone else in
participating in these elections
equally.
Currently it takes an
independent between five to ten
minutes to register on same day
registration and then they have
to go to another table where
they are provided with a valid.
And it took one voter nearly
three months to re register
themselves as independent
following the primary election
in June so we think that this is
a waste of our county clerk's
time in funding and we have
provided a letter supporting
from the supporting clerks we
also have the support of the
secretary of state that this is
a good bill for New Mexico and
again this is just a small step
forward and it significantly
improves the efficiency of the
current procedures we have thank
you so much and with that madam
chair go.
Go to the audience are go to
questions.
You have
Position.
We have anyone signed up in
opposition we have one percent
of disappointment Representative
hard if you come on.
Use the microphone.
We have a couple other people
after that side of I want to
thank you thank you madam chair
members committee my name is
like the heart of the Christian
lobbyist in New Mexico
connections out there.
I think I.
Thanks thanks that the cake out
of the register lobbyist New
Mexico open elections and about
a hundred years ago we decided
to have by the primary system
the reason we did that is
because party at elections were
decided in the back doors and
you know behind closed doors in
smoke filled rooms during that
time we also have suffrage and
we have a huge movement across
this country this is just
another movie that is going and
if it regards to to progressing
voter rights in this in the
state thank you.
Yeah.
Three people signed up on soon
in support
tell.
Yes Mr chair please please go
ahead for a please keep your
your costs about three minutes
or less.
Thank you madam chair hello
Committee members I did not have
to join a party to express my
opinion here today I do not
believe I should have to join a
party to express my opinion in a
publicly funded elections.
Just be seventy three would
remove that requirement and I
support a do pass for this bill
I thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr tell next we have
Jeremy Gruber.
Yes go ahead Mr Stewart.
Good afternoon madam chair
members the committee my name's
Germany river on the STP of the
election reporting station open
primaries there are three
hundred twenty five thousand
registered independent voters in
the state of New Mexico that are
currently disenfranchised in the
state's closed primaries the
central for this twenty five
percent of all registered voters
to put that in context New
Mexico margin more voters by
virtue of their dependent that
exist of all political
persuasions in the entire state
of Wyoming.
New Mexico is one of the last
states in the country to address
this critical voting rights
issue and one of only nine
states that continues to
maintain closed primaries over
fifty percent of young people
are independent half of our
military veterans are
independent thirty five percent
of Hispanics thirty percent of
African Americans and twenty
percent of native Americans are
independent voters they are the
fastest growing group of voters
in the state by far these are
the voters being shut out and
post primary is often the most
important elections in the state
were denied a state
representative them and how they
are governed.
As we said before primaries are
taxpayer funded elect an
independent voters are paying
for these elections that
currently are that this
committee can help change that
and I hope to lend your support
to SB seventy three thank you.
Thank you Mr Gruber next we have
Carla I called.
Unable to hear and members of
the committee my name is Carla I
cuff I'm a board member of New
Mexico open elections and a
graduate student in the
political science department at
the university of New Mexico and
I specialize in ideology in
polarization.
No it's not just an illusion
according to every objective
measure we political scientists
have been able to come up with
our polarization has
dramatically increased over the
last few decades and it's not
hard to see the negative effect
that has on the health of our
democracy partisan gridlock is
commonplace the work of
consensus building is difficult
and disincentive finest and most
definition the important for
democracy the voters get
frustrated and stop engaging
even if they're not technically
structurally disenfranchised
feel ideologically
disenfranchised they feel that
their voices may be heard but
not listens to in an environment
that magnifies the extreme
voices they don't vote as often
they lose trust in their elected
officials and that makes it
harder for elected officials to
hear that it's a vicious cycle
so how do we break the cycle and
get people back into
participating I've heard the
counter argument that no change
to the primaries is necessary
because anyone can vote in the
primaries if they wants that
it's enough to give them the
ability and yet the numbers are
clear from every state we have
seen try it true semi open
primaries motivate more voters
to make their voices heard
registration restricted
primaries don't and it makes
sense when you think about
independence in the Clinton
state voters are flowing away
from the parties these are
people who feel kicked to the
curb and when someone feels like
you've been tossed out of the
room it's not enough just to
unlock the door you have to prop
the door open and wave them in
support this bill to tell people
not just that they can raise
their voice if they want but
that you want to hear their
voices thank you for your time.
Thank you as I said we have now
and sign up this is the if I may
madam chair of we also have the
Santa Fe county clerk care to
answer questions and the
secretary of state's office is
represented in the audience as
well and if I may um if we could
go to my colleague Senator Ivey
Soto first a he's gracious
enough to propose this amendment
that that he's been working with
with some of the applicants.
So I do have an amendment.
For the bill that senator
Senator.
Thank you Jeff we up.
This this came up earlier today
and so we
I did just that let's council
repair formal.
the little details about someone
just by I have a.
Part of it so you'll turn to
page seven.
This is.
Section one S. X. yes which is
what one does this is the mail
ballot election about a dozen of
these precincts around the state
the very world very small very
isolated so they don't have
opposed plans and so
consequently
the.
These proceeds are able to go to
to another location because they
don't have their own to get a a
notice
in advance that you will be
getting a ballot in the mail
unless they ask not have a valid
email in the case of open
primaries senator Phil lead over
need to get a notice of how to
request about and for the men.
And so what we what we have of
the seventy one cents to sixty
this language that that says
that there's this does that goes
up and that the the the notice
will have them return the part
of indicate which with
of the shape effective this
amendment.
Is to allow the person also and
in those who have or log into a
website hosted by the secretary
of state twenty eight which
major political parties balance
will refuse that primary
election so simply give those
waters twice of the return of
our on going online by the car.
And and so Madam chair of
Montana the one that's the
message I was interested caucus
on Representative provision that
you would not have to provide
the online part until July one
twenty twenty five you guys
still.
Need that for
you know for the next we don't
we don't do the page fifty more
so just the seven point.
Doing.
Thank you.
And I take it that's a friendly
amendment yes I think that it's
definitely friendly and and just
I I it was brought in for sector
six on I I just couldn't hear
what you said when Sir I've sort
of we are not in need of a delay
one of my questions okay
correct.
So any discussion on the
amendment.
Senator Stewart.
So Madam chair of senator and
senator I understand what we're
doing and why but I think the
grammar is not quite right.
So you're changing it so it's of
prime elect primary election the
notice.
Play the pace car sent to voters
and then this describes them
shell a your amendment says
shall inform such voters may
return the card indicate.
I think you need maybe that they
sell inform such Fodor's that
they may
return the card and indicate.
A minor.
Issue but otherwise it just
doesn't require right mmhm
etcetera chair Senators toward
his correct.
Where it says on page seven line
fourteen the end of the line
insert may that should be
answered that they may.
This year amendment to your
amendment yes with your and
thank you senator.
So.
Amended amendment is there any
objection to adopting the
amendment.
The line that amendment is
adopted we're back on the bill
as amended.
discussion on the bill.
I move to pass just meant.
This other states worth thank
you madam chair so I know in our
analysis the they're basically
saying we do this it's going to
be unconstitutional on its face
California did exactly this and
the U. S. court ruled it
unconstitutional require
California to go back and do a
constitutional some wonder if
you could address.
Issue.
Madam chair and senator I just
don't agree with that I mean in
many other states have done this
besides the minutes almost as I
understand it it's that that
issue is is not so clear cut
let's say at the very least so
I just feel strongly that that
it's
This is in line with what other
states have done there are that
are doing and so forth so I just
have to agree yeah.
So if I can.
You know it does say that.
Medical law that's the one that
was first case required voters
in a party primary to be a
member of that party and the
Connecticut secretary state
concluded that this rule change
was illegal so it might be
unconstitutional the way we're
doing it now because what we're
doing now is requiring them on
election day to choose to be
either Democrat or Republican to
vote in either of those primary
sorry that's the Green Party was
honor libertarians so what we're
doing is saying you don't have
to change your party you don't
have to change your registration
you just get to choose which of
the parties ballots you get on
that primary days so it seems to
me that they miss that although
I haven't read the whole thing
and you know they make them do
it they're just thinking about
venture seems though that under
the current system they're
switching their joining a party
for the day I get that that's a
I have over the years it's
always been on the Senator John
savings for amendments check.
and really I mean I think what's
important is this isn't we
already allow independence we
just make them to go through
this process of.
Going to the party switch but
the interesting piece if you
think about it.
Does the change why not making
them actually join the party is
that result in the analysis and
I'm just flying in it I think
it's a good discussion to happen
for us to think through and and
look I I also think it's
important for us you know we had
another billing here on the
federal nuclear preemption
and you know sometimes it's
important to the questions not
just assume the courts are going
to jump yes but I just want to
plan issues etcetera to
supplement some point I think
silo wanted to respond yes just
to quickly respond madam chair
Senator so the current bill we
are proposing does not actually
violate any constitutional laws
what is what would violate the
constitution would be if hi
let's say as a registered
Democrat were to go and vote on
a Republican primary so that
would be a violation of the
first amendment and the bill
that we're proposing does not
allow for this so it would not
be an issue in the situation
thank you so much.
That.
Thank you actually the that for
years and with the help of the
part of this is Joan K. if I
remember correctly and to go
back and re read it.
The federal correctly that was a
that was a primary system that
they created where you at all of
Canada all parties on this and
now.
And that and then it was the
highest ranking of each party
that would be nominated and that
that's what created the
constitutional provision when
they went to their.
jungle prime for two where we
both
regardless of party
that was not the as being the
question from.
the the issue.
Right now the Mexico we do have
a.
The case that in the case of
probably this is that
closed primaries is a political
question.
and not one for the courts to
determine I've I will set the
act from my own perspective like
at eight I think
This is although.
The work like what to do just
for the spouses are still there
right is that is that up.
The current system we have and
what we're going to both.
Violate federal association of
the parks.
The social.
That the
that the
I prohibited the farms
prosocial agents nonmembers.
Or violate proves Association
led by now I requirement for
associated with others we're
equally by.
Up there was social
right the there are several
states that have in their loss
of the party this.
If there are people that are not
and there are some states where
one party has pulled the
primaries of the party doesn't.
And they get to the judge that
way with that state.
you know but the the
Nonetheless this is a.
What is Mexico Supreme Court
this is a political question for
us.
not a not a judicial question
and the and they they indicated
the problem case that they were
going to strike down
the closed primary system and
then take the the indicated that
they likely would not strike
down open.
I appreciate that and even if we
pass this my correct that
nothing would programs say the
Republican Party from basically
doing its own private part
primary in other words not not a
state.
It's the right now we are
publicly funded primaries could
either party
Basically do their own.
Viruses I think the Democrats
divided in Alexion.
Rep which one it was a
presidential election did did
Areas that.
Yes definitely a second election
on the state about.
That party chooses to the
presidential primary on the runs
into the.
As as well as part of the
problem this and then yes of the
Democratic Party the star
there's a reason why election
revival violations.
But the the
And so and then that is a Mexico
that's the trade off for being a
major party is that we are going
to regulates as the state your
nomination process.
So and so the the option to
withdraw from this does not
exist for the major ones.
But I appreciate that so that's
good clarification I just I want
to read the conclusion from our
analysis are measures what
lawyers the constitutional line
is clear New Mexico cannot force
the party to fall non members to
vote in that party's primary it
violates the speeches
association rights of parties
and party members if New Mexico
wants to enact a constitutional
amendment to create non party
primaries U. S. constitutional
with the state to do so this
again is kind of defaulting to
the California model now again
the opinion of our good lawyers
and you know lots of lawyers
obviously have different
opinions and that's what you got
courts but I just wanted to
provide those issues and have a
discussion so thank you Mr
thanks for flagging.
Thank you Senator Stewart.
So Senator nail have we never
heard this in Judiciary because.
You know this is the first time
I've seen this.
To us this bill never made it to
Judiciary.
Never to do this year.
So we're breaking new ground
here.
What the law.
We didn't know madam chair
Senator I really you know these
are subjective I mean I mean you
can make all kinds of arguments
that you know it just as a
Senator Wirth that we you know
we've been dealing with this
preemption preemption issue
before and I just don't think
it's so cut and dried in in
stone you know I mean I I people
close to this issue maintain
that it's not that they have a
you know an honest philosophical
Dick disagreement with our
Senate you know attorney's
opinion.
Yep madam chair I don't I don't
think this is a philosophical
agreement I think this is the
constitution says we can't do
this.
I'm reading in these you know
after I read it more thoroughly
so I don't like that I want to
vote for this bill I want us to
do this but I certainly don't
want to have a primary like
California
that's not what this is I know
that I know that to Senator this
says to me is that we need.
Amendment to allow this.
Madam chair I mean this this is
come up and and and previous
committee I just this is hard to
know whether this is different
opinions on this you know valid
opinions I don't feel like we're
breaking the law if we pass this
bill in this moment in time.
But the discussion will be on
going for sure.
So did you have sometime yes
madam chair senator if I may um
as I mentioned the bill that we
are proposing does not you know
violate any of the US
constitutional rates it you know
enhances the rights of our
voters to be able to participate
in elections that they are
paying for I believe we did an
analysis of the crime case in
comparison to the bill that
we're proposing today and it was
not applicable to the bill that
we're proposing today so I can
assure you hard that this will
not violate any constitutional
rights or amendments.
Madam chair.
Further discussion.
Etcetera etcetera I thank you
madam chair I so personalized
items has been.
Bills that would allow you to
select what.
And a lot of the far left.
The members for their members
and
the voters and members of my
party voters or any voters to be
able to.
participate in their.
The progress I will say I do
the.
That is the
that is the most
Legally defensible position.
that we can that we can have
You know I.
I would just say that that
hi this is a and and I'm gonna
vote for this bill.
because as advocated for.
For the exact same reason that I
think are that are.
There are analysts with
inclusion that this is forcing
association is unconstitutional.
Our current law.
Prohibited associations is
equally unconstitutional.
So in that regard.
Although it is you know we never
like to say Gasol has a
when when do it work with simply
trading.
Well outside of the
unconstitutional point from the
side of the impact of of what we
can on the same issue.
And and
we are making the situation in
the works for.
I I will say that from
philosophical perspective I'm
long.
Struggle just.
I don't want from this from
philosophical perspective
because.
Yes.
The the little party primary is
is one.
Hello for parts system of the
strange ways for the general
election about.
And work messing with with only
one from.
Our system of constraint choices
for the journalists about as
opposed to dealing with so we
have the.
If your major part of our state
you self select for that gives
you access to the gentleman from
ballot is the primary election
into access to the general
doctor.
And that's a very low.
I would say to of
threshold of of Senator need to
collect.
For all a minor party.
The party selects the candidate
first.
That candidate gets to.
So what's the signatures having
already collected by the parties
their access to the general
public.
So therefore they have a higher.
Independent over.
Nobody likes that person nobody.
As a state they that is a good
idea that person.
They have direct access to the
ballot so there for them the
highest Russian.
And that the fourth is
Jennifer rate again is.
We don't require much of them
but we're not going to thirty
anyone in the business so you
know it's like having one of the
things even even as we are
proceeding potentially with this
bill today and certainly this
discussion.
Is it is not the technician take
a look at in terms of.
Of.
How we manage that strange was
in the general doctor.
What does it mean to be.
The the nominee of the
Democratic Party.
If you have people who are not
Democrats make the ultimate
decision.
and and
and whether or not there's a
there's a better way to.
To have the voice.
Of the people of the voters B.
R..
Up in the selection process of
their representatives their
centers and and the other people
that they want a lot if it is I
mean you know a lot of the test
twenty we had.
Right is that in many places of
the state and I think increases
after this last districting
the the decision for most
offices is made in the private.
And and that's because we have
system.
Where.
We make an initial selection of
primary.
And then and then we can spray
the toys from the general.
So that so that no one else
philosophical the can you tell
us the first.
And the right so like I said
that's something that I think I
think we should be thinking
about and looking at.
Because the product is
significantly higher than the
general.
But the decision was made in the
private.
And and that's and that's it's
a.
it could be the feed the future
or the fact of the system to
them on this but it is it is
these are all at the.
Long term.
The short term.
This is no more has to be for
the.
Thanks for.
Thank you.
Senator Senator Wirth thank you
madam chair and.
Again I think the this is a
fascinating kind of lesson and
separation of powers and you
know when the branches.
Are moving right to the edge and
whether something is
constitutionally constitutional.
Ultimately has to be signed by
the courts so again I think we
did have.
Pretty good discussion of
federal preemption issue that
gets really into the weeds and
and they may well the one that
the federal courts come in and
say you can't do what what we
did in this committee was one of
the discussion of floor I mean
for me you know we made this
decision when we did the
amendment on the Senate floor
and came up with this kind of
stuff very interesting way which
was at two in the morning when
the idea was special session I
believe it was played it was
late and it I think we left as
soon as we passed and I do
remember that the house was left
here to deal with it and I think
this is a better approach
current long.
And so I don't know if I'm
willing to say you know that
both percent of that is black
letter unconstitutional because
I just don't think we can say
that I just think for me it's a
difference between this versus
what we have now and I just
don't think it feels very
strange to force independent
voters to switch their party
registration and that switch it
back the other way and again as.
The twenty six year old a twenty
nine year old and yeah we're
solidly registered Democrats but
have lots of friends that are
independence I do think the
point you make a Center o'neill
about young folks you know not
being locked into the party this
gives them a chance to kind of
calm and see what what part is
about you know they're gonna
have to make a decision in a in
a primary or what we stand for
and what the different to
Democrats as a joining us on the
Republican stand for and they
are gonna get chance participate
which is good because you don't
want them just sitting on the
sidelines not participating and
then feel like it's a done deal
that's that's the other side to
it so I'm gonna supported and I
just sticking and as the lawyer
if he gets makes me possible
would something being presented
as kind of point blank
unconstitutional I really think
that's going to require some of
the challenges in the courts to
weigh in and make that
determination if they do I think
we're gonna be back here looking
at all the way to do it so maybe
this process I think madam.
That's all I'll say the Senators
and and for Senator Stewart with
all due respect we're amazing
Center to share analysts I I
disagree with this plan that is
black letter constitutional
I I do think that reasonable
minds differ on this I think
there there might be an argument
that.
That you have to have a jungle
primary for it to be
B. constitutional which which is
not the bill we have before us
but also you as Senator Ivy Soto
noted in that crime K. the court
signaled quite a bit that they
This this is a decision they're
leaving to us that they're not
likely to to come in and and
overturned this as a political
decision so so I I don't think.
We are asked in the wind bye bye
to innocence in ourselves up
just for a a lot to get struck
down
I also think it is
It is unconscionable for twenty
five percent of the voters in
New Mexico to be excluded from
at least half of our political
process which state they
effectively are now so I I
support this bill I feel okay
about the constitutionality of
it
And I now Senator.
I understand that the exact same
but the.
The duplicate bill that was in
the house died on Saturday so I
don't know that we're going to
see this
both.
Get it.
This is a different bill now
Senator Sanchez he.
You.
So what what's the will.
Yes be able to.
Okay we're gonna we're gonna
pause for just a minute.
No I think we might have a
member who wishes to weigh in hi
this on their way.
All.
In the meantime I will I will
echo what what senator Wirth was
saying that you know the more we
can do to encourage the next
generation's participation in
our democracy better when I was
the the clerk at the City of
Albuquerque I was looking at the
statistics one day and saw that
consistently more people over
ninety have voted in those
municipal elections than under
thirty
and that is scary that that
should just terrified all of us
because there's a whole
generation of folks growing up
who for whom voting is not have
they don't feel they feel
alienated by I by both the
parties than they don't feel
reflected by them and if we
want.
Our citizens to have a say in
what happens in our democracy
going forward in the future we
should be doing everything we
can to to make it as easy for
them to do that as possible Mr
chair
I believe you might have some
thoughts on the staff I've been
paying very careful attention to
all of your goings on and I'm
just here to vote with you
correct.
There is just one last time
before the.
One percent because of the
support demographics.
in the ditch is constitutional
analysis and that is that.
used to be with somebody that's
what happened.
They join their the first thing
join the PTA thank join the
other.
And people people's affiliation
what I former members.
And then for for anybody.
Really under the age of thirty
probably thirty five.
The the concept of of
Affiliation to formal
membership.
Is is is
not exist.
It's a concept really really
Asian choose to practice.
But not affiliation I.
And and this is K. pop folks.
Thank you center so we're gonna
do passed motion
as amended is there any
objection to that motion.
I see none I think this is the
first time open primaries is
passed up both.
one thing and thanks for the
discussion I mean this is just
really helpful is to talk about
all.
All right so.
Good to them.
Next up is going to be the forty
two.
Senator Wirth.
Yeah okay.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Pat just Senate bill forty two
continues.
and effort to make changes to
our campaign reporting act.
This is been something I've been
involved in.
Really starting in two thousand
and nine when and a group of us
in the Senate passed on a limits
on campaign contributions for
the first time in New Mexico
each prior to that so.
it was always interesting we
could as a candidate for the
state house we I could take
unlimited donations and a
candidate for the U. S. that had
caps amounts it was always
interesting to me I think
Senator dede Feldman led the
effort for years New Mexico was
referred to as the wild west in
many ways we're one of five
states with no limits on
campaign contributions so in a
bipartisan fashion Senator
harden and I actually have one
of the bills we put limits in
place in two thousand nine and
then the U. S. Supreme Court
stepped in and was citizens
United and basically kind of
blew the doors off the whole
system by creating a whole
separate group of independent
expenditures and entities that
could make fun limited donations
and as a result of that we've
been working to do the one thing
the U. S. Supreme Court said we
could do which is required
disclosure of those independent
expenditures which is a critical
piece for voters when they are
trying to figure out where the
money's coming from so we have a
system
in place and this bill continues
that work we do have an
amendment so when when you're
ready we can do that or I can go
through kind of the outline and
then with me today is Mandy
Vigil from the secretary of
state and Mario Jimenez
executive director of common
cause New Mexico and they can
just jump in so it's up to you
madam chair of how you want to
do the amendment or you want to
just give an overview first and
then deal with the amendment.
Yes that are significantly over
the first month okay great so
what the bill does
Is the following there's some
gaps currently in the campaign
reporting act that this bill
closes one and and perhaps the
the best thing to do is just go
through the sections and I think
it's easier that way so in
section one we at a definition
of expenditure which is seeking
to broaden that definition to go
as far as we can
constitutionally
and require those expenditures
in the constitutional windows to
be disclosed that's the primary
changing the definition in
section one section two as
electronic communications to the
current requirement in our
campaign code for disclosure
when telephone calls are made I
think we're all familiar with
robo calls requiring at the end
of the Wrobel call there's a
disclosure of who's paying for
it when there's a certain
threshold of calls that are made
on this is adding electronic
communications to that
requirements I think the fact
that everything is gone online
to the extent that it has this
is a great change that's what
section to dust on section three
deals with reporting by
independent expenditures and
closes a loophole it creates and
this is a bill actually that
mirrors one that that passed in
the Senate in two thousand and
twenty one Senate bill three
eighty seven it creates a
separate provision for a
segregated bank account so when
you have a large
Whether it's a nonprofit or you
this engaging in some
independent expenditures
it creates a mechanism to have
those expenditures deposited
into a segregated bank account
where it's clear they're not
going to be used I to fund
independent coordinated
expenditures that's important
because otherwise what happens
there's a gray area when dollars
are given did the donor actually
understand those dollars were
going to be used for the I. E.
or not this provision is
important to do just that this
section also contains a new
definition of donation which
ties into that so
To that provision of section
four
Is simply clean up for the
secretary of state that says
that if the filing deadline for
us to file reports falls on a
state holiday the report we
found no later than the next
business day so that's a clean
up on that makes sense I think
we've all dealt with actors
right now that's what's allowed
but that's not exactly what the
law says what happens there.
This also in this section for.
there is a similar requirement
being added for political action
committees and it will lot of
discussion rules about the
center Stewart you had questions
about this provision and the
requirement that those
committees just for those
committees that they currently
there's a there's a situation
where they wouldn't file a
report this will make them file
that report to be consistent
kind of with other entities.
on page eighteen I'm sorry
Paragraph ten through twenty
four which is deleting that
requirement to have the
exception for political
committee so it's just gonna
treat them the same way as other
entities are treated center if
if I might yes
four days before that that would
make the expenditures that are
made kind of on the eve of an
election have to.
Yeah the thirty day provision no
that's a very important one
thank you for pointing that out
Madam co sponsor.
the that right now we have is we
have a situation where an entity
was being formed all right on
the eve of the election and
because of the way that the code
was drafted there was a
situation where they would have
to file a disclosure report till
thirty days after so this is
again.
Leveling the playing field to
the rules of the same under that
scenario as well.
section five deals when we is
loans and advances page twenty
one Nibert adds a new provision
that states it's unlawful for a
candidate or the candidate's
agent to make an expenditure to
repay a loan that is received
from the candidate and that
includes a rate of interest
currently there's nothing in the
code that would prevent someone
from charging interest on a loan
they make to their campaigns and
with the current rate of
inflation you could see the
interest rate conceivably could
be charged that could be pretty
significant and the issue would
be you don't want them paying
back the interest rate using a
campaign contribution that could
get messy to say the least
hasn't happened I don't think in
New Mexico but there is a case
Ted Cruz or the federal case
involving this exact issue and
so this was flagged as something
to clean up that's what that
provision does it just would
basically make clear you can't
charge interest if you make a
loan to your campaign.
likewise on page twenty two
section G. this would have a new
requirement that if you do make
a loan on the terms of the loan
that you keep that you make to
your campaign committee and
evidence of the loan are also
disclosed so there's a provision
that requires that disclosure
of section seven is where the
amendment comes into play
originally there was a lot of
language here this is this is
for contributions during the
prohibited period originally so
couple things that the thing
that's going to stay in here is
that contributions so if you
give for both eight a a and
COVID and a candidate now during
the prohibited period the
candidate as well as the income
and cannot solicit contributions
all right now that was unclear I
think that's a very important
clean up
we did originally the way this
bill was drafted it would have
prevented us from receiving
contributions during the
prohibited period
During the The presentation the
rules committee there was real
pushback by both parties members
and both sides about that
provision and in fact an
amendment was adopted by that
centers the fan Xpert presented
that removed on page twenty for
the bottom line twenty three
section B. which would have
required
that that the that if you did
get a contribution your return
it's
During that that period and so
the basically the decision after
visiting with Senator Stefanics
and one floor and this was a
real issue for senator Morris.
We're going to take this out so
we're not going to change that
provision so basically you'll
still be able to accept a
contribution you can't solicit
but you can accept it during the
period and this whole idea on
page twenty four eight hundred
dollar recurring contributions I
my understanding is that there's
some language that's done by
rule by the secretary of state
that allows this but putting it
into statute just got
complicated and so that's really
the purpose of the amendments to
take that section.
Out and senator maybe we can
discuss more of maybe when we.
We have to get on the amendment
but looking at the amendment
here it's still keeping in
language that says he cannot
accept a contribution to this
this employer come in our
candidate campaign committee or
political correct correct and I
think that's currently.
It's not currently okay so what
about this.
This so so yes that's that is
staying in so we can talk about
that.
So it's generally that's that's
the gist of the bill and the
amendment is just to clean up
that section seven kind of take
out the the complete prohibition
in the whole hundred dollar.
Recurring contributions an
individual contributions which
gets really.
Tricky so that's what it doesn't
have to be able to either Mr
menace or Miss Vigil if you
anything else you want to add or
we can answer questions about
specifics the time limit for
your presentation is a good no
matter we will hear a lot from
problem for both of them I also
video to my to my co chair of
the my co sponsor but she's the
chair C. control the clocks.
Are we did not have anyone
signing signed up as a proponent
we have one person signed up in
opposition on zoom Luke coffin
copy the by the.
There are is is live here you
just have the.
The owner.
Okay.
We look at.
Yes.
Our.
From.
Thank you another couple seconds
we're going off but we will know
if you are reading had move on
what we will know your
opposition loop copy I believe
it's have as pronounced of that
left so do you want to go ahead
and move the amendment or I move
the amendment let me get point
two two five zero one two point
one for discussion.
Today on the amendment.
The representative of the so.
I don't have
I did walk the walk through some
of the changes here some of the
events have.
I thank you from.
Rusal's.
All of.
all the.
That the
federal taxes yes I what else.
I
This is a couple things in here
the first of all.
It is re write we do clarify
that ever they applies equally
to income of that and if that
wasn't the consistency for.
As a consistent by the office
previous.
it it also.
What is it receives are audited
period has always been.
Representative fox.
Well we're not headed for C..
And and that is something that
that oftentimes that come up
the.
problem at the same time
Has been a problem but at the
same time examples seven six
weeks before I get back home.
And I don't know what that
meant.
and so
you know that is.
so that's that's one reason why
those I think that here are some
of that
house and Senate a couple years
ago.
leader it was during the session
again a contribution from the
this committee or as faster as
members.
Wasn't terribly large
contributions we should make.
And and that's where we're if
it's certainly.
I think I think we.
The actors of terms of those who
might get a contribution to the
people who are who are most
interested in what we're doing
for this this employers and
candidates campaign committees
or political committees and who
should know better.
And I think a prohibition on
that universal folks thanks for
the census the average person.
That's not somebody.
Who is.
Who is in.
World.
We're not all the time that they
the state choose on our own here
contributions.
to read here is all we're not
the ones so.
Constitution for the.
So and then having.
I think it was problematic.
The the amendment in the rules
committee without making this
other change the subject to
date.
I don't know I I think it's fine
not to have the state.
About returning.
Is
It was received or about over
the last
I think the the incentive is
actually clear.
Of the last thing though but I
do want to point out the
section.
Is that we are changing the
prohibited purely.
Just a little bit.
And this is a famous actor.
there was a discussion about
whether the
special session.
And and for the special session
the mother extraordinary session
for never covered by the other
there they are it will be with
us for the other thing that that
that came up with that.
Well for those of us provided a
statement of those.
That we wouldn't be able to get
a.
so the patient is.
Ontology we jerk.
The governor and the lieutenant
governor as well as counties
would have a channel twenty six.
And so so the the two changes
that are so one of the changes
that are made right here in.
Is this process.
Is it right with this for the
governor or senator.
Representative earlier of the
twenty first day following terms
so that twenty days to be the
first is a state.
Right.
following German of the session
for.
The first calendar day after all
bills passed by the legislature
to send me to a possible
sectors.
Because of the and special
session.
If the governor signs the bill
within three days there is no
longer after that and there's no
reason to have the additional
seventy day tail.
Whether the for there's a
prohibition so we take care of
that and then the other thing is
there's always been some concern
about the beginning of special
session forms for.
And often times the governor
doesn't propositional morning
This allows actually the
predators of start.
would start I.
that the lesser period.
Of seventy two hours prior to
the start of the session.
For the population size
governor chose to sign the
proclamation fairly early so we
are going to be here.
The representative period cake
at some of our stuff.
And so I think that allows for
greater frustration
of of these areas during that
time.
almost but it's it's it's up I
thought of those things that I
this close a loophole.
Portable power.
Then the political.
Arena not making contributions.
So debate of the amendment.
The members.
Senator.
Chair and senator Wirth I'll
just say that I that I
appreciate what you've done you
know we spent all our time
talking about that one section
you know what about if the check
is written in December and then
it's mail to you and something
happens you don't get it till
January Seth then with before we
amended it we would have to say
that given back
which
is really thanks to.
So it just it didn't make sense
put so many restrictions so.
I don't know that this is sort
of more open now that I think
what we'll do is we'll cut back
to what we're doing I'm it
doesn't happen very often but it
does occasionally happen that
you you get something that takes
a while to get there and then it
comes in the prohibited period
what you do before you amended
the bill it was like you can
accept it you have to give it
back be able to give it to the
general fund or back to work
came from or something so I like
this better than what you've
done I think that will make the
bill a little easier to pass and
the rest of it is so good
anyway.
What a manager and I appreciate
again etcetera so talk walking
through this I I will tell you
this.
This was really not where I was
starting with this bill this is
a section that we were asked to
put on and Celtic have the
history is good to kind of go
through the specifics of exactly
what's happening with the end of
the prohibited period I think
makes a ton of sense so that is
and that is positive and I don't
know if Miss Vigil want to add
anything to Senator Stuart
Poynter.
Where I I do I do think it's
it's it's cleaned up and it's
important to kind of have the.
The differentiation between
those entities that are playing
quote unquote I mean a political
committee by one of us one of
our political committees to
another member to the session
not a good thing to happen and
now it's clear that that can't
happen and yet just as you say
if you've got a contribution
from an individual that has
nothing to do with the session
and it shows up during this
window I think that now can be
accepted in a way that
originally it wasn't so I do
think that will.
Make this more workable.
is there any objection to it
often the amendment.
Seeing none that's adopted.
From the bill as amended yes.
Any further debate the question.
Representative and just a
reminder we have a five thirty
hard stop time and the couple
and what the last we're gonna
get to can be quite like okay.
Not so madam chair Senator Wirth
page twenty one.
One point seven five I heard
what you said you intended for
that sentence to say and I'm
reading that sentence and I'm
just hoping we can diagram that
together to make sure it says
what we cause us.
Because because we described it
it sounded like you just want
something that.
So that it is unlawful for a
candidate to.
To make along with interest.
So to pay on.
Yeah so if we could if we could
walk through that please.
So again the goal of this.
Is certainly to a I mean again I
think what we don't want to do
is say that the candidate can.
Repay the loan itself the
principle of the loan.
You know from listening to make
the loan your campaign you do
have the right to pay that back
the the the.
The the the point of this was to
say you can't charge an interest
rate and then use your campaign
account to be paying interest on
a loan that's what we're trying
to do here and I do see the
concern that.
You know that this I would say
this language came from the
ethics commission.
Flagging this issue
so we may need to.
Tweet this to make sure we're
not saying that a candidate
can't use.
A campaign contribution to repay
a loan because I think you can
and I don't think that's the
intent at all and so it's
unlawful for candidate or the
candidate's agent to make an
expenditure to repay a loan that
is received from the candidate.
And that includes a rate of
interest it's the rate of
interest we're trying to get to.
Not the ability to repay a loan
some it may well you'll to my co
sponsor and yes Senator I I
think the intent of this was to
say that if you're doing giving
yourself a loan with interest
you can use any any campaign
funds to pay yourself paper pay
yourself back period and I think
the the end intention of that is
to say you can't it's really to
make sure people don't give
those what do those loans with
interest of themselves in the
first place but it I don't think
the at least it was never my
intent to say.
You can pay yourself back to the
principal on that interest
bearing loans you just can't pay
yourself back the interest I
think the intent was to
essentially have make it
impossible for you to ever get
paid back on alone if you're
putting interest on it and in
that way make it so that people
do not make loans to themselves
with interest and it's more
about having what is done with
campaign funds than than what.
And limiting someone's ability
to to give themselves loans
overall I think.
I think that's why it's written
the way that it as as opposed to
just saying Candace can never
give themselves loans with
interest or you can pay back the
principal but not the interest
That makes sense me and and
perhaps we should talk about
this before we're committing.
But noted Bellamy's validates a
good flag to because I do think
I I hear what you're saying.
And okay.
So I would I would I would keep
the language as of this.
And madam chair and so the work
I guess the concern that I'm
half of the languages of.
Is.
The definition of candidates.
Means an individual.
and and so.
What we're is where I think what
the intent is that it's
unlawful.
For the campaign committee.
To make it expenditure to repay
a loan that is from the Canada.
Senator I think that's covered
by candidates agent I think the
campaign committee was to
consider the canonization under
with this language and and I
think it is a we do want to.
We wouldn't want people to say
well it's not my campaign
committee it's it's me
personally so I'm kind of
wiggling out from under that if
if those limited just to
campaign committee.
Yeah and and I guess I'm not I'm
not sure that the.
The committee is seen as the
candidates agents but again it
would be that the agent of an
individual.
And and and that's not the the
concern isn't that the
individual.
Not making expenditure or agent
of the individual not make an
extension of the service as I
understand it madam chair.
That that the.
That you don't get money from
the political committee.
Right.
That that she'll get campaign
funds.
There's no expenditure out of
campaign funds to pay loan.
That
includes rate of interest.
I will ask the secretary of
state's office would you
consider a campaign committee to
be.
The an agent from Canada.
I've HSD languages is generally
interpreted so broadly I I I
think it covers it but but what
really matters is what the
secretary of state's office how
they're interpreting that so
Miss Vigil.
Madam chair Senator Ivy Soto I I
think what I'm hearing is maybe
a suggestion to include
candidate or candidate's
campaign committee instead of
stating candidates agent so that
we are identifying a reporting
entity within the campaign
reporting act to answer your
question madam chair I think we
would probably you know as a a
reasonable interpretation that
the candidates agent could be
tied to their campaign committee
but I think campaign committee
is.
To provide and that does make it
super clear.
So what if it said because I I
actually I like how broad that
can just agent languages
what if it's that candidates.
Candidates are campaign
committee or candidates a time
with that the workable for the
the secretary of state's office
and and administrative
administering the house madam
chair I certainly don't want to
go down the rabbit hole we
started in in Senate rules tied
to you know a family member on
that sort of thing so any time I
mean strictly speaking from an
administrative perspective it
can be as bright line as
possible that would be the
preference of the office of
there's any debate on what we
are referring to tied to a
candidate's agent you know I I
might ask if we can keep that as
tied to the C. R. A. as possible
that that that makes sense.
But I've got to say though that
if you've got the specific tied
to the C. R. A. and you include
the candidates agent uses kids
getting broader it seems to me.
So you just.
I mean I I I I like the idea of
adding the candidates of the
adding the specific language out
of the LFC reporting act but I
also I guess I'm kind of
deferring to where you started
Senator doing in terms of having
the third.
Candidates agent just to think
through.
Because what so think about it.
It's on lover candidate for the
campaign committee to pay it but
what about.
The uncle.
The uncle decides you know you
got a loan from the uncle for
ten ten thousand Bucks with an
interest rate of fifteen
percent.
And then some other third party
that's not a.
And I don't know I just I'm
trying to think through what
that would look like and maybe
it all has to go through the
campaign.
So but what they're worth your
state is that is that.
It.
If I give a little to my
committee.
L. and.
And senator
o'neill decides to.
Pay me the interest for apple.
That's not expenditure covered
by the.
By the campaign for.
Unless he's paid from his
campaign committee that this
language it would be an
expenditure
The expenditure but it would be
prohibited spend for the way
this run because Senator o'neill
would not be my agent.
And and so you know it is
and so that's the right so and
and and that's the problem with
this effect actually work in the
city with a parent line for
because because it can make the
loan.
To the campaign committee so the
the so the one who holds the
belt is the cabinet committee
not the can't.
Right and so that's the.
You know so what it is.
so there's I would do is that if
we read them right the the title
one what the.
It is unlawful for a campaign
committee to make an expenditure
to repay a loan that is received
from the candidate and includes
a rate of interest.
It you could also.
Of the state it is unlawful for
any expenditure.
pursuant to this act to repay a
loan.
That is received from the
candidate and includes a rate of
interest but again the problem
there is that you've got a
prohibition against repayment of
principal and the note holders
the campaign committee.
So.
I mean there there be no vehicle
for Senator o'neill to use
campaign funds.
To pay off my loan.
Representative contribution
that's exactly right but he
couldn't he couldn't use
campaign funds to pay off the
loan because the loan comes back
to the person.
And so Senator I.
I think that's not a bad thing I
we we do not we we do not want
to leave open loopholes for
people to make loans to
themselves that include interest
here so I I actually similar to
to the your second suggestion is
that it is unlawful for any
person to make an expenditure to
repay a loan that is received
from Canada that includes rate
of interest I think that would
make it as broad as possible
and do the most to accomplish
the intent of the section which
is to make sure that people are
trying to profit off of their
campaigns for office.
So I would suggest that
amendment on page twenty one.
Nibert.
After the word for striking a
candidate or the US continuing
on to pit line five striking
candidates agents.
And inserting in lieu there of
any person so it would read it
is unlawful for any person to
make expenditures to repay a
loan that is received from the
camp that includes rate of
interest.
That governments that that is
the problem that was.
Senator.
What I like because to take four
and.
I think it complicates what
we're saying we don't want that
to retail loans from the
candidate that includes a rate
of interest.
Because the and the sort of
throws it it just makes it we're
so I don't I don't think you
need that work.
No I've been playing around with
it taking out and that put it if
it includes but also to that but
you know that includes right
renters so is there some place
here if they were.
Thank Madam chair the other day
Senators the simpler approaches
the better okay then just take
out the end alone that is
received from the candidates
that includes a rate of interest
I think that's a great
suggestion the firm ask a
question.
Where do we put in here that you
can get free rate that you can
prepare yourself from the long.
If it doesn't include entrance.
Is that in here are we not
allowing the.
You can retain alone you think
to yourself you just can't do it
with interest not here I don't
know if it somewhere else.
Madam chair and and Senator
Stewart that is just how it
functions currently so this is
just creating an exception to
that so it was only prohibiting
repayment of a loan with
interest.
K..
And I believe Madam chair of the
bears are Senator Stewart that
there's actually section says.
and may not be in this bill that
campaign funds may be used only
for the following and repayment
of loans as well as there is
thank you.
So.
Emily I think you have that
amendment is there any objection
to drive both both right first
changes include also district in
the end any objections to that
scene that amendment is adopted.
any further discussion on the
bill I believe we have a due
pass motion pending.
All right you madam chair if I
could I think it makes sense to
roll this into a soft just clean
this all up otherwise it's going
to get really confusing with the
rules changes in the different
amendments in the original bill
so if we could do I do not make
a motion well whoever made a
motion that is a do not pass and
then do it is.
Do not pass forty two.
And I do have on the almost
always.
Forty two all these things that
we may all right any objection
to that motion seen done that
passes you have to pass.
And we are now going to Senate
bill two nineteen which Senator
o'neill is graciously presenting
on behalf of Senator Moores.
Okay thank you madam chair and
and
So if the if you read the
sporting pages or follow sports
this been this huge change and
and that happened after we
passed in two thousand twenty
one the N. I. L. bill or the
name and image and likeness bill
so with this is the cleanup of
the two thousand twenty one name
image and likeness bill after
the NCAA lost an anti trust case
in the Supreme Court and drop
the rules on and I. L. after we
passed basically it's it's just
a.
Free for all out there you know
you can you can like.
Have all kinds of of the college
however this is paying you know
indorse Mintz's etcetera
etcetera so so the NCA a rules
against coaches and schools
participating in and I of deals.
You know that it's no longer
germane and so the bill cleans
out our prohibition against
coaches and schools being
involved and I L. deals like
most other states have done
since the NCAA dropped its role
having lost that Supreme Court
case so the Education Committee
amendment took out the
appropriations for schools to
require athletes to wear certain
as lex's this is sponsored both
by UNM and and and just you so
with that I stand for questions.
Senator we didn't have anyone
sign up either in support or
opposition on this bill so we
can go straight to questions
from the committee we're
functioning as committee right
now I think senator Wirth will
be back momentarily we'll wait
until you fax taking official
action but I need to pay for the
committee.
On this bill in the meantime to.
This is Senate bill two
nineteen.
Well folks are thinking about
whether they have debate we're
waiting for our important Center
also it you know I think this
bill makes a lot of sun sun room
It is not an appropriate cleanup
given that that ruling for the
and C. W. double eight.
we and we do pay attention to
the Supreme Court we just you
know just twenty six.
We feel like it.
Are what is the will of the
committee on this about there's.
We're a we have a due pass
mission is there any objection
to that motion.
I see none you have to pass.
Thanks.
We are now moving to bill a
Senate bill forty one.
I need to step out very briefly
major major difference given to
go here.
Are you texting the I just did
good wrapping up its ability.
Yeah we're off of.
Wants to sit in place for just a
second to let me know the.
Chair once the.
Here in this bill.
So much as I'm as of but it said
he's what what committees.
Back.
Help the public affairs.
That will yeah no I think we're
gonna do is yes I mean we're not
gonna sit here.
I don't know what bill he's got
going over there.
More than one the the the the
next one is on the second last.
She's just take issue setting up
for a second.
Maybe that
was.
The.
Is.
Mexico and.
I.
So that those people down there
hello yeah.
Okay they're doing the vote now.
Perfect.
Senator technology.
Slide two I.
We have.
That.
Is
of the LFC.
Yes.
Thousand.
Really.
Okay.
Someone has center PNM right
yeah I just.
Hi this.
More so.
Just past.
See what happens.
Yeah.
And.
Representative actions as
supposed acceptance of this
Senator Stewart is.
Madam chair that you want me to
sit down or you may know it for
you know the please feel free
we're just wanted more Canadian
secretary to return and
go on and Senator will be back.
Entirely.
I just put another a bill in
your cue.
Yeah you thanks.
So I'm trying to be paid maybe
all over thank you.
o'neill is the co sponsor.
Senator Padilla has been
exceptionally gracious I went up
to the him this morning and.
About us saying good morning or
anything else I just I don't
want to lose another word.
Future.
Springing you.
Well yes yes thanks.
These are the state.
This.
And then there's there's.
Speaking as.
There.
Okay we're gonna go ahead and
start as a subcommittee.
We take official action until
Senator Ivy Soto returns.
But please go ahead with Senator
forty one thank you madam chair
and members of the committee
appreciate your time to do this
so Senator forty one essentially
is further clarification to the
New Mexico.
One get an echo there.
Mexico telecommunications act
that was able I was able to get
through the legislature in two
thousand seventeen we're and we
took a look at the three levels
of regulation in New Mexico on
telecommunications providers
And we toss the ball obviously
once legislation was passed to
the public regulation commission
they took we came two years to
do and they literally took all
two of those years and we felt
that when they implemented
promulgated the rules from from
Senate bill fifty three two
thousand seventeen we felt like
they implemented them in the
complete opposite intention of
the law and so now we felt like
we should begin drafting
legislation to further clarify
for the PRC exactly what we're
trying to accomplish their and
so essentially what we're doing
here is is we break we have
brought to significantly
simplified bill from the last
two to attempts to do this it
requires a PRC to regulate the
basic voice services of all
traditional landline phone
companies and in the same manner
that they've been regulating
rural companies for the past
twenty years with the rural
telecommunications act.
And the reason that's important
is the company there's there's
one company that's directly
affected by this I do have an
expert today Leo I think we all
know and I'm asking the speaker
a little bit but essentially a
company like blooming who he
represents a week where he works
the people he works for they've
gone from approximately just
under a million
you know access lines to
something under one hundred and
twenty five thousand access
lines are very quickly going to
be a real company anyway we
don't know how quickly that
they're on their way in that
direction
the legislation you know again
it it requires that any land
lines were which in some cases
are the only telecommunications
then your mortality for a
consumer in New Mexico and
especially in some of the more
rural parts of New Mexico nine
one one services and and and
that are available to customers
in more rural areas
those lines must be maintained I
know one concern that is come up
along the way with this
legislation is will customers be
abandoned and that we had some
great feedback from the majority
floor leader the Senate majority
floor leader so I just wanted to
ugh you know ally some of those
fears I didn't believe that that
that you know this company
they've never abandon customers
anyway but just to ensure that
that doesn't occur
you we have in state statute
sixty three dash nine eight
actually start to care last
resort requires that if there's
ever an attempt to abandon the a
class or group of customers than
they would have to go to the
public regulation commission for
permission to do that they can
just simply do that and and and
leave a community on the cold or
whatever then be on there there
appears public regulation rules
that specifically outline
exactly how that would work in
terms of discontinuance of
service but again that's never
been exercised here in New
Mexico and then even beyond that
at the federal level section two
fourteen of the FCC of the
federal communications act forty
seven USC.
At two fourteen I don't know
what's in it also further
outlines that so that there's
adequate replaced an adequate
replacement yes if the company
chooses to back out of a
particular area but again it's
never happened I just wanted to
let the fears of the for the
that that that that's very well
covered in in New Mexico law and
federal law we do want to come
forward
with with an amendment here it's
to twenty four eight six four
dash service I talked to.
To further apply some of the
fears that we received in the in
the first committee hearing on
this legislation if you go to
page you do you have that number
Madam okay so if you go to page
the amendment has two items to
it
I and number one is on page
thirteen one seven we are we are
wishing to strike the work
recently as there was a a lot of
debate in the first committee on
the word recently and we didn't
want to remove that board
so that they would remove them
and if you would be there the
second item is number two on
page thirteen line eight we
would strike within and insert
in there
of
not affiliated with the
incumbent local exchange
carriers so to further
strengthen the fact that we're
effective competition would come
into play it couldn't be that
that a company could claim you
know where you're
ABC you know telephone company
and then if they were also
affiliated with ABC teleservices
as an example that you know the
the root of the company and and
the network might be the same
with a look as though they're
different companies that would
not apply here if we make this
the second item is made this
change in the amendment that
number two they would they would
be allowed to do that either so
just further strengthens the
fact that effective competition
would have to be to actual
competitors in the market in
order to determine effective
that competition so there that's
the amendment on a high one act
on that but I would like to ask
Mr Bacchus a few words and then
we'll go whatever direction like
to mentor.
Guidance I madam chair members
of the committee my name is Leo
Baca I'm the director of
government affairs for lumen in
New Mexico I'm also registered
lobbyist here in New Mexico
I've been with the company going
all the way back to Mountain
bill which is about forty one
years that I've been with the
company I've seen the changes
that occurred in this industry
and I was there when we were
well over nine hundred thousand
access lines which roughly
equates to a thousand customers
in the voice market and then
something happened you know the
these cell phones became more
and more prevalent in society
and in the market place and also
voice over internet the whole
broadband issue broadband is
really exploded over the past
twenty years you know and and
we're still trying to get more
and more broadband in New Mexico
in the rural areas so there's a
lot of other companies that are
out there now providing service
whether it's over broadband or
the cell phone companies and
they're not regulated by the PRC
in fact we basically serve about
fifteen percent of the voice
market in New Mexico now eighty
five percent of the voice market
is served by someone else and
someone else who is not
regulated by the PRC and so it's
it's a a difficult situation for
us right now being treated
differently than our competitors
and I believe that if we can if
we can pass this bill and at
least level the playing field
initially with the rural telcos
and then give us an opportunity
to go to the commission to get
the effective competition
determined based on the test
that we have to show that there
are two or more alternative
providers and then the
commission can determine that.
Then that would make it up there
level playing field for us to
compete with all these
unregulated providers and with
that.
All the equipment and madam
chair the the the one thing we
will wrap up with their in our
introduction that is then it
would be with their for their
for help these companies that
are might find themselves in the
situation to look at New
Mexico's more attractive place
for investment with regard to
broadband because that's where
all of this work is going this
is a dying technology it's a
shrink technology it's but it
still must be maintained so that
nine one services are available
and where it's the only thing
that's available bless you in a
smaller community that that they
be able to maintain this so
thank you thank you and we have.
One person signed up in favor
one.
I know there are folks in the
room who who had not signed up
but I we're we're second to the
the procedures of the Senate
Judiciary Committee
and so those who signed up in
according to the procedures
we'll look forward to hearing
from Anderson Espinoza had
signed up as a proponent if you
could come and use the money.
And there's a there's still
quite a bit of time left for
them so feel free to.
The first to to talk madam chair
members the committee Jason
Espinoza registered lobbyist on
behalf in New Mexico idea the
statewide economic development
professional association and the
New Mexico technology council
just similar to the committee
before you know we want to
create more we need to modernize
our regulatory structures that
we have in the state to create
incentivizing Bassman in new
technologies I want one of the
data points I just wanted to the
national center for health
statistics to the national
health interview survey in
twenty twenty and according to
the data specific to New Mexico
seventy six point five percent
of adults eighteen and over here
in the state are wireless only.
And then when we look at land
line only.
These statistics only three
percent of New Mexicans eighteen
and over our have a land line
only and I think that showed
that talks about you know the
changing landscape that we've
seen in terms of consumer usage
for New Mexico we want to
modernize and shift our
regulatory structure to match
that so that companies can Abbas
invest in new technologies thank
you.
Thank you we have on zoom one
person signed up in opposition
for non.
Madam yes my apologies so I I it
will on support I they do
believe that Mr leader what that
was given a list of of with
actual names of supporters just
want to call them out of that
story yes we can certainly
announce them I have here.
Chelsea Canada's Scott Lopez we
take I always miss something on
this.
This
does your first name I I always
mispronounce Charley Marquez and
Alison Riley on soon Jareth
shallow.
So signed up for an opposition
is for non the Roman is he on.
Mr revenues please go ahead if
you could keep your concert just
couple minutes.
Thank you madam chair person and
members of the committee my name
is from the.
Representative America we are
the.
Representative workers of this
regulated communications
companies because and thank you
for listening to me today.
I sent an email out this morning
to members of the committee at
approximately eight thirty AM
attached to the email this is a
cream Supreme Court decision
dated five to twenty two and
also taxes an overview of the
New Mexico public regulation
commission case seventeen dash
zero zero zero one eight six yes
you do an eighteen dash zero
zero zero two nine five dash
you.
If one were to review the
Supreme Court and PRC documents
they would see that SB forty one
just basically part of bailout
situation before SB forty one
gets too much further down the
road lawmakers should start
thinking about some constituents
are going to be angry when
suddenly they don't have a
reasonably inexpensive
alternative to the service that
they have now SB forty one is a
one company focused piece of
legislation that gets them out
of responsibility that they have
to New Mexicans the New Mexico
Supreme Court in New Mexico
public regulation commission
have already weighed in on this
so I'm confused why the
legislature want to undo this
commitment so the communication
workers of America the essential
workforce essential workers more
out in the field trying to
service the customers of New
Mexico strongly opposed the
passage of SB forty one and I
must mention that president
money into infrastructure
investment and job that will
invest hundreds of million
dollars hundreds of millions of
dollars taxpayer dollars in
investing into reliable
affordable quality broadband
infrastructure in under served
and under served communities but
until this happened we cannot do
regulate the Dalton industries
thank you guys very much for
your time.
Thank you then we'll go to
discussion from the committee.
The amendment I'm sorry right I
forgot about the amendment and
so.
I'll go ahead and and move the
amendment hi is there any
objection to adopting the
amendment.
Just chair I appreciate.
In the some of the language the
reasonably term is.
Super squishy so I appreciate
that got taken out and then
we're going back to.
You know something that was in
the prior language is being
stripped down on page twelve
that year.
Requirement for the the
alternative I for other
affiliated connection that's now
being put back in here so those
were responses to specific
things I flagged in the tax
committees I appreciate.
You already do that.
Thank you a debate any other
debate on the amendment.
We can't necessarily a document
because we don't have a quorum
were and supplementals
But we have which is
representative
thank you.
But we will proceed at as with
the assumption that that
amendment will be adopted
Additional discussions in the
committee.
Senator.
You know I have some heartburn
over this bill
and and I agree with you that
that is not fair that the folks
like Lumina regulated when when
broadband and and and so
providers are not and if this
was a bill to regulate them as
well to to level that playing
field I I would be in favor
But.
A couple of things so one I I do
agree that this this is a bill
that really and this is one one
company focused legislation
which in general is not
something I'm I'm a fan of that
I don't think that we should.
Create laws around one company
it overall but but apart from
that.
So for example.
Madam commitment some of what
you're looking for sure thanks
so so while it may appear yes
that it does affect one company
today this is not a bill for
this company this is a bill for
that class of for that type of
the committees will make that
clear for the committees thank
you and and and I I appreciate
that that clarifications of not.
It's important Senator.
All right
To see
there's an amendment being
offered
Do you want to.
As I don't believe there's going
to be if there's any opposition
to adopting the amendment.
Etcetera etcetera all right that
the amendment is adopted we.
Okay.
So so I'm looking at page ten.
And this is talking about.
The the what the commission so
the enacted before I get to that
let me back up a little bit my
understands that a lot of the
problems that the are the folks
like the men are having is
actually because of of our now
prior PRC we have a new PRC
that's getting started and I
would prefer and and and I have
high hopes for.
Them taking thoughtful approach
to issues like this and I would
like to see how that new PRC
handles issues like this with
our our existing statutory
framework
so I.
I I still see a path a path
forward on this issue I just
prefer to not have it be what
we're we're we're making changes
in statute right now before we
have given our new PRC a chance
to to look at these issues.
But I also so looking at that
page ten that's talking about
when.
When the PRC when when affected
of competition has been shown.
And right now when there's that
showing of competition the PRC.
Is is told to to modify it
reduce or eliminate rules or
regulations and other
requirements having to do with
level.
This takes out modifier reduce
of right now the PRC so there's
a finding of competition the PRC
is compelled to eliminate rules
and regulations.
Dealing with and then we go down
in which added and quality of
service that really bothers me
that that we would be tying the
PRC is hands to affect do
effective regulation around
quality of service for consumers
in New Mexico
I also it if we go to page
eleven that.
Looking at lines on nineteen and
twenty this is language is being
struck out and this talking
about.
How you kind of making these
determinations determinations of
effective competition and one of
the things that is taken into
consideration now is that
separatist termination shall be
made for residential and
business services.
That language is taken out and
it's not put in anywhere else so
then when we turn to page
thirteen we're we're talking
about effective competition.
It's that.
There's a bit of competition
when there's two or more.
I two or more folks providing
these services but you don't
have to different differentiate
between residential and
commercial so I have a company
in a small community that is
providing only commercial
service you have a company
Senator has provided only
residential service and that is
somehow deemed effective
competition are such that.
The PRC has no ability to
regulate things like quality of
service and and that's not
effective competition just
because they're not actually
playing in the same markets
So I have all I have a lot of
heartburn about that.
Senator can I take those three
just real quick and then they
sell please so first of all
anyone with the committee know
that the chair didn't wonderful
job of and I wish this happen to
me every time I had a bill and
Judiciary with was fantastic
about coming to see me on the
floor today and and I was
reaching out and had a great
conversation on all on on the
three subjects that have come up
so far be talk about peers even
so I'll just I'll just start
their real quick so thank you
very much for the feedback has
been incredibly helpful so the
PRC new integration of the
appears to have a ton of faith
and confidence in our our leader
for earlier was was a big part
of making that happen and I
think it was designed the right
way.
Why I'm not a hundred percent
sold yet is I think that body is
going to need and I know that's
not the purpose of this bill but
it was drugs all address might
my feeling I spent an awful lot
of time with the PRC because of
the type of legislation that I
that I cover sometimes I move my
body as fast it'll just it'll
possibly go to get myself over
there and they've asked me to go
there and then I want to sing at
and what that's all about anyway
but but bottom line is we have
to do a better job with the
legislature to fund the PRC with
professionals at that the
commissioners are are
outstanding I think the ones we
just confirmed are outstanding
they need staff they need people
that understand
telecommunications
the previous iteration the the
understand the level of
understanding of the staff was
was it was they were just being
run ragged so I hope that we as
a body will fund them
appropriately that's an awful
lot to leave out there and and
wonder if they're going to have
that skill set and have that
ability to regulate telecom
properly I don't at the moment I
don't have
I don't feel one way or the
other item but based on history
I'm a little concerned so that's
what I would say about the PRC I
think rolling the dice like that
it is one thing and center if I
may I mean and that's that's
true for everything the PRC
regulates I would agree I we we
we just we have seen the
function yet but we did take
this move to to.
Improve the PRC and the I don't
I was very impressed with the
the commissioners that that we
we all just confirmed yesterday.
Today is a Wednesday yeah
I I I I hear you and I just
maybe maybe we we I don't want
to wait and see if you have a
real problem right now that we
need to prepare that's one
coming forward with this and I I
think that this will give
excellent direction to the new
P. Garcia the new iteration and
I hope that that's what into
transparent such item number one
of the madam also on page ten on
the quality of service line
seventeen I think what you what
you have happened there is
market conditions will push
companies to be of the highest
quality provider in probably the
lowest
price provider also so I was a
big part of the at the nineteen
ninety six told him the
telecommunications act at the
federal level where
You know we we do regulated and
and and and and did did some
work to help local and long
distance services were provided
at the time and it's incredible
how immediately after that last
time you heard her her it's a
long distance call when was the
last time you heard you know so
there are tons of of market
conditions that corrected
quality of issues of service
issues and competition created
better quality and and lower
prices so I think that the
market will help us to ensure
that the quality leave it to the
market basically with that
particular change and then in
terms of of your comments Madam
chair on if there is a
residential.
Telecommunications company and a
business telecommunications
company and the legislation
actually we do agree with you
that it it we could get we could
go either way but we I tend to
agree with you because I really
love you to vote for this bill
today and as always I say that
way that yeah I if there's even
any room that a business center
and residential company.
Would would would be the
effective competition I'm with
you I actually agree with and so
we actually did draw up another
amendment that that we I don't
know if it's here yet but we
work really hard to get this
done a moment to talk to me
about it so I I I agree with you
I think that I would just I
don't think I can support and
acuity that a residential in a
business company all suddenly we
have competition well no I
actually don't think we do
because those are two totally
different types of
telecommunications the services
the cost of the quality of what
what the telecom does so
All right here so yeah we do
have a minute to another member
for you.
It is
So if you I and I know that you
have policies in terms of our
practices and how you want to
handle this but I can sign one
of them and given to for the
best and I think Senator they
they have to be moved by a
member of of that the committee
okay when I and I I appreciate
you getting that done will we'll
take a look at it will be out
because I agree with you on that
no and I appreciate that I
appreciate you you're responding
to that concern
On the quality of service issue.
It would yes ideally market
conditions would would drive
the.
The best quality of service at
the lowest price and and that is
what we always hope for why
would we preemptively tie the
PRC is hands that'll to be able
to deal with quality of service
issues I mean that.
Why is I don't understand why
that is even being asked for
here and so I I I I if there's
an answer that's something other
than we're hoping the market
will take care of that then I.
I I I'm I would like to hear it
but it is just we think the
market will take care of it.
That is not a reason for me to
to deregulate
To do it deregulate things will
say two things thank you madam
chair so so one company do
themselves a major disservice to
their to their business model
that they provided you know less
than some of the subpar Human
Services or whatever but so I I
think that's why I fall on on
the on the the market will will
dictate how quality and price
are handled on this type of
service but Miss Mister bucket
also
Madam.
Madam chair members of the
committee
in addition to what the senator
said
We only about fifteen percent of
the market that regulated today
eighty eighty five percent is
not regulated by the PRC so.
Quality of service for those
eighty five percent you know.
I get pretty good service from
my cell phone but they're not
monitored by the PRC for quality
of service my cell phone company
wants to provide good service
because they want me as a
customer.
In our business the fifteen
percent that we are
participating in right now we
want to keep our customers we
want to provide the best quality
service that we possibly can and
our managers who are in that
part of our business that they
provide service through the
staff through our technicians
their rate is measured by their
performance on how we provide
service to customers so if you
want to drive behavior that's
how you pay your people and our
managers have metrics that
require them to meet certain
standards of quality of service
already internally that.
Once we measure ourselves
internally just as any other
company measures itself in order
to provide the best possible
service to its customers so Mr
Rocco Senator.
If you're doing that already if
you're holding this high quality
of service already why do you
want to forclose the
commission's ability to be able
to to also ensure that customers
get quality of service.
Why you know.
Madam chair in a competitive
environment you can't well you
should be able to treat one
company differently than the
other competitors it's just it's
just unfair to the one company
to have to have oversight on how
they do their business and
everybody else does not have
that same oversight it's just
not fair to that one company
we're talking about a level
playing field here with all the
competitors who are trying.
Possible to all their customers
and his record I I agree with
you that that it's not fair and
and again if this was a bill to
to give that oversight
regulations all the companies I
would be I'd be signing on I'd
I'd I'd be here your number one
left but it's not
And so.
I think this is something that
that we're we just fundamentally
just disagree on I think it is
important for the commission to
have the ability to regulate
quality of service I think part
of the commission's you're part
of what the commission is for is
is to help is to protect
consumers
and anything that is time time
there has a for closing their
ability to do that is something
that that I can't support
but I think I've I've be that
our to the but but we have here
your men here would you like to
explain your amendment.
This.
I'm sorry will we'll move it for
purposes of discussion thank you
madam chair and so if you the
amendment essentially is in my
name but everyone and will
decide make sure to handle
properly so page thirteen take a
look at line seven after the
word available want to make sure
that it's crystal clear that a
residential company that service
provider any business service
provider is not team the
effective competition
first that would not be called
affect competition so we do
there is we insert to both
business and residential
customers from two or more
alternate providers within the
wire center serving area so we
would have to be for the
business side of to be to
business service providers for
the residential have to be to on
it but based on the first
amendment that we that we put
here that we added it would be
to unaffiliated residential
companies.
And and madam madam chair what
we see in the.
What we see in the industry
madam chair and members of the
committee is that we don't I'm
not aware of any service
provider that only provide
service to residential customers
and not business customers for
any provider that only provide
service to business customers
and not residential customers
the providers that we're talking
about here that are our
competitors they provide service
to all customers because when
you're looking at broadband
broadband doesn't see
residential or business
broadband is just broadband
whether goes to a home or goes
to a law firm or or whatever
goes to it broadband is
broadband and for the wireless
companies the wireless companies
all serve whoever wants to buy
these phones and by their
service residential business the
fixed wireless companies that
are out there they provide
service to residential business
because whoever wants it fixed
wireless services they don't
discriminate who they provide
service to I'm not aware of
anyone that only I'm just going
to provide service to business
customers are on just that
initial because I'm not aware of
that but we put it in here to
make it crystal clear that
checked on that point though
I've gotta say Mr Baca I've got
high speed broadband going right
down the street from my house
that is not available to any
residential because it's been
put in by the I think that with
the federal grant for for
schools so the school up the
street has it in this box is all
the way down the street and
we've had a heck of a time I had
to finally get starlings fast
enough internet in Santa Fe to
be able to kind of run
everything I'm functioning so
I just think I think it's X. so
that something and I'm just this
amendment fixes that potential
issue because I think you could
have had an argument otherwise
the yeah there's fiber in the
ground but they're not let me
get access to it based on the
way it's set up and again maybe
that's a unique.
Education I think it's an
education.
Focus yes Senator Stewart has
the answer to that.
Yes madam chair so we have this
the rate for schools the federal
government pays eighty percent
of that
actually I think it's even
higher than that so that's why
we have better internet around
the state to schools communities
we are trying to integrate that
we are to have the school the
right work with do it and the
new broadband Department but to
ship to share that so that there
are hubs
and then you have spokes out
from but we're obviously not
there yet then that is Mr chair
that's absolutely right with the
pro to be in the office
broadband access expansion
here in the working that out
right now.
It's a wonderful thing that the
race because it just said this
has meant that we we've we've
hardly had to spend money on
schools to get product that
we're trying to.
That and use it for residential.
And business and community
libraries etcetera.
And and that would language here
that that broadband what would
count consultant providers
includes a whole slew of folks
but I I'm not sure that this
language on this ammendment
actually fixes the issue I.
Because what this is talking so
it would read effective
competitions pursuant to the New
Mexico to help
telecommunications Act jobs this
in a wire center serving area
when voice services are
available to both business and
residential customers from two
or more so.
You're making the decision
whether you're saying business
and residential that's talking
about the customers who are
getting it not the providers
necessarily who are.
This makes sense I'm not sure
how exactly how to articulate my
my concern Miss America is like
no it doesn't.
It's.
I'm I'm just I'm not sure that
that.
The issue and.
And I'll be honest with the
senator I I don't think you have
my vote on this bill either way
even though even with an you've
read when we with this morning
with.
Feedback is valuable feedback
has been very much but I will
say that if you if you read
beyond what the amendment says
from two or more alternate
providers so that means that the
residential section would have
to have or offering would have
to be two or more to determine
effective competition and the
two or more alternate providers
for business is the way that
that would be so so that it
doesn't merry the two and it
removes the ambiguity of
marrying into the residential in
the business as being is calling
that affect competition yeah and
I'm I'm I'm.
I I'm not sure I don't
necessarily read it as as as
resolving that issue all I'll be
honest
and I can't I can't think of of
better language I I I wish I
could think of a better way to
to resolve that issue I mean I
would choose the old language
that was left struck at.
Let.
But
I'm not I'm not entirely sure
what what to do with this
ammendment
because I was.
But we don't have a quorum
again.
Four and a half.
But.
I mean it is.
We wanted a vote on the
amendment or I mean Madam you
maybe what you gotta do is just
spell out flights what what
services the reason that they
will go to.
The business customers from two
or more alternate providers and
to residential customers from
two or more alters providers you
just do it twice fell out and
that is that it's clear because
I think it's a question of the
way it's drafted that no thank
thank you senator I think that's
a that's a good suggestion Madam
chair of the leader has a bright
that leaves no ambiguity
whatsoever so let's just let's
make sure of the Health Analeigh
get this is so it's basically
page thirteen line seven.
After available after available.
To have the words to business
customers.
From two or more alternative
providers and then we're gonna
have to lift the amendment and
the from the prior amendment
language not affiliated language
right Senator will clear.
And then.
After the call of their online.
State we're gonna repeat the
same language for residential
customers with the unaffiliated
that's right with the US
language.
Yes so it's the the the
challenges we've gotten this
language going as we need to
make sure that's in.
So the purpose of you do it once
for business customers.
Two or more.
Nope that's not so just yeah
from two or more of the and take
up to two or more the legal
language so it is.
The highest customers from to
pour over to find or is not
affiliated.
In our service area stands.
After the COVID and from the
filling the residential
customers in the same way again.
The second.
And from yeah yeah.
And residential customers from
two or more so just track the
same language.
Madam that's a it's a good catch
it is your right the legislation
I think family is a little
repetitive the way we draft the
Senate's caused.
Okay how are we
are we looking into it Senator
Wirth say.
Basically from the issue was we
need to make sure the language
in lines.
This page thirteen line seven
eight and nine which were
previously amended in the first
amendment's wiped off my points
and once for business customers
and once for residential
customers so the requirements.
So basically it's going to
happen is is in New Mexico
telecommunications action.
Shell exist a wire centers
servicing.
Serving the area with forty
services are available.
To.
Business customers from two or
more alternative providers not
affiliated with the incumbent
local exchange carrier in the
wire serving area and from two.
And.
Available committees track the
same language for residential.
Change the work business the
residences repeat the same
language again but make it for
residential.
How are so whether you're a
residential customer or business
customer effective competition
will not be seen unless there's
two or more and before it could
have been it appeared as though
you could have used a
residential provider and a
business provider in the same
community also that we have to
come just want to make sure that
that's crystal clear that.
Right right.
And then injection the amendment
seen.
Senator
In my continuing story of well
of Hartford
so so looking at the MSA page
page thirteen.
The fact that that voice
services provider is getting
state or federal funding can't
be considered when I talk about
effective systems that if you go
down the line twenty two if a
broadband provider is getting
state or federal assistance that
is that is automatically
considered considered and and
for makes it automatic that that
competence Act competition as
fast
Now when I first read I I I read
line twenty two before I.
In support team my first thought
was well third and they're
getting all this extra money on
this assistance that's that's
kind of fair.
But we're just saying it it only
matters of one one group gets
gets the assistance not the
other so taking that out of
consideration for folks like
lumen but making it a.
A determinative consideration
for broadband to me is not the
level playing field that you're
talking about it is it is again
it is a and better playing field
for that the telecoms in in that
direction.
Let's walk through that.
Okay madam chair what this is
all about it has to do in more
of the rural areas currently
I've been up we've been working
with the office of broadband
because they're already making
awards to providers to provide
service in more rural areas
which would be in direct
competition with those companies
that already serve those rural
areas it could be little meant
it could be some of the
companies represented by the New
Mexico exchange carrier group
who supports this bill but that
when you have taxpayer money and
government money funding a
provider to be in direct
competition with the provider
who's already been there that's
what this is about is that it
should be declared effectively
competitive at that point and Mr
Baca if if that's all this was
saying I would agree with you
but it's saying.
It's saying that is unreasonable
that as competition when
broadband gets it but not when
we get it when we get it.
It shouldn't count as it doesn't
necessarily it shouldn't it's
not something that should be
considered and so the fact that
it's only being considered for
for one group and and and not
the other that that bothers me
and I I think I see we're
tracking now with that.
I know it's it it appears that
way but what we're looking at
when we say broadband it's
really the voice over that
broadband because our existing
service in that area is voice
service and so even though these
providers are being funded to
provide broadband voice service
comes with for up with broadband
you know whenever you have zoom
or anything over broadband you
get the voice coming through too
and people can can make voice
calls over broadband so it's
that voice compliment because
this deals with voice primarily
it's in this whole build us and
and that way it's that broadband
company providing broadband
service.
Compliment of that is voice and
that is what's in direct
competition with our voice
service in that particular rural
area.
So so two things Senator Mr rock
at one.
That's not what that the
language of the site us this
doesn't say only to the extent
that those
federal funds or state funds
apply to voice.
The part of broadband which I
don't know if that would be
distinguishable.
But it's still.
It's still the same.
It's also if that that Robert
voice over broadband competition
for you you are presume the
competition for it as well and
the only then getting the
assistance gets considered not
not you getting the assistance
and that's what I have the
problem with that that that the
same issue of getting the state
or federal funding assistance is
treated differently for for the
telecoms versus versus prop and
then.
And so I.
I I can't support this bill
I think that there's there's
clearly an an issue here to be
addressed I don't think that
deregulation is is the best way
to address I I think that we
have a new PRC that should have
the opportunity to look at these
issues and I have every faith
that they will do so
thoughtfully and if these issues
still exist after that thank you
to have this conversation again
but make deregulating this is an
area that and I know it's fifty
percent of the market is also
fifty percent of the market that
covers some of the most populous
areas in New Mexico
a lot of New Mexico consumers
that we are now going to be do
you regularly and at an
essential utility that they use
and time the PRC's hands to do
their job to protect New
Mexicans and so I I can't
support.
But the only thing I would add
if it's alright madam chair is
you know here again the way
markets work is effective
competition and the removal of
of the regulation of the near
term I don't believe they're
being deregulated exactly but
you know if I would agree with
that then suddenly the market is
is is two or more carriers that
are competing with each other
may be doing themselves a
disservice like I mentioned
earlier if they provide
important wallet they provided
prices that were unacceptable to
the consumers in that market so
we just respectfully disagree on
that but it becomes and center
yeah I I think we do we we just
have a difference of opinion on
that and and I agree with you
that that that is how the market
should work that is how we hope
it should work I don't think but
if we have backstops that are in
place to protect consumers just
in case the market doesn't work
that way.
I don't see I don't think we
should remove them because
sometimes things don't always
work out the way the way we hope
that they well planned but
further discussion on the
committee Senator of work thank
you madam chairs of a question
of on page ten going back this
call.
Widely include any of these
qualifications you're basically
saying well once once
competition is back on.
The commission is made that
determination.
Areas of the budget cuts
competition.
This is the purpose of the Act.
Basically they sell eliminate
rules regulations or other
requirements for the will to the
provisions of.
Telecommunication services
within that wireless service
areas period I mean it just
seems to me that why are you
putting including the always get
into questions including you've
added one is raising a bunch of
issues for Senator doing I think
you know I thought you just took
out quality of service it would
change anything in my opinion
because I think quite frankly
you said there's no way to do
anything.
You know that the you're
basically saying once the
competition is meant they no
longer gets a lot of fighting no
longer get to reduce the have to
eliminate.
Right so it's just it's just
straight up elimination and so
and you're saying including the
fixing it determining the
specific rates quality service
terrace or fares.
I mean I think the challenges
you've added this new quality of
service I guess because you want
to make it crystal clear there
is no scenario here seeking.
Well back and try and do that
except you said right above the
they have to limiting any rule
on that fact so Mr chairman and
madam chair office madam chair
industry leader so yeah what's
the effective competition is is
is established that just brings
parity this really all that's
doing it brings parity to
everything all the other
providers that are in that same
class of provider.
So I think madam chair I mean if
you just if I'm starting a lot
of the what ifs it's about com
online sixteen after the work
area you put a period and just
deleted including the fixing
indeterminate specific rates
quality of service terrace or
fares just eliminated that
section completely then your
base that that that's cleaner.
Quite frankly seems to me
because by putting some things
in there and not others what
you're doing is creating a
scenario where quite frankly
there may be some other issue
that flags there I think the
reason that this is the quality
of service is jumping off the
page because.
So Mister madam chair and Center
Mr leader and so I completely
agree with you the other thing
it so so we do that that.
Ally some of the other items
that could come up but.
I'm guessing that we'll be back
here I'm still around here doing
the still two or three years
from now trying to further
modernize this act.
On a dying technology so I think
you're right if we just put a
period their captors whatever
else might face us or face these
types of companies down the road
could we insert this.
Some ads on what you think about
that but it just seems to me
that that's clear way and it
just we don't start trying to.
Pick out some but not all
Senator Ivey Soto seem to like
that too so I mean I guess I
would I'm gonna.
It sounds like it's a friendly
amendments all of us to make
that.
Do and and senator I I think
you're right that it's cleaner
also that I state does make me
like that knowing.
Still has so that we should
eliminate the PRC's ability to
make rules regulations that
protect Mexico consumers I I
think you're correct that's it's
a cleaner I would see that as a
friendly amendment also.
So is there any discussion on
the amendment any objections to
adopting the amendment.
The amendment is adopted.
So Madam was still the floor one
of the questions I've got and
and let me just say these bills
have been around this is been
the legislature because I think
New Mexico was pretty unique.
In terms of its regulation of.
This particular.
Like there the the incumbent
carrier and I guess my question
for you Mr bar how many other
states at this point have a
regulatory over lay that's
comparable to what we've had in
New Mexico we currently have in
New Mexico where where do you we
were you all do business madam
chair senator Wirth opt off the
top of my head there are more
states that have already adopted
deregulation or some form of
deregulation then we have a New
Mexico we're we're not the first
were among the last that's just
off the top of my head were
among the last to try and do
something like this so madam
chairs and through later so just
north of us Colorado has I mean
you talk about the regulate
completely deregulate the entire
industries and their economies
thriving in in a lot of ways I
mean it's just just to give an
idea what took place there when
they decided to go down another
an extreme path of the
regulations.
And in this industry and one of
the the questions I asked and
and one of the reasons I've been
hesitant.
For many years to kind of go
down this this road is the.
Those parts of the state were
aware there just hasn't been the
ability to have an alternative
and I know I have someone who
works for me in this building
who until quite frankly until
she put the starlink in.
You know the cell phone didn't
work the land line.
And and and she used I think you
might have it for one of this is
New Mexico serve writing in
support I can't one of the small
little systems with fairy
interments for internet
connection and so one of my big
concerns if if we do this are
they gonna be left high and dry
and I think that's yeah that's
right so I'd like you to just
repeat what the answer what
you're you're.
That can't happen thank you
madam chair Mr leader so yes I
know I'm very well aware of the
person you're talking about and
I look at multiple options to
help that family in that
community in a very unique place
in New Mexico which is a
beautiful place but but but just
more to the point so yes I mean
talked about it when we first
got going with this hearing
sixty three dash nine nine eight
dash six dot two carry last
resort prevents the company from
abandoning a market or a group
of customers
they would have to have approval
from appearing from the public
regulation which none of that
goes away with any of this
legislation with this
legislation and you know and
then beyond that discontinuing
there's a whole discontinuance
of service rule that the PRC is
enacted and then beyond that
there is a an FCC at the federal
level section two fourteen I
know I wish that I had the lingo
that the proper lingo Senator
Ivy Soto has to read the
statutes off by by these codes
and stuff but it's all clearly
outlined the company cannot just
abandon a group of customers
without going through a number
and the other thing all mention
is limited.
At this company was here today
they never done this they've
never abandoned a group of
customer service so I guess the
question that chair so if.
Affected competition is found in
an area like this under that
scenario can women make the
decision to no longer provide
land lines in that area.
they could make that decision I
think that they have to go
through all of the steps that I
just outlined in order to
accomplish that so I think that
the challenge would be though if
you've got some.
You know far less stable entity
that's up there that's currently
providing the service and then
you all are able to jump out and
then all certain that falls
apart you know they're gonna be
that entity of last resort and
they may not be the same in the
same place I mean luminous when
we look at that madam chair
Senators this is a dying
technologist one say that one
more time it's a dying
technology pots lines are are
going to be in here making other
changes to this every two to
four years on.
I don't see even want to go to
in the community in New Mexico
set up the whole operation that
doesn't exist today because the
capital outlay in expenses to do
all that are so enormous for the
return on investment I can't
imagine they're going to do that
so unless you want to if I may
madam chair senator Wirth these
process sees that the Senator
Padilla mentioned both at the
state level and at the federal
level if I could just you've
been hit by Senator.
It's a lengthy process if you
see this piece of paper that I'm
holding here it's there's
several steps that would have to
go through in order to
accomplish this is at the state
level and then at the federal
level.
This there's again several steps
timelines customer notice it's
it's not an easy process and
it's a process we've never done
in New Mexico it is it is
extremely difficult process to
do and one of the key
compliments at both the state
and federal rules is that you
have to prove to the FCC and the
state commission you have to
prove that
So I'm just.
Again
madam chair and senator for the.
Given that just explain to us
why this bill is so important.
To this to your business because
you're still going to have to do
this is what I'm hearing.
Yet this is going to free you up
as I understand it open up a
whole bunch of alternatives for
broadband so just tell us if we
do this one that you don't have
right now because what I'm
hearing is you still got a
responsibility for all these
landlines you're still going to
have there's gonna be Kerry of
last resort.
But clearly this is going to
allow you and I just have one of
the big things is to use some of
the resources in the in the
moving into the broadband area
so some which Ghazi to compete
more competition there but you
still have this time of year you
still got the obligation to
provide to take care of these
folks.
So just tell us what what what
you're getting if we pass this
you don't have right now.
Madam chair senator Wirth what
we get is we're able to compete
in those areas where we have
competition on a level playing
field with all of the other
competitors that are out there
without having to have the
onerous regulatory oversight of
of telling us what to do how to
do it how to measure it wonder
reported had reported that.
You know internally we want to
provide the best service to all
of our customers everywhere but
to have that regulatory
oversight that none of our
competitors have is unfair to
this company and any company you
know companies look at coming to
New Mexico to bring jobs they
look at the regulatory
environment and sometimes New
Mexico isn't chosen because of
that and for those companies
that are that are still in that
operate in New Mexico for
decades you know that still look
at consideration for us to
sometimes were shackled because
we we can't do some of the
things you want to do because of
the regulations and would like
to free ourselves from that and
be able to compete provide
better service and invest more
in the growing part of our
business which is broadband
while we still take care of all
of our customers and so the and
some of the regulations that you
currently are under apply to.
The whole portfolio across the
board workshops to these.
Residential why the possible.
The regulations apply madam
chair Senator Wirth the
regulations apply to all of our
voice services it's urban rural
business residential they they
apply to all of our voice
services urban everywhere
throughout the state.
C. in New South Mexico just
Madam chair for this center I
accept but.
To me there's some of that I
mean I I I understand.
Part of this argument because to
the extent that you've got.
Four different entities
competing in an urban area and
one just got a whole regulatory
overlay that the others don't.
That does doesn't feel right to
me that's perfect and so yet yet
that the piece that's always on
final it's the it's the legacy.
Lines that are the part of it
that we just want to make sure
that.
You know that those parts of the
state and look to give what we
just went with the fire up north
I mean many of those communities
are the perfect definition of
the ones that I mean they were
completely out of luck nothing
worked and so it just for those
little pockets.
That's where I'm still having
the the heartburn about this but
it helps me to just understand
kind of how the overlay works
and that's the purpose of
questions and I'll certainly be
able to you or to Senator Ivey
Soto and and we can go Senator
in a moment but.
But one of the things you also
get this is if you go through
the whole process and your
denied.
You that you still don't might
not have you don't have any the
PRC.
Can't do any rules or
regulations to to make sure that
you are serving those little
communities so if you do you're
stuck there.
You would could.
You would not have to to
necessarily find that fantastic
service that that I know you do
to your customers and and and
and and saying you and I don't
mean you know I don't mean
limits I'm but but this is that
this is a law that will apply to
everyone
but a company that goes through
that process and if they are not
granted the ability to withdraw
but there's affected competition
found because there's there's
two or more they're then they're
still there but there's no way
to make them as provide good
service to that community and
that's my concern except for the
market but again I I I'm not
going to put all my eggs in the
market basket I think it's also
a good idea to.
To have have safe access but but
I am having of course kids
couldn't lumen requested a
competition determination now.
From the PRC.
Madam chair we have and we've
been denied by the PRC and the
reason is is the current law is
so subjective and so vague that.
You can get.
I think senator Wirth and I had
this discussion before you can
get for lawyers in there and
argue over one word as to what
does that mean and it means is
that means that and it just it
is not clear cut that's why this
bill makes it clear cut two or
more alternate providers in that
serving more center and that's
effective competition and we've
class helps clarify that we.
We believe we did this in two
thousand seventeen but the the
the way that the two thousand
seventeen New Mexico
communications act was was
implemented over the one year
eleven months thirty days and
fifty nine minutes.
Complete so we thought we we
need to further clarify for the
PRC and that's what we're trying
to do and that was with our our
our former PRC I and I know our
new players I was three years
ago right is is very very new
but has Lujan and submitted
resubmitted with our new PRC for
and competition determination
and and other plans to do so I.
Assuming this does not Pat Woods
doesn't.
Madam chair if this bill does
not pass will have to evaluate
where we're at and and go from
there we've we've tried before
and the laws so they the way
it's currently written that it's
up it's like I've I think I've
had this conversation with a few
folks here is that it's like a
Lucy and Charlie Brown Lucy
holds a football and turning
tries to kick it in the she
picks it up in the fall flat on
his back and come back again and
she falls flat on his back again
we've done this a couple of
times at the PRC under the
current law and we just can't
kick that football.
Representative.
Thanks very much I you know part
of the.
Part of competing issues.
That come in with this bill.
Is
You know we have the United
States postal service.
And for the cost of a.
Of a first class stamp.
Send a letter anyway.
And they've been proven madam
chair there been.
attempts in the past to to
privatize the post office.
To let private industry to the
post office and and every state
has been done.
Is is that.
In the urban areas that works
right you have lots of
competition there are buttons.
It's the but you but for the
cost of first class stamp you're
not going to get a letter to the
stranded there.
And and and that's that's what's
at stake and I think I think
that that's a sort of
conversation what we're having
right now.
The flip side of that is exactly
what senator Wirth was breaking
out in terms of.
having a differential regulatory
environment and expecting.
but competition.
And and and and the problems of
that creates and and fortunate
that six to fourteen of the
telecommunications act.
They they wrote it specific to
technology as opposed to service
nobody considered the ability of
voice to go over anything but
copper when they wrote it.
So they wrote it specific to
technology not to service and
and if the fed whatever do their
job and we write it all to
service.
Would be a completely different
place except that.
It's that as we've noted there's
lots of folks making lots of
money.
Providing service through
different technologies.
Another one to keep it from
getting from everything getting
equally regular.
But my question as I'm looking
through this.
of Bill is is I'm looking I
don't see.
I don't see in the bills and I
don't see in the repeal section.
section sixty nine three eight
six point.
and which is carrier of last
resort are you making any
change.
Madam chair representative was I
making any change to the care of
last resort statute that we have
New Mexico madam chair no
Senator.
And okay and so explained we've
we've mentioned a couple times
during the conversation
okay well governor because
statute about carry less risk.
That is not being impacted by
this and so and so my question
is is is.
Right it is.
Is that this is.
Very clear it's it's it's it's
equally eight.
A
Commended on the commission.
The.
With a certificate of public
convenience and necessity
permitting it Representative
message suffocation service.
Problem that strangers shall not
be allowed to terminate or
withdraw from funding for
messages of communications
service between or among local
exchange areas without them
order for commission of our
funding the representative of
the Syrian place table provided
service not with the Russian.
So.
and this was actually just say
this because this just has.
I there's another
telecommunications company I
actually put through here to be
somewhat in conflict with just
because you're required to
members to the to the existing.
but I don't think it creates a
the profit that you create
potentially higher sentences
percent right now the carrier
losses are the two most chair
Senator Padilla and distracted
use windows how carrier Alaska's
rules.
Thank you madam chair Senator
mascot Leo there Mr bucket
explained that.
Well definition.
Madam chair Senator Ivey Soto
again how it works is is
difficult to say because we have
never gone down this path in New
Mexico
we have never utilize this
language to try and stop serving
a particular area so how it
works I'm not exactly sure as
far as the implementation of
those.
Madam chair
this I believe.
What is it need to be a carrier
last resort and.
And.
And.
What happens.
I am here.
Madam chair Senator Ivey Soto
lumen in its service territories
certificated service territory
in New Mexico certificated by
the PRC we are the carrier last
resort in all areas whether it's
urban.
You know very rural the so we
are obligated to provide
services to all of our customers
in those areas.
Is there anyone else that New
Mexico is a carrier losses.
madam chair Senator Ivey Soto I
believe that the small rural
phone companies also have that
requirement in their law I that
would be subject to check but no
is something on as is still here
I'm not sure if I I believe they
have that kind of obligations
well to serve their customers.
Members in the I'm not in the US
the fifty worlds that.
Yeah okay and there's several
telecommunications act.
Right well as were as rural at.
At that the regulation aspects
and and you know and I
appreciate.
The
the the comments that you made
about.
the commitment that living has
quite candidly I am.
Sorry it's okay.
I can't really I'm not persuaded
by the by the good words of the
commitment that limit has
because frankly company does
whatever's in the company's best
interest based on the law and
if.
And and and and the reason we
have a lot of these predatory
lawsuits that we don't go by
just trust us.
but but the thing is I'm looking
at at this other law though that
that is not in this bill.
That is.
That is providing in terms of
the the requirements of care of
last resort.
And so and so that's where I
and.
Hi I'm reading through the
changes that you guys are asking
for so that you can.
So if you can.
Compete.
Without this as much of a of a
of an acre on you.
while we also make sure that
people are going to get.
Service that that we're not
gonna have stranded communities
they're not gonna be able to get
service you know in and so
is the carrier of last resort.
Is that impacted at all that
language that's in stature ready
is that impacted at all by this
the number.
Mister Walker madam chair
Senator Ivey Soto no.
Okay well I think that that for
me what what is the bottom line
right is is is I recognize you
guys have and you all have an
unfair responsibility.
because of that.
I think you got your first job
and I'm very responsible but.
But someone has to have that
responsible.
Whether it's fair or unfair and
as long as that responsibility
remains.
Then then my next concern.
Is to make sure that that.
Frankly that our company remains
viable to be able to fullfill
it's unfair responsibilities.
And and that's where and that's
would be able to compete Mexico
is so thank you Matt thank you
Sir.
There further discussion the
committee.
What's the will of the committee
with us.
If you're a roll call vote as
as.
And.
Once you Senator Stewart
favorite thank yes but I really
need access makes sense the
rules and those of the cleanup
versus having all these separate
moments down the floor for so I
just think it's much cleaner
it'll be exactly does take the
amendments that are put here
instead of having four different
methods and everyone's looking
around have a clean product
coming out of your.
The track.
and will we need to wait for
another day or will you do that
work now so you'll adopt that no
if you drop it the impact that
will help those of.
Or chair of the do not pass
Senator wanted to pass the
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
one including all the equipment.
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
Centerview yes.
Senator.
Yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Duhigg not.
And you have to pass thank you
very much thank you this was
