Smidgen of a difference in terms
of the prices of the legislation
of keeps the legislative
oversight to make the swap of
Kerr
and the state owned portion of
the new state portion would
become a law enforcement agency
for the state police
consolidating about five
different offices and properties
that they have into this
property and the state so that
there's no real a real fear
whatever going on there and no
one you know whatever going on
there that the GST is just going
to handle the transaction as
well.
And secretary so it was a
Mr chair of members of the
failed to stamp the questions
thank you so anyone here in
opposition to senator resolution
fourteen anyone at all you are
here to support.
Panamax the issue the chief
secretary so go ahead Sir give
me one minute please stand no
more Mr chairman of the
committee you gotta you gotta
use of you guys my phone.
And I have set up your.
Mr chairman of the committee we
obviously support this currently
in five different offices in
Albuquerque leasing three to
four three or four of those we
would be able to build a new
district five which is this your
largest district in the whole
state of this we've been looking
a property for many years this
one fits perfectly because we
have a access to both high forty
and I. twenty five very quickly
so what we're very strong
supporters of the state thank
you Representative the big I Mr
chairman so.
Right committee members
committee members Senator
resolution fourteen a discussion
there Stewart.
That motion for two passed is
there any objection saying no
percent none shows Senator Ivey
Soto Stuart o'neill serve
artisan worth you have in the
passenger seat seven.
Senate bill four twenty six
Senator o'neill.
Sounds good don't get any ideas.
Of the.
Thank you again for coming back
to four twenty six you for the
bill we've been through the
audience to for The presentation
by the Attorney General there
were some questions about some
specific language we've taken a
couple of days and to amend the
language will but if things are
ever so to work on that that
with the Attorney General and I
believe of the two gentleman in
a minute or two could explain
what changes are recommended to
the committee that we roll out
the bill thank you.
Right.
Senator Ivey Soto you're
proposing additional one thirty
one point one is our.
It is a friendly amendment.
Explain your amendment.
Hello.
I believe that was
a long.
Yeah that was provided.
People live.
The
state or local.
As far as opposition.
Also.
We just.
There I.
So we move your amendment.
Are
there any opposition to that
amendment.
The line you have amended bill.
You go back to the losses.
Explains where we are with this
okay sure we've been through
this process this is that which
is a division for civil rights
attorney general's office we we
thoroughly through this to
committee there were some
questions about that not
withstanding language this is
just to clarify that there maybe
confidentially provisions for
probably in the children's code
is the or that what they were
looking at really you're trying
to establish that there's a
civil investigative demands that
we recognize that children scope
confidentiality and that will
continue to comply with with
this long standing all the
worries and would not
withstanding to do so so that's
like that's really all this
those of them Senator Ivey Soto
said there's a reference search
accord  we're seeing players
this report that's it so
districts for with us on at
anything where we go to the
committee yes okay so I members
of the committee was aware of
the committee.
Okay.
All right so is there any
opposition to the to pass.
The state line you have a.
Okay.
Yet so is showing Senator Ivey
Soto Senator Mimi Stewart
Senators advances know your very
first thing that voting in front
of you have I mean this is a
cesspool Delft.
Access the most office vision
or.
With one word speech was the and
the word was no one of the yeah
and all right I think we're
alone.
That if you want to stay up
there for your.
Okay all right so we have Senate
bill seventeen dental insurance
changes.
All right senator Tom.
More.
Mr chair if I could I think let
me start with just the procedure
to get us on the right place I
move a do not pass on Senate
bill fifteen seventeen and a do
pass on Senate bill seven Senate
Judiciary Committee sub two
percent bill seventeen for
discussion purposes the point
two two five nine oh five point
one version thank you passed out
right now.
And the second little cleanup I
do need to make one there was a
typo they left in the title of
the bill page one line fourteen
and fifteen we need to delete at
the end of line fourteen the
word assignment.
And then on fifteen of the
budget and the common.
Again that was a section removed
from an earlier version of the
bill we just need taken out of
the title.
So I would make that motion.
Senator these we were right.
I think I think you always want
to have a committee some twenty
one make amendments to committee
subs that be great that and I
think that that's the only
change that I have coming in.
So on page one line fourteen
delete the word assignment and
on line fifteen delete of
benefits comma.
Daniel.
This.
There's just change.
So Mister chair presenter Ivey
Soto just there was the on on in
the title on line fourteen we're
going to delete making a motion
to delete the word assignments
and then in line fifteen of
benefits comma that was a
section and earlier version that
was taken out and it just to get
out of the time these yep.
So that's the motion Mr chair.
That.
We were to.
Of the.
We're back to the
a presentation of those as.
Maybe.
You probably don't even need
that much.
Do that.
Over the years.
Whether it's for.
Is the overview of all the
losses of the Mr chair this bill
was brought to me by the New
Mexico dental association and
what we bring before you is a
compromise that was worked out
with a number of the dental
insurance companies Senate bill
seventeen create some standards
transparency accountability for
dental plans that will allow
patients to better understand
their coverage and receive the
care that they needed dresses
five things in the substitute of
prior authorization assignment
of benefits network leasing
retroactive denials and virtual
credit cards are removed from
the bill as originally
introduced was section on
medical loss ratio and rate
limits of those have been
addressed by the superintendents
and through regulation and
ratemaking with me is Thompson
sh sh scripts Representative
scripts mother is executive
director The New Mexico dental
association and Mr chair if
there's questions we can go
through the specifics of the
different sections but this is
the language that was worked out
with the dental association and
the dental insurance companies
so happy stand for questions.
So.
Yeah.
That.
The state on the.
Or.
The.
As.
Our.
We.
The service have actually had a
chance to just talk.
Offline.
Of the cover up.
and
Also perfect for the fact that I
don't understand and so
so in that regard Mr I would not
this.
Seventeen a massive issue.
To.
We were.
Thank.
Future.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members we heard for twenty
eight that's the bill that we
ended on the other line running
out of time I'm glad we've had a
couple of additional days for
the committee members and staff
and others to look at the bill
it's been modified slightly from
the other night but we did
already go through the audience
and those registered to speak in
support opposition heard from a
number of folks on both sides so
Mister chairman I think at this
point time I'm prepared to.
Questions from the committee the
bill fundamentally changes the
unfair trade practices act
principally to address and allow
for a cause of action against
those who missed Representative
has lawful firearm which is
unlawful and so the easy place
to really begin to understand
the heart of the bill is on page
seven.
Lines four through seven of this
Committee sub student leader
proper motion.
To have a committee substitute
percent before twenty eight but
the really you'll hear some
concerns you heard some concerns
previously about a large penalty
large fine cause of action
people going out of business and
so forth the bottom line is no
no one is at risk here went out
of business we put out of
business or poor being penalized
for anything unless they violate
the language on page seven one
four which is to represent
something which is not legal to
purchase the nice it's one or
the something that is look
Representative as legal
something which is not legal and
that really is the fundamentals
of this bill is for prevent
misrepresentation if you look at
page nine you'll see an
additional definition among the
list of things that are deemed
to be unfair and unconscionable
trade practices and here's the
key to the bill also on page
nine line twenty twenty one
knowing that.
Knowingly manufacturing
advertising shipping we're
offering for sale a fire arm and
destructive devices that are or
far apart for XS three country
laws of United States or New
Mexico so as long as you don't
manufacture advisory to offer
for sale knowingly something
country laws of the state of the
United States or Mexico of this
act will not impose any
penalties or fines on you
whatsoever.
Can I get a motion.
Yes.
We are.
I.
The chairman you said but we've
already been through the public
testimony and all that so let's
go directly to the committee
members of the committee Senator
Wirth I think you should just a
just a comment appreciate that
you can work this into our
system New Mexico framework for
unfair trade practices I think
that is a
an important change to work
within those guardrails and so I
support what's been done here
and when you're ready for a
motion to make it.
Anybody else on the committee.
Right so we do have a motion
right.
Okay okay so that ready for
making most drivers do pass on
Senate bill I do not pass on
Senate bill for twenty but a do
pass and Central District me
seventy percent of four twenty
eight.
Right so are there any
opposition to this.
The
most.
Seeing none you have.
And yes I will now mentioned
that Senator Ivey Soto Senator
Stewart center of neo Senator
Wirth and centers of this voted
in the affirmative.
As the senator Bob.
So.
Did you want to read certain
types of all
right okay okay all right thank
you thank you all right
chairman.
Senator Brandt see your.
Okay how long do you think.
Okay software packed with
important the way for Senator
Brandt Senate bill five
thirteen.
Right.
Texas.
Richard is experts.
Severance.
Thank you Mr chairman sorry from
five thirteen serve.
Right we heard the the bill
previously we got started we
went through the audience we've
heard proponents in opposition
there was some question about
the definition of a new term.
What in the center I know you
were to that definition someone
and if you would bring us up to
date on.
What changes amendments you
heard since that I think I think
you're very specific
recollection was very specific
a request which you found
acceptable in the committee was
strongly behind so we just
identified how those being
corporate and then I think we'll
probably probably right take
action on it but before we do
that let's have a proper motion
Senator it's going to make.
Do not pass.
For purposes of passes the
is.
Motion before Senator Browne.
Point two thank you yes
severance to explain the changes
made since our last year thank
you Mr chairman and and first of
all Senator Stewart brought up
the point notwithstanding so we
just remove it and actually once
remote ever like Hey this works
just fine without it so thank
you for that Sir Stuart no then
we went and actually remove
references to the other statute
so this is standalone and have
any reference to any other
statues so when it comes to the
public safety agency we just
made a public body which is what
Sir Ivey Soto recommended that
provides firefighting law
enforcement ambulance medical
and other emergency services so
that's very.
Prescribed and then public
safety answering point means
twenty four hour local
jurisdiction communication
facility that receive nine one
one calls to very clean I think
it's those are good changes that
makes sense so much cleaner bill
and then there was something
with intent.
We.
This
sure.
I have that confuse I think
those are only three changes
that we needed to make and that
the committee wanted us to mix.
We're a motion for to pass with
the committee's of no there was
a motion for substitution of the
pandemic.
I.
Yes.
The committee will go to the
committee.
The members questions.
Video.
No there's a do pass motion on
the bill.
Is there any objection.
Signal three we do have some I
thirteen steps to four nine
three three point two this
gentleman mostly on the floor.
We've called for Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino see we get him here.
Senator Mestis.
Senator Shendo.
I don't see the house members.
Wait a couple minutes the
technician was.
Be good idea you have to
sedition.
Then you have money to make
money folks.
A an hour or two.
This year.
I put on Representative Chandler
is built if you want to do it
house bill twenty six.
Right those two solutions gonna
mind as we start killing issues
she's doing she's and.
on the twenty six was quick
review if they look like they're
kind of trouble I'm gonna roll
within three in the Sanchez I
don't expect this to be
problematic.
House bill twenty six.
Thank you Mr chair on house bill
twenty six as amended
reinstates provisions of section
of law that was removed for a
requirements for notice and
publication of the list of
abandoned property basically
what this does is I understand
it Mr lance here's take this
back to the loft as it existed
before was changed a couple
years ago which requires
publication occurred in in the
newspaper as my understanding
with Mister Hernandez I get a
ride or anything else you can
add the needs to be out of Mr
chairman members living
arrangements of this press
association that's exactly right
the only thing we've made
improvements this is publication
of the entire address now it's
just municipality of the left of
the for the first located we did
that for public safety concerns
this was taken out in the tax
cleanup bill we didn't catch up
during the COVID session
otherwise we would've objectives
were putting it back.
You the fifty
with doctor center care of
Representative Chandler so
anyone here in opposition to
house bill twenty six.
The board.
But if the committee sent a
little bit so should.
Next.
Senator Lopez New Mexico press
association we we are in favor
of this bill on the correct so
something that.
Thank you for the members
question.
Moores.
So I'm here yes Representative
the ones.
Everyone is.
Madam chair senator Morris
that's correct and when they
initially did it or for budget
savings they just publisher
website so once we discovered
what happened that we were in
communications at all like it
but we did make some suggested
changes fixes including the
address peace protection with.
Jurors or reserve this for
everyone in the building to
Those attacks from supportive or
there's a little over a year.
Mr I can answer that question I
think that poses.
Yes and so they're just need to
yeah the.
Mr chair Senator more wonderful
so Mister chair I think it's
it's a cost issue and it's a
question of how they are able to
reach more folks by buying not
using the newspaper using other
methods of communities the same
we've had this debate on a
number of different bills and I
just think they feel like they
made the change in the and again
it was part of a cleanup bill
and again they just feel like.
This is going to review costs
back to them to do it this way
again.
Sure for major we run on
strongly support or.
Factual issues.
Fox
news is on our.
G. R.
with this are you guys with or.
Miss Mister oz asked to sit in
and for the house chair the
house judiciary chair who's bill
this is and that's what I'm
doing here.
This for.
And consumers there I I have a
message for you here.
Your.
The weather report hell is
freezing over.
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair kind of torn
with this on the one hand it
it's for us.
It's of the publication
publications are I think of
those of us who who read
publications regularly I mean
the newspapers charge an absurd
amount for them just ridiculous
because they know that that
essentially they have it for
state law that you have to run a
notice in general circulation
papers so they get to charge
whatever they want for it
because you're a is here you
have to follow the law that's on
the one hand on the other hand
if it bothers me that taxed Rav
wants a break from the cost you
know it's good for the goose is
good for the Gander and so you
know I think both of those sites
need to be addressed you know
taxes there should have to do
with everybody else does and the
press really just needs to
control their costs especially
when they have you over a barrel
in the No Way.
Anyway that was just more
commentary than anything thank
you thank you very so.
I'm looking on page three.
For the.
I understand lines.
Or I.
Most of sex.
I don't understand the rest of
six after the after the
destructive.
Seven eight could you explain.
Mister chairman Senator Ivy Soto
so you're talking about after
select someone six through.
Line eight.
I want to make sure we're
dressing right for.
Page three.
Sorry.
Rating up to or.
The end of the line.
So that section is.
That section Mr chair Senator
Ivy Soto is the limitation of
the property is less than fifty
dollars it does not have to be
published and that's that.
Our.
That part I get four through six
yeah.
I don't get the rest of six
seven eight but but I apologize
I understand Mr chair Mr chair
Senator Ivey Soto that's
language that in in in statute
so we just put it back to the
way it was.
You.
If you explain to me how that
works so Mister chairman Senator
Ivy Soto as I read that that
would mean if information
concerning a travel check or
money order or similar type of
instrument that is the abandoned
property there's no requirement
to publish that.
Mr and if it's got a value of
less than fifty dollars.
What is your.
That's for a whole.
Property.
At least correct got it back to
Representative yeah.
I'd what respond we office.
Administrators have part
advertise.
Server location on our.
Property have any time just
hours for information
concerning.
I was checked on the order of
course some of this.
So they don't so they the
settlement property travelers
checks.
What the the nominations.
That.
They're not required to
advertise.
Sure that's what it says that's
correct.
Okay and Mister I don't
travelers checks anymore I think
kind of a thing of the past.
You know.
Representative with
after you're trying doing with
this.
The task.
Could you pass Senator Stewart
on house bill twenty six as
amended over in the house side.
Any further discussion.
There any objection to that do
pass motion Moores.
Senator Baca in opposition shows
those.
I was so close to prepare meals
because the work.
In the affirmative you have a to
pass so Representative Chandler
thank you so there were.
So with frontier house bill
thirty one is amended thank
Senator what we're gonna get you
here shortly and we're gonna
have lots of time I think so too
were so we're thank you Mr chair
house bill thirty one
creates a new options for a
district judge when any resident
of the state fourteen years of
age or older petition the
District Court for a name change
and I'll just read on page two
line fifteen exactly what the
court would now be allowed to do
if the court finds the notice to
one or more legal parents of an
applicant who is under fourteen
years of age will jeopardize the
applicant's personal safety the
court shall not require notice
the court's order all records
regarding a petition to be
sealed a record show in the vote
by the court based upon a
showing of good costs for an
applicant's request
Mr chair this is to allow the
courts to.
Deal with a situation where
there is a concern raised about
an applicant's personal safety
and basically when they come in
for a name change allow the
court to address each case as it
comes in and gives the court an
option currently they do not
have a with me is my expert
Marshall Martinez the quality
New Mexico could also expand on
this thank you Mr chair members
the committee you Senator
putting is on for us the other
thing that this bill does that
is critical for us as it removes
the newspaper publication
requirement changes so right now
when you change a name legally
first you must publish an ad in
the newspaper announcing to your
entire bill like this the public
safety issue especially for
trans and non binary folks who
often live in communities where
outing themselves as trans
people may not be particularly
safe and this is also really for
folks who are fleeing violence
situations or violent people
with whom they passed.
You very much appreciate that no
one is sure is is an opposition
for supports over members the
committee.
Moores.
Sure workforce across
associations.
Four hundred from Mr chair you
may need to send them a text and
they haven't come back.
Of the yeah maybe yes there and
Senator the support of the bill
in the last committee hearing
two days ago.
Foremost prosecution.
One of the committee.
You're
looking
at for the past house bill
thirty one as amended.
Any further discussion there any
objection to the do passed
motion.
So in fact a yes by Senator
Moores I Baca one is o'neill.
You're in Ivy Soto worth.
Tells Representative Chandler
tries to tell Representative
challenge you gotta do best.
I don't see anyone for house
bill one seventy nine.
There you are I see.
Representative Jones thank you
so let me just check real quick
let's see we have we have so and
welcome over the Senate little
bit nice to see you again since
you and I back in the house is
I'm doing these older different
over here Representative so
we've nobody registered in
opposition your bill we ask for
people to register in advance to
be heard so that we can plan for
time and in the meeting so we
can only registered in support
or opposition which means that I
won't go to the audience so
we'll give you up to seven
minutes if that works for so we
need to explain to build purpose
and then we'll go to members the
committee hi.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
House bill one seventy nine
basically the purpose of it is
to require that
Already owners receive
notification when a lien is
placed on their home
right now anyone can go place a
lien and county clerk's office
and you will know about it so
this bill basically asks that
the person whose place in the
lean.
As a property owner send that
property owner notification the
notification can be via email
certified mail
regular mail and if all else
fails they can post a notice on
the on the property.
in hand delivery for that that
Candelaria as well is so the
idea is to advice again advised
property owners that they have a
lien and this would also give
them the opportunity to clear up
the Lee and also would give them
the opportunity to have Salim
you moved it for the clean isn't
isn't properly placed are
properly filed with the county
clerk for example someone may go
and file a claim against me
because they think I'm the
property owner of a particular
home that they did some work on
or in a situation where
someone has a lien filed against
them and they don't know and if
they find out years later that
the lien has been placed on
their home and they had no
opportunity to to basically do
anything about the lean.
I also have with me show Kevin
who is the who is from the
county clerk's office of
Bernalillo county and with that
we stand for questions.
We have no evidence hello I'm at
the thanks for business witness
wants to add something thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm the deputy clerk
for part the Bernalillo county
clerk's office and on an average
month we received over four
hundred liens filed in our
office on properties around
Bernalillo county
And you know consequently we
receive calls every single day
from property owners who did not
know that there was a lien filed
against their house because they
never received any notification
they're only finding this
information out when they are
trying to close on a property or
refinance or do any sort of
changes to their property and
they're being hit with this in
the last days of their closing
process and what not and and
that inevitably delays that
process for them and so this is
a very very simple way for
for that responsibility
notifying somebody that there is
a lien on their property you
know we just ask that to that
you let that property owner now
it's it's really a very simple
and an easy process to follow
you can find out who the current
property owner is on the
assessors website any any County
and their addresses are listed
it's really in my opinion a no
brainer thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much members the
committee question.
Yes senator Wirth thank you look
at the.
The floor amendment number
please
So.
This claim from the southeast
said because it
so you could just put in the
regular US mail to the.
Certified mail with return
receipt.
Mr chair Senator that's one of
the options that's available
that would probably be the
better option well when we were
hearing the committee in I mean
the bill I'm sorry and House
Judiciary there was concern that
perhaps sitting a certified mail
was.
Cost prohibitive.
Yeah Mr after the I'm a little
bit it worries me somewhat I
could see.
You know someone's going to say
well yeah I Senators what the
problem is if the person didn't
get.
Then you're gonna have a to go
over that.
One of the.
Just jumps off the page and then
again let me just ask Miss
Mister chair so so and and I get
and the reason for the bill yeah
I've.
Representative lots of folks
that are filed liens and lots of
folks that have eight filed
against them and it really is
pretty amazing when someone goes
to a closing and all of a sudden
there are all kinds of eight
many of which.
They have been totally
improperly I have been sitting
there but there is a you know a
doctrine under the law
constructive notice so once you
file something it's supposedly
notice to the world but but the
reason for the your bill I think
it's because the fact that that
just doesn't get to the actual
person so I mean I I the concept
is good I just worry a little
bit about that it's about four
five box to send a certified.
and that would that would give
protection quite frankly I mean
my clients this bill is in place
and I've got classified as being
I'm gonna have a Senator mail
because I want to have something
that shows that was actually
they complied so you just don't
get into that whole back and
forth so just just a thought
Mister chair I don't think I'm
amended bill but I just wanted
to.
Our that our thank you.
The committee members of
questions.
There's for.
Along that line so what would
happen the.
Sen.
If the.
Here is providing notice to
their voice plan.
This property is.
So
Mr chair representative of
Senator.
As long as there's a good faith
effort.
And the person who is filing the
claim is able to show that there
was a good flick faith effort
than
then we're okay.
Bills or.
It is.
Yeah.
Okay have.
That doesn't work for.
Do so there's a lot of those.
Lofty.
Mr chair Senator I agree.
I think.
No sob.
Yeah.
The committee members Senator
Ivey Soto.
Thank you so I just.
I support.
This will serve as.
I do want to.
We.
I had on the cells for several
years.
You know a lot of times leave.
This place property.
Because.
As of this to work.
And seven eight.
The some.
And.
So.
Then so one of the witnesses.
The service.
Is that.
The.
Getting notice these are places
that are.
Markets is a.
It's a
On.
The.
The substance.
And
and said the.
No on the.
And.
In that situation
Able to.
Yeah there's forming or houses.
And they drop off and pick all
the gravel off.
This is.
Right.
Mr chair Senator so.
We have that same kind of
conversation in the house about
this bill and so what this
really is about is
you know giving notice so if if
the sub gives notice to that
owner and again if it's not
properly place then the owner
can basically
Address that issue right if it's
a situation where a sub hasn't
gone rate again you know maybe
the homeowner rate
the regular contractor Mr chair
Senator and.
The owner doesn't know that the
contractor didn't pay this up
again the property owner has the
opportunity to address that
issue so what this bill does
Senator I mean Mr chair Senator
is nearly provides
the requirement that the
property owner give notice.
Where as right now there is no
notice given.
Yeah.
I am I will consider that and
Russian this is.
Just introduce.
So this activity.
So.
Action is.
Decision as.
That's a.
They
you for.
Your.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative.
I'm almost certain and I'm
trying to look it up now that
that subcontractors have warrant
also in non original contractor.
dealing with the mechanic's lien
has notice requirements already
that have to be posted on the
property itself notifying the
owner.
that.
That they have a right to claim
the.
So I I tend I I you know and I'm
I'm like I said I didn't have a
chance to look it up here but
almost certain that my.
Action news.
So sure there is.
Legislative employees.
This.
We.
I know that the process for
subcontractors this researchers.
Recovers.
At yes some instances of
subcontractors.
This report is already ninety
I'll give you some more of a
subcontractor who is hired to
maybe not to work but
delivers materials to job site I
deliver.
Yards of concrete or what have
you expecting to get paid at
some point I never get paid in
cost concrete actually a bad
example let's say gravel gravel
sits there.
Or even of the work is
completion complete so chief
substantial completion of the
project.
Very tight deadline to get your
you're leaving in because you
haven't given gotten paid.
Are you go file your claim
within the ninety days and now
you have fifteen days.
Pass that pass completion to to
file your ITR chair
I'd like to have my expert
witness respond thank you.
Chairman Senator Baca this
particular bill does not affect
any existing legislation my my
own parents in fact who were at
judges at the time had an
unhappy defendant filing a lien
against their house completely
unsubstantiated and fraudulent
but he was able to file that
lean without really any
justification for it and so this
this doesn't affect that
existing legislation but anybody
else and anybody who is filing a
lien is going to have to find
that notice and and that's
really all that that that this
does it doesn't affect
leans that are it doesn't affect
the filing of the lean period it
affects their obligation to
notify property owners
afterwards and that's really all
it does thank you.
I I understand what you're
targeting you're trying to
target.
Focus eight okay I just go and
buy a lien on and and it it
might do that but it seems like
it pulls into their mechanics
liens as well as what worries.
So that you're requiring those
people as well to comply this I
guess that's my problem with it.
This is an emergency yes.
Yeah.
That that explanation she just
came if I understand correctly
Mr chairs at this is for focus
eight its for leads that aren't
Catholics leads that someone got
a judgment against somebody here
I don't know there was a dispute
of some sort of as I lean that's
not a mechanics lien Mr chair
that's that's just a random
screen and we were sucking in
the mechanic's lien process it
into that
Mr chair Senators for all liens
that are filed because as we
explained earlier anyone can you
know when I leave this file to
the property owner does not get
notification so what this
legislation is proposed to do is
that one when a lien is filed
the property owner must be
notified.
Yeah I I I guess I just having
trouble with the interplay of it
million.
It's been said I I see your
intent and I like your ten guess
I just don't like course that
you know in the mechanic's lien
section.
Hello I'll leave it at that I
don't have any amendments or
anything for you to to help it
out initiated a don't think it's
about idea.
Yeah I don't think I could
support the page written.
Sure.
The committee members questions.
So I have some thoughts with
maybe plow through in just a
little bit
Won the election no
Representative got it seems like
forever ago when I got here
early on I passed.
Changes to lean law that allowed
for reciprocal attorney's fees
to the prevailing person in
other words used to be that the
only person who get attorneys
fees and costs and interest was
the lien claimants and because I
was aware of the circumstances
where folks everybody's records
so we know you don't find out
about the get it cleared is very
expensive to hire a lawyer for
the job the post a bond that's
kind of the but I've had the
Representative lot of people to
do that to get a closing
completed you sometimes bond
around a lean body put mon money
for the court to essentially
have a lien release and the
money then becomes the security
for the obligations so it was a
real serious problem so I
created reciprocity so that the
lien claimant to get their fees
as has always been the case but
then a person who had or was
subject to alleviate their
attorney's fees likewise there
was an improperly recorded
laying.
Well look at the floor amendment
that you all have and I can get
the committee to work with me a
little bit here.
You've heard a number of members
of the committee expressed some
concern about the consequences
are how you endorsed this.
And I look at the last sentence
really of the floor amendment.
This talk about the failure of
the owner of a repeat reported
owner receive a copy.
seems strange to me that we we
focus on the failure of the
homeowners have received the
notice I think the burden should
be on the person who's making
the claim in other words the
bridge on the claim claim it not
some burden on the owner
particularly because you've got.
Before that you've got some
language that allows for the
notice to be served by posting
in a prominent place on the
property I really dislike that
idea a lot you know if you have
the notices to go posted on a
telephone pole really who's
gonna see it nobody really and
and what is a prominent place in
how long to really stay there
and that in Los crucis in March
is going to stay there for about
two minutes I think
before it's gone so it would
seem to me that the burden
should be on the lien claimants
and and you know what I have the
committee think about you
Representative think about is it
the link claimant does not
assure the delivery of the
notice according to your your
bill Jennings ideas for the
Lincoln as a deliberate here's
what I think should happen I
think building claim it should
not be entitled to recover
interest and attorney's fees
which is the the existing
statutes those are the reason we
protecting the claim as a state
you'll get your attorney's fees
you're interesting your costs
to record a claim but but here
if the person who's reportedly
doesn't serve the notice of the
property I don't think they
should I I think
The court should be allowed to
preclude recovery of interest
costs and attorney's fees that
make any sense at all those
willing claim it fails to to
ensure that the owner finds out
about this and the lengths is
there for two years or six years
of ten years and you find out
about closing the data be
precluded I think from being
able to recover interest or
lease have a judge evaluate
whether they should recover
interest on that wing four to
six ten years because the owner
never knew about.
So that that seems like the
logical way to
The person who's reportedly to
deliver it and then they feel to
do that.
And show that they did that then
it doesn't seem like it should
benefit from that I by getting
interest and prejudgment
interest right now.
In New Mexico judge can ward
deployed I want to this in the
past few weeks but I think the
project manager is up ten
percent a court in order to ten
percent that's for but still
pretty high right and so the
court can do that so that makes
sense the they should be able to
recover interest so look at my
thoughts for the committee I
don't know whether anyone else
shares and votes and we we go
there is certainly getting there
we may want to actually do the
work to do with some amendments
on the bill but I wanted to
propose the idea to get started
and see what it takes root so
right we so on the.
That suggests or anything else
on talk about yeah actuals for
first of all the.
Cancellation expires after two
years.
It does not that is becomes an
enforceable after two years but
it expired eight stays in place
right.
Believe that go away.
Yes No Way.
Right which means you start
clear if you're trying to close
on it we do not closing the
title company still gonna
ceiling.
Right and and the title
companies not gonna say well
those are forcible so we're
getting or they won't give you
the title insurance and closing
front bill will still see a we.
I'm I don't mean to quibble with
you but I think I think the
distinction is important it's
unenforceable but it's not
invalid at that point I think if
you have still produced we have
to accord  to go to court to
have the wind released.
Was gonna really silly I.
Share this no I I it is also.
All the latest.
Iterations of this bill over the
years.
One of them was jettisoned
notice the more I.
On the face of the leading you
and certified.
Issue of those.
That way it was done before you
probably.
Sir.
another option.
Our.
Was that.
Is a twenty five dollar fee to.
I believe.
The the options.
Additional dollars.
Provided the address.
The clerk would.
The both of those the.
Have a.
One of the past.
Sure that was actually.
And those fishes.
But it is.
Sure that is.
This issue.
Mr chair expert witness would
like to respond to them.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Ivey
Soto this point about requiring
a twenty five dollar fee
we actually would charge the
same twenty five dollar filing
fee to file a lien or record a
lien that you would for any
other document that you would
want to record so it would be
free to following you would
still have to pay the normal
twenty five dollar recording
fee.
Thank you Mr chair.
Senator.
Yes the chairman.
Bill.
On the.
That
about forty five years.
For a
couple of years.
Down a little late for.
Yeah.
Media state I like the idea of
low.
Or some of that.
So they don't send this year.
Mr chair Senator I'm agreeable
to that.
So shares are here okay here.
That.
This is our that you forget
about that yes I did.
they think of Mr chair Senator
the the difficulty came in the
future we have lots of
conversation around this and
again the the final amendment on
the floor was at from one of the
members and judiciary trying to
again you know perfects the bill
I guess my question is I mean I
I I I like the idea in terms of
you know shifting the burden Mr
chair Senator then I did forget
about having to go back to
concurrence and I don't remember
how long that might take.
For.
To take but an alpha maybe I
don't remember an hour.
To long.
And.
Actually I I listen.
Researchers Richard.
Of those motion tables not
available take the motion.
It will take motion then we'll
come back bill.
A motion to table.
Yeah we're going to roll call
sorry Senator Baca relatively
motions of course.
Senator Ivey Soto.
There Moores.
Center on you pass.
Stuart.
No.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator on you.
Senator no so I.
All right I said about that back
to the committee of I'll take a
stab at it the sponsor sounds
like you're amenable I
appreciate Senator Stewart
concerns but they're never my
concern which is that we can't
touch House Bills certain about
this this function in the.
well I'll use the word.
I'm not saying the house is
dysfunctional provided the
potential for this function is
not enough reason for me to not
touch a house bill so I think
it's pretty simple at least I
can get a start if you are I'd
like to propose amendments to
the house floor amendment.
You all have.
And I looked you said he's a
representative of the other was
a lot of discussion on the house
Judiciary Committee I look at
their committee report they
didn't really do very much that
looked like maybe that's why he
had come to the floor amendment
because they maybe get them what
they would like to but unless
I'm missing something I'm
looking for the house Judiciary
Committee substitute and look
like.
All they did was add a mailing
the the concerted email and
certified mail return receipt
requested no not not a very
consequential change their
and then after owner that is
that based on the county
assessors records I I don't
really see that much but but to
to run I think address some of
the concerns others of and I've
expressed on your floor on your
house for maybe look at that.
The next to last sentence my
first of all raise that my
concern that delivery of the
notice.
Of the lien should not be
allowed to be served by posing
in a prominent place in the
properties that strike that
language and and for the reasons
I indicated previously.
We allow for service of certain
lawsuits and so forth by posting
but but here the posting of all
believe or a notice of a lean on
a project that likely is under
construction maybe may not be
complete and then what and even
when you post.
Service on a house or by that
we're usually pretty specific
got a front door on on on here
here this is from a place I'd
hate to think that this
requirement by stapling
something to a telephone pole
and as I said probably not going
to be there for more in a couple
hours a lot of cases so I I I
proposed to strike that language
to start with that and then I'd
like to propose that we change
that last sentence.
And not focus on the failure of
the owner to receive a copy but
failure of the claim and so I
would propose that language read
the failure of the claimant to
serve the notice here may
preclude recovery of interest
attorney fees or costs and just
leave that.
So those are those proposed
amendments I have and I think
I've explained the reasons why I
think those would be good to
your bill so.
All of those as a moment and
would you get that yep no okay
no I'm not surprised with the
quick if you look at the house
floor amendment.
The next the last sentence and
with.
The following clause reads four
posted in a prominent place in
the property I proposed a strike
that language and sort of period
after the.
We're files.
Then I propose to substitute the
the last sentence to strike that
last sentence instead have it
read as follows.
The failure of the claimant to
serve the notice.
May preclude the recovery of
interests attorney's fees or
costs.
That allows a person who has
only require their property and
to show they didn't get the
notice in the clinic actually to
deliver notices they don't get
the benefit of the interests of
changes or at least the judge to
decide on whether the
circumstances that's a good one.
The storm that we're.
So that's thank you for that so
of Representative is that a
acceptable amendment to Mr chair
this.
Members on the proposed
amendment etcetera Stewart.
The.
Right.
House.
Do.
To the the
also read.
The.
That we're.
During.
Faster.
Let me let me make sure that I'm
phrases correctly centers to
appreciate the the suggestions
of I think we're not our members
not gonna be strike house floor
amendment number three which is
what you're saying because there
really isn't house part of the
three four second house for
rural number three of us for
mineral one is that right is
that work.
Okay so so we're Representative
other way would be striking
a house for member one paragraph
three.
And then we would be adopting a
new amendment which would.
The essentially what is the
house of.
Amendment number three floor
amendment number three pair of
three except with the model
which has been.
You so the only really well
that's good.
Remember what we're tired and
when we left there there was was
a tough.
I know this.
And even that so that's a
proposed amendment for the
committee and will correctly and
hopefully point.
User discussion on that
amendment.
For any objections the adoption
described as acceptable to the
sponsor show no objections show
center Pirtle worth serve on
this o'neill and Stuart in the
affirmative that amendments
adopted.
I think I saw before I don't
have anything else anyone else
or anything.
Home just a question Senator
Wirth Here want to make sure I
understand so the house
Judiciary Committee subs
amendment number one.
As email.
And also and.
Certified.
More would return receipt
requested and there's a.
Here in the just trying to try
to understand how that would.
Because of the period yet the
bill itself continues on for
hand deliver.
I'm just I'm just Rep I reading
that wrong I want to make sure
and it just doesn't seem like it
doesn't track I mean I know what
you're doing at email and I
appreciate here's the certified
mail as an option which is good
a reference in here because
again I I my clients are the
notice requirement about tells
by the five boxes certified but
it looks like it is a there's a
period there and yet when I go
to the bill.
There's additional language.
It says or or hand deliver
equipment gets what's tricky is
that we've got this floor.
Seventeen so there's another
floor amendment maybe that's
what fixes it.
Right written notice of the
claim handle it okay here is
this year I think I figured out
on on the floor amendment the
second floor amendment.
It strikes written notice except
they're still appearing in that
first.
What I'm saying in the first
amendment.
They don't track.
Of course.
I
think so okay so that that that
it takes it in and then and then
you've got to read the of the
stuff floor amendment number
two.
That strikes written on page two
one seventeen if it it's just
tried a arises trying to read
these without amendments and
processes as far from I get I
see where this I'm good.
Yes.
Before the committee do we.
Out of the court.
Rescind the couple members we we
can get everybody back here.
Representative.
Well I'm also so we can get
Senator.
So Senator Shah is this just
this nice opportunity we have
here to read the size.
Their spirits remarks we over
here really try hard to send out
bills with substitutes so that
you'll have to do what center
we're just went through or Mr
went through trying to figure
out where does this fit your
instruct this move that there.
And that gets even more
complicated last days.
We're getting less sleep when
we're trying to work quickly so
Mister chair I will keep that in
mind but I agree with it yes.
Track and finish chair just we
did on the other house bill
seven the firearm storage bill
was helpful on the floor we have
the amendments in contact you
might just send a message back
in New York but will come over
like this search and rescue
equipment and contacts so that
we have those in front of us and
we can track it that way that
that just made it easier on the
floor because that bill which
was at.
House Bill nonsensical line
seven seven selections.
No for selection.
For costs house bill nine yeah.
That's what I do passed motions
are every so we have a quorum
back.
Any further discussion.
Thirty junction.
And present Senator Wirth
survive this ordeal Stewart and
if so to have a to pass with the
amendments here in the Senate.
The members.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
This is.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of Senate bill three
fifteen is.
The revised.
Interstate compact on the
placement of children.
And I have with the expert
witnesses who deal with this
contact on a day to day basis
who work for children youth and
families they are Jennifer
argument over the protective
services division.
Deputy director and Amanda
Romero who is the.
Office of the inspector general
that these at CYFD who's the one
who deals with this the the
operation this compact as it
works now.
This is a long standing compact
the state is belong to this what
I was a child welfare worker
back in sixty eight sixty nine
and seventy.
we had the interstate compacts
the state of New Mexico needed
to
place a child in Louisiana with
the the of a biological
relatives who who was willing to
take the child.
The state of New Mexico didn't
have to go to Louisiana to do
the home study they just says
Louisiana to do it because they
belong to the Coptic similarly
if Louisiana had an adopted
child living in New Mexico that
needed to be followed up in the
make sure that the child is
doing well in this adoptive
placement they didn't have to
send a worker over the state of
New Mexico as as a member of the
compact would do that for
Louisiana and send the reports
back to.
So for seventy years this is
been going on.
The for sixty years cinema sixty
years it's been going on but as
with all the treatments after
sixty years.
Practices change so
operations are different.
And so the the compact is being
revised updated.
And all the participating states
are are provincially gonna be
members of the compact because
if they don't.
They literally have no way of.
Following up on kids that are
living there in their custody
but living in another state or
that have been placed in New
Mexico from another state.
So the issue is not whether we
should belong to this or not we
we will ultimately have to it's
whether we want to be one of the
first thirty five states to get
to drop all the rules and
agreements of of of the compact
is going to work.
And the and so having said that
will be first to amend it and
let Amanda explain how this
works and why it's so important
we do this.
Thank you it I think the first
thing I'll say is I think I just
want to emphasize a point that
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino said which
is it's not
if we join its its when we
joined because it one if we
don't like he said we will lose
the ability to monitor our kids
that go across the state lines
or to have a say in when a child
comes into New Mexico from
another state so I I want to
emphasize that first
being one of the first thirty
five gets a vote every state
interstate commission meeting in
the rulemaking process in the
process of developing the
procedures so we want to be one
of those first thirty five
states.
so so ICPC is the only law that
ensures that children placed
across state lines for foster
care or adoption or place in
savings in suitable homes I do
want to really also emphasized
that this does not apply to
placements in out of state
residential treatment centers.
Right now we currently have a
hundred and thirty six children
in New Mexico state custody
placed in other states.
on average we receive about two
hundred requests from other
states to place children here
and to send about two hundred
requests to other states to
place children out of state.
gaps in the current ICPC law but
again that was developed back in
the sixties have been filled in
by each state in ways that do
not coordinate with other states
therefore causing incongruity.
recognizing this problem the
American public Human Services
association along with the
association of ICPC works
closely with many stakeholders
including tribal partners the
American Bar Association and the
children's bureau to improve the
language of the ICPC Senate bill
three fifteen at mir's that
language that that all of those
partners got together and
created.
Again.
Only the first thirty five
states get to be at the table to
create the rules that will
accompany the statute.
and if we're we're not part of
the compact we lose the ability
to place children in out of
state homes with their relatives
who want to adopt them you know
if we're we're at a time I'm
sorry I was actually that was my
last point thank you senator
sorry the other is for
Senator question okay is there
any rubber registered support
from this online or yes Mr so
we.
Okay this is really.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name sounds so late
I have both a professional and
personal interest in this bill
being passed my daughter or
daughter asked that I tell you
quickly her story we adopted her
when she was four months old she
was born she was two pounds in
Texas and through the interstate
compacts we're able to bring her
back to Los crucis she was that
we were interviewed by CYFD
social worker made sure it was a
safe home until the adoption was
finalized six months later
professionally I've reviewed a
number of cases and worked on
adoption and everyone of them
has work seamlessly I must say I
was almost shocked at how
efficient CYFD not just CYFD but
the other states cooperated with
each other and ensure safety for
children that this is a critical
critical tool in child welfare
and I hope you can see the way
to pass this bill thank you.
Online we have a proponent
Ellison and they got the new
owners.
Allison are you there.
Yes can you hear me yes one
minute please.
Okay.
I mean can you state.
The scope for one at all okay
sorry about that.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Allison and
cockiness and legal director of
advocacy in New Mexico's largest
provided legal representation
for children in foster care and
we are hoping that you'll
support Senate bill three
fifteen this bill needs to pass
the only way out of state coffee
places will be evaluated and the
children placed in them
supervised through this compact
without it no one will help want
our children no one will be able
to monitor their seek your
insure their needs are met
unfortunately with compact we
are unable to change the
language we're stuck with what
is an already drafted by the
governing body that said we have
an opportunity here to
participate in the subsequent
decision making related to the
compact if we pass this now we
can be one of the thirty five
states that will be considered
official stakeholders and able
to participate in the drafting
of the rules and procedures that
correspond with the new icy PC
language if we delay passage we
will lose the opportunity to
have a voice.
Then once we are in crisis due
to our previous refusal to
ratify the ICPC and we end up
having to adopted anyway at that
point will be too little too
late thank you very much Allison
and then we have a Maryland back
from New Mexico to help for you
know on.
Okay thank you thank you okay
well is there anyone in
opposition.
Sen Bill.
They now and you know we're just
now we lost a quorum but let's
go to the go to the committee
discuss though.
Yes Senator Wirth thank you Mr
chair saw.
It's.
Chad it's frustrating to me I
will tell you because it clearly
this needs to happen I'm gonna
vote for the bill but I gotta
tell you there is you know the
waivers of the immunity this
pages twenty seven and twenty
eight I mean these these
compacts they just can't help
themselves to the put in these
immunity provisions you know
that basically on page twenty
eight extend not cover.
Member state or here's the
commission no the
representatives these are held
harmless for settlements
No it basically says.
You know they've got no.
Let's active mission in our
reserve and the US is
intentional or willful and so it
just gets kind of immunity
provision like twice and then
page twenty seven section the
qualified immunity defence
indemnification so these are
things we just don't do in this
committee.
To them and bills and yet along
comes the commission and so in
order we had this with the
nursing compact and and then
we're told we can't touch
because if we taught some.
Then that you know that doesn't
work so I just and I know I know
Senator Ortiz you know you have
it you have expressed your
frustration at not being able to
do these contacts but.
This is these are the ones that
just jumped out at me but I hear
what I hear what you're saying I
mean that to sound there's no
way we can't do this or we're
going to create a problem so I'm
not have.
I mean if we don't do this just
just reiterate what happens
again if we don't do this.
Mr chairman and then Senator
Wirth that by I believe I'm
accurate in saying that that
does not extend to the state or
or wrongful that mystique by the
person's actually doing the home
study if they do a home study
and they falsified the documents
or something there's a lot of
this is just the administration
of the compact itself that the
asset liability there.
And just Senator can you just
again reiterate if we didn't
pass this one.
Mr Chairman Senator Wirth to
reiterate what happens is that
we will not be a member of the
compact and if we're not a
member we cannot safely placed
children across state lines
because no state will be
required to cooperate with us
nor will we be able to prevent.
Other states who are members of
the compact for placing children
here in New Mexico without going
through the home study process
nor would they be required to
maintain so it for the for
example
there is a section of the bill
that requires that that's set
for the recieving States
responsibilities meaning I'm
sorry the sending states
responsibility so if
Texas census a child here they
are required to continue paying
for that child care and support
ensure that they have you know
with Medicaid you know insurance
things like of that nature
without being part of this they
can send that child here and not
do any of those things they
would not be required to assist
us in the care and support of
that child.
Share if we don't pass this we
want to place a child in Kansas
we've got to send the staff to
be in this study and can.
That's right because and.
Members.
Or.
So.
The size.
Also in the.
I.
I.
Yeah.
The
either.
Through and everything that is
take out of the schools that is.
Thank you
Mr chairman Madam pretend.
In the event that we change the
language so that there is no
longer a quote meeting of the
minds between us and the other
states who are members of the
compact we would not be allowed
to be a member of the compact.
what I can say to to hopefully
ease some of the trouble with
that is that we have been a
member of the compact the
existing compact for over fifty
years and with that we.
The current state of the compact
is such that the states are
filling in gaps as the so please
so that there are incongruent
and even with that incongruent
incongruence nature of the
different states there is not a
reason any legal issues between
the states that would
Lead me to believe that we would
have any issues in the future
because this compact have such.
Better language it tightens up
holes it fills in all those gaps
and it allows for this
interstate commission where if
one of the first thirty five
will be part of that rulemaking
right will have a seat at that
table and will be able to you
know how that say and be part of
those votes to create the rules
in the procedures and so we we
really don't and there hasn't
been for fifty years don't
anticipate that there will with
this better and improved
language.
Five thirty five.
Mr Chairman a settlement for Tim
you know I think this state
believe that that is efficient
number out of the fifty plus the
Virgin Islands and two thirds of
the keys to I think yes at.
Exactly.
Sorry.
Mr chairman and.
Madam chair ten of fifteen
states have passed it.
And US six are currently
actively pursuing in their
legislature currently.
It does.
And I apologize Mister chairman
Senator not to pretend it does.
Okay.
The fourth turnover torture I
want to say this is the the
urgency I know from my work.
Generals are for those home
studies are key in or is time
sensitive so this
Senator Wirth misgivings but I
just feel like.
Having said that for over.
Yes one more question just by
Senator Stewart I want to make
sure I understand so it requires
thirty five states before this
kicks in.
Mister chairman Senator worked
yes Sir and they and we've
accounted for that on the last
page of the bill images Mr chair
at on.
Time and so once we get to
thirty five states what happens
to the fifteen states that are
that the existing contract go
away.
Mr chair Senator Wirth yes and
those fifteen states will not
have the ability to accept or
receive children.
To.
So what are the rules
just a few questions for me the
Gonna get all the way through
the bill come in a little bit
late but.
I'm looking at page twenty and
then this problem where I pick
things up there's there's a
creation of an interstate
commission there's a the
executive.
body an executive committee that
commissions what do we do we pay
dues to belong to this
interstate compacts Mr chairman
of.
Yes we do and we already pay
dues we will continue to pay
dues and do not anticipate that
the costs of being part of the
commission will
rise much from what we already
pay the federal grant because
the committee discussed the
issues so what kinds of no that
is what what what we pay dues Mr
chairman currently we pay our
approximately forty thousand
dollars.
Yes I'm sorry Mr chairman.
Madam pretend yes about
approximately forty thousand
annually we pay this to.
Mr chairman we pay that to the.
I'm sorry the association of
administrators on the interstate
compact of the placement of
children.
I am looking to.
Sorry.
Yes.
Looking around I am I'm looking
for.
Committee I do not but it should
bring on the phone together but
I I apologize I apologize Mister
chairman but I I'm about ninety
eight percent positive that that
that is correct I apologize for
not knowing that for certain.
Okay.
I apologize Mr chair it actually
goes to the American public
Human Services association I
apologize.
Action they're a nonprofit.
Looking around the room for the
two
of you know what I don't mean to
put you on the spot but you're
illustrating a point that I'm
trying to make which is we often
times this committee see these
compact so we never really
talk about is in the seed round
these compacts this is a
business these contacts are
business
the the organizations that
organize these contacts create a
need they put themselves in a
position to administer the need
they scheduling meetings they
take our dues you know forty
thousand dollars a year for New
Mexico plus
we having get fifty states
eventually on the compact
you tell me what the what is
this.
Yeah yeah so the revenue last
year is about eight million
dollars of this organization
they schedule meetings they
oftentimes a publish the
learning materials the handbooks
the by laws they they
coordinating organized but we
should be honest about it these
these compacts are often times a
business in you know I know I
know you wanna respond I'm gonna
get a chance respond over but
but when this committee sees
contacts all the time and
Senator knows I think probably
walls of the room we we look at
them sometimes skeptically in
here with the language and we
should because for example if
you look at
Age twenty two line eight one of
the things the commission says
commission should have the
following powers.
one five to promulgate rules and
take all necessary actions to
affect the goals purpose in
obligations in the compact
pretty broad were given
authority promulgate rules take
all necessary actions.
Page twenty two line B. were
given this commission the
authority to provide for dispute
resolution among the states
right we're we're you know we
have a beef with taxes about the
placement of a child or how
things that we're we're we're
given this commission the
authority to decide that dispute
this well to reach you're
looking at me quizzically this
is to provide for dispute
resolution among member states
so there's a dispute between us
and other state about this for
you in this commission that kind
of authority.
That's what we want to be on
that commission yeah well I
understand I I get it but you'll
be one of of how many people on
the commission does it say how
many members.
Yeah yeah we will be one of
whatever it is so again I'm I'm
not I'm gonna vote for the bill
and so this doesn't mean to be
late.
But I I think we need to
recognize and this not to
isolate your bill Senator or
this particular commissioner
this compact but we see these
contacts all the time and and to
meet it is a business somebody
comes up with a good idea Hey
there should be a contact on
this issue this is a good idea
there should be a compact among
states for placement shown there
should be compact among states
for lots of things I can think
of
we just sell today for several
hours of the issue of abortion
the really great to have an
interstate compact among states
on the topic of abortion good
luck trying to do that of course
but you know somebody could come
up with the commission to do
that right and come up with an
interstate compact on on that
issue if you come up with any
number of different compacts we
can get the states to all pay
dues we can establish the dues
we can hire executive director
of the staff we can rent an
office we could have annual
meetings we could have of
meetings of the board of staff
of the employees anywhere in the
country we choose to do that
probably be someplace nice Vegas
is kind of nice springtime I'm
not being cynical the price
sounds a little cynical but not
be cynical with this particular
issue this Senator I'm not going
to be critical of needed I just
want to these compacts or or
business and we should at least
acknowledge them for what they
are and and approach them with
some level of caution.
In terms of the the need for
that so I as I said I'm gonna
support but I think it's
important for us to know who
were paying
we're not paying a governmental
entity we're not paying anybody
the federal government's not
paying a by the state government
we're paying a private.
company and there were there.
Making money doing this looks
like NCSL absolutely resist G.
apps absolutely right it is not
is no different than those of
those organizations and anyone
can anybody got any ideas are
looking for a business to get
into former compact form a
commission started up get states
the pay and get their membership
and you may do good work and
maybe could important service.
But let's not let's not be blind
to the fact that the the this is
not some hello federal agency or
anything else like that we're
this is we're we're joining up
so ciation that the I guess it
makes about eight million
dollars a year by doing this.
Anyway that's the point that I
thought was worth making Senator
Ivey Soto.
Image.
I have.
Programs will serve on.
This is.
In this compacts.
We have a seven.
Twelve and thirteen.
Raul.
Which is a great recommended
standards.
Has the force and effective and
administrative role in a member
state.
Well how do we get a little in a
member state.
Visitors and comments.
At least in the state witnesses
have.
There's no requirement that
there be notices.
And.
How they really mean this one.
Another is one.
Yes H..
Thirty.
Five six nine.
Rules.
We'll get about Interstate
fission.
Other forces affected with
administrative rules which I am
the.
The compact states.
The staff and the matter
provided for this.
They up.
We.
We got the topic of rules part
of over twenty twenty eight
thirty two.
You want to change.
Executive legislative and
judicial branches to government
division state shall.
Endorsed this compact and the
rules.
The state commission.
I'll take all actions necessary.
This compacts purposes or
intents.
This compact and its rules.
The binding in the contacting
States to the state and the
matter for.
In this contract because they
really really.
And then you look at the very
next one.
I wanted to.
All works shall take.
Judicial notice of this.
I just kind.
And the rules.
The judicial or administrative
proceedings.
And member state parties.
Of this kind.
You know that's.
So so we want to first thirty
five eight of the table help
from rules.
we.
I suspect.
That we're talking about.
You.
The lady on the.
Compactors.
And if you were trying to do it
in a central New Mexico.
Yes the Senate finance
committee.
What it does now with.
You just lie back.
As a is what we will.
Right.
This so.
and then the work right that our
courts of the.
Back up that way.
Right that's that's where the.
The problems communities this is
not that.
Most of the.
Are also seeing a lot of the.
Whether.
But it is.
This is problematic our.
Where.
Not that we have that.
That in doing so we give up.
The control over those.
Senator.
Okay did you respond to it I
could say something chairman she
was first.
Okay
Madam chair and.
No question by the way if you
don't have to respond to that.
Okay I'll do my best madam chair
Senator Ivey Soto
I agree with.
Your assessment that we would be
at the table we meeting.
Folks from CYFD to assist in the
rulemaking process.
I believe it's better to be one
of those.
At the table then that not.
By I see your point about the
promulgation process for rules.
I think that.
I'm trying to.
Sorry I I apologize for the the
hesitation but.
With without again I think what
I fall back to is
without that we we would be we
would have to create rules
regardless that that.
Aligned with the compact
otherwise we run into the same
exact issue that we have now
which is state aid doing this be
doing this Stacey doing this and
that's why we're here.
And so
I understand the concern about
the promulgation process I I see
that but again in order to
avoid.
Coming back here with the same
problem in ten years twenty
years thirty years I don't know
what it might be I think I think
there's no other way but to.
Handle it in a manner that.
Dozens some affect force the
states.
To.
House rules that align.
And then madam chairman and and
Senator Ivy Soto the the I think
the point of the compact is.
If we don't belong to the
compact which has a set of rules
affable in all fifty fifty
states the district of Columbia
and the Virgin Islands.
We would in essence have to
create our own negotiation and
contract with.
Whichever state need to make a
placement here or wherever we
need to make a placement
ultimately we have to fifty two.
Fifty two agreements so this is
this is state these the
relinquishment of some imagined
the level of control over our
own destiny if you want to take
it to the extreme.
But.
It's to do is to make life
simpler it's to make it possible
for these kids to be placed
without having to go through the
negotiation of a new contract
every time some new state wanted
to place a child here where we
wanted to place a child in New
jurisdiction so that's the point
of the company and and yes the
the keep in mind that the rules
are about two specific things
placing children in adoptive
homes and placing children in
foster care and and.
There's it's not like we're
giving up our ability to tax or.
Yes laws of the firearms or any
of the rest I mean we're talking
about two things only about
these two things and only about
the Interstate place that we can
have our own set of rules for
what we do in state we don't
give that.
In fact there may be slightly
different standards that we
would applaud that are higher
than the standards in the
compact that apply to other
state placements if we're gonna
make a placement state were
differently a higher or lower
but different.
So this is just stated vehicle
for making it possible to work
pretty smoothly across state
lines with all fifty two other
for fifty one other
jurisdictions.
And if that takes agreeing to
let them set some rules.
For how we do those placements
then that's the case we we give
up that look minuscule amount of
of sovereignty that would that
would mean that we will want to
follow the rules you want to
place kids according to our own
rules.
The
Sure.
to sit on.
Thank you.
Representative.
So.
But there are.
Thirty one thirteen different
areas.
The commission's rules of.
Creation.
The
There's.
The problem is that.
The.
Commission is not limited it's
on.
On.
The topics of the.
I would love it if they would.
That would make this a lot
easier for.
They don't look at the top.
In fact the issue making.
Senator Ortiz the of the subs
Authority to do it over
arsenal's.
I believe on.
And the usual rulemaking
procedures.
R. retroactively apply.
The.
Los process.
and so.
Yeah so that's the.
I said that's.
For me that's the.
The concern.
Is that if we're talking about.
The Sherman centre talking about
the.
The areas that you're talking.
I had a problem with the
legislative.
Maybe Mr Mr Chairman and Mr
chairman and senator Ivey Soto.
The whole first part of the
contact deals with what they're
with that with these are about
it's about placement to.
These are.
Transition rules forms and
procedures for the placement of
children timelines for the
placement of children data
collection for the it's all
about placement of children
that's with full time because of
the it's not about anything
else.
Yeah and and Mr chairman and
senator you know that's where if
they would just simply say.
The end of our class.
Right they would say.
Authorities limited.
To
And.
That's will.
Mr Chairman.
I'm sorry.
Yes this is aspen dental up.
Yeah go cats this is the.
Concern is.
Is that what point.
Other rules options.
There whether interfering.
The state for example there's
nothing in here.
That says.
That the.
The commission will observe.
Civil rights.
Member states.
Right so there's nothing there
was German Services you know I'm
not saying that the.
There's nothing in here that
says.
That one doctor will say.
That they that is an option but
only after.
Yeah.
About I don't expect that but
yet they don't limit themselves
I don't argue with.
Here.
On the other state options.
And.
And that's where the concern.
This gentleman up I've got for
now I would like to.
Good.
Mister chairman Senator to the
kids so I just let me I'm sorry.
Is that a lot of people do
holidays it's the double name
thing.
I'm sorry Mr chairman Senator
Ivey Soto
So just a couple of three points
four first.
On page.
With the release section.
Page eight.
I apologize.
I don't have I have to find the
right patient apologize
Here we go a page thirteen.
Lines twenty three through
twenty five.
The substances losses I'm sorry
page thirteen lines twenty three
through twenty five.
The substantive laws of the
state in which an adoption will
be finalized shall solely
governed all issues relating to
the adoption of the child and
the court in which the adoption
and then over a continues to
page fourteen proceeding is
filed shall have subject matter
jurisdiction regarding all
substantive issues relating to
the adoption except and then it
just sets forth a feud options
regarding if the child or ward
of another court which is again
if we're the the sending state
we would be maintained
jurisdiction.
when the tribes in the legal
custody of a public agency in
the sending States of so that
would be the kids in our legal
custody.
And when a court in the sending
state is otherwise appropriately
assume jurisdiction I think that
hopefully we'll take care of the
issue of adoptions and Office.
Just one more quick.
One moment to find the right
place here.
I.
The ability.
Section.
Just for my delay.
and I'm struggling to find the
language
There's action here that says
that the commission only has
authority to create rules that.
Effectuate the purpose of the
compact so does limit the
rulemaking authority to meeting
the purposes of the compact set
forth in article one.
And I apologize if I'm
struggling to find it now but I
do know it's applicability.
It's.
I'm sorry I think it's actually
in the section you mentioned I'm
sorry it's page twenty nine.
Winds five through seven
interstate commission shall
promulgate and published rules
in order to effectively and
efficiently achieve the purpose
of this compact.
and I'm my interpretation of
that is that it is limiting it
language to achieve the purposes
of the compact as set forth in
article one.
Thank you for allowing me to
respond and at the bottom of
that page invited Mr chairman it
does talk about.
Publishing the proposed rules
entire text allowing inviting
all persons to submit written
data facts and so on this these
are not going to be done in a
vacuum they will be done with
full participation of all the
fifty two to jurisdictions.
Unless you have come to all move
on to mine.
So that.
Yes go ahead.
The state is coming years.
The the the original laws passed
in nineteen sixty.
So we.
On that night.
I'm madam chair Madam pretend
yes ma'am.
State but you are.
Yeah.
You know we've done in you know
I I these were not the password
now that.
So.
For doing that.
So Senator all note that the
compact we have before us is is
very different from.
Compact that we've been in since
nineteen sixty
it doesn't have that rulemaking
language it doesn't have that
the original one doesn't have
qualified immunity defense and
indemnification
there is like a lot of language
in here that's not the
contractor currently in and if
we don't pass this we are still
under the old compact no there
will be no old company.
That's so that was my
understanding from talking to
some folks at Pegasus
So but I'm gonna.
Madam chair of in their.
On that.
So if we don't pass this the
session that does not make our
existing law article let at
thirty two a an article eleven
disappear that is still in place
and.
All of the thirty five states
will not have ratified this for
it to go into effect only
thirteen states have a long
Senator.
So
I understand is that not passing
this the session does not mean
suddenly we do not have the
ability to do out of state
placements
but I'm gonna I'm gonna make a
motion.
To to strike subsection D. which
starts on page twenty seven
continues through line three on
page twenty nine.
Which inserts community that we
do not have now under the
existing affected also would
affected Lee make the the
commission staff
to Senator there's munity they
note that the benefit of our
tort claims act despite not
really being state actors I know
people don't like people always
say you can't change anything in
a compact that is not true in
two thousand seventeen Montana
struck a qualified immunity
defense and indemnification
clause from their physical
therapy hi compact there's been
no problem with it they've got
along just fine so Mr chair my
motion is to strike all of
subsection D. beginning on page
twenty seven going through line
three on page twenty nine.
But right.
The.
Senator Ortiz Pena well that
would be a terribly on friendly
amendment Mr chairman of the
playing with dynamite.
from the by the sponsor of the
committee.
First session.
Thank you for sitting in I've
got the minutes the little going
back up just in the so.
With us so we've got a proposed
amendment.
To the.
Senator it would be restatement
with.
The.
As.
The letter.
that goes for the work.
It is the last.
That are but.
Any other questions on that
could I ask you questions to
Turner.
What contacted Montana.
The leader of the provision from
so
is there is there is a need to
be.
Thousands of the session.
So here's so you've found the
state that made a change in a
different contact six years ago
and you think we will be
endangering our participation in
this one if we do the same thing
that month tentative for
physical therapists I think that
that that the same time
qualified immunity.
You.
The state have any contact that
have survived.
The lights the argument that
many here on.
four or and Senator a.
On that.
The physical therapist didn't
the physical therapist didn't
that doesn't mean this
commission will and and centers
of can we please go to the chair
Mister chairman yes I just find
it is those that are doing to
but we're asking a question or
make a statement about your
responses it avoids the debate
yeah.
Mr chair yeah I of the issues
realizing there was a specially
the commission language that is.
For.
I the.
Or they.
Whether there are times that.
Prior.
This is all over.
In this contact.
That is correct.
Basis.
Motion for the body.
The other discussion.
By roll call please.
Thank you.
So.
Senator Stewart.
Do you have yes.
Oh I'm sorry survivors of the.
Those are.
There's about this yes.
The proposed amendment failed.
The.
Where and I.
Another thing that we generally
seeing compacts but is not
addressed in this one is a venue
provision I often this many
provisions are not great because
they say there's there picking a
venue outside of New Mexico but
not addressing it at all that I
know there is the jurisdiction
language the you're talking
about that would apply to the
adoption itself this is a venue
if someone has a claim against
the the commission
so I would also.
I'm not exactly sure where it
should go but there should be a
venue provision inserted in
there that says their claims
against the provision that
happens here in New Mexico.
Not all sweat
So I we could even just tacked
on the end.
yes.
Well it would have to be in the.
Language itself so.
I would propose.
Have a at article nineteen.
That would.
State and all I can repeat it
more slowly but I'm sure that
through for the first venues
property
Thank you for property proper in
judicial proceedings fire
against the commission
I.
All on one second.
Okay except as to judicial
proceedings for the enforcement
of this compact among member
states individuals may pursue
judicial proceedings related to
the compact in any New Mexico
state or federal court that
would otherwise have call
centers.
It doesn't matter division that
would be inserting that page
thirty nine between lines six
and seven.
with a problem with the heading
this at article nineteen than.
Please.
and off to.
That's one of.
Representative
I'm not clear exactly Mr
chairman what the vice chairman
is is is.
This saying it is if anybody
anywhere.
Has a complaint against the
interstate compact on the
placement of children.
It would have to be handled here
in these courts in New Mexico.
In now Mr chair Senator so this
would be if someone here in New
Mexico had a claim against the
compact other contact had a
claim against someone here in
New Mexico that would then then
then you would be here in New
Mexico not somewhere else
because for instance and we'll
get to this in a minute on page
thirty if you want to.
Yes one of the rules you have to
go to the district of Columbia.
In order to do that I don't want
to the national center please
don't interrupt I want to make
sure Mr chair Senator that when
New Mexicans have a legal issue
with the compact earned contact
hasn't legal issue with let's
say the legislature and mine too
and for something that we don't
have to go to that they come to
us really.
So madam chairman I mean Mr
chairman and madam vice chairman
so if any of the fifty two
jurisdictions adopted this
policy.
The compact would have to go to
all fifty two jurisdictions
whenever they had a disagreement
with the.
Mr chair Senator if they had a
judicial proceeding for a
judicial proceeding then other
rules not rules you're saying a
rule that we please.
Back and forth Mr Chairman she
is that German to questions of
the Finnish Division which.
So Mister chair there is
existing language in here that
says to if you want to weigh in
on the rule you have to go to
them I'm just using that as an
example we haven't gotten to
that yet but for a judicial
proceeding if it's I or against
someone in New Mexico the venue
should be proper here in New
Mexico we should not have to go
somewhere else to to advocate
for for our rights in a judicial
proceeding or to respond to a
traditional proceeding against
us.
Mr chairman and senator do it I
think there's a reason that
there's no then you listed in
here because nobody has ever
been able to imagine a judicial
proceeding against the company
they might very well be able to
imagine it is a proceedings
against individual state
agencies that have done a bad
placement study against some
individual who didn't carry out
their duties but the contact is
simply an agreement among the
states.
To provide the same route read
requirements the same
regulations so that it
facilitates the placements and
why we would ever want is have a
judicial proceeding against
them.
Let alone an individual would
have a judicial proceeding
against them I I don't
understand what what possible
liability.
Would be involved in that Mr
chair I will note that every
other compact that I have seen
in this committee since I have
part of the body has had a that
you provision provision and that
usually one that is one sided
for the benefit of the the
compact not not the member state
and so this is the first time
I've ever seen one without any
provision but I think there's
people do content and the fact
the fact that they have built in
lot immunity for themselves
shows that they have
contemplated from
potentially suits against them
so I.
Hi this is my all all make the
motion would you please sure
for.
There is so thank you thank you
Mr chairman I don't know if I
have a question and she's
yielded to me I have an
observation perhaps make you
look on page twelve.
The paragraph B. sections
because by having a venue.
Provision in here this is not
explicit but to me it reviews of
and provision we look on
patients line three.
This one issue child protection
of customary is brought before a
court in the receiving state.
Of course confer with the court
the sending state to determine
the most appropriate form for
education.
I I got to I have never seen
like that in thirty plus years
of practice of law because
there's no mechanism for that in
other words it seems really
really strange it and really
value provision it seems to me
it's really bizarre one which is
the the receiving state the
state in which the child was
received.
Shop confer with the court of
the sending state to determine
the most appropriate forum so
that kind of says that the two
judges into the other side venue
which I've never seen before and
I can't imagine could possibly
work.
I don't know how you do that two
judges in the legal form.
Can they can really judge can
just pick up the phone and say.
Sally what do you think.
Representative what do you think
the that does work with us with
this reads the two judges should
get together have a.
Chat about where the form for
education the.
I agree with you that the one we
could do that probably conducted
next party of.
Some other process issues but I
just want to want to interrupt
the discussion question and with
two alerts to what looked to be
almost looks like a venue
provision but a very poorly
worded wanted my opinions so do
you still have the floor the.
and we have your you're in the
middle of Mr chair maybe a serve
during supporters limits I'm
interested in the form.
Where where we get with that.
So that we don't have a quorum
yeah we know you're you're right
of the.
do it let's see who it got so
around here and so we're gonna
get one back help look for
members couple things well
before we get too far for so at
seven o'clock Center were
devised by the majority leader
it by the with one point seven
o'clock.
I'll see if we can buy some more
time of things were going to get
this done.
I think it's important to
probably let center Maestas and
pope no we won't get to that
bills and I I'm sorry we've been
waiting so long but I think it's
going to be wanted and needed on
the floor and so I suggest that
you had there I don't know
whether we can get to Center
should over the thing here is
going to be quick but I could be
wrong about that too.
but we certainly have a of a
quorum at all but my apologies
to those of you that way here
it'll be the first to know
before you go the reason I
wanted interruptus this
committee is going to meet
tomorrow morning at nine thirty
and so please take note everyone
who's here you know you won't
get another good and also for me
and unfortunately you probably
won't get a good agenda from me
till late tonight or first thing
tomorrow morning because we're
gonna have to put you into that
agenda have you first up so
chief I'm sorry the center post
Secretary all of you've been
here for a long time this is
taking a little bit longer than
I hoped it would be but I
thought I'd let you.
That out so Senator do if you're
about to make a motion.
Motions to table.
The motion is a tabling motions
will take that by roll call.
Please thoroughness of the Mr.
There are no.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth is here Sir do you
think yes.
Sense of this yes
that fails on a vote of three to
two.
Well I can keep doing portrait
amendments.
Chair what.
I don't want to miss anything.
project.
you have the floor you can make
a motion to a Centers so if you
think the votes are not going to
line up on those amendments will
leave it to you to decide with
the one.
Make those motions and feel the
vote goes or not make them or do
anything else but I'm here for
the committee so you have the
floor it's our duty would like
to be recognized we want to
yield Hirsch's suggestion
otherwise we'll keep working or
will take whatever motion the
committee wants and that gets a
major.
Well first of all Sir Duke so as
the floor so all you'll to
Senator studios.
That's an appropriate motion.
We'll take a roll call on that.
The representative of yes.
You yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Thank you now.
There's about this no.
So you were the best thank you
very much Mr chairman members of
the.
Well I would like to hear it
right now so let's go see we get
to get it done in the short
order believe they're starting
on for.
You may may not be able to do so
let's let's at least give it a
shot.
the.
Find out if that's the case but
does not go too far.
The.
Three.
Six.
With these.
Very.
Senator Shendo.
Well informed and can assure you
we will not be able to put
together for
so I will put you first up
tomorrow morning nine thirty Sir
article I apologize to you again
Sir you've been here many times
many nights I regret this but
we've been called on the floor
some of the members are gonna
work down there working hard
working too many places at one
time so are you.
This.
