One section two subsection.
It's simply a question of how we
allocate that.
I don't think that's really is
budget issue issues that is
finances so Mister chairman at
this time of the.
two passed motion on.
Is that a Texas just days with
some.
Percent of the three thirty six.
Indication that the bill before
the finance.
They do best.
With recommendations with no.
Yes I'm sorry.
Two budget recommendations on
Senate taxes transportation
committee substitute.
The thirty six the nation that
go to finance.
Senator.
Yes Mister chair and yes I.
Session server Division to that
motion.
Senator Stewart Neil to
somewhere.
Thank you thank you members of
the committee.
we had a chance to re evaluate
the a little bit.
Here's a seventeen the terms
changes and I my apologies for
that.
We will.
Go back to the the central for
seventy one that'll be pretty
quick
What you're going to make sure
we do that one of our state
Representative solar.
Share.
Next the.
Your Senate bill three fifteen
that those in the photo
discussion and work on.
Compact the the Center keeping
will here Senator seventy two
and.
And then we'll figure that
Senate bill thirteen Boller I
thirteen.
Resorts so.
To be precise.
A good question I would settle
for seventy one.
Ready yes thank you for some.
W. mission opposition so from
the precise okay thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee Senate bill four
seventy one mix of a minor
tweaks to the end of life
options act that makes it very
clear that someone with a
conscious objection to medical
aid in dying does not have to
participate in anyway discussed
that with our patients make
referrals etcetera and there
will be no negative consequences
and that's it with that Mr chair
stand for questions you know
registered supporter opposition
members the committee Senate
Bill endorsed twenty one it's
Senator underpass motion any
further discussion.
Thirty objection.
Seeing none show center I'm Soto
Stuart o'neill serve on this and
Wirth there's a do pass thank
you thank you.
Senator three seventy three.
Office of child advocate staff.
Third time thank you Mr chair
members of the committee.
During a recent CYFD department
interim hearing a group of
legislators consisting of the
LFC members and guests expressed
concerns with CYFD operations
and oversight for really lack
there of the concerns included
potentially incorrect statistics
shared by the agency during
their presentation regarding
child maltreatment perceived
lack of transparency around
cases of injury or death and
general lack of oversight those
same concerns follow us that the
legislature here today there
seems to be a want and will of
this legislator to bring change
to this agency and this is
powerful legislation that that
takes the first step in doing
that this creates as an
independent outside oversight
office outside of CYFD in
practice house within the AG's
office I'm gonna let Senator
Gallegos go into the details of
this bill are you have a
committee set up before you that
mirrors HB eleven.
Yes thank you.
Point four I have not received
anything you it is this is point
four.
What.
Senator you got a guy with
seven.
US forces in here here's a look
when we change the schedule in
addition to at the last minute
of the let him know that
sometimes we accommodate members
when they do.
Thank you.
Do you want me to do the.
to over with.
There by.
Working of point two two five
six four six point four yes we
have.
Focus on differences between.
Well let me correct that Senator
let's let's let's really hear
the bill in the affirmative I
think it's important for us not
to just compare this to the to
the bills that we have the full
presentation just let all of you
know that there are.
Four people registered in
support advocating but none in
opposition so
the table intend Maryland back
hello Sally and Alice and can
you owners are the more they
part of your presentation on.
They're not Mr chair okay so
they they register to speak
other here will recognize each
one of for a minute but
Centers what controls will
recognize that the your
presentation for up to seven
minutes please okay and then
we'll go to the other proponents
New Mexico to the committee so
seven minutes please.
One Mr
Hey just to give you just a
little bit working trying to do
this brief.
Our but I want to start off by
thanking center do the for her
deeper view of the bill we had.
The products to the committee so
and I appreciate the dialogue we
had some real key interest
points that we've worked on with
Legislative Council if you don't
mind I'll go ahead and turn over
chart for women's.
Matt back in order to give good
detail on the chains.
Mr chair members of the
committee
As the senators and Sanchez
explained this bill creates an
independent and permanent
ombudsman office.
the changes from the bill that
you previously saw.
Are
There are a number of them
although they're not very
substantive a lot of them.
Got rid of some stuff in the
bill that I would say
was language that is not
necessary to the bill.
And and that includes
one change that that you'll see
is that is is an administrative
Lee attached to the AG's office
instead of the department of
finance
When there is a new appointment
of the child advocate it serves
continues to serve until the
other add another advocate is
appointed.
In addition to the governor's
ability to remove the Supreme
Court can now remove the office
the child advocate officer.
Members of the committee changed
and that the appointment of
partisan committee members by
the governor to of each party
includes language that neither
of the shall have changed their
political party affiliation
within the last two years.
It also includes someone with
knowledge.
Of child welfare issues.
It changes the timeline for when
The committee may nominate.
A person to service the child
I've Kate.
And the timeline for when the
governor may appoint that
person.
It now includes per diem for the
committee members.
After the initial meeting of the
committee instead of the
majority of the committee being
able to the call for another
meeting it allows the chair of
the committee to call for.
For a meeting.
In terms of the shells under
powers and duties it takes out
it moves a lot of those and
takes out any kind of
discretionary acts.
Only leaving the mandatory acts.
In the NMAA section for meeting
with the child alone if that
were to happen where the office
the child advocate in its
investigation meets for the
child alone the child would have
to consent to the communication
or the interview.
In terms of conflict of interest
it makes more clear.
What a conflict of interest is
so that anyone reading the bill.
Or at some point if it is passed
the law can know exactly what a
con what exists for a conflict
of interest and it makes clear
that the acts that would be a
conflict of interests are only
for persons or entities
providing services pursuant to
the child's coat the children's
code.
It adds near fatality for
reports from CYFD to the office
of the child advocate's office
of the child advocate when
there's a death or near fatality
it takes away the language of a
significant risk of injury which
previously was included.
And there is a deadline on when
CYFD must provide those reports.
Section ten which talks about
what law enforcement
reports are forwarded to the
office of the child advocate.
It makes clear that.
Law enforcement only need report
does the office of the child
advocate if it identifies the
class of child victims so if
there are different law
enforcement agencies around the
state that do not keep track of
the specific information
reported and it it does not
impose on those agencies an
obligation to report them to the
office.
For the confidentiality
provision previously allowed for
disclosure of information up
what I copied I although I I I
don't think that's.
What's written the identifiable
information for the child it
used to say that the office
could disclose that if it was
already known to the public that
has been removed so that there
just a Brandt blanket
prohibition on providing that
identifiable information.
Takes out a set section twelve
that provided that the complaint
process to the office of the
child advocate does not prevent
any other remedies it remove
that section tirelessly.
Throughout the bill it said
that.
Persons can bring complaints or
concerns to the office of the
child advocate for children that
are subject to referral to the
department has been changed
referred to the department to
make it clear that.
A recommendation proceeding has
already taken place the language
before could probably be read
broadly to include any child.
There's also a section in
section thirteen and previously
referred defective can as
receiving notice.
It now says identified fictive
can so that
It is so that only for victims
can who have been identified
we'll be here for.
And and I think those are the
the majority of the the changes
Mr speaker members of the
committee.
Mr speaker members of the
committee.
Sorry.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you
This is in my experience has
taught me that this is a bill
that is sorely needed
I'm Albuquerque attorney I
practiced primarily in oil and
gas law.
By color criminal defense and
some constitutional rights.
Senator Wirth talked about
coming to the to the right to
repair bat Bill by happenstance
being brought to by clients.
That so I came here I had no
intention of developing a
practice called CYFD
but it sort of has become a
niche practice just because
people are brought complaints to
me.
I think that this permanent
independent objective office is
crucial.
Actually that it's independent
objective.
What I've seen is that they're
real and perceived conflicts of
interest in the dispute
resolution process within CYFD
as it currently exists.
That everything that goes
through the apartment ends up
before the secretary and that
perceived conflict of interest
turns into a real conflict of
interest when you get in that
process.
The people that are involved in
the dispute process have been
nine since the beginning before
the decision was made.
They're involved in the dispute
process which ultimately goes to
the secretary who very often
times was involved before there
is even a complaint.
That takes this out of this
process.
The governor the governor's
office as opposed this this bill
saying that it will make it more
difficult to recruit frontline
workers.
What I've seen what folks have
told me in my experience tells
me the opposite.
That if there is a complaint
process and disperses outside.
Of the subject to pressures of
CYFD.
Frontline workers will be
encouraged to stay in CYFD
knowing that they have an
independent and objective
resolution for they have those
problems rather than worried
about being retaliated against
for bring those complaints
within CYFD.
Thank you thank you.
In addition to your
presentational recognized for
one minute I don't see JD
Bollinger here soon.
Maryland back.
One minute please.
Good afternoon chairman and
committee members my name is
Maryland back I'm the founder
and executive director of New
Mexico child first network a
nonprofit organization dedicated
to improving the lives of
children in foster care
empowering those families who
serve them we stand in strong
support of SB three seventy
three creating an independent
and objective Office of the
child advocate I want to call
attention that there is a
similar bills that is passing in
the house this afternoon it
passed the house appropriations
seventeen to zero the AG did
stand and support I think he's
headed back to Albuquerque but
he has stood in support as
offered to take the finances of
this for the first year I want
to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward I
want to thank the chairman of
the committee for recognizing
this bill this evening and I
want to thank senator Katie do
hate for working with us
diligently this weekend and
really getting this bill to a
place we can pass that I want to
say the most important part of
this bill is it's intentional
outside independence from the
agency as presented to the
committee said will be
administratively attached AG
this model has been thoroughly
vetted and the interim is known
best practices with over forty
three states passing this bill
please pass it thank you.
hello instilling.
Recognize one minute.
Thank you chairman serve on to
some members of the committee my
name is Alvin soleil I sent you
comments this weekend by email
there were of course more
extensive I want to make it
clear tonight that I'm speaking
for myself and no one not
representing any other group I
had forty seven years of my
aching math is correct working
with CYFD and its predecessors
in the area of child welfare
based upon that I strongly
recommend this bill I think it
helps in many ways while I was
very involved with center to see
Pino with said Joseph a consent
decree federal court order back
in the nineteen eighties through
the nineties and it brought
about great change in fact CYFD
was a model agency in the
nineteen nineties we had people
visiting New Mexico from all
over seeing what we were doing
was working with families vest
to cations
I think does this also will
actually improve services and I
know that apartments working
diligently to hire more licensed
social workers but if you're a
licensed social worker and
you're practicing and you know
there's an independent
organization looking over your
shoulder that will help improve.
Services thank you Mr thank you.
Malleson Endicott communis.
Recognize up to one minute.
Hi good evening Mr chair members
of the committee my name is
Allison and cockiness and I am
the legal director of advocacy
in where the left on New
Mexico's largest provider of
legal representation for foster
children on behalf of our
organization I'm asking to
support this bill our
organization has learned over
the last since nineteen eighty
six all representing over
thousand representing thousands
of children in foster care that
CYFD cannot police itself the
only way to effect meaningful
changes through independent
oversight transparency and
accountability this will not
happen from within the
department CYFD has had ample
opportunity to address its
issues which resulted in a
dysfunctional system of south
health protection the
retaliation against critics and
using confidentiality as a
shield.
This has placed children in
harm's way and is lost critical
resources such as workers
providers and foster parents
that are needed to help our
families an independent office
using the but small Department
on the EDD's office model used
in forty three states is a
critical step in achieving the
level of accountability to
change our failing system thank
you very much.
Appreciate that that's all we
have registered members the
committee.
During.
Mr chair and I want to think
that the sponsors for bringing
this and thank all the I know
there's a lot of people been
working on this for a long time
and I and I really appreciate
that the changes that are made
in the sob
There's one part of that I'm I'm
kind of positive and it's it's
on page eight Mr chair.
eight thirteen fourteen and this
is.
So this is an issue that came of
where we're looking at the bill
before I I have concerns about
child to.
This basically being being
questioned by this independent
office.
Of without without an adult
there with them because often
you know developing question is
another their parent or guardian
or are living with we don't want
that person there with them but
we do want to make sure that we
have kids who are being asked
who are being questioned have
appropriate
supports and protections there
with them and so I see that this
has been this language saying if
the child consents to the
interview.
I kind of pause on that because
I.
I don't know that house always
gonna be able to consent but I'm
also getting this and then I
started texting all the people
who know a whole lot more about
this than I do.
who are telling me that so first
of all if a child is and isn't
CYFD custody they're always
gonna have a GAO
appointed to them so in those
cases I'm not as concerned has
also already have a jail there
but there will be situations
where you don't have a G. A. L.
and.
I know that many of state house
interviews what what they do in
those situations
and the situation that there is
someone there with the cat they
have a highly trained questioner
who who is doing the interview.
so it.
This might be a whole lot of.
Cost me a.
Get worked up about it for
nothing Mr chairman I I I did
want to see if anyone else on
the committee had any ideas
about whether would be necessary
and if so how so to to build a
little more protection for child
questions without.
Without an adult their presence
but otherwise
That's thanks for.
Thank you the members committee
members questions.
Mr chair and professor do they
could just
Hello we're here if you're
referring to I can't find
anything on page eight.
And I'm looking at the the
committee order.
So I have it on page eight lines
thirteen and fourteen.
The this is in the NMAA section
thank and.
And and and and I want to stress
again.
Are that concern would not be a
reason not to to pass this bill
It's just so much my brain
stacked on that Mr some might
want to make sure that we're
with the contract.
They have already surely do we
already have some staff.
Job is being.
I know we've.
Or.
Receive.
So
Look at that.
Use.
Representative
I do.
I understand the concern.
I do have an issue with the
contents of the interview.
Because if the child is not
being treated well at all.
Job does not feel like they have
the power already.
As a foster child.
And.
And and then being told well do
you consent to talk to us.
I just see.
A lot of foster kids.
Opted not to doctors and want to
get into further trouble the
homeless costly problems.
Where it was centered the line
is.
Late.
I don't need to do well.
I would suggest.
Of what I would do about it.
A. J. line thirteen.
They J. line fourteen I would
strike if the toxicity in.
So make sure it's in a develop
emotions we gotta Center on the
motions and about does it on
that motion I was going to
suggest exactly I think we were
all gonna suggest exactly the
same.
That's what I was trying to get
the cows over the buckets ways
all right is there is there any
further discussion on the
proposed amendment.
that chuckle about that no is
that expression before council
about this really Mr chair
representative move the
committee staff.
All Mr chair I do not have
Senate bill three seventy three
eighty two has for the purpose
of discussion on the substitute.
Discussed and approved.
In the amendment we have
everyone have the amendment to
the repeat.
Page eight.
Being a line thirteen striking
words if through the end of the
line.
Line fourteen struck into the
semi colon.
Yes.
A further discussion Senator
division to that amendment.
Senator Marco Center were
Senator Montessori to o'neill
Center steward and center I'm so
to all in the affirmative that
amendments adopted.
Thank you very much.
I would move it to pass as
amended.
Motion forces defenses medical
student I don't know that we
really need to committees of the
amendments relatively.
It has rules okay okay good.
I got it'll be it'll be a point
five point five version three
sections.
Any further discussion.
You got that right you all work
on getting you committee so
together with that amendment
adopted is there any further
discussion.
yes actually.
Can we
This.
We will conduct is that.
Mister chairman Senator.
Mr Mr chairman and senator Ivey
Soto it it does what what you're
referring to on the last page of
the appropriation of five
hundred thousand dollars to the
AG would not be in this budget
year but next year.
So I turned the last page thank
you for
that.
Mr chair Senator also the AG's
office is willing strictly
appropriation because they're
willing to pay for this
themselves and so we don't need
to date but on that last page we
would like to change it over
change in the
Committee set up to twenty
twenty three.
Okay Mr chairman I would live to
strike section sixteen of the
bill.
Section six today.
No section sixteen.
And then a section seventy.
Age twenty three line seven I
would move to strike twenty
twenty four and that's our
twenty twenty three they closed
all as one motion together is
there for the discussion on
awesome and Senator you also
change the title.
Representative I thank you for.
He's.
Section.
Our help page one eight sixty.
Right section sixteen
altogether.
In section seventeen changed a.
Mr chair of the money so we just
in discussion the AG's office
actually talked about the first
year.
So we would need the twenty five
appropriations.
Section sixteen Mr Chairman
would need to state that
appropriation is not for this
year that's for fiscal year
twenty twenty five.
At a level because I understood
that he was going to cover the
cost the through the.
Yeah.
We don't really do it that way.
So I can't really pass a bill
saying we're going to pay this
much money next year.
You know let's just rolled into
the budget and its multi years
so you should look out and if
this passes get the money in the
next year's budget right.
The motion for the committee
distribute beginning on the
first page of the committee so.
One sixteen page one during the
period after nineteen seventy
eight striking remainder of the
line.
The struggle all of section
sixteen on page twenty two.
Yes yes.
In the.
Re lettering section seventeen
to sixteen online six of page
twenty three and on line seven
change effective the twenty
twenty four to twenty twenty
three.
As the motion before the
committee knows
session.
Is there any objection to the
adoption of that amendment that
would be your point five version
so.
Getting else remembers to do
pass the amendments as a new
committee substitute.
From seven seven three seventy
three is there any objection.
Senator Ivey Soto Stuart o'neill
do it serve on his worth I got
all willing to permanently have
a Senate do pass on three
seventy three.
Share.
So one seventy two Senator Ortiz
Pena.
Seventy two.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Senate bill one
seventy two deals with let me
let me let me give you a bit of.
Of frame workers etcetera so
there's a number of people who
sign up Richard advance.
As proponents are of these part
of your well organized
presentation order when we get
any to recognize each of them
individually.
Mr chair Senator we have three
people in the audience who are
here as part of the organized
whose trio serwis Sanchez and
front end up on that.
What was the first one please on
a tree on.
Right and I'm so I'm I'm showing
another for individuals in
addition to those so in Philip
on faith yeoman later love you
mean Ruiz what are all those
individuals who we choose it is
is info on here.
No faith human here no.
current and up
telephone.
Who's calling.
So we.
New Mexico so we enrollment.
Allegra love.
No.
India's means.
Your echoing through is here no
all right okay center please the
evening we we've got one
opponent Jennifer L. you hear.
No one soon.
Scratched.
Is the.
Here now.
Senator can we keep the advocacy
presentation to seven minutes or
less I believe I with with the
individuals who identify as part
of your presentation all right.
Seven minutes please and so
Mister chairman members of the
committee Senate bill one
seventy two deals with the
situation that it's come to
light in which people in this
country legally seeking asylum.
They're not committed a crime
for being detained by ice in
three facilities in the state.
this bill seeks to stop that
practice and to and to the.
We require that the states and
local governments no longer
contract for the tenth civil
detention by detainees and with
that I will ask my expert
witness of Sophia Genovesi from
the.
The immigrant law center to.
Give a bit of a presentation
thank you and good evening Mr
chairman and senators my name is
of the identities and the
supervising attorney of the
asylum in detention programs at
the New Mexico immigrant law
center and I'll see along with
our partners has been critical
of monitoring the conditions of
the three facilities as senator
at RTC Pino has just mentioned
these facilities detained almost
exclusively recently arrived
asylum seekers leader of
education in their countries of
origin and their attention under
immigration laws completely
discretionary meaning that they
can be released at any time
because they do not pose a risk
to public safety under our laws
and despite the fact that
there's asylum seekers survivors
of torture when they arrive in
New Mexico's immigration
facilities these asylum seekers
are subjected to renewable
conditions of confinement such
as deteriorating infrastructure
there's a rat infested
infestation right now at Cibola
I bug infestations in Torrance
inedible food racism and
xenophobia by guards willful
disregard for the medical mental
health care and even death I
know amount of oversight as
remedy these problems which is
why attorneys and advocates are
here today asking you all to
vote I do pass on SB one seventy
two so that New Mexico State is
longer complicit in this human
suffering and we look forward to
today's discussion we are happy
to first recognize when about.
This
chairman of.
Mr chairman the Senator masses
of my co sponsor that prepared
an amendment and so we might
want to have that discussed at
this time to.
They're not to so I think we
resident Miss Mister chairman in
consultation makes for with this
we're not going to put on the
amendment to the.
Well.
Well let me let me let me
consult.
Everything on the amendment
except number one.
Montoya was was senator of
Maestas we're here to explain
but barely said item number one
is not in effect that everything
else is.
And at Mr chair Senator just to
briefly explain that the
modification is points simple it
is simply deleting the last
paragraph in the bill the very
very last paragraph of the
effective date of that section
two and so instead that that
this section would go into
effect over the summer after
hopefully being signed by the
governor.
So anybody want to move the
amendment.
Will move the amendment minus
the first paragraph that Wright.
Well that is
it is because session the.
Then a.
Session Mr chair Senator that's
correct that's what two three
seven are there to suggesting
that indication that.
We remove anything further on
the amendment.
Any objection it often
amendment.
Senator Ivey Soto Stuart o'neill
doing survive to swerve and
Baca.
All right committee members.
On the bill as amended certain
duties of and that.
so Mr chair and senator I I have
a question.
So looking at page two.
For this really only applies to
a terra correct.
Mr chair Senator it would apply
at all three at detention
centers Otero county processing
center is owned outright fire
terra county so we know for
definitely that this bill would
and impact that detention
facility Torrance in Cibola are
slightly different CoreCivic the
private prison company owns and
operates that facility and the
use the counties as go betweens
to shield themselves from
liability what may happen but
what is not guaranteed is that
ice would contractor actually
with Pacific which is within
their authority under the
immigration law the county would
no longer be part of that
contractual relationship
potentially we don't know for
sure.
Thank you so Mr chair.
Senator expert so looking at the
language on page two
really online for this says that
you have to exercise termination
provision contract by January
first of twenty four but then
I'm looking at.
The bottom of the page to that
so for now sub whatever with the
eight the amendment that says
you can't they shall not receive
per diem per detainee or any
other payment related to the
tension of individuals in
immigration facility
That is owned managed or
operated in whole or in part by
private entity so what what
about that period of time
because the termination
provision it says it ends in six
months right.
Mr chair Senator the three
different contracts have three
different at termination clauses
for Torrance it requires a
hundred and twenty days notice
for C. will lie in Tero it
requires sixty days notice so
during those so once this goes
into a fax between from the time
that this goes into effect to
when the contract is actually
terminated they're not getting
paid under this language and so
I there needs to be something to
account for for payment during
that in between time.
Mr chair Senator yes I think
that that is a change that we
would need to make in light of
that the amendment.
All right I don't I don't have
the language for for that Sen
here I.
Let's open Mr chair.
The committee members questions.
I have several questions from.
I thank you Mr chair I'm just
looking at page two which was
formally section to winds
fifteen to nineteen which is now
I guess a new subsection B..
Sell any public government owned
property.
That is the owner manager
operating whole part by private
entity do you Mr chair you
really
This this kind of extinguishes
any.
Any possibility of a privately
owned immigration detention
facility facility Mr chair of
existing but then now we're
telling the government or public
agency they can't sell it so
that's one problem with the the
other is that it creates a
restraint on alienation of the
real property that isn't
supported in law.
And so I I just don't think that
that subparagraph B. is really
necessary you're telling people
they can never ever ever sell
this property to.
People for this purpose but in
the area in other parts of the
state you can't do it anyway so
anyway I just think it's
unnecessary I move to strike
section B. on page two which was
no subsection to.
Thank you lost me Senators on
page two so we asked some page
two.
It's subsection.
it was inconsistent with the
same kind of it was it it's on
page two and it was subsection
on ten section to a subsection
two I think it's being now
because of the amendment starts
with selling the public on line
fifteen.
Would strike that said I would
district that section for the.
Committee agrees.
That would be and then from the
amendment.
So that is in that that is an
amendment you're proposing some
of yeah I just think it's just
not supported in long Mr chair
thank you can't really put those
kind of restraints on real
property sales that for in
perpetuity that's the reasoning
behind that.
These are public this is the
public facilities understood by
the proposed amendments to
strike a language that would be
on page two lot twenty eight
fifteen eighteen.
Of fifteen through eighteen yes
Mr chair we further discuss
close amendment.
being no description when we do
of.
Roll call on that proposed
amendment.
Senator Baca yes center of some
of the.
Senator.
Senator Stewart no.
In our work no Senator Lopez no.
That amendment fails Bobby Joe
force for.
Could you discussion with
the representative
of the question.
This is the issue that.
Spring is.
Back active.
Do we need section two of the
bill at all.
Chair Senators this section and
it would ensure that facilities
that are owned by counties now
do not try to circumvent the
purpose of this bill by selling
to a private prison company for
example to ensure immigration
detention that was the purpose
of this section
So explaining the Mr chairman.
Senator explained to me on page
two and three number.
What looks like number four but
that was letter D..
Yes and I think that Mr Mr chair
Senator I think this is
something that we could strike
to to address the issue Senator
Duhigg mentioned earlier I'm
because for the purpose of what
we're trying to accomplish that
preventing the sale of these
facilities is accomplished
through the other sections and
everything else has to do with
the ownership of the building.
Mr chair Senator that's correct.
Yes I.
Move to strike.
The session the.
For page one two.
And then the on page.
July twenty three.
Out of warranty is.
That would be premises.
Every.
Because of the.
I'm certain we'd her response.
The friend Senator are you to
recommend.
For
further discussion.
Senator.
So Mr chair at I just became
aware of the fact that.
Where in some other states where
they've done this
that federal courts are it's
being challenged in federal
courts and not necessarily of
health.
I think that's something that
we.
Should be aware of all the real
time with bill homeless on the
amendment for total name I'm
sorry extra woman personal so.
Early objection the adoption
amendment.
Six million for those watching
at home that senator Wirth serve
on this too Neil Stirton Ivy
Soto on the amendment
Representative so for some I
think chairman.
Senator.
So Mr chair
I'm just have concerns about.
Is there an in New Jersey right
now there's there's a lawsuit
over the same thing
So have you have there been
safer this was done and it was
health.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
that question I want to into
that in two parts so first this
is not his in bands you may be
aware of the case geo group the
news and the ninth circuit which
held that the it private prison
band in California it was
unconstitutional under the
supremacy clause SB one seventy
two is not a private prison van
and it's notable that in
California at their I. TSA ban
is still in effect it was not
impacted by that litigation
additionally we have favorable
case law out of the seventh
circuit make Henry V. Raul and
similarly there it was up held
under the state's historic
police power to regulate the
health and safety and welfare of
individuals within it states
that this with step legal
challenge it was not pre empted
by federal immigration law this
is not something at this is not
a bill that is seeking to
regulate the federal government
I'm so we believe that is the
proper reading of IDSA fans
there are several other states
six other states that have
passed.
Intergovernmental services
agreement band thank you I'm and
we are aware of the recent
filing by CoreCivic in New
Jersey that is a very recent
filing that litigation is
ongoing we believe that the
seventh circuit was correct in
holding that ideas a band there
we are hopeful that it would be
upheld in in New Jersey as well.
Thank you I I appreciate that
our Mr chair just for our have
there been any cases where has
not been held where where has
been.
Where where this kind of a band
not not anticipate prison mental
overall but but but something
more more similar to what you're
doing here has not been a hello
Mr chair Senator now the only
case directly on point that has
been rooted as the seventh
circuit and that help the I. TSA
them.
Lawsuit jerseys.
Course is not about.
Mr chair Senator expert I am and
and we talk about that I am I am
no fan of private prisons I used
to see them a lot I think they
are four and a treat both their
inmates and their
staff shamefully
With sometimes fatal results
Is there any concern of that if
these private entities are in
order.
Our contracting directly with
ISIS.
Instead of I think you you for
to the county and a terrifying
as being kind of the middle man
that there is lasts less
opportunity for oversight and
transparency on the state level
about what's going on with these
private entities in our state
because now as the state we are
we are out of the picture.
Mr chair Senator thank you
question the state does not have
oversight authority over the
immigration contracts in New
Mexico yet are assuming a
tremendous about a liability
over these dangerous conditions
out there are there are private
entities that DO inspections and
these inspections have been
criticized by the office of
inspector general the
government's own watchdog as
being wholly ineffective at
identifying problems and ice has
not rectified those problems and
they're not held accountable so
we recognize that this bill is a
step to making sure that the
health and safety of immigrants
is taken seriously and advocate
state by state are helping to at
an act such policies and there's
additional advocacy taking place
federal level as we all know
that the advocacy can be slow at
the federal level so this is a
stat.
Okay and
It so I know that
Not not all.
Facilities house trans detainees
and so if the transiting is who
are transferred out of here
where they likely to go and is
it going to be any better than
it is here what my my concern is
that people go elsewhere at
least when they're here we have
some degree of.
eyes on even though I I
understand I understand what
you're you're saying about the
intellectual kind our ability to
really effectively do oversight
but if we're sending them same
bunch of trans detainees to
Texas that doesn't strike me as
better
so.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
that concern it's something
we're certainly concerned up as
well these are clients I point
out that there are four
nonprofit attorneys providing
immigration legal services to
people who are detained in New
Mexico that population can range
anywhere from five hundred to a
thousand that's not enough of us
to address all those.
Many of the people we see
transferred out of New Mexico go
to Denver in Colorado there's a
universal representation program
or every single detained
immigrant receives
representation in frequently and
that facility ice actually
exercise of their discretion to
release individuals so that that
is likely to occur in this
situation we additionally have
built and time between requiring
contract termination and when
that would actually go into a
fact so advocates can file for
release of individuals here in
New Mexico it is quite expensive
for ice to have to transfer
people so it is in their best
interest to release those who
are currently in New Mexico
during that termination period
we of course of knowledge that
transfers are always a
possibility but there are
programs in place to seek the
release of of individuals
sitting in New Mexico because
again there are.
Their detention is completely
discretionary under the
immigration law.
Follow up question.
Thank you I so I am a little bit
concerned.
that with the subsection the
bill.
Right now we're delivering
without.
At one.
Are you.
If we were to modify.
Be getting online for.
I'm just reviewing.
Which is.
So not renew or extend.
A contract for grievance.
In fact.
On January one twenty twenty
three.
As a blind housing educating
individuals.
Mr chairman to Senator Ivey Soto
that would not be considered a
friendly amendment Mr chair
Senator I'm happy to explain our
concern would be that if we
allow the contracts to expire at
the counties I ace and the
private prison companies can go
ahead and extend their contracts
for many many years again kind
of rendering this this bill
useless we believe that under in
New Mexico constitutional law
and case law contract
termination here is permitted
and warranted to promote the the
general welfare of people in New
Mexico that is a valid exercise
of the state's police authority
to regulate the health and
safety of people in our state
again people are are committing
suicide and mass there are there
are suicide clusters and all
three of these facilities
significant mental and medical
health care problems not to
mention the could the the
crumbling infrastructure at each
of these sites contract
termination is certainly allowed
under under New Mexico case law
and it's set to temple Baptist
church the City of Albuquerque
which have existing contracts
are subject to the legitimate
exercise of the state's police
power and then again in national
building the state board of
education I'm that had to do
with the lease agreement in
termination of a lease agreement
that was also upheld after
legislation was passed by this
body I'm additionally each of
the contracts each of the IDSA
agreements that I GSA's have
termination language and it
doesn't require Sir Vince
conditions to happen in order to
terminate the contract they can
happen for any reason or no
reason at all.
So I was I was asking about it
of a suggested minimum.
And and by the way that I just
wanna make sure that that you're
innocent some not renew or
extend.
So so so right because I think
we're good so that they would
just keep extending.
Decisions which or extend.
In
chair Senator.
Question.
I I was yes.
Whether or not whether or not
that would be acceptable to try
to find that out medications
question yes Mr chair Senator.
Are you suggesting then that
termination would not be
required on January first and
said it would be you cannot
renew or extend so in other
words you would allow the
contracts to run until they're
currently required to and
correct and it would be based
contract as an effective as of
January one twenty twenty we.
Mr chair Senator I think we
encounter the same problems that
this bill would go into effect
immediately and so in between
now let's say and the summer
when the bill would go into a
factor January first that gives
the counties where civic and I
just ample opportunity to extend
because there is that gap time
so that's that's a pretty
significant gap and I'm
concerned that it would defeat
the purpose of this bill.
This sort of.
Chairman of the to pass as
amended.
Shares of the concerns are doing
The area.
The ability of this
Thousand.
As well as.
Representative is willing to.
Representative will be.
The house of the lord.
Number of the.
Sir.
It doesn't what is that about
requesting access to concern.
We were closed these facilities.
Other and better conditions the.
Oversight that's.
Federal court.
But.
The.
The
less than ideal circumstances of
to.
the ability to this question as
of tomorrow and other
facilities.
Two other detention center.
House the committee.
Congress is going and.
As of the game's over.
Contract basis for the use of.
Mr chair Senator I just want to
clarify that the the verb house
would be for the federal civil
immigration violations so it's
contemplating detention or at
least a carceral Environment it
does not contemplate hospitality
for example for shelters.
The economic.
I.
And others
has.
For for.
The violence.
Mr chairman I know the three
sides are Torrance County Cibola
county and Ontario county no
other contracts
in order.
No other city local governments
the contention of a.
Mr Chairman now and this bill
would prevent such contracts in
the future.
But the.
Karen and the family has
contract with the government.
In certain federal.
Mr Chairman that might be for US
marshals custody.
The resolution.
Representative.
We we have with us
please.
The okay yes.
Having.
These are.
Absolutely that's right so the
that will then become a.
Point three.
Okay.
Revenue.
Thank you.
We are.
There are.
So Mister chairman.
Yeah the.
Okay.
The state.
Thank you I was just explaining
that you're not gonna do the
compact the minutes of the
though that you don't need to
be.
For through all over.
This year Senator.
The.
Bill goes.
Our internal phone.
Registers.
All of our.
Cheryl the more rural library
association or so.
So zero percent for the reserve
fourth.
The has
fans of the one.
At all support.
In the bill.
This is a constitutional
amendment Mr Chairman that that
takes the existing anti donation
clause with its many exempt
exceptions that been created
over the years and and re re
states it in a in a in a year.
Clearer fashion and and so it's
a repeal and replace
constitutional amendment to the
anti donation clause as you know
the anti donation clause was
written before there were any
such creatures as nonprofits
there were there were.
And nonprofits created in the
internal revenue service's Act
but before that they didn't
exist so we've attempted in this
bill which was crafted in
conjunction with the.
Local government division of the
department of finance
administration then with the
the Legislative Council Service
to to provide to and the LESC as
well to find a way to
present the Indian nation clause
in a way that updated to take
into account the fact that right
now many governmental
many activities that government
would like to see done there
does not exist a governmental
entity to do them for example.
Domestic violence we the
government does not provide
domestic violence services the
government contracts with other
organizations to do that because
it wants to see it done and so
this this is an attempt to
updating and and modernizing the
anti donation clause so that is
not an obstacle of the other
piece that we're trying to do
here is to avoid a situation
it's become a burden for local
government where they have to
take over the authority for
administering any any monies
that are allocated to non
profits in their communities and
make that then somehow part of
their responsibility even though
they might they might not be in
a position to do so and
certainly don't have any money
to administer those many
contracts it is become a terrier
and a and a way of slowing
things down so over the last two
years there's been workgroup is
been working on this we keep
refining it and at this point
it's in this this condition
right here and I'd like to have
my expert witness of for us net
they choose the ahead of an
organization called New Mexico
thrive New Mexico thrives which
isn't a group that helps
nonprofits improve their
performance and I'll I'll ask
her to see if you were it's
about this and then the one
person you might want to hear
from is clay Campbell who's
available on
zoom clay is the head of the
local government the of of the
Bernalillo county capital the
project that does a lot of work
with nonprofits will recognize
each one of your two additional
experts for one minute please
okay.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Esther nine
clarifies that if funds and
resources are used for a public
purpose it is not a violation of
the anti donation clause so
there are three new exemptions
and this one is to provide
disaster relief for individuals
businesses and non profits
should the legislature decide
that that's appropriate another
one is for certain classes of
individuals given
Criteria.
And the third one is for
charitable nonprofit
organizations.
And without him we have clay
Campbell speaker enrollment will
be recognized for one minute.
Thank you in terms of office and
members of the committee I thank
him on the chief of staff to the
town manager from the county
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino said this
legislation will help modernize
the activation cost modern
reality.
We all know that the nonprofit
sector plays an important role
to committee and vibrancy and
that mystery are not house
records in the evening
legislation I'm gonna I just I
cardinals rams might not protect
tax payments well as the senator
Senator this will help remove
the burden on local governments
who are endorsed by the town
this is becoming increasingly
purchased on the following
vehicle Peter.
A million settlement on proper
organizations seats state
funding provided
I will say that I this
legislation passes and long
legislation all of that stuff I.
Much for physicians to better
serve nonprofits.
Thank you very much for your
time preachers Campbell all
right committee members.
Questions Senator o'neill is a
thank you for bringing this
forward as a long time nonprofit
person I remember you know in
the nineties coming up here
trying to get funding for Dismas
House and learning for the first
time about the anti donation
clause fast forward yes happily
we were funded through the
corrections department but photo
ID must be an R. F. P. Hey
courts generally designed for a
charity and Candelaria St Louis
brown walls that that
reintegrate ex felons in the
community you know so I just
feel like okay just served a
purpose at one time but that
time passed and I think we need
to modernize and I think this is
the right direction thank you
thank you those with
Representative.
So Mr chair Senator I'm
wondering why you wanted one of
the elements that I did and
rules taking out.
Representative favorite we're
really a missile curry the
range.
Is something that should never
be and something that we would
expect the public to read and
understand why it was up and I'm
done in the south.
Mr chairman of senator do if the
wind is Senator Ivey Soto read
over the the thing he said we
really need to put that in there
and at the moment I was worn
down by his argument and agreed
to allow him to put it back in.
Mr chair center the reason I
took it out of your members
because this is a problem this
voted no on this and rules was
because the title I think does
not give the voters a clear
understanding of what they're
actually voting on and then.
Let me go to try to look at the
actual.
Legislation so I'm a voter I
want to understand what I'm
voting on I can't tell from the
title I go to the effort of
going and getting the actual
constitutional amendment and
reading that language I'm
understand what I'm being asked
to vote on.
And I'm supposed to understand
what you will miss merry means
this is not a voter friendly
approach to a constitutional
amendment
and the title has not been
changed theirs or obligation was
stricken from the title that
otherwise it's the exact same as
the title was when it was in
rules then it will pull into our
virtual ask your question is yes
question just making statements
from.
So Mr chair I.
I I don't like that we are
doubling down on making
something not voter friendly and
not easy for voters to
understand what we're seeking to
make a really significant change
to the policies of our state
I and I don't really have a
question Mr chair and just I
I've explained disappointed to
see it cut come to this
committee disregarding that work
that was done in the rules.
The.
We've explanation presented we
we went we took your your
suggestion to heart Senator
Stewart said the same thing that
the title is a real obstacle we
went up to Legislative Council I
suggested some some language
that would consolidated state
and maybe saying something along
the lines of.
Including all existing
exemptions the exceptions to the
anti donation clause and they
said no you can't do that you
have to have each once build up
so I I had to defer to the more
knowledgeable people in in
Legislative Council Service we
tried.
Mr chair I I hear that I I can't
support this as it is.
The committee members questions
were thank you Sir just a couple
questions that I certainly the.
Disaster relief makes total
sense obviously after what's
happened with the fires up north
it's super frustrating that I
think actually Center
accomplices hundred million
dollar bill had to be done with
loans also that seemed weird to
me tell me what's of making
payments to a class of
individuals as part of a program
with eligibility criteria just
give me some examples of so I
will the the thank you Mr
chairman Senator reserve in a
couple of of of pilot projects
going on in the state in which I
think was Kellogg.
I think Kellogg funded at the
funded them in which it is an
effort was made to show that if
people are given out right
requests that it it actually it
works very well for them at it's
essentially a
But it is guaranteed in the kind
of a guaranteed income
demonstration.
Senator Jay Mr Mr Chairman said
that would make it possible to
do some of those without
violating the anti donation if
the Legislature chose so I think
Mr chairman I know that not
spoken to the speaker about
wanting to do direct and I think
we've done some of that already
without changing the.
Constitution I can't remember
but that's a anyway that
explains it that helps I know
we're doing in Santa Fe and then
the final one is just is one
that I just I I still haven't
some challenge with and that's
just opening this up to all
nonprofits and perhaps that's
because I may have more
nonprofits per capita in the
district I represent than any
other district and I just it's
really hard right now you know
with those few that are able to
navigate through and do the RFP
process.
I'm just trying to think how how
as a legislator trying to figure
out I mean just with capital
outlay for example you know if I
got sick all of a sudden all the
nonprofits are like okay we now
can come to the legislature.
help help help me understand why
and how I can be able to deal
with and they get part of it is
our own dysfunction with capital
outlay in in a citizen
legislature I get that but I'm a
little worried about that I
think and that's part of it so I
I again that's where I'm having
some support for thank you Mr
chairman senator Wirth that's
where the negotiation with the
local government division of DFA
and the LFC and and the
Legislative Council Service have
taken us in the direction of
creating of if this were to pass
they would have to be enabling
legislation the enabling
legislation spells out in great
detail a process by which the
legislature would have would
would be given a list of project
they didn't thoroughly vetted
during the interim the then that
than the determined by
departments of state government
to be something they wanted to
get done and then those would be
brought to the legislature for
for actual the enactment so so
that would be the the way we
would prevent this you know
incredible rush of everybody in
town trying to get a little bit
of action on and just one final
question Mr chair I know with P.
threes which we've talked about
a bunch of you know is there
anyone that's going to.
Have oversight over the
nonprofits in other words it's
all great for us to have the
programs all lined up but then
we have.
You know nonprofits come in and
some some maybe great others may
be.
I I night I mean who's gonna is
gonna watch you know that level
of involvement Mr chairman and
senator with all that of Sephora
answer them Mr chair and senator
so we developed this project in
conjunction with DFA and their
counsel has thoroughly vetted it
and some non profits are large
and have the systems in place
and could manage the the funds
they do federal grants and they
comply with the audit
requirements of the state and
the procurement procedures and
some nonprofit to to small to do
that.
And those would have to go
through local government.
So in the application procedure
all of that gets that it and in.
In addition to.
DFA an agency representation
there's also representation in
the enabling legislation for it
this vibrant communities council
from the New Mexico county's
Association the municipally the
health councils.
So that.
The process ensures
communication with local
government with elected
officials.
And with state agencies.
And as we said there would be
there's a process that we've
developed and
after the projects have been
vetted a list would be put
together and given to the
legislature and then it's up to
you to decide how much funding
is allocated so just just one
final thing Mister chair I I
again I personally would be more
comfortable kind of having an
understanding of exactly what
the oversight look like and I'll
just give an example and when we
did the change to the public
regulation commission cerebellum
I carry the bill before the
amendment passed we passed a
bill contingent upon the
constitutional amendment passing
that laid out exactly what it
would look like and I think that
was super helpful for folks
because then they could
understand what they were
getting into and I just have a
look this this is the part of it
it just has me.
This is laying it out has
partnered over it so I just want
to make that statement so that
that's all I have Mister chair.
Which would.
Pass.
In the past.
The role of that yeah.
That.
Thank.
Passes.
Since.
Right now.
Senator go ahead.
Your status.
We have thank you.
Senator Lucian time to do that.
Here Representative capacity
turning in fact.
Right we're gonna do passed
motions to roll call please.
This
more.
Mr but.
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
Senator when you yes.
Senator Stewart now.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator.
Senator no.
that bill fails to pass much the
motion fails anyway.
Any other action of the
committee right now all right.
Regrettably not gonna pass up to
it we still got to build on the
agenda
reflective of the committee go
much later than we've gone I
don't think we're doing good
work and I can already see
everybody starts right
Senator Brandt anybody here
percent of ram I'm happy to do
it for I think it's pretty
straightforward.
We've already it's the same bill
we passed last year which is
changing.
We're at S. as I understand it
maybe unless you tell me to
change it has changed other than
this you want to.
Is yes to yes lock box here now
I want to put on I think I'm
looking back at staff right so
it's not okay yeah I thought it
was just developing statutory
law school years and thirteen
we're gonna spend not more
thirty minutes doing this though
thank all
so be pretty quick.
Yes.
Thank you.
Rebuilding the so these days
every.
With a different.
Senator.
The mid south of motion will.
do not about.
Okay we've we've got a number of
proponents the number of
opponents we just don't have
time for me to recognize who
they are
cable is just always centers on
the proponents communities
individuals are party present.
Taylor hearing.
No okay yes.
Here
We're just gonna have the
experts testify we're not that
public comment okay Dr come.
So.
Dr Carol.
No.
Dr McQuaid.
Though Dr Friedman no.
Haley's are.
Those individuals eleven that
means you're gonna have a little
bit more time for your
presentation okay.
we had registered opponents
let's just see who's here Jody
Hendrix.
No.
Michael Hendricks no Bolivia's
summers.
No okay.
Kelly Lester.
No.
Lisa Martinez.
No I got no opponents here that
means the your time is going to
be cut a little bit just because
of that so let's try to keep the
equipment center we can for
advocacy please by the time as
you wish among all of your
experts care okay I'll let you
know when you're at eight
minutes we'll go committee after
that.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thirteen.
It's into law New Mexico's
policy of ensuring that every
person who receives or provides
reproductive and gender
affirming health care in the
state can do so safely and free
from it intimidation and
harassment ensures that other
states do not interfere with
health care in New Mexico.
we have a Senator Brenda McKenna
who is here another one of the
other co sponsors and we also
have experts the lie Rushford
and reproductive of the
reproductive rights attorney
with the ACLU and Rebecca guy a
ghosts attorney and board chair
of the rocky mountain of planned
parenthood action fund but what
we are going to do very briefly
is just have of miss Rushford
explain the bill the committee
for the substitute and this was
prepared with the idea of trying
to make it easier for this
committee removing redundant
wording and of this but the of
the attorneys worked very
closely with Senator Duhigg to
make sure that we could bring
the best bill possible before
you today with that I'll turn it
over to Mr freshman thank you
senator Mr chair and committee
so the the committee it said
that you have in front of you
largely consolidates for that
that that came to you from that
from staff.
So section one into remains
unchanged that's the title in
definitions section three again
it simply removes redundancies
and things that go without
saying and it also creates an
affirmative duty for public
bodies to notify subjects a
request for protected health
care information.
Section four which prevents out
of state parties from using
interstate subpoenas and process
these to obtain protected health
care information to criminalize
deter kind of health care in New
Mexico.
Again this remove some
redundancies and unnecessary
language and we also wanted to
make sure that the the
intentionality was clear right
we didn't want to accidentally.
At includes state clerks of the
court process servers who are
part of the legal system but for
not
Behind some of these these
requests for protected
information section five abusive
litigation creates an
accountability mechanism for
those that abuse our legal
system because of the cemex
thank in the legal system
against patients and providers
is unfortunately common and
increasing and so in that this
that we simply take out some
unnecessary provisions and we
added again that intentionality
at to make it clear that this
section doesn't apply to folks
that are just effectuer legal
process.
and does not apply to causes of
action under New Mexico state
law.
Section six this intends to make
sure that entities that do not
fall under hippa and that was
never the intention of the the
bill to create a conflict with I
have the protections that that
folks that do come into
possession of that protected
health information are not
releasing it and it clarifies
that if the act is violated if
such information is requested or
released with the intent to
harass intimidate patients and
providers.
Section seven details the
enforcement that by the Attorney
General of district attorney
again consolidates that section.
Section eight provides for the
private right of action for
those whose rights are violated
under this act time and again
there was a drafting error that
I'm fed public bodies in the
type in the title and so that
was struck.
Section nine protects patients
and providers from extradition
for care that was lawfully
provided in New Mexico this does
not apply and to those who are
considered to be fleeing from
prosecution in other states for
violating other states laws.
And section ten of which is
already currently in place you
know with our with the RLD have
the medical for the nursing
board makes it clear that
license holders or applicants
cannot be disciplined in New
Mexico for providing
reproductive and gender for me
it is legal in this state what
it does not do is create some
sort of exemption exemption
excuse me from accountability if
there is no practice or
negligence.
Thank you Mr chair with that we
stand for questions.
As we all know what in
opposition about the
presentations of the committee.
Do not.
Here.
The
means super.
Motion Senator thank you
look at section five of this
bill.
Mr Chairman said.
Subsection the it's as an
individual right to play would
be I violation of this section.
What should be my violations of
section.
Education.
Mr chair that is a really good
good catches state act.
I agree violation of an act I
apologize for agree by abusive
litigation.
It should read
Likely should read subsection
may.
so aggrieved by subsection a
abusive litigation.
Representative okay.
Would be as friendly.
Sucks to say agree by subsection
of this section.
Subsection a is merely a
description.
We have a.
Description I think you can be
agreed by abusive litigation.
Because our.
These.
Another way of doing it would be
to be aggrieved by the bringing
of abusive litigation.
I use
yes yeah.
That would be a friendly
amendment.
The state I live twenty three
strike a violation of this
section and insert a new piece
of litigation.
And session the objections
of optimum of stories so those
two o'neal two X. amount isn't
worth.
Affirming the amendment Senator
what else voting to section
four.
Now that what is correct about.
However the previous line.
And Vigil ready so.
The individual or entity knows
or should know.
As a violation of this section.
Well the only people that are
you in a people not.
And I'm not sure how you'll
solution accountable.
And so I just suggesting that
the phrase are like twenty three
that the individual or entity
knows or should know.
Is so sorry.
That would be an individual is
over the speed up that is a
violation of this section shall
notify this report.
That would be heard from him
and.
And just one note the
accountability mechanisms I mean
I I agree I think it's it's a
fine amendment
the accountability mechanism
does not fall on that individual
or entity it does fall on the
person who submits the
inappropriate at yes
inappropriate subpoena or
summons but just wanted to
clarify that that that person
will not face a penalty of some
kind
but I do think it is appropriate
to strike knows or should know.
That because that's that's
clarified and see.
When the credibility correct
okay I will well I'm sorry Mr
chair.
Of this thanks for line twenty
three strike that the individual
or entity notion.
There I think we're just
starting on those are the or of
all that the individual or
entity musician
So we're on the proposed
amendment
to the.
Mr chair line twenty three you
need to strike the work that
should individual entity
Services Pena that is in
violation of this section
correct yes they should in these
the work back in Morocco okay
good I thought I'd heard the
state.
So we're on the proposed
amendment I don't know what to
do about this amendment because
again all of this flies in the
face of some of rules of civil
procedure this is not going to
practice law really right when
you get a subpoena you know of
individual answer with a
subpoena.
Show notify the issue in court
so what let's say there's a
subpoena comes out of Texas you
don't notify the issuing court.
And the and this is the moving
party of the defect.
I don't know who's the moving
party.
We usually which is removed
quite enough what have what we
do you don't do any of this you
don't notify the issuing court
you know for the moving party
million the defect and you don't
get the default shall not comply
with the subpoena got a.
We've got a tired body of law
you do this so this is all kinds
really strange to me
Because of your as far as of the
Medical Center I was sort of in
a moment makes it better but
it's not in the way we do
subpoenas certificate subway we
do subpoenas.
Right well of the the committee
I was gonna get to the issue the
issue according to secretary.
Going back to the
and then it really got read it
really at that intersection for
party shall not submit four
subpoena or summons for
discovery to provide testimony.
I don't know how we do that then
again the Texas issues a.
What would be a foreign subpoena
a party shall not submit that
foreign subpoena.
For discover with this.
You don't submit the subpoena
you service subpoena and there's
a procedure process for doing
that right right process serving
on our goals how to do all of
this so how does not really sure
how all of this would really
work in reality that ever came
to having to work but
I don't know how to rewrite all
this mail.
Get outside the rules of civil
procedure code Mr chair I I have
a feeling this pressure for.
Mr chair and the committee yes
this is creating some additional
protections land for in fifteen
our summons is like you said
submitted to the point of it if
the if in issuing body and out
of state body prosecutor
Attorney General whoever submits
a subpoena if it goes through
the clerk of the court here in
New Mexico and in order to.
Yes.
What.
Yes yes if it's a foreign
subpoena or summons.
The.
Yes.
So really issue question.
That we've had this question
have over years can you can you
tell New Mexico court that can
optimistic the subpoena I must
say that so that's the issue
that is the issue that's a
that's a great Mr chair Senator
that's a great flagon absolutely
what we are trying to avoid is
to put the onus on the clock on
the courts and ensure that if a
subpoena or summons is sent to
you know the clerk of the court
in the state of New Mexico there
is
an attestation business at
there's an attestation that the
foreign at issue were is not
attempting to use our process to
harass deter interfere with
protected health care activity
in the state of New Mexico.
And that's why there is that
artists Station piece because we
obviously did not want to
overstep in the rules of the of
the point.
Well that's part of a a partial
not submit forms of Peterson's
prehistorical.
Related to interstate
investigation.
Six impose liability.
Unless the requesting party
submit so from somebody from
Texas and I want to domesticate
a subpoena in New Mexico I've
got included that test station.
The the foreign subpoena
relation out of state actions
that would that would make sense
force the same claim exists
under the laws of the state that
would never happen right because
the laws in the state will
permit such an action so you're
you're you're prohibiting an
impossibility it sounds like to
me.
So Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator again this is a
very narrow set of circumstances
that you flag so we're talking
about out of state actions and
that are being at that are
attempting to weaponize New
Mexico courts and essentially
use our legal system to
investigate rate and all of a.
The your rights at which is that
you're prohibiting something
that would be impossible right
now couldn't have an attestation
like the one you're describing
you could never happened.
This.
Mr chair.
Sure I mean if there was another
state where they had the same
the same laws in place there is
a lot of things that we have
that they were doing that action
under in that case they could do
an investigation of domestic
that subpoena but.
But.
Well I think what you correctly
identified is that what this
bill is trying to get at is
those those cases where it is a
state hasn't although we don't
have a long Texas and in that
case they would not be able to
so we want to provide a path to
domesticate in cases where it's
appropriate to do so but in
cases where it's appropriate to
do so they would not be able to
truthfully execute that at the
station and therefore they would
not be able to domestically the
subpoena.
Thank you Mr chair perhaps we
could add that the Supreme Court
shell.
Or I don't know if you order the
Supreme Court but the Supreme
Court may make rules and forms.
Thank you Mr chair they've
already we don't have we.
That's true the chair.
If we're trying to get rid of
things that we're already true.
Well I'm not gonna have to
practice in this area support
somebody figured out in the
years I on I guess
So.
Sure I make a suggestion yes
session for.
The.
A little slow subject came up.
Where we're at different things.
eight four eight seven eight.
Strike a party shall not submit.
And that's our tool for entities
with.
Thanks for.
Let's see.
After the word activity.
Stress answered is not required
to comply with the subpoena.
Thanks for.
Slide twenty two.
Twenty three strike from and to
low.
And started Lujan according to
the state shall not domesticated
subpoena.
At allied twenty four but
appeared after section.
So that'd be an individual or
entity separate the forms being
or summons for discovery.
Six jumbos.
The liability for professions
connection related protected
health care activity is not
required to comply with the
subpoena unless requested
participants and at the station.
If if we want to keep that
that's we we go back to on that
and then according this takes on
that Westgate a subpoena that is
in violation of this section.
All of us all you need to say
so.
Mexico City under this law yeah
the coverages Act in most cases
we're doing that I mean if you
look at subsection C..
Party submits a false
attestation.
So we subject to the
jurisdiction of the courts of
the state of that really works.
Jurisdiction got a foreign
resident based on the
attestation of.
We would be upheld I with them.
Noon that.
Yeah and then and then they're
liable for damages and fell
fifty five thousand dollars per
violation all of that as a way
of saying you better never
signed one of these at the
station that's really what
that's about right that's the
purpose here is ever do this
and so what we do so you can
investigative so for this
information simplex.
That's all you're trying to do
all of our justice intended
right to avoid.
A subpoena from another state.
Court.
We were Mr chair trying to avoid
putting the onus on the course
but I'd like to turn it over to
the plate one of my efforts of
Mr chair Senator.
These are all things that we had
in earlier drafts and did think
very hard about and one of the
things we're trying to avoid was
putting the onus on the clerks
of our port who worked very hard
already are frankly overworked
we wanted to put the onus on the
person requesting the
information because they know
why they're requesting the
information is not necessarily
going to be this from the
subpoena why there requested
information that's it's not
necessarily clear that the
clerks with no.
The attestation was added to so
again that that owners could be
put on individual requesting
information who knows exactly
why they're requesting
information
we didn't want to say.
All right that this.
If there's a subpoena violation
this act yes would be
unenforceable it would be
quashed directly.
But we didn't we also wanted to
make sure the enforcement
mechanism was in place of these
people would not be deterred
from signing attestation but
signing attestations for a
particular purpose because you
can think of an example where
for example a medical
malpractice action.
Is there a questing it for
medical malpractice action that
would be legal in New Mexico
well then they could get that
information because it wouldn't
be to try to circumvent this act
or to her to harass providers or
patients.
Right but we I think Mr
chairman.
With all due respect I don't a
lot of the folks on the five
thousand dollars going to swim.
And I think we have a tough
time.
And collect that.
I mean you know you need to make
sure that people know they're
not required to comply.
And that a court the station led
to Medicaid recipients analysis
of this act.
Some of the work of the boards
on the judge.
So.
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto I I
do think you raise an important
point but the question becomes
just a just a practical
procedural matter how is the
clerk and the court going to be
made aware of the situation.
And to do that someone would
have to bring a motion to quash
or alert the condition where the
New Mexico mission court in some
way and to your.
Getting jurisdiction over the
person who is sending it to
station you would restriction
over this person this person
would be submitting themselves
to availing themselves of the
court process and would be
allegedly for not committing
perjury by signing this asset to
anticipation unlawfully and so
I I don't see it a personal
jurisdiction issue
with this section
You have to domesticated in New
Mexico court so yes the court in
Texas what whatever the
litigation was going on what
issue the subpoena but that that
person who wants to serve the
subpoena in New Mexico would
still have to come to our ace
occasionally done that way that
is not the way the world is
written and in that case I think
this is it's cover here is that
they're not to comply unless the
the defect is cured.
Or by order of the court and
that means a court here.
Right but but it's still unclear
that we're talking about The New
Mexico court we talk about the
issue of course.
Mr chair Senator again we were
flying towards what the rules
say hello foreign subpoenas work
and we're not contemplating
people trying to avoid the rules
on domesticating Ford's.
I'm sorry say that again we were
we were targeting and what the
rules actually say for
domesticating Fund subpoena me
Representative this bill to be
To to stand in line with with
those rules.
Yeah and and I guess I like is
that right I just think it's.
I think.
You resolve any ambiguity by
just simply saying a core this
stage I'm not domesticated
subpoenas a violation of this
section.
And as such by themselves Sabina
has been.
Domesticated the question
question.
Mr chair Senator I think if if
that if the defects with the
section is brought in front of
the court a motion to quash.
I think it's probably pretty
likely all of the core of our
state would question if it's a
violation of this section.
Well we just tell them that.
We do require that they alert
the issue court.
The issue court.
The New Mexico the New Mexico is
quite.
This is one six worry I Senator
did you ask a question.
I'm I'm not.
We both want to get the same
place I'm not finding this to
be.
Having the clarity that you are
suggesting that.
I would choose to.
There was room for.
That
state is.
How is the court going to.
If there's a defect or if this
is a violation.
Although if if if if the court
is someone just automatically do
how are they going to do that
and then what are you trying to
address that.
The thank you Mr chair Senator
Duhigg yes that's exactly what
we're trying to address because
there's no way the clerk or that
they should go for our issue in
court with no unless it was
brought to the attention by the
person or entity who served the
subpoena.
Thank you Mr chair I think
that's why this language needs
to stay as it is and and why if
we do we switch it as as been
proposed it's going to
essentially be enough it won't
do anything because the court in
the clerk won't know they won't
have anything to refuse to
domesticate to automatically
clustering thank they need the
information to know that there's
a need for.
No Sir so you yielded the Senate
do if so thank you so the floor.
Any of the rules.
We're not on the amendment
rating just past the building
with everybody so everybody.
You know my attitude I love
lawyers of lawsuits.
Just go for it I I I I think
I've made my point is not fully
practiced law at all.
and I know you're trying to do
something different.
Thank you for.
Maybe we'll.
So I mean I I I I agree with
center I'm so we all want the
same thing from the other states
messing with us and getting this
information I think there's a I
think you can do is very
directly very straightforward.
So you can't do this.
The.
Requiring an attestation and
provide penalties and fines and
put a false at the station.
So with that seems like a very
convoluted way to
to say don't do we can do that
can do this in New Mexico.
I don't think this is the.
Like a fix to that so.
Budget committee with.
You know I do have one of the
flight is.
For section C..
Or.
Process.
Dollars per.
Instead of.
Mr chair Senator I believe that
produces addition to.
The separate current.
And so that's always available I
know that it's not very much use
but it's always available.
Well.
I would I would read this as as
of course shows us a statutory
penalty.
Provide elation that is exposed
with one.
Mr chair might be able to answer
them.
Many of them to.
So that that that was years of
we had talked this is sorted for
originally as that anticipation
of the members here for her have
to stations are already under
penalty of perjury you don't see
things that are order true so
that's why we took that
language.
So we.
In our last.
Hearing passed a bill that stuff
that was already to.
That the vice chair of this
committee one to happen.
And again the way this is for
them.
It does make it sound like it is
schools.
However.
Sure this.
I just think in New Mexico where
she.
Have a lot of people five
thousand dollars is the cost of
doing business.
And I would really like to see
that at least P. ten thousand.
About twenty five thousand.
Mr chair if that if that is the
amendment to make a ten thousand
we don't really have a problem
with that.
So this.
Of age I live eight.
Eight seven line twenty one.
Page eight.
For.
Not all of them strike five
thousand insert and.
That's motion anybody care.
Chair this point is really care
no not really but I guess my
only question is is this.
If I thousand cost of doing
business and ten thousand for
reflect that ten thousand in the
same and I just wonder if this
is an increase that will just
Stoke increased opposition to
this bill rather than.
Really.
Change it's an affirmation the
doctor I want.
That's not what's going to get a
opposition.
and the
Access charges.
For anybody who
What is that send us.
I said we need that.
There's a motion and.
Shares a friendly.
Relevant.
Will we would accept it either
way.
Fifteen twenty twenty five
whatever right at this point
that right so the the motions
change five thousand find the
ten thousand.
Friendly any objections.
We go actually I I.
Madam I would like to begin with
okay we're on a motion to change
the fines and penalties from
five thousand to ten thousand.
Your.
Mr chair just you know just a
hint of bothers me that we're
deciding.
I penalties and some of the
reason the night here which is.
It might might trough further
ire against the bill I think
that is just are and I
understand that we're trying to
do something right here we're
not doing enough based on the
reaction of what somebody might
or might not do and so obviously
I'm gonna propose.
When opposing amendment because
okay that's we expect.
But otherwise I'm gonna you know
the reasoning is just a.
Ridiculous.
Rules.
Yeah it's going to be strange
amendment no we're trying to do
it support we're trying to do
I've got I've got abortion
provider member during a county
I've got an abortion provider
incentive traces across the
street from Texas right
literally across the street.
pretty busy and so you know I I
understand the need to push back
on Texas and other states that
are the deal with the it is
again I.
It is so we we realize what
we're doing here so we look at
section eight which is what
you're talking about senator and
individuals provided free of the
Indian individual claiming to be
aggrieved by a violation of this
act may file an action may be
entitled to damages for what you
would make would be ten thousand
dollars right so the first of
two says there are Griego this
acting superintendent of all.
The
for your salary news that I get
ten thousand dollars.
Maybe brought in place the right
against the public body for
third party that means anybody.
Through a.
They intentionally knowingly
willingly recklessly released
information.
Related to protect healthcare
activity.
The release information.
Regarding any this protect
healthcare activity.
Yes I am going to.
But in the house.
And and then subsection B..
This report shall work railing
plaintiff reasonable cost we're
the search for the estimating
the.
American role increasingly this
is the heart of the last first
bill we've seen we're we're
doing all the attorney fees and
**** caution shifting again hi
absolutely support choice
absolutely support pushing back
on states that.
What Texas is doing just for
effect I just don't know that we
need to meet them hi General
Fund on the on the.
Lori ourselves as well too but.
I'm here to run members changes
I just wanna make sure well no
we're doing we're.
We're going to create a field
day thanks for the information
and the and claims and not sure
if they fail.
This report shows.
From the moment this any
objection to the of the option
amendment other than.
You're going to have an
objection it option.
so as to roll call center about.
No.
Yes ma'am center on you yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
There weren't yes.
Senator Duhigg now.
Senator service no.
That passes the limits adopted.
Well so you want to do tonight
service sort of nothing else for
this.
Of the.
We will see.
Senator Paypen.
For the reasons stated by many
of you here I move to table.
The whole.
Senator Baca this.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Center.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator mountain snow.
The table motion fails on the
bill still.
Hope you all will be the closest
munaasabad good I hope I didn't
surprise anybody like the way I
quoted you certainly did not
surprise me
you know here we are at ten
o'clock at night we have really
no phone it's not many
proponents either I mean by this
committee's own admission we're
here sloppy sluggish tired
whatever was said but we're
gonna.
Vote on this bill and vote on
others.
That's all I got.
We'll see.
We're looking like we're
dragging gang I'm gonna get you
out of here I won't go on much
longer I hope you all will do a
lot more work on this bill
between now and the and I mean
I'm looking at page nine usual
lot arrested deliver a person
etcetera etcetera pursuant to
provisions of the act including
a charge based on Kerry's joiner
Senator liability I got it we
were writing this does not have
the foggiest idea what joint
several liability is about for
our how it exists in New Mexico
law you don't get arrested for
joint several liability there's
just so many things here that
are just not law the the.
they're completely inconsistent
with the law or legal principles
and so I just I this is
important and it's important
subject topic and I really do
hope will talk about that but
again I'm some medicine and how
a person is arrested for a
charge of joint several
liability
I can't even begin to imagine
how that could possibly happen.
Just that one question for me
how do you arrest somebody for
joint several liability.
Mr chair Senator the the
operative language includes
including a charge based on
vicarious joint or several
liability of conspiracy so these
are circumstances contemplated
we're seeing these laws passed
around the country that are
creating criminal conspiracy
and.
In trafficking got all that the
conspiracy human trafficking my
questions different vicarious
liability Senator I really have
to get arrested for that so
we're seeing again in the in
these acts we're seeing and.
Liability civil and criminal
liability
that show up in
and a number of ways including
in.
pardon me the professional
practice.
Acts we're seeing providers
being held for two at a very
strange standard that creates
this.
Joint and several liability for
providers that are not setting
foot in another state
no I I understand nothing with
taxes the deplorable and the
notion that they're going to
create bounty hunters and and
people getting paid to turn
people in of all that's
ludicrous and asinine and that's
Texas
do we need to play that game
thank you we rise above that but
one of the past motion from the
guys gonna be game
Trying to pass could law on this
one from my perspective so move
on to pass motion will call for
the Senator Baca yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Pass.
Senator yes.
Senator Stewart yes yes Senator
yes Senator profit.
No.
Senator Ivey Soto this is.
Senator yes that's it for
tonight okay go.
I think chairman.
