The real quickly what we've got.
Nobody registered in support or
opposition of your bill in
advance so we won't go to anyone
in the audience or assume.
Senator you have the needed ten
minutes I'm hoping you much less
than that.
Two eighty six go.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Senate bill two eighty
six is a result of increases
that were made by investigative
reporters into.
The situation at least in
Albuquerque and it turned out
it's broader than Albuquerque
many cities have the same
problem the the the dating back
into the thirties twenties
thirties and forties the
restrictions placed on covenants
these properties can never be
sold to Asians blacks native
Americans Spanish whatever those
restrictive covenants still
persist in the language of the
titles and so the the the the we
were we were shocked Senator Ivy
Soto never shocked to see that
that's still the case and this
bill as a result of an attempted
cleaning up the historic
injustice and with that folks
I'll turn it over to my co
sponsor who explained how he he
has developed a method for doing
that thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee the so
first of all these of course
these different of course is
going to cover those are not
enforceable but they're still
part of our record is what this
does is that whenever a a
that the title is over this is
transferred that's when they
would be removed in the normal
course of business off and that
they would and then we also
allow the homeowner the if if
they would just like to simply
re record their deed
strigulation restrictive because
we give them the option to do
that as well for example with
that you have to stand for
questions much nobody in the
audience members the committee.
Two passed by Senator Judy.
thank you senator one of the
committee the other session I
just take a moment to note
something I appreciate very much
which is your bill is saying you
can't do this you can't some of
the deed with the restrictive
covenant that has some
discriminatory language and then
and then to your great credit
and this is a no for everyone
who's listening you have a
consequence right so if you do
do this here's what happens
which is the instruments
considered void against public
policy and the clerk has the
right to rejected and so there
are a number of things to
enforce your law which again I I
know because we in this
committee are increasingly seen
bills written by others that say
you don't do this and then my
easy question is always or what
and then everybody trucks or
shoulders so we pass memorial
and we're passing lots more as a
thank you for having to build
actually usable
any further discussion or
observations is there we got
apartment we do is there any
objection to do passed motions
show center Stuart o'neill do
extra month is an Ivy Soto in
the past thank you two eighty
six.
Senate Bill to fifteen center
Moores are you around anywhere.
Can is here senator Kennedy to
fifteen.
Thank you good morning chairman
and committee members Senate
bill two fifteen proposes to
reduce the number of states that
still do not have the COD
outlawed in their statute to
one.
this really is a difficult issue
to talk about sexual us DCL is
not only cruel to animals but
is.
Often connected to other of port
crimes like sexual abuse of
children.
Up to thirty eight percent of
child sex abusers have also
sexually abused animals a third
of those arrested for animal
related **** also possess child
**** thirty seven percent of the
studio the offenders have prior
records including child sexual
assault domestic violence rape
and murder.
I will keep this short chairman
and committee members I do want
to.
Acid to my subject matter
experts
first is Jessica Johnson chief
government officer with I'm a
projection voters and then
I also have doctor Levinson who
is he is with the New Mexico
centenary.
Let me just moments.
He is The New Mexico that merry
medical association to my left
and we do have a committee set
up adjournment.
Yes my room this what what's
different between the seven a
bill that was introduced please.
I'm so we're getting rid of the
sex offender registry provision
we're also removing several of
the related offenses including
**** porn **** and organizing
**** events and then thirdly
there's a reduction of all
violations to fourth degree
felony except for aggravated
****.
Senator with the motion.
It may have a do not pass on
Senate bill two fifteen and a do
pass for the purpose of
discussion on the Judiciary
Committee substitute percent of
the people.
We have no one registered in
opposition to bill and so we
will try to make good quick
progress of this you've got to
identify proponents who
registered along with your
expert then there's probably
ten or so folks on the.
Zoom conference we're not gonna
go through the in the absence of
any opposition so
Senator you want to tell you
have about five minutes to
exploit your bill would advocate
for okay very good on chairman I
would like to
sure the presentation with
Jessica Johnson one of my
subject matter experts.
This Johnson.
The five minutes please.
Mr chair and committee members
Justin Johnson with animal
protection voters I'm just
really quickly so what the
substitutes L. prepare for
committee do it establishes the
crime of the CLT which is.
Animal as well as a crime of
promoting the fidelity which is
coercing manipulating listening
another person to commit a
felony for selling offering
advertising buying or possessing
any animals in the entities that
and with these you know the
those kinds of before three
felonies it also establishes
aggravated.
which is committing **** or
promoting the stability in the
presence of mind all the minor
as a participant in this county.
The bill also outlines
consequences for those convicted
which include having animals in
their custody or care C..
they cannot possess live with or
care for animals for a period of
time and then maybe order to
submit to psychological
assessment counseling and pay
restitution for the care of
animals harmed by their crime
lastly I'll just note that one
of the most common questions
that we have gotten about this
bill and this issue is whether
this is a serious issue in New
Mexico whether it happens here
and so we did submit materials
that were distributed to the
committee secretary this morning
with testimony and evidence of
but the answer that question so
that this is a common in New
Mexico.
Thank you I'm happy to answer
any questions thank you.
Chairman if I may
I would like for are doctor
Levinson.
To testify.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Dr Daniel
Levinson I'm with the New Mexico
veterinary medical association
I'm a veterinarian in
Albuquerque thank you for the
opportunity to speak today and
we appreciate the Sanchez a
proponents work on this issue.
The New Mexico veterinary
medical association obviously or
maybe not so obviously strongly
supports this legislation as
veterinarians our purpose is to
promote the health and safety of
animals in our community we
strongly believe in the healthy
support of the human animal bond
whether it's pets livestock
animals for food or for work we
believe that all animals need to
be treated with respect
outlawing this cruel and harmful
Act will provide a tool for
professionals like veterinarians
law enforcement the courts to
address this and prevent other
behaviors that harm our
communities is actually
subspecialty in veterinary
medicine now and forensic
science that looks specifically
at trying to figure out.
Animal abuse and how that can be
brought to the courts and this
is just another tool that allow
us to do that.
We urge you to pass on this
legislation and thank you very
much for allowing me to speak to
the committee thank you doctor
Levinson.
Representative Senator anything
else for the committee that's
all chairman thank you thank you
committee members Sen bill to
fifteen.
Session of the two thousand.
Which would you pass any further
discussion or debate.
The line is there any objection
to do past motion on the
committee substitute seeing none
shows etcetera every sort of
Stuart Neil to serve on the past
I think chairman thank you
members.
The sixty eight.
Sir pro free sixty eight
Years ago I passed the original
legislation for the requirement
of body cam use around the state
at the time the sure footed
Bernalillo county was extremely
extraordinarily resistive but
the notion and so we had to
force it on him.
and Bernalillo county by law
three sixty eight are you
telling me I didn't get it
perfectly right not all Mr chair
that's what became the spoke
spoke with you a few weeks ago
talk about this.
I think that all for you know we
you know I'm always happy to
learn and to learn from mistakes
we don't have anyone registered
opposition to this bill Center
pope gonna recognize you for
five minutes hopefully that's
enough time to get through it
all I realize there may be one
or more Canadian substitutes to
consider so Sir Paul thank you
Mr chair committee members once
again highlights that this was
a.
Great legislation that passed
before I got here the
legislature but
now that we've been that
following through with this
having the body counts talking
with a law enforcement
specifically Daymon Martinez
from the Albuquerque police
department
there's been discussions on the
for a few exceptions questions
we do have a committee so
Senator and I'll talk about that
but the bill that we originally
brought forward the past Senate
health and public affairs at
exemptions on a death notice of.
Public debt.
Of those that are showing up for
you know bombs Water bomber Kerr
for safety of those personnel of
the force these electronic
devices could possibly set off
explosives and the third
exemption for the for those
under cover operations after
that committee we actually made
the committee so we actually
remove the public the death
notification after speaking with
Mr Martinez again that was
originally in the draft that he
actually did want food and
talking with G. Johnson the
state police
I was told that actually they
would be better to film this
because sometimes the situation
can arise from that notification
and it would be better to just
opportunities that and so we
removed the death notification.
But we also added
a definition of the under cover
operations because I was also
suggestion that was not in the
original bill.
so
Chairman serve on to this this
committee so has to exemptions
the bomber coverage under cover
operations and then the
definition of undercover
operations and that's what we're
presenting today.
Senator could use the
number it is two two five nine
zero two point two.
For.
Members please take note you
have a different set in front of
you.
they're both referring to I know
to point to which is the stuff.
With that Mr chairman I do have
public support if I could allow
for committee my time.
Because.
Regis is a.
The two previous.
So committee members please note
today's event is a line of two
point two three seven there's a
time for two quick release of
Senator focus referring to.
Federal where there's no other
committees of secretary.
Then the C. remember do we
already have a motion for the
release of of.
Senator through its got a motion
do not pass with reserves the
hassle also for three sixty
eight in a two point two right
so.
We have a registered.
Hello Sir but we don't have
anybody registered supporter
opposition so let's just go to
the committee members so you do
need help from anybody explained
hi I am I okay Mister chairman I
would say I think the other
committees of that you have.
We spoke earlier that I think of
this maybe.
To add a section to from that so
into this I maybe that will
happen in the discussion I just
want to let you know that that
section two of would be a
friendly.
As far as we're concerned to do
so.
Maybe we can get this.
Out so the the nine four two
point one is a proposed
committees of the differs from
that that's before the committee
the the that section two
provides for express
preservation of
Video.
And I hear the sponsor the
suggestion albeit from we
physicians is bill yes so that's
the case Senator the nine four
two otherwise tracks your.
Those committees of I think
entirely so it does not Senator.
Actually Mister chair if it.
Yes.
That would the only thing you on
this section of the.
John that squared away but it's
like we need another third
working committee so but let's
see what the committee wants to.
All right committee members
questions over by the way you
did you did of have registered
lieutenant Ryan Nelson and doing
Martinez with the on the bill is
here there they are on.
If if we have if you wanna you
wanna be recognize a permitted
to happen this info.
but I think we're okay I I think
gives questions I'd like to
refer to the prescription or go
to committee the committee
members three sixty eight center
I'm so.
Up vote a couple things one is.
Meditation to from the.
My questions what what's up.
I guess I'm a little.
I guess my question is that as I
read it.
Those cameras include security
for is just for carriers of the
campuses but in this project is
not thank okay.
Under this law officer for the
municipal officials.
And so if if so I don't I'm I'm.
I don't know that that this is
the preservation video
recordings section of you would
want to at if we're going to
have.
Because this excludes by one
campus.
So.
that's the first observation I
have we're going to honor the
second and and that is really
just a question for the chair.
I'm I'm looking at the nine oh
two point two of.
Three.
The guidelines we have the up.
Get that faith.
subsection.
Wishing I know the chair.
What's wrong with that I guess I
I just have a question about the
promotion less will be the final
slide the chair one eight five
of the six.
Finalized I and eight of.
Thousands of the case by.
And it shall to may yeah on both
sides of of the.
Eighty percent of act that maybe
the libel.
The part of both part of.
Of
The proposals minutes I'm I'm
asking that shared with the
chair with I have to be friendly
to the.
you know etcetera so do I I
would
the.
The language initially was
pretty harsh you know Shelby
presume bad faith is so pretty
pretty heavy sanction.
I insisted on it at the time of
pushing hard because we had a as
I said earlier we had a.
Shurikens dollars in Vernon
county who was.
Openly hostile to the idea of
his deputies wearing body
cameras and had every excuse
imaginable to expensive
technology didn't exist and
etcetera etcetera and
About the will of the public in
the committee the legislature
was very strongly in support of
body cameras and so I've had a
very harsh action because
expected even we passed the law
the chair if we continue to
raise because he said he would.
even we pass laws that he
wouldn't wouldn't comply with it
so I
added language is pretty harsh
which said if you don't do this
you're going to be presumes to
be acting in bad faith I thought
it was important to send a very
clear message and we did so and
I appreciate that my my sense
right now law enforcement is
very supportive and and
cooperative and uniform in
adopting this technology and
it's it's helping them is
bidding for my perspectives of
as much is been a problem for
them you've done the
prosecution's of the W. icing
when there's a video camera
running on a D. W. Y. and you
the prosecutor it's game over
you know most of the time and so
the the cameras I think we're
both ways so I you know act to
your question I I would I would
support that is emitted the
philosopher some discretion on
the part of the court and I'm
all about giving discretion to
judges.
When they're exercising at the
and we're seeing them consistent
exercise and so I would support
that change of of the page to
make that motion I'll vote for
it and hear from other.
Of the three look at it and I
just want to these three line
five one six two right out and
for and.
Servo the committee
he did Mr chairman and still
have some discussion I just.
Also.
No it's been it's been bears
repeating again my name chairman
as law enforcement fully
supportive of this and they're
not to gaming our intention to
the public wishes for them to
use this technology so other
committee members and questions
or debate or discussion.
Is there any objection to
adoption of that amendment
normally within a certain.
All right seeing no objections
so in support of the amendment
etcetera I'm Soto Stewart full
meal do exercise system Baca and
Pirtle.
Looks good to me all right.
Good all right back in the bill
as amended.
The committee set up so we're
gonna.
We're gonna have another version
of the committee seven nine oh
two point two back to the
question on the
Also section two from the other
types of center I'm sorry made
an observation on the.
I don't know used on the floor
but we'll go to the members
of our okay other committee
members questions debaters
Goshen.
Senator doing so seems that this
would only apply to Albuquerque
most likely I don't know if
anyone else has the ability to
monitor hundred twenty five more
cameras
about half Representative.
You are not Mr chair but I guess
what is the purpose of this up
to minimum retention period.
Posted for Albuquerque for
reporting other than health form
the what what is the extension
of excluding the help and
footage from the minimum
retention period of under twenty
days.
This so you're looking at the
center of the this is not my
proposed language I I faced.
That.
Yeah I think that that probably
just doesn't belong in this bill
them I understand the idea.
Probably good idea which is that
my understanding is Albuquerque
does have.
Video cameras all over the city.
But they don't keep the video
for which I think is probably
with the the staff was probably
trying to address you to
probably a good idea but it's
not long probably were we're
gonna be right runs great
further issues by.
Then.
The following what are local
cameras and so with the for its
emissions.
I I think that that probably.
Could be done for eligibility
and qualifications and morality.
By I will not make a motion to
amend section two of this seven
yes yeah.
That's it I think we should
choose which one would do is
just.
Right so we're still in the
operating within a two point
two.
Committee so with the amendment
of Sarasota with which would
generated committees of.
Two four three.
Continuing discussion on three
sixty eight for the committee
so.
Health.
Senator mentioned about the
thank you Mr.
Thank you senator of.
I have a few questions if I
understood why
the exit the exact these why not
just make them maybe not
available to the public I think.
I understand if there's under
cover operations there's a
superior officer that wants to
say look you make sure that
they're
undercover agents doing supposed
to be doing if they have the
video to review they could do
that with it just don't make it.
Where we could be
Public to understand you want to
check the
the informants you want to
protect the identities of the
undercover officers but I think
it takes away the ability to for
the the real need to ensure that
officers are doing what they're
supposed.
yes Mr chair center for can I
have
AP would tend in online as well
and the and let I just all
answers some of it
that was one of the reasons that
we actually removed up to death
notifications because initially
that was gonna be an exception
but we decided you know to just
have that would not release of
indicates when it comes to the
it was just the officer safety
of being identified having that
and the fact that in a lot of
cases there are already other
cameras are recording those
operations of the sites a
personal body chambers and then
when it comes to the farmer
coverage of those electronics
actually posing a risk actually
setting up the school so so
that's really why we're focusing
on those to the undercover boss
actually you know.
Taking into account what you're
talking about it's actually
better to report this is not
really said it happened that not
recorded have at all with that
Mr chair if I could have
the lieutenant if you could
comment on.
Yes can you hear me Mrs
lieutenant Nelson yes generate
cost yes Mr chair.
Yes Mr chairman and members of
the committee I appreciate the
opportunity to speak on this
you're absolutely correct this
is the a safety issue or
undercover officers it's a
safety issue for them personally
for their in the mission of
doing an undercover operation.
they're constantly being put to
the test by the individuals that
are investigating happy.
Reliable technology in a covert
manner is very difficult.
And especially to have that on
there percent of there's many
situations where it's not
feasible and we forego those
investigations currently to
include human trafficking
investigations and things like
that so this definitely is a the
officer safety issue up it's a
it's a public safety issue.
Are we always have security
teams that are available to
rescue the undercover operative
undercover officer in the
situations and.
If they are on covered that
reporting device on that person
that usually creating.
If I encounter or the potential
very violent counter.
Zurcher Senator on.
Reading through.
Here I don't see.
Requiring where the camera most
or.
so I don't know yeah I
understand that most people
think it has the right here
morning ladies at two but
there's nothing in this law that
prevents you in honor of the
shining of the topic.
just just to protect.
Undercover officers so I'm.
A little confused why we want to
make you aware that you can't do
it as technology changes.
Constantly they have lasses now
that have
lots of course rated that.
With this that they don't have
to do it.
But I I understand we want to
make sure that they're not.
Found out in hard but we also
need to know that they're not.
Then.
Maybe.
But I do have a little bit of
issue with that.
I do appreciate the help.
Yeah.
Baca.
One of the committee.
What I will do that so.
well the last
Senator the sixty eight at the
pass on Senate bill of the
Senate Judiciary the services.
For Senate Bill raise a.
Why should I nine oh two.
So Senator allows you to make
sure that you realize we're
gonna do a new committee so this
point three version with the
amendment changing the words
shall to may the other
discussion committee members run
to pass motion is there any
objection to do past motion.
Show some remorse Pirtle Baca
serve on this to hate o'neill
sure that IT Soto all yes we do
have some.
Senator Regus.
Three ninety eight.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Your.
New Mexico coalition to end
homelessness before before it
begins.
Senator before you begin just to
alert and of for in the
committee Senate bill three
ninety eight we have no
registered opposition no
registered a proponent so I'll
recognize you for up to five
minutes etcetera that's adequate
time to explain but we will not
be having to go to anybody in
the audience on this bill
Senator three ninety eight
Senator thank you very much.
Following visited office for
would also visit with
Always Mr chairman.
Baseball office hold in our case
I think it's an act of nineteen
sixty five years and four days
but the fact.
Public Health.
And what the law says currently
is that.
Housing
establish their white
counterparts.
Point for anyone from the public
the server.
But they they discovered a lot
of self that says the
termination meaning anyone
commission to that for me
doesn't need a county
commissioner shall not hold any
other office or employment of
the city for which the
authorities created well that
kind of makes me think that
folder I think that this office
is removed because they can
serve you for many many years
ever since I can recall in this
Albuquerque has this Housing
Authority Santa Fe has in this
probably other counties and the
same thing all we're trying to
do is remove that restrictive
language so they can continue to
serve on their own public
housing authorities the base
that was that's all it does Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you senator.
Andrew anything to support yes
thank thank you Mr chair members
of the committee all at is that
the reason this came up is that
we're trying to beef up the
Santa Fe County Housing
Authority to address the
affordable housing issues in
Santa Fe County and we noticed
that we were out of sync with
the state law when we're trying
to follow the federal law that
all of these you should
introduce yourself to I'm sorry
I'm Hank Hughes Santa Fe County
commissioner and former director
of the New Mexico coalition to
end homelessness.
And also be available for
questions a lot of folks
watching at home we are yeah.
Right committee members
question.
Reduced to pass any further
discussion.
Is there any objection to do
pass motion control center
Moores Pirtle oxygen serve on
this Duhigg o'neill Stewart I
was so depressed center over
thank.
We're trying to retrieve Center
woods.
From finance.
Yes their soldiers one of twenty
one.
Sometimes not going to order the
agenda for works to your
advantage.
Mr chair we all know that
sometimes you have to jump
around to try to find somebody
to the next bill we do we have
nobody registered in support or
opposition your bills etcetera
that means I'm gonna do it
pretty quick there center would
Senator Woods we will be right
to you Sir I think those this
will be pretty quick of some
schools one eighty one here I'm
wrong sometimes
Center souls one anyone that's a
recognize that we've got nobody
in support or opposition but all
recognize you up to five minutes
to be needed hopefully I will
need anywhere near that much
Google will be passed a bill
that when doctors were
prescribing opioids that they
shall also prescribed the anti
in this that is the reversal
drug naloxone is the typical
wanted people talk about with
this and with that there is a
requirement for written
information warning the person
administering the opioid
antagonist should call nine one
one immediately after
administering many times a
person who is administering the
reversal drug in this is the
health care provider that would
be called if you called nine one
one and so this makes just
within less that person is a
health care provider has
provided the relief act so it's
just some clarification that the
person doesn't have to call
themselves on nine one one in
order to come in in the analysis
that there's a reversal thing
going on.
Now stand for questions your
image all right that nobody
registered as I said support
opposition expertise members the
committee questions remorse with
question thank you Sir
so what the reversal of the over
the counter on house of.
It was really awesome of
this kind of outdated at this
point we are.
Hello all those phones I just
spoke with to our.
Mister chairman Senator excuse
me from my understanding and the
doctors are to offer this as a
whole prescription and so this
is just the warning that would
be on that co prescription that
they are are offering.
You for your service or whether
anyone wants over the.
Whatever your warmers I Mr chair
and senator I don't know what'll
happen specifically my guess is
that these with all contain this
warning on them.
At least that would make sense
to me this doesn't particularly
address whether it's a
prescribed or whether it's over
the counter but that the warning
label would indicate that
somebody doesn't have to call
themselves on nine one one to do
the deal with the with the
justice minister Mr chair
Senator the resort reward
offices we have different
labeling issue so as you look at
this new year we have a
different way one thousand one
the federal one
reason.
Problems with what they're doing
on their land renewable reserves
are on so more stable while just
our system changes so.
Yes.
Right.
Members questions later special.
For the past thirty two of
socialism glad you're here
earlier note I think this is in
fact a good change I'm going to
of course supported doesn't make
any sense at a health care
provider would have to comply
with this question for you does
the existing law that has all
these requirements and I know
you're not.
Dealing with any of the existing
law but are there any
consequence to all the
requirements of this loss as the
all these things shall happen a
health care provider shell do
number things show up by the
patient
health care provider show.
prescribe the antagonise the
prescription shall include
written information shall
include warning shell so are
there is there any consequences
lot of any of these things Mr
chair where those were some of
the questions came up when it
was initially passed a couple of
years ago and that falls within
the realm of any person
prescribing authority that if
they are not doing it then they
would run afoul of the oversight
agency I could tell you
specifically which one but they
deal with that on a regular
basis thank you who knows
questions revenue passed motion
there any objection to do pass.
So Senator Soto Stewart
o'neill's do serve on this
Moores pocket hurdles you have a
do pass Senator.
There was.
Good morning Mr chairman thank
you for the opportunity I'd like
to tell you a little something
about my bill.
This has to do with the the
confidentiality of the person
who wins a lottery.
And working under the theory
that if you want a million
dollars you automatically have a
million friends and it doesn't
give you much opportunity to
keep that money in your pocket.
the technical part of this bill
has to do how we restrict the if
a request on the bill and as a
read the FIR this morning I
found two places that the
Attorney General didn't much
alive because hi.
One part was that I had
lotteries contractor listed in
a place twice in the bill online
on page three line twenty one in
line twenty three so so much
should take one of those lottery
contractors out.
The other thing is when we start
talking about the exact of
qualifications are are the exact
things that we want to
Pulled away from the public.
Of the the list is the exact
same list that I believe is in.
Fourteen two one but the current
general said I should referenced
for the sexually in fourteen to
six and he says I should
reference the
that particular statute is to
the listed out.
So those are the things and and
what his reasoning on that was
that by golly they might change
one statute in this way would
have to change to stop.
So it's it's up to your opinion
as to whether we might need to
at.
Is.
Section.
Good section on page three.
Somewhere around.
Line nineteen nine twenty.
If we should that.
reflection to fourteen to one
and fourteen to six I've got
those two particular statute
printed if you would let me
bring them up and let you read
over to run through your
computer fourteen of two six is
that the nations and fourteen to
one is a right to inspect public
record.
With the exceptions so.
With that I would stand for any
questions that you might have
Mister chair.
Senator think you should have an
elderly we've got nobody
registered in support or
opposition wanting.
Will this.
Going to anyone in the audience.
Committee members in question.
Representative.
I was trying
So with that I
generated reading this.
expect that I guess my concern
is we're not talking just about
the legal letters we talk about
all winners of the lottery and
and they have never been given
away.
They don't know who's being the
laces.
That provides incentives for.
Project.
Yeah as of.
This also.
All of these this is also a lot
of those fractures fractures.
and you know I I.
Another tax.
Other factors.
and it was a lot.
And and so.
I think that's a.
I think that's a problem
this is really.
The hi dollars that's something
that I think.
There are fewer of them.
and there's other according to.
TRD and the state less thanks
for the session.
But as this.
Is this what the pipeline all
lottery winners.
regardless of the amount.
I have a I think it is or.
Thank.
The committee members question.
Session.
The shares Center what's the
amount currently we're looking
have to make sure that if you're
scratching with twenty Bucks.
That H. dollars nobody asked
your name number.
What I was.
Mr chair incident for.
I didn't do enough research to
know that but I know good and
well you don't have to give it
all for the scratcher.
It is of a certain dollar amount
before you do have to go in and
declare and and come to the the
office to pick up the money and
not I think I headed here
somewhere but in the interest of
time I'm going to tell you I
don't know.
Thank you for this.
Some were Representative
I can't hear you I'm not.
But there is an amount and it's
a fairly high amounts that
before you have to come in and
actually
come to the office and pick it
up.
There is a.
Mr chair Senator for.
Well of.
Mr chair Senator it's six
hundred dollars.
So I think
Kind of a small amount have to
give.
That type of information I do.
Share some of Senator Ivey Soto
whose service but.
If I were to improve lottery
only I would just make sure all
my winnings runners dollars in
the long as we have that they're
having to give the information.
What is not available to the
public.
Really the.
Three.
It's still subject may I read it
to.
Correct or.
Violation of the act is that
correct.
I
think it is
you know it's still subject to
the tax revenue loss.
And it simply.
To keep the those particular
names out of the public domain
it's still taxes have to be
collected over this.
Mr chair Senator.
In the limit for this recording
is over a million or more.
Required the six hundred
dollars.
Thank all winners have to be
reported in the public domain.
Is what the actual lawyers
today.
The new year.
The.
Who knows.
Senator wonder is this maybe
just maybe.
Seems small but I think it's
important on page two.
Got the names of information.
On this subject losure.
Imagine the idea for the need
for apps maybe this for the
committee as a whole to discuss
whether subject to public
disclosure.
Because I think we're hearing
that there's there needs to be
disclosure obviously for
taxation purposes and perhaps
even for investigative purposes.
Concerned about but.
I'd like to propose a
disincentive to work public
disclosure.
There before the word
disclosures.
Thank you Sir and without going
to certainly amend that Sir.
This is on pace to.
It is page two one seven that
sort of.
I'm.
In that place I don't out of
this this is because I wanted to
or.
Yeah maybe right maybe maybe
redundant or maybe self evident
it's gonna be for a little bit
better because I don't know
whether.
I don't know whether to approve
relief operates in the inter
governmental.
So one government agency for
another government.
this general updates they have
the so the way that those
structures able what the section
one section two section three
section what is.
Is that they're not services
over under that from that is
they're not required.
Section two however.
Is.
Interviews.
So there there's the front part
as opposed.
But that's not not to school at
eight yeah it is all disclosure
the sessions is.
Sure.
Well let's see we can find a
good place for that and and and
I did want to talk about that
sections well too because.
I think we've got to have the.
The mid mental state of scienter
component to the criminal
violation your identity to think
that a person who negligently
inadvertently disclosed
publishes information than
subject themselves to criminal
prosecution.
Something else I wanted to
discuss with
You may you may have a good
point Senator maybe the word
public is necessary and as I've
proposes to I'm not gonna make
that motion right now but if we
find a better place for in
section two.
The.
Twenty five.
I just love.
Or published.
Yeah that's better place so.
All all make that motion then on
page three line twenty five.
Have the words close to the
point that these are the words
to the public.
Come to the criminal part of
things a little bit too so
that's my motion discussion on
that Senator Baca.
This may or may not have
something to do with your
amendment.
If we.
If we make the effort request on
page two.
Is that person bound by section
two.
So if you have for this
information get the information
out publish the information as
an individual.
Have you violated section two Mr
chair Senator.
For the committee committee has.
We do ask the question again so
if if you make the request in
section one you obtain the
information she can.
And.
You disclose that information
are you now subject to penalties
under section two.
I would argue that you are.
I
would argue that section two
does not.
What section was not facility
from the limitations or
restrictions section to.
That's.
My right center.
What was the question to you is
the question Senator Woods I
know I was asking the question
Mr chair Senator Woods or the
committee
opening it up to the end of the
committee so your opinion is
taken thank you for your money
anybody else want to weigh in.
That that the server actually I
don't this section of the.
Session two of the proposing
that Activision has a lot of
provided by law.
Mr chair I I think I would tend
to agree with that that's where
the teeth are do this into the
ever requested teachers
inspection to and that's really
what you're after strange.
Others I agree and like it
because of high I don't like
putting in exceptions to ever a
various parts of the law
election trying to consolidate
all active growth.
Those of us to practice law you
know we we try to understand and
apply it for you go to the upper
Act you don't wanna have to go
through every section of every
part of the state law that makes
reference so we don't very
things with it so I think that's
good solutions to striking
section once in the bill the
section to.
Going to the proposed amendment.
On page three.
That's a much better solution so
I did we did that from earlier
motion so with that
having for right now all fall
then my motion to strike section
one of the bill.
The ten section two amending it
on page three line twenty five
after the were disclosed as we
indicated earlier consider the
words in certain words to the
public.
That's.
Yeah.
On page three.
Percent.
When we write a redundancy
the.
One twenty three straight.
In the two columns.
The comments yesterday.
This is a very good amendment.
Read I agree our.
We assure you your yes Sir
that's a good thing if folks
with a lot of experience is open
you'll.
That's mostly for the committee
any further discussion the
objections the adoption of that
amendment.
Senator Moores Pirtle Baca serve
on this to a Neal street Soto
on that amendment.
All right and Senate bill one
eighty eight as a man.
a motion.
Ready for motion just trying to
figure out what we need to do
this to committee so but I don't
think so.
Three so what we've done is.
Show Senator in the opposition
all of the members in support of
the the risotto unable to serve
on this project for the course.
The past thank you very much
thank you thank you for allowing
me to come in today so.
Senate bill one thirty eight.
That started with the estrogen.
Well my recollection as we go
through public input for any
audience every patient your
experts we were on committee.
Session or just get ready with
committee discussions we did we
get an amendment if you recall
yesterday we struck out of the
last section of the bill or
something like that right.
Do do that before we broke.
The fact we're we're at.
Thank you Mr chair.
And so.
Have.
Questions on this.
And it might just be because I
don't understand this area
But what I'm looking at.
The definition of a claim.
On on page one one twenty one a
claim means any requests or
demands whether under a
contractor otherwise for money
or property whether or not the
state has so so that that
initial language is very very
broad any request or demand for
money or property
and then later on when we're
talking about this.
It's it's it's not more to
medical claims that that
language and so like my
understands this is all about
Medicaid.
But the definition of claim
doesn't and is not limited to.
Medicaid claims that could be
any.
Literally any claim.
To the state for money or
property and so.
Explain to me.
How that works throughout than
the rest of the bill Mr chair
Senator refer to my experts.
Mr chair Senator Duhigg.
These definitions should be
pretty verbatim of the federal
acts when and.
When the.
I go through this in the
determine whether or not they
will accept it and as you know
meeting the federal requirements
there are four main areas that
have to match but there are many
many sub little bits and pieces
that they are and one of those
are the definitions which need
to maxed almost word for word
what the federal act hello that
is quite broad in definition of
claims later in the bill is does
This bill is only applicable to
issues of Medicaid fraud
specifically and I'm looking for
the.
Mr chair and that is the intent
of this bill but because it has
that super broad language and
then we're talking and then this
is about.
Really significant penalties for
making.
Claims found to be false so I'm
looking page six
you don't have to have page six
lines thirteen fourteen there
has to be it doesn't have to be
any specific intent to defraud
and then if you look down on the
same page sort of lines eighteen
nineteen the penalty is twelve
thousand five hundred thirty
seven dollars and not more than
twenty five thousand seventy six
dollars for each violation we
have the super broad definition
of a claim you have to have any
specific intent to defraud and
your subject yes crazy hi
penalties if you are found to
somehow made a false claim
despite having no intent to do
so and it's not.
Limited to Medicaid so at that.
Thank you also to heartburn Mr
Mr chair and then on page seven.
that the sub three of the top
rate lines one through four and
this is.
This is the application of our
American role and it's not so
usually what for every in the
American on saying not people
are paying their own attorney
fees we're only doing that
because we really want to
incentivize attorneys to to take
those cases they might not
otherwise take to represent
secular but folks
And and what we're doing it for
that reason that makes lot of
sense to me and it's only the
vulnerable folks who would give
their attorneys fees paid not
like maybe the big corporations
that they're suing but here it
just reverses that for everyone
so like so the state could find
someone with no intent to
defraud made a claim not
specific the service and I know
this is a long time or this but
just under the language as it is
before us.
Not even like necessarily
medical claim has these crazy
high.
Penalties against them and then
the signal to be like and pay
our attorney fees and costs to
citizen.
And I don't like any of that Mr
chair that I I please I if I'm
getting this wrong and I know
that none of what I just said is
the intent of this bill I
understand that but but the
language as I see it before us I
see a possibility of that so.
Please feel free to respond to
thank you Mr chair and committee
of.
These requirements these
penalties are in fact required
by the federal government in
order for New Mexico to qualify
for these I have to this federal
incentive the penalties and the
damages and fees have to be at
least as high as they are in the
federal law and that's what
these numbers reflect
Seventy five percent of all
Medicaid fraud claims brought
under state and federal false
claims acts nationally are
Representative qui tam actions
so these are whistleblowers to
you know take file these actions
on behalf of the government and
so.
I think it's it's considered.
My understanding is that by
paying the attorney fees for
these whistle blowers they're
often you know personal
individuals these are not big
corporations
And in terms of only being
applicable to Medicaid fraud
section fourteen that's the last
page twenty seven aligned to the
provisions of this act apply to
civil actions alleging
violations of the Medicaid false
claims act
But I imagine making that claim
submission more specific would
not likely violates.
Federal complaint.
Thank you experiment I'm sorry
about that thank you senator
appreciate everyone's patience.
And I'm going to be read twice
and ask you if you could please
repeat your answer.
Mr chair Senator I hope I can
replace that the reviews the
last section of the bill yes
thank you so in terms of being
specific to Medicaid.
At the last page of the bill
section fourteen applicability
of the provisions of this act
apply to civil actions alleged
alleging violations of Medicaid
false claims act file on or
after July first
I think if.
If the committee wanted to
specifically more specifically
to Medicaid I don't think that
would interfere with federal
approval but of course it is a
bit of a risk making amendments
are without having the federal
input because.
Small where changes can subtly
make this not passed federal
review to get the incentives
thank you.
With the blowers yes thank you
so
While attorney fees.
Are required and I do believe
that our apartment that the
defendant maybe I will have to
cover the reasonable fees and
attorney costs seventy five
percent of all actions brought
under federal and state Medicaid
fraud acts from qui tam at.
There was suppliers who filed
these actions on behalf of the
state so they're not huge
corporations and this act one
thing that the Feds really want
you know the the big motivation
behind these incentives is to
make these laws as friendly to
whistleblowers as possible there
are a lot of strengthen
protections for whistleblowers
they want they want there to be
enough incentive for
whistleblowers to go through the
process and bother and I think
that's why they have the fees
tied to what the the federal law
is.
And and I I I certainly
understand wanting to to
encourage you to have I mean
that's a.
Sure saves the government a lot
of trouble when we have.
This is doing that work for them
And and I understand wanting to
the the the concern about
matching federal language I will
note that in this committee we
all the time we're told you
can't change something because
it has to match the other stuff
and that's generally not a very
persuasive argument for us when
it comes that to compacts or or
situations like that so I think
we have an independent duty to
ensure that our state laws are
doing everything they can to
protect New Mexicans
independent of any other
considerations about we agree
with you Senator.
The problem is is that we're
losing a lot of money because we
don't comply and that's that's
the whole purpose of the bill is
to make our statute comply with
fits so that we get the.
The books from the Feds or St
title to have that we don't get
currently we've lost a million
dollars or whatever it's been
number for the twenty million
five million dollars and over
twenty because we don't comply
with federal land and and so I'd
like clarification on how much
money it just because I've I've
heard three others by here but
all of the state's expert
travel.
Yes.
Madam chair the five million
that they references the amount
we left on the table however
when you leverage that with the
federal funds in the Medicaid
program it's about twenty
million dollars so that's the
amount we left on the table of
the.
And and I I appreciate that
answer thank you are you are you
will Center expert to it to tell
me.
How many other states are
matching federal language
exactly
three Mr chair Senator were one
of seven states not compliant.
Do you know what those other
states are.
Thank you.
Mr chair Senator Florida
Louisiana Michigan New Hampshire
New Jersey and Wisconsin.
And and the reason I ask in this
is probably a far a vast
oversimplification for me to do
but sometimes I and there some
say so we tend to align with
more generally policy than
others and that sounds like a
real mix of states where we we
do and do not probably aligned
on on various issues
Twenty million dollars is is
certainly nothing to sneeze at.
I I do question whether it's
it's so much that we should be
compelled to smash language that
That might not be.
The in the best interests of New
Mexicans
So but but looking at I I but I
appreciate your your openness to
to making
estimated narrowing the
definition of claim.
So looking at that definition.
If we set claim means any
request or demand.
For Medicaid benefits what what
what do you think would be the
appropriate language to put in
there to to narrow that so that
throughout the rest of the bill
it's very clear that it this is
only talking about a claim
specifically for Medicaid
benefits
Madam chair maybe for Medicaid
benefits and services we often
refer to Medicaid is services
but.
Yeah.
So it pays so any request or
demand for Medicaid services
that would do it.
it.
I think.
I was just look up with the
federal.
And.
Yeah.
That plea madam chair that is
how we referred to
Lanes is that Medicaid
Service claim benefit our
service claim so we could maybe
include benefit and service.
Chair still looking at that
federal P. thank.
You're you're saying something
after demand for Medicaid
services or Medicaid benefits
and services yeah.
Medicaid or Medicare Medicaid
benefits and services is
probably pretty comprehensive
because the budget can cover of
state like pharmaceutical
components and services can
cover you know services
obviously medical or behavioral
health or whatever so we have to
kind of look at all of those
components such as
transportation pharmaceutical
services all of that so I was
trying to think of a kind of a
broad umbrella term.
We we've lost quorum so I'll
note that to to come back to and
I in the meantime if you look at
page five subsection for this is
another section that that didn't
seem tied specifically to
Medicaid and anyway it's time
and knowingly making using or
causing to be made use of false
record or statement materials an
obligation to pay or transmit
money or property to the
government or knowingly conceal
are knowingly and improperly
avoided decrease in obligation
to pay or transfer money or
property to the government and I
know about that the
applicability of portion of this
but I mean this could be for
this could potentially cover
like child support obligations
that are on page has written
this thing which we could also
at here to make a specific to
Medicaid
And maybe it is just saying.
in connection with a claim at
the end of that line thirteen
before the semicolon in
connection with a claim of for
Medicaid services about benefits
services.
Madam.
I will say this that sub I read
anything that I really like to
that section
as I've heard of a lot of
situations where people are.
let's say I buy it living in
like a halfway house or at is
kind of residential many
concrete care settings where
folks are just getting all their
budget Clinton them and using
them for their their own and I
really appreciate that that
section will.
Will address that
I do want to also take out that
that
So if we take out of this page
seven that's that three sub
three at the top of the page
would that make it so that.
E. tamb
plaintiffs.
But not recovered get.
Recover payment or at I think
the key to have folks for.
Thank payment to them was
covered under something else.
And madam chair would it.
The.
An idea to to specify qui tam
and that subsection three.
Well I was just going to strike
it all together but I I don't
want to do it that if it's going
to
Significantly decrease why I
keeps him going to recover.
and therefore take away
incentive for folks to bring
this to him actions
so I guess I'm I'm wondering
what your opinion is on on what
the impact of of putting that
would be.
I think I have.
And I think we have the answers
that section six on page on page
fourteen.
It looks like they're already
going to get attorney fees and
costs and.
Proceeds from that.
The
The action or settlement
regardless so I would have also
want something we have a form
again thank you I move to strike
lines before.
And I guess as I'm saying all
this I'm I'm not going to and
and I think we'll have to do
with the ticket and how I are is
this friendly unfriendly.
The only and madam chair that
these would all be fine are only
because of what we're being
somewhat reticent is we work so
much with the fed on this and so
that's why we're
sorry.
If we don't if we don't meet
their approval then we don't get
that extra ten percent to drive
down the money and that's all
we're trying to do the news with
the whole exercise this is for
not that.
Twelve which I guess kind of
makes the question of
Is it better to to amend or to
table
Which.
Mr chair Senator that we could
that changes with the Mandy
Vigil friendly we get and if we
need to we can come with four
minutes or whatever so.
On page eleven subsection page
eight nine through twelve.
Says what a person brings action
to the section no person other
than the government may
intervene or bring related
action based on facts underlying
connection do we do we do that
do we have are we that
restrictive on intervenors and
the other.
All content.
Center expect pictures.
Mr chair Center I can't comment
on that.
Because what it what it seems
like areas that saying you can
regained tam but like no one
else can get in on it.
even people who might have a
life be happy interested
parties.
It that like it might be about
them but they can't get in on it
as an intervenor
So that you get all the money
whatever brought the key to.
Madam chair just speaking from
experience typically when we had
the come forward they've been.
a Medicaid provider that there's
an issue with the billing their
with their claims and so it's
typically how they work is that
they've been flagged either
through a whistle blower or some
other mechanism and then.
Medicaid the Medicaid division
notes that problem and then they
work with that that Medicaid
fraud control unit at the
attorney general's office on
it's a typically that that
price.
Here.
There's usually not other party
that never seen other parties
involved so that typically have
the W. where.
In my experience I think your
point is well made that maybe
there could be some variance to
that but that's just in my
experience how these things
usually play out and thank you I
appreciate that explanation and
and and and it makes sense you
don't want everyone and their
brother jump in and.
Just just because that.
Kind of create an opportunistic
way I just that that struck me
as odd I had not.
See that handling of file that I
I understand that for staff of
the.
Some other statute has the for a
fraud against taxpayers after I
guess thank you.
On page twenty.
Looking at celebrities started
line sixteen.
This would appear to
not being keeping with our rules
of that this is not withstanding
any rule or other provision of
law final judgment in favor of
the state in a criminal
proceeding parking up broader
for.
For their part of verdict after
trial or of the you'll see our
our I know Oakley stops the
defendant from did not from the
nine essential elements of the
offense in any action brought
pursuant to this act involves
same
transaction
but rule that ends for ten
provides a guilty plea that was
later withdrawn or no plea our
statement made during the
preceding on any of those please
or missions in court or
statement made during plea
discussions and that that does
not result in a guilty plea or a
later withdraw guilty plea is
not admissible in a civil case
so with this one.
if someone did a nolo plea and
they later or had later
withdrawn plea it would could be
used against them.
An act that qui tam case brought
under this
so I I think there's a conflict
with our our rules of evidence
there.
That.
So Senator experts you all with
referred experts.
Is that Mr chair members of the
committee I believe yes that was
a slight change from the current
version and I.
I think I don't believe that
would affect.
Federal approval of the bill
that was changed.
They may well ask our our staff
if they came up with the idea of
that might be amended.
To
Mr chair Senator I can just know
that if you removed about four
words from the line it would be
back to the current state it
affects us actually I will what
would you suggest LFC.
Whether a verdicts after trial
or fund a guilty.
A plea of guilty it would strike
board nolo contendere.
that it would.
Instead of shallots stop it
would save preclude the
defendant from denying and then
continue as written what's the
difference between this stopping
for.
Mr chair and senator you are
we are.
Years of it's hard
because I think is that install.
The stock is the problem
I mean I would just be tended to
strike the whole subsection.
That hold the.
I'm sorry this page twenty
subsection D. which is lines
sixteen twenty three.
Again where does that leave us
with the federal compliance.
Mr chair Senator it's.
I can't say for sure whether or
not that would interfere with
federal compliance I am sure
streaking this two words I don't
believe would would be a problem
stricken a whole section.
I can't say with certainty
whether that would be a problem
or not doesn't immediately seem
like it would be but there are
hundreds of issues they look for
when they go through it so it's
hard to say for sure how.
Yes I.
And I'm sorry I know that that
would be huge one that I'm
suggesting it's it's another
A program called what what
you're trying to do here but
But I don't see how else we make
this drive with.
Our rules of evidence Dr.
Are the settlement would also be
to strike that seventy on page
twenty.
Order forms.
Service
madam chair I guess it's worth a
shot we can do it and then see
if we can get it approved.
On the floor double later.
You could check in on we could
check it let them in and again I
thought that was.
This is prohibited by state law
Listen I don't know how to spend
less otherwise prohibited by
state law was suggested.
This is the.
This.
Mr chair Senator if if you
prefer district the section
rather than I return it to its
sort of original state by
drinking if you were I think we
can.
You know I can contact the Feds
before we hit the Senate floor
and maybe make a minutes later
if we need to.
If.
The state that.
The losses and.
The.
That.
Madam.
It the state is not really
involved in that.
based on the.
To.
Percent of leading really
without.
That are.
At three three later related to
their.
We have to get anything out of
the this really.
madam chair there's incidences
where the don't go to the whole
legal settlement so you'll know
that sometimes it's just
you made a mistake in a claim
you know you just didn't file a
claim correctly and so then
it'll be adjusted more through
and administrative processes
that posed to a legal process.
Show.
This is the ability to.
Thank you.
If you guys.
With that person and.
so.
That.
Senator.
Years or.
Later the.
Lawsuits.
So.
Funding I have.
They live in the last.
And chairman I think usually
these are Medicaid fraud claim
so.
The every leader that he take
the what yeah.
It's usually the the state for
the AG is saying Hey you did a
project we've got a problem here
to pay it back.
So I don't understand the other
three hello I.
Madam chair just trying to go
through that the logic in just
the again the experience with
these the state and or they
G.R.T.  general working usually
in tandem it's saying there has
been an incident a red flag a
problem here of Medicaid fraud
potentially so that's usually
have these are brought these are
Like our.
At Presbyterian health or
something saying oh Hey if use
of the state border agent that
Hey we have a situation here so
I think that flips in if the
opposite side maybe of what you
were just asking for the state
and the eight year thing we've
got a problem here.
So.
I have.
Where.
Says.
A
And this.
This
I
how much.
State and yeah.
Hang
on.
Madam chair that.
Not a situation really familiar
with usually.
As we said the at that entity is
that pushing back and saying.
Now we didn't do what you
they're trying to so that they
didn't overly because the
problem because usually this is
around just problematic billing
is what usually comes down to
and then the question is for you
overly trying to to have a
problem with the whole thing to
save money to.
Commit fraud or do you just have
a problem with your billing so
that's usually this situation
and I'm trying to think like a
whistle blowers that meant the
TV
Usually they don't anticipate
that money just comes reverts
back because it's it's it's it's
usually twenty five seventy five
percent state federal dollars
matching money for Medicaid so.
That some for the money usually
just reverts back to the state
and then the federal portion so
I I'm not familiar I can't think
of a situation yeah I do that.
Much more.
My last.
I really appreciate all.
Why.
Talking about
I.
Madam chair
Both acts which need to be
amended in similar ways and
they're fairly substantial
amendments mostly their changes
reflect the language of the
federal on the definitions of
the federal law but it's a long
process of review with that with
the feds
if this statute needs those
requirements.
But doesn't have this language
making it the controlling Act
whether conflicts and The New
Mexico fraud against taxpayers
act didn't go through the same
process we would not be eligible
for this federal incentives
That's why.
On the.
To
order by.
On.
That.
He added.
There is.
That.
Our.
Sorry.
For the summer.
In the.
For that
the HSD made for.
One.
Which is
One.
Right.
Years.
Well our problem I'll probably
just do is of those one.
We have one less you.
It's better to do it otherwise.
Senator Wirth any.
Also on that.
All right so since since we
don't have a quorum and there's
there's work to be done this for
now working at we're gonna move
to the next bills are discussing
that we're we're gonna roll this
just Montoya and and when we
have a quorum back it'll come
back to this
I appreciate your patience with
my probably.
Somewhat that questions.
So I I but I really really
appreciate you all explaining
that we're going to go to a
house bill seven.
Representative Serrato.
Thank you Representative
and got I would I would do your
presentation and in about five
minutes.
Financially thank you madam
chair thank you centers so today
and report H. B. seven the
reproductive and gender
affirming health care freedom
that it ensures that we're not
adding here to the host of
reasons people don't seek life
saving health care specifically
prohibits public bodies from
discriminating it's individuals
who are seeking or refusing
reproductive or gender affirming
health care including abortion
care on and as we know New
Mexico very difficult to get
health care and when I was my
pregnancy I've met individuals
were coming for weekly
appointments traveling an hour
plus just be able to have these
regular prenatal appointments
all we do know that now and
maternal deaths or significant
eight out of ten of those are
preventable and we do know that
eight out of ten transgender
individuals contemplates suicide
however when they receive gender
from health care that number
significantly reduces with a
seventy five percent reduction
in knowledge of suicidality
among trans youth so to us this
is a very this is a life saving
in many ways what this bill does
not do it does not change New
Mexico's parental notification
laws at all which are in line
with what the American academy
of pediatrics recommends it
doesn't change of agenda from
health care is received in our
state which is often with
families something is as simple
as working on using the proper
pronouns for an individual can
make such a difference it
doesn't change how we recognize
found families state because we
know that often times that young
adults who don't feel safe at
home may end up feeling
and may rely on an auntie or not
well I for health and finally it
does not change a scope of work
relationships between patients
and doctors or teachers and
students infection this bill you
know go away then be signed into
law those relationships will
still exist and we cannot
legislate those at all because
they they just what they are
however people still have to
manage these difficult or
complex decisions in trying
times you know we did have
conversations with the with the
vice chair of this committee and
really look for the conversation
and how we can make sure that
we're crafting a successful
legislation with me today to
experts here in Armstrong and
Eleanor rush forth we're both
the two.
Journeys Eleanor's miss
Rushworth is with that you see
you and finally in the
consideration of time because I
know we're all this very few
days left we are not the
proponents are not gonna have
anyone come for to speak I do a
letter that they've signed in
support essentially saying this
was developed by more than
twenty in groups contributing it
to it and it's on my number of
people including
The New Mexico religious
coalition for reproductive
choice with that we stand for
questions thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative thank you for
doing that so quickly so I
understand that you are not so
we did have some people that
were signed up as proponents and
saying you're you're waving
public comment in support we did
have organized opposition sign
out you took about two and a
half minutes with the entire
presentation we will for the
organized opposition I the first
person that I have listed was a
livia summers of you you you may
have two and a half minutes as
well and then I think we're just
going to in the interest of time
and get get to the the the
debate on the bill
The fact.
It's our job to the next person
I actually there we have some
folks listen as being here in
person so so Lisa Martinez.
Right as much as you you have a
to okay madam chair members of
the committee my name is Lisa
Martinez and I'm the executive
director of New Mexico Alliance
for life I stand opposition to
this bill along with twelve
thousand New Mexicans across the
state who oppose this
legislation it's my hope and
appeal to the committee that
with the with the early consider
the implications and decide
dissect some of the hit in the
language in this bill that is
not being disclosed for example
the new term that is being
introduced which is indirectly
interfere which is no water in
the statute admittedly by the
the sponsor in what does this
mean it is so broad in scope and
clear that how can we possibly
expect an individual to
understand what it means to
indirectly inner interfere the
languages simply unintelligible
or nonsensical section three D.
is equally if not more
problematic as it would bar any
law ordinance or policy that
would violate our conflict with
the provisions of this act
including existing state law
that.
Regulates consent laws that
regulates conscience protections
and potentially we know that
teachers in classrooms and
school clinics are indeed
referring for abortions so
what's already happening well
this bill has been amended to
include a provision that states
health care career providers
cannot be forced to provide care
they do not otherwise do so
there's no exemption whatsoever
for their conscience protections
this state is already driving
medical providers out of state
and it puts every New Mexico
citizen at risk with that being
the case now we're going to
further complicate the matter
and Dr especially rural New
Mexicans who don't want to have
to park perform abortions it out
of state as well lastly the
hidden language in section three
is the most alarming aspect
since this bill mirrors the
infanticide language in post
abortion bills that shocked the
nation in both California and
Maryland and this is absolutely
hideous and inhumane California
Maryland bills both contain the
term peri natal death in in in
relation to the actual or
perceived outcome of a woman's
pregnancy which was cleverly
place in section to see this is
a hidden language of the Sanchez
interest behind this bill don't
want to discuss the term peri
natal refers to a period of time
generally encompassing the
twenty to twenty eight week
objects just station.
Up until twenty eight days after
just station in an effort to
hide their intent to legalize
infanticide up to twenty eight
days pulled first to remove
state consent laws and
conscience protections Mandy
behavior caught of state failed
elective health care I ask for
you to not support this bill
thank you.
And and Mr chair just to catch
you up on what we're doing.
That that the men of that place
To catch up on what we're doing
that representative of of
introduction her bill that was
about two minutes and waves on
any public comment and support
in the interest of time Anderson
that we have to get to the floor
so there was organized
opposition signed up person who
it miss Martinez was here's part
of the organization I.
That gave them two and a half
minutes and for equal time
that's where we are right now.
Okay so
the one make sure I understand.
Yeah.
I may if I understood that
correctly just because the.
Way there type position.
Yes that's right I disagree
strongly with this time last
year on that of the.
I know what they are would agree
that's that's really not the way
generally viewed.
In other words I don't say just
because of proponents are waving
their time the civil war the
solution which we tried so slide
ten minutes for proponents of
the measure so as I understand
it
receipts so you know that all
helps because I'm making sure
that my my procedures are or
where I'm not gonna hold us as
of the close one up to ten
minutes thank you have a they do
not want to use them with us on
reduces for us on the web that
let me that there was a
opposition.
So I'm not really sure where we
are in terms of the opposition
let me just understand is there
a sign in sheet indicates
there's no organized opposition.
This is the clear the way that I
do this is the way the
committees about that system
which is the purpose having
organized opposition or organize
advocacy subway very frankly
what you come up with thirty
seven wanted to move and very
frankly have almost no.
The impact of the committee
process.
your reserves it is organized
support organize opposition
somebody may have a ten minute
really the end of the bill which
of us are in our system I
process otherwise we just by the
time on the everybody there
because of the limited here
frankly usually sent them over
and over in a way really gets
into the into the the bill which
figures because we usually
offer.
So back to the.
Do you do you want to have the
bill or you want to stand by the
the argument we.
So.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senators you know I yeah maybe I
did have a signed letter from
twenty different organizations
can I just refer to that briefly
then with that be okay through
the frontier used previously.
To use the yeah so as far as I'm
sorry about fifty minutes to
have the ability
them moving make sure on the
opponents of is there an
organized opposition to the
bill.
There is an issue that you all
got agreement by all the other
ones yes folks for.
Okay.
Here are the results please.
The New Mexico.
Five hundred centering.
Register in support and
opposition in advance or Larry's
on to.
Yes.
Your little early support team
members.
So.
Yes the coalition of.
Very Mr chair and all.
Right James Lang and return this
coalition of five one did you
all registered and essentially
all of us we were unaware of the
role of the we're here on time.
She that that is changing the
least operated from the rules
consist of your I can't chair
committee without knowing how
many people are going to speak
to for how long otherwise we.
Mr song tagged on language
summers of.
Are you all in agreement to.
Have.
Senate rates go to Michael's
group.
For your control the border the
funding okay right so so and
Senator useful for.
All right so will allow the
opposition to go back to the.
What thank you Mr chair thank
you senators to the letter that
I was referring to states the
bill you have before you is the
work that is community led the
following organizations
Representative working to
justice movements centering
black indigenous women and
people of color and queer in
rural communities these
organizations are seeing first
hand what it means for
individuals across the state and
those must travel to New Mexico
to access the healthcare they
need encountering barrier after
barrier to care the undersigned
organisations firmly believe
that if your health care
provider who wants report
provide the full spectrum of
reproductive health care
including abortion care or
gender for me health care you
should be safe providing that
care to matter where you live in
New Mexico and to those across
our state who need or may need
access to reproductive or gender
affirming health care you
deserve to access that care in
your own community without
government interference it's on
by a quality New Mexico for
together strong families New
Mexico pulled futures Planned
Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains ACLU of New Mexico
transgender E. source center
coalition of sexual assault
programs progress no New Mexico
to what women United girls Inc
New Mexico central New Mexico
Black central organizing
committee black health New
Mexico New Mexico religious
coalition for reproductive
choice students for reproductive
rights and MSU southwest women's
Law Center Easter Easter New
Mexico rising American college
of obstetrics obstetrics and
gynecologists reproductive
health care access project
project of U. N. M. eastern New
Mexico right those exercising
again NM coalition on the status
of women and New Mexico health
care help public health
association thank you.
The city of school
with issues of that sort of the
sense of our reserve says.
Thank you.
Number my name is ability any
numbers and I am here litigation
counsel with the American center
for law and justice for a lot of
national nonprofit organization
that is dedicated to the defense
of constitutional liberty to
provide a lot of quitting the
defense of the thing to do if
you like I can open a field and
prevented definitely more state
and federal legislative body
Representative oral argument
Representative parties more than
fifteen the court as well as a
senator cracked the country in
following up right into the
city.
Today I'm speaking on behalf of
the field day and nearly two
hundred thousand that is an
including four thousand nine
hundred and nineteen from New
Mexico who oppose legislation
that expanded portion am here in
opposition to HB seven.
More political debates that have
provided in our country for the
two years it is not a new story
and report directly to last year
with you into this constitution
PKT no language bring the right.
I have a what's not clear is
that the doctor did nothing to
change the laws in any state
including New Mexico with regard
to abortion yet we've got a has
been presented as a way to
protect the questions what it
truly doing in thousands of
years of parents and citizens of
New Mexico who oppose abortion
the fire protection and eighty
seven is on the wrong side of
history out of touch with what
your even more fire and with
plaintiff evidence.
Billing eighteen seven is very
broad and thank you not that it
costs a lot of problems and it
is not possible to fully
quantify the effect eighty seven
would have another one Mexico
and the citizens of New Mexico
what we can say is that you can
find.
Most notably eighty seven what's
on her mind Frank.
Protection I would religious
expression and practice the
public service.
Mexico previously had that house
or mine I think you know forty
five out of the field and twenty
twenty one eighty seven with
any future provided to put back
lady lost like twenty percent
are creating new restrictions on
abortion even those that are we
provide an evidence based
restrictions the morning ladies
and gentleman this is value into
my can do to protect it finally
eighty seven with the public
body.
Logging and current public
bodies to discriminate against
any employee or agent overview
point different from the one
thing questions and I'll and
I'll review to David reviews on
on the building at the corner
propose eighty seven thank you.
Members of the committee Mr
chair thank you for this time I
am Judy Hendricks I am the
executive director with New
Mexico Family action movie I'm
also a licensed mental health
counselor and we want to give
you some facts this morning of
some things that are already
happening in New Mexico and how
house bill seven will pass into
law something that directly
violates parents right right now
in our schools we have educators
being trained on how to find
gender support plans for
students in order to support
their gender identity at school
the support plans include
changing pronouns changing names
changing dress being able to
recognize which bathroom or
locker room they want to use and
having it support groups of
provided to them General forming
support groups.
Social transitioning is medical
treatment it's a general
consensus that it is medical
treatment so we have educators
giving medical treatment to our
kids at school already and that
standard operating procedures
with Senator support plans is
that they are not allowed to
call parents specifically told
they cannot call the parents so
we now under house bill seven
we'll have Senator support plans
protected as a gender affirming
health care per the definition
in the bill and now we have
teachers giving medical
treatment at school without
involving the parents the
parents have an unequivocal
constitutional right to make
medical decisions for their
children so this bill with these
plans in place violates the
parents right strips the parents
right to be able to make medical
decisions for their children so
we ask you to the oppose this
bill.
Morning chairman members of the
committee
I think I find us very fortunate
to be able to address you in
opposition this morning the fact
is is absent any other body or
accepting any other body in this
whole capital you are the ones
that we can come in reason in
front of and that will make a
decision based on sound logic
and reasoning and that for us is
a major a major issue to make
sure that we're sure heard and
that it's listen to and our
concerns are seen as legitimate
so that we've already heard
about parental rights being
stripped and we've already heard
about teachers and others in
schools being made to provide
health care and provide medical
services the problem with that
is that there's no training for
that right we have people
providing medical care they
don't have a license don't have
the tools or resources to do so
lastly we also have to think
about the constitutional
implications the fortunate thing
is that I know that you guys
will pay attention to this this
committee will listen because
the constitutional implications
of conduct of compelled speech
are very clear interfering
directly or indirectly is
something that has no definition
therefore if a teacher were to
look at a student side ways upon
saying that they want to change
their gender their could
theoretically be an
investigation and a criminal
prosecution or civil prosecution
this case for interfering with
that child's medical health
care.
We ask that you oppose this
because this is going to create
great amounts of judicial
inefficiencies people are going
to sue from the side of parents
when they say you shouldn't
interfere with my kids and you
didn't call me about it and
we're gonna have people suing
from the other side saying look
I just want to receive the
healthcare that I think I need
and you didn't give it to me or
you interfered we asked you
oppose this bill thank you.
Mr chairman I by Senator guy a
goes to speak on their behalf.
Mr chairman committee I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak before you today as you
said earlier this is one area
that we can depend on to look at
the law in its entirety I want
to bring to you my opposition to
house bill seven so I live in
Eunice Mexico Lea County New you
New Mexico Hobbs Roosevelt and
Clovis Roosevelt County holders
have all done ordinance to
protect their areas from
abortion in the our clinics are
coming to the state and I just
ask you to consider because the
Their ordinances are based off
of the federal Comstock Act in
all of page three major page
three is for it affects and I
just asked you would consider
that as we go forward I would
just hate for that to be
overlooked in your discussion
here
View of the committee so what
that are you thank you.
The.
The.
The.
The line is on there.
Thanks a lot
of years.
A little bit.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee on
Larry's ontact part of the
better together New Mexico
grassroots advocacy organization
in addition to what you've heard
an opposition I'd like to point
out that your inboxes is your
email should be full of close to
eighty ninety thousand emails in
opposition these are from New
Mexico.
And the concept that is being
proposed that there's something
new about children.
Not agreeing with their parents.
And so they should be protected
and have a safe place and even
schools where they could go and
decide what they want to be what
they want to do outside of the
parental rights and obligations
just fortunate that we're having
this conversation.
So in addition to all the other
opposition for constitutional
reasons I urge you to vote no on
house bill seven.
Bill Murray.
Go.
April oil or.
Hi.
Lisa Martinez was.
I just last year right I don't
know if you want that are going
and what we got.
The
phone is likely a regular.
Thank you Mr chair Senator is
I'll be brief and handed over to
my experts also be brief as well
again that the language in the
bill is fairly clear and we're
gonna discuss that stand looking
forward to that conversation and
we had some preliminary as well
you know some of the U. as well
I do want to mention that again
we're looking at what this bill
does is prohibits public bodies
from discriminating it prevents
the checker board of health care
across our state as we know
oftentimes we live one place get
health care somewhere else and
this is why this is important as
a parent of young kids my
children transgender youth they
they could play with them it's
it's not a it's this is not
something that's so important to
them so difficult to them and
those children will rely on
their parents for a lot of these
life saving health care needs on
so it's important that we're
understood that and I know it's
a body look at this we know that
we're also legislating also for
those who just don't have that
safety who wanted to only
briefly about the basically
label and legally thank you Mr
chair committee
We are living in a manufactured
public health and constitutional
crisis.
Following the job decision last
year around half of the states
in this country that either
order to restrict or permanently
banned.
Access to abortion care.
We've also seen a flood of anti
trans and anti you legislation
passing throughout the country.
And since that time New Mexico
has continued to offer safe and
legal health care to New
Mexicans without discrimination
and to our neighbors and
communities who have been forced
out of their homes to access
basic health care.
And so what this bill does is
the it's a couple of things
protects the full scope of
reproductive health care so this
bill is simply not just about
abortion this is about
protecting everyone who needs
access to basic reproductive
health care and it's also about
gender affirming health care
which we know encompasses us
scope of interventions and
support that that many people
need throughout their life.
And so what's happening in New
Mexico today is the provision of
safe and legal health care we've
also seen out of state actors
come into our communities and
attempt to circumvent our state
constitution
I passing unconstitutional
ordinances that I job at a
separate licensing scheme report
instead to excuse me they adopt
a separate licensing scheme but
as we know I'm those words have
one intention to ban abortion in
rural New Mexico.
And so the risks that we're
facing are for all New Mexicans
and the risks that we're facing
is creating like the Sanchez
said I checkerboard of access to
care in our communities and fear
in our communities about what is
and what is legal and just this
year I mentioned earlier
hundreds of anti at.
Transgender from health care
anti use had bills have been
passing around the country and
we.
It is incumbent upon us to make
sure that the health care that
is provided here is safe and
also legal and available across
the state.
That we stand for questions
thank you very much thanks for
staying within the time location
all right we've gone through
registered support opposition
we're ready to go to members of
the committee center doing
within the.
But then it's been passed out
thank you Mr chair yes this is
that two two five eight nine
eight point two you should also
have in front of you
I I really it Senator Stewart
did and amendments and contacts
on the bill yesterday I found
that really helpful so this is
and amendments and contacts that
miss mistrust for Health put
together just so that the
committee can see clearly what's
been done already before the
build out here and what this
amendment would also at.
And so Mr chair
the first thing that we're and
and and I want to say that I I
really wanna appreciate the the
the sponsor and the the experts
on this bill
because they.
They are they they really worked
with me high and making these
changes and and and these
changes are made with an eye to.
I can mention is that this
committee and generally has the
purchase of this committee
generally takes to to all bills
and making sure that that the
language conforms to that
but there's also some stuff in
here that that I'm doing that
that I I believe overall the
members going to be friendly but
but that it in in in all honesty
they did not want to do.
They did not not feel like makes
the bill better and and there is
some pretty specific stuff they
were doing to try to build in
flexibility to deal with the
changing legal landscape that
that frankly I took at because
it would not have been in
keeping with the approach that
this committee generally takes
on bills and so my understand is
this is gonna be a friendly
amendment but I I do want to
acknowledge the fact that that
they made a lot of big
concessions in this ammendment
hi and and and I've I really
appreciate that so Mr chair.
That with the first thing
doesn't this ammendment it's
it's striking some of the house
Judiciary Committee amendments
either because we're putting
them back in in a different spot
or or re wording them
Numbers what two and three is
striking the words outside
directly or indirectly from the
page three line six and eleven.
and that this is one of those
changes that that was a really
big points of discussion and
contention and and that I I
insisted upon
over over that the
representatives objections I and
and I'm taking that out not for
the same reason Mr chair I think
that was is there some reason so
the place about this language in
in the public comment
and and I don't I don't know Sir
I don't agree with with those
statements I'm taking this
language out for two reasons one
it's it's squishy we don't like
squishy language in here too I
think it's true whether we say
it or not and a lot of the
changes that are made in this
amendment is taking that
approach that we always take in
this committee to bills that if
something is true you don't say
because otherwise people are
going to start reading our laws
to mean that things that are
true are only true if we do say.
And if I know that missions are
intentional so.
So we are striking that language
and still on page three looking
at number four on the amendment
this is just a correction this
was the type of that said
persons per persons with that
and aposs yes where were they
ship in person with an
apostrophe S..
Also on page three at line
eighteen we are inserting a new
subsection the and this is
languages that I understand as I
I I believe this came from the
insurance company they wanted to
make sure that nothing in this
would be read to require that
something that's not already
covered by an insurance policy
now must be covered by virtue of
this law.
we're also putting in the
subsection path this is what now
nope that's part of the same the
same one Mr chair and members if
I'm running through these too
quickly please feel free to tell
me yes to slow down that my
number six of the amendment now
which is page four line I
The effects of that.
Ladies work changing this was on
the.
damages.
Under when
the AG for a DA is bringing.
And action Mr chair and
originally included compensatory
damages punitive damages costs
of suit attorney fees and also
have language in here that again
it's true whether we say it or
not the that that the damages
were exclusive R. as in addition
to any other kind of really
allowed by loss all that
language was taken out.
and for now if the DA or
Attorney General was Frank came
under this the day available
them to the court may award
appropriate relief including
temporary preliminary
appointment John.
Really.
Or the court may assessed a
civil penalty in the amount of
five thousand dollars or actual
damages resulting from the
violation whichever is greater.
But all that some of the story
attorney fees just I don't think
it makes a lot of sense we're
talking about the state
a claim to a force as it does
make sense when we're talking
about a private right of action
but before we get to that Mr
chair
At.
Number seven on the amendment is
is really taking language that
was added in and House Judiciary
I'm just changing it a budget to
make clear that the claims under
that can be brought against a
public body or or an entity
acting within the scope of of a
story of a public body but not
against individuals
which is the same approach that
we take an hour I New Mexico
Civil Rights Act.
Then we're getting into the
private right of action.
In the bill again we
We we just change some of the
language here to make clear that
folks it so so if you bring
private right of action you can
get that injunctive relief you
can also get compensatory
damages or punitive damages or
the sum of five thousand dollars
for each violation whichever is
greater and this language about
the sum of five thousand dollars
whichever is greater that is
language it is modeled on
language in our EPA which
provides for you can get damages
or.
Some of there's a couple
different something talk about
whichever is greater.
Mr chair this is this is also to
make sure that the sometimes
there's there's going to be
cases where there are nominal
damages probably oftentimes
there's gonna be nominal damages
and as you often note if we
don't have real consequences for
violating our laws and our laws
are meaningless so this ensures
that even in a situation where
there's nominal damages this law
will not be meeting less because
it has a real consequence
and Mr chair.
I think that gets us through
number eight in the amendment
number nine.
We are striking out.
The existing C. because we have
essentially moved the language
that mattered about back up to a
and we're also again putting in
that language that this is you
can only bring claims against
public bodies and entities with
us over there so not against
individuals
and again.
putting back in the house
Judiciary language.
I think question to that.
but then finally Mr chair that
over the last substantive thing
that this amendment does is it
strikes the severability clause
because again it's true whether
we say it or not we don't want
to say.
That is the and I would move
that amendment Mr chair.
On the amendment committee
members questions.
Assessors Senator Ivey Soto.
I
like to ask of the.
Bonser
Do you consider this to be
necessary for the.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I feel you know I really
respect the process of this
committee I do feel that the the
insurance one is an important
one to add in in those after a
lot of conversations with
insurance folks as well but I
really do respect that you know
we're looking to streamline and
do a lot of these aspects to
make sure it's solid and not
interrupting other things are
doing so absolutely I think
overall this is an important
amendment to it to.
Thank you.
Question center Moores thank you
Mr.
Hi or insurance.
to.
Sure.
Their lives are.
Thank you Senator thank you
chairman I would yes I believe
that that's going to be in a new
fund the section with us I can
point to you.
So it's three the yeah three and
this we will.
On the unlimited she added in
contact that would be on page
four
And so this this enables
providers to not to not provide
that care for a variety of
reasons and we felt that
including morality concerns or
others would include in there in
it's even says specifically and
point to the.
For the yeah on that three easy
to when the services against the
medical judgment of the treating
health care provider and we feel
that that language was expensive
enough to include for whether
it's moral reason of medical
judgment or otherwise.
The state medical.
Not.
More.
So.
Judge.
Right thank you Mr chair.
Do I think Mr Senator I'm happy
to add to but I also approval
how to that's fine.
Mr chair Senator so if we look
at the one and two together this
these are in fact much more
broad than you'll see in the
specific religious or otherwise
exemptions
I apologize E. one and E. two
the in the amendment sister.
and you know.
Within the medical standard of
care within medical judgment at
the ethics and
experience scope of practice all
of that is contemplated when we
look into the medical practice
act for example
we we consider and you know the
medical body
and medical literature considers
the ethics of a health care
provider rights and
responsibilities of providers
and patients to contemplate
those the specific concerns up
front sure.
There's nothing new here.
Why are moral all the general
moral consciousness.
Right service.
Life they have I.
I.
There are more.
Use of all.
Mr chair Senator and wanting to
know as well as individuals are
not liable under this act and
you know when we we take a look
at that you know that the
economic of the refusal law we
point just but particularly in
the area of abortion we can look
to the federal church amendments
sixteen.
Section fifteen fifty seven of
the affordable health Care Act
our uniform health care decision
act that all contemplate those
circumstances and this nothing
in this act requires an
affirmative duty to provide
care.
Sure.
One.
Law.
Or longer.
Yeah I sure.
On.
On this.
One.
There are.
This is one of the worst.
Senator Ivey Soto.
At.
This is one of the.
The.
House Judiciary Committee.
Verses what is and then that
from us.
Now.
I was in the.
So the other option is this.
A little bit of the bill of the.
Subsection
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator yes essentially the only
part that's being added here is
that subsection us the reason
why the entire I. H. T. C. is
added on was because we to move
the quotation marks that's why
that's all highlighted here and
we had to add it back in that's
the dropping process and see us
so.
Exams are not actually moving
in.
Just as a section yes chair
center yes.
And.
I guess my question is.
organization offers coming out
of our lives that are out of
our.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator will again on in this
particular section this came up
in conversations with
to be Frank with Presbyterian
overall they were when they're
looking at this and that was our
concern that they wanted that to
be extra clear in here on that
that would be helpful to them.
Yeah and it was and Mr chair
Senator this builds on insurance
mandated all.
Representative reading.
However that is not.
J. opt out.
That is the case.
Thank this is the case.
Revenues as a.
Thing that is over the line.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator again this is just
ensuring that they feel
protected in the sense I if you
want to add more only to as well
for the for the sponsor the
amendment I'm not sure if you
all want to chime in as well.
Mr chair Senator
like the Sanchez said this was
pre negotiated language we were
approached
fairly early on and you know it
was never the intention of this
bill to the insurance mandate
they they raised a few other
concerns and apple timidly we
decided this was the the the
compromise right and so
While we believe yes that this
is not an insurance coverage
mandate this is pre negotiated
language approach by a health
care provider in our state Mr
chair on that that this is like
the same language in the center
of million bills that we pass
this body add this this does
seem to be language that that
isn't one of those that is
automatically true
regardless of state
another.
I have.
The service.
Representative
figure out what in this movie is
really.
And going to see what.
Over the changes.
Based on.
The thank you and I spoke
chairman Senator I'd like to
into the sponsor them I think
you know it as a sponsored
rather the.
Our motion.
I'm asking you.
What this provision.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator you
know again overall we want to
make this consistent with New
Mexico law we want to make this
in line with everything up
everything else is coming out of
this committee so this again in.
Good good at faith working
together to make sure we're
coming out of this with a strong
bill that that accomplishes of
the objectives are here respects
of the process we have before us
and then also ensures that
people get you know don't have a
patchwork of health care.
Mr Chairman.
Senator I'm glad very wary of
overstepping.
you know one thing that is
particularly important at least
from my perspective and as
somebody who litigate in the
world where legislative intent
often comes that I I was
particularly persuaded by
Senator Duhigg argument we would
never want to unintentionally
and set the precedent that we
know that a mission can be read
as legislative intent and we
know that inclusion can be read
as provided in time and so you
know particularly on the places
where we're talking about things
absolutely that already true in
law
whether we say them or not we
wouldn't want to unintentionally
create a circumstance where and
omission or inclusion going
forward would create problems in
court.
Senator disposable or yeah.
Yes I have an idea that that is.
Senator Pirtle incentive.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I do have a few
things first
I just have to state that is
extremely confusing.
Right this is all structure
context the.
So for the amendment
No any other time we would do of
a committee so we don't make the
mistake that happened.
The.
I understand why there's a
desire not to do a committee so
but in all actuality if the
house would quit passing over
such for the legislation we
would have a equipment like this
we would be having this
conversation that we can't do
Committee subs.
but I mean that's I guess
reality we live in that the
house to pass anything without
reading it or what they're
doing.
But I I just I don't see how we
can even take action on this
ammendment seeing it for five
minutes having to explain
I'm still Mr chair and and
Representative wondering who
work together I I keep hearing
that who's the.
Who are we talking
who work collaboratively on this
who was ignored was listen to
because it wasn't me.
It wasn't a member of the minor
party we're seeing this huge
amendment for the first time as
the bill was scheduled
I'm not sure what was added to
the agenda but it wasn't there
when I went to that night so I'm
just I'm just concerned from
from that point who who worked
on this thank you Mr chair thank
you senators so there's I was
fairly revert back to racing
earlier who worked on the bill
itself the I. list of those
twenty organizations chair
representative I don't mean to
cut you off on time at the
amendment specifically amendment
thank you Mister chairman
Senator again we work with
Senator Duhigg on this and we
also as I mentioned earlier with
with Presbyterian who brought
forward concerns so when these
concerns were brought forward if
they were amenable to the intent
of the bill we're able to work
with them.
And if I may ask Miss Mister
chair representative that they
they worked on it did any of the
language that they want and
actually get into the amendment
itself thank you Mr chair thank
you senator yes that's that's
the that's the page for that's
or page five the section three.
F. three the.
That we're discussing here.
Mr chair representative when was
the amendment.
The work done.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator we worked on this I mean
I will go back for seconds I
make.
Because when we got the final.
Try to go through the chair the
comments of a question for.
Sanchez thank you Mr chair thank
you senator the conversations
with Presbyterian have been
ongoing for a month as long as
this actually been in
conversations with them we went
in to sketch this with LCS and
had a fairly finalized version
of it because of Thursday I
believe is the Friday.
I believe this Thursday we we
sat down with the LCS and how
the draft version Billy was
actually submitted to the
committee there is one section
that was omitted I believe the
sender can speak further to the
what was omitted.
Mr chair representative.
You for that but I I still think
you know for this the affected
sure that we're on the internet
on the.
This really should be it and I
understand why it's not going to
happen with this.
What are to make good decisions
and and find errors in.
Leave it is rude.
Where is the.
So I'm I'm going to
Oppose the amendment for for
many reasons but also just.
Nine the scope of it the size.
Active learning aware of it.
you Senator.
Mr chair I'll just so that the
representative was right on
Thursday the amendment was sent
to the committee
there was one small one small
section that should have been.
Rock wasn't strong so that was
six last night but otherwise the
substance of the committee has
amendment than any since
Thursday and.
And and I understand it is hard
to to see a bill.
How everything comes together
which is exactly what we
prepared this amendments a
contest for the committee
because we're not looking at
this option so.
The amendments in context show
what you would be C. and if yes
at that actually give more
information because they're
showing very specifically.
Who put in wax
and and and and what's being
taken out very clearly more set
and and you don't get the
information out who but what and
in order to we want to make sure
that the committee had all the
information needed and
considering the special.
That's all Mr chair Senator
Hemphill though I'm sorry the
one other thing is if in the
event that any members would
would like to hear more about
that why that.
F. was in there hi Larry ran for
Presbyterians here and we can
hear from him on that topic at
the.
Senator Stewart is a request to
get recognized look like one
Senator Mr chairman having
reviewed fees thank you for the
context really do pass on the
message.
Run the amendment still center
Baca and then some more set of
hands up for some time Senator
Baca Mentzer Moores thank you Mr
mayor thank you for.
Presenting this and I I too I I
really have to voice my concern
here regarding the process here
and I I would tend to do just
disagree with the vice chair
this is not clear this is a we
have a Levin amendments coming
from house Judiciary Committee
we have
Looks like two pages worth of
amendment striking large
sections adding here and there
and then we are presented with
the amendment here that no one
got ahead of time
at least not on our side so I
don't know I can't speak to to
the other side over there but we
did not receive this this has
nine amendment so we have twenty
amendments in total some of
countering each other between
House Judiciary this judiciary
we have no committee seven I and
I really have to say that you
know it's it's disappointing
that the process is in this
committee would be altered or
changed
by by the time or activity from
the house side we have we still
have two weeks left
every every committee we come
to that house amendment to this
size and scope
it is rolled or and I and I
don't even think that needed to
I mean we could've addresses
even a couple days ago and maybe
have a sub would be sitting here
with this up right now but this
amendment to contact certainly
does not take place of the of
the committee substitute I've I
like many others on this
committee I read for a living
and this is difficult to read
and so you know I I would voice
that and and and just a hope
that this committee would
consider going back to its
normal practice of the committee
substitute in giving a good fair
hearing of where we have
something to read that is really
legible so we can could do a
good job with what we're trying
to produce here in New Mexico
good loss of the folks rather
than kind of taking scraps and
peace million it together really
that that's all I have Mister
chair thank you Sir Moores thank
you Mr let me go second time.
I want to dive a little bit
differences sure.
it was stated that.
For.
Learn
of the lawyers.
Researchers were talking or
since you're here.
Just wanted to our county in the
state similar market
researchers.
Present your insurance card
you're in the hospital.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senators
It was both yeah it was about
the services they provide all of
that one providers on.
They bring up any concerns they
have over their providers of out
of this thank you Mr chair thank
you senator when we were
discussing the bill and what
it's called was and again of
many conversations with the
lawyers many of those concerns
were alleviated and the one that
remained was the insurance
concerns and that's why this one
remains here now this so we were
able to come to an end a good
place of those other concerns in
which can you check if your
microphone.
I would it would all committee
members receive these remarks.
Thank you Mr the representative
of
and because a point was made
that you've tried to reach on
the proposed here in that one
did not share concerns about
their employee Dawn having to.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for the question again
we were for the wrestling which
we felt we feel comfortable was
with them in consultation with
them to cover their concerns the
wanderings was the insurance one
I will say that we've heard from
some of the the hospital
training and other providers
that are noting that we are
seeing providers come to states
where they have access to be
able to provide this type of
care and that was also part of a
conversation as well Mr users
are state parks to drive on the
medical.
Talk to anyone else.
By here the size of the area of
a large.
Large files on.
I.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator again one thing I will
say about this bill and I are
sixty process is that it is
under a microscope and we've
heard from people from across
the state as was mentioned
earlier in conversation so
individuals across the state
have been able to come forward
and talk to stop concerns in
terms of providers bringing
concerns this is the primary one
that we saw that have
recommendations for the language
and as I mentioned earlier we've
been contacted by you know
hospital training areas and I I
I love the people that that
information you know who also
noted that this lady that this
bill would be helpful for
recruiting doctors.
Someone responsible.
Mexico.
So my concern is that it was
Senator uses online talking
right sure.
Your line is.
I just want.
These are.
I'm also.
Your.
One of.
Others.
let me just address not really
the specifics of the moment but
I I appreciate the committee's.
Wishes that the committee
operate in a certain manner and
consistently and I a of take
that to hard line here and I
want to pick knowledge it would
go I do oftentimes tried favor a
committee substitute because I
think it's important to be able
to read legislation I appreciate
survive we we read we do this
for a living we read this and we
have difficulties lawyers
following the amendment and so
when it becomes problematic
which we should let the public
know I think in fairness to all
watching all the ideas the the
reasons for these debates over
committees substitutes and
amendments is tactical let's
just be honest amongst ourselves
if the committee steps too on
the nose renewable was written
in this committee as is our
normal practice with the Senate
bill really the session twenty
sep two have to go back to the
house you have to restart
through the whole house process
in the committee process and
that's an effective tactical way
to kids legislation or to slow
down to run out the clock at the
end of the session so that's
that's frankly would then why we
go the alternative right route
which is to accept the members
from the house recognizing the
difficult to reach individual to
follow but of doing it by
amendment awards the step of
having to go back to the house
and throughout the whole
committee process and then it
just goes back to the house
what's called concurrence I
think it's important for us to
all public what's going on.
But when we come.
and why would we let folks back
home know what's going on so
that's that's really a lot of
what what this is about but I.
To hear the committee and I
wanted to recognize that I try
and balance as the chair I try
to balance out the goal of
making sure the committee
members able to follow the the
amendments and.
Of the language well against the
realities of the way the process
works in the time in the
calendar that we have in front
of the I use my judgment and I
The committee understanding what
goes through my head when I make
those kind of decisions thank
you Senator.
For.
R. the house the.
Probably not.
They're aging healthy.
So I understand.
So.
It is a request that house our.
Seven
years as.
Zero comments.
So that's the.
At.
Of.
Representative.
Workflow.
Or.
By there's a reason the cost the
upper house.
If we always.
yeah it's good it's a good
suggestion and I appreciate it
very much madam president you
know anytime anybody on the
committee has a good suggestion
and and I'll take it to heart we
have a new chair woman in the
house Judiciary and it's a good
discussion I should have with
her and her staff to make that
suggestion and and.
Show them how we do things over
here I.
Anyone else anyone else on the
proposed amendment.
We're gonna do passed motion
there's a do pass motion before
us with exhausted discussion
produced by roll call vote on
the.
Senator Baca hello.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores.
Senator o'neill yes Senator
Pirtle no.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth yes.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
service.
Four four four.
yes ma'am it's amendments
adopted.
Discussion on the bill as
amended.
The other discussions center
with the of the tax man.
Any further discussion wanted to
pass motion as amended.
And we have a roll call center
Baca.
Thank you for that motion I
thank you Mr chair if I have a
question within the bill.
Help me understand.
And so I'm gonna I'm gonna go
back to the original bill
because god knows where this is
another thing it's in section
C..
and on the original date bill
it's page two
You tell me Mr chair and Sanchez
what period need needle is.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator and and for those are
looking on the the minutes in
contacts version on its own is
also on page two as well section
C. is that correct that's right
C. two that should change thank
you Mr chair thank you senator
so this is this includes all
different reproductive to
reproductive health care and
it's available we do include or
they're just on the clear Terry
Neil would you like to discuss
that further with that means
this context of solicitor and a
chair.
Mr chair Senator I really
appreciate the question because
it's so important that we
understand that this bill is
about the full scope of
reproductive health care not
just abortion.
And so when we talk about the
perinatal period something I've
gone through myself that we're
talking about the health and
mental health care related to a
pregnancy from at twenty two
weeks until.
This is an interesting.
Well it's sometime have to the
pregnancy I've heard numerous
comments today which don't align
but seven days after birth and
so.
What that includes is all sorts
of health care it includes
prenatal care you know the
visits that we go to the filter
sounds that we get the vitamins
that we take and prepping for
you know labor delivery
postpartum period all of that
and I.
And so that that's what it means
it's the health care provided
during that period of pregnancy
and after.
so so thank you Mr chair so
under reproductive health food
the talks about one of the
things and reproductive health
is surgery this is that correct
Mr chair thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative Senator
yes it can be.
And so so I guess that's what
troubles me because we're
looking on section see talking
about reproductive health and
and and one of the categories of
that would be an abortion
correct and so Mr chair and and
representative and Dr what what
worries me is that we would
conduct a procedure like an
abortion have failed procedure
for the child is then living and
we have the authority under this
bill to surgically fix that
procedure for could be
interpreted that way which would
need to finalize an abortion
outside of.
And do you think that would be
covered Mr chair by this by this
language thank you Mr chair
thank you senator for the
conversation I think simply
answer is well it doesn't change
how health how abortion care is
administered in our state at all
that is not help wishing care is
administered in our state and
what I will say on that is for
example posed you don't have to
refer to the fourth trimester
right that led to the following
three months after someone gives
birth after I had my first I had
a D. and C. to remove the
additional membranes and details
that we're still in my uterus at
the time that was necessary so
that I could survive and so that
is an example of the help
hearing able health care would
be protected in here and ensure
that if a person does need to do
and see for example but they're
not concerned or confused that
that maybe an abortion care in
some way I'm happy to head away
expert as well Mr chair Senator
quite simply no I would be
baffled flabbergasted if not
only a quarter ever interpreted
it that way but a professional
medical
provider.
Thank you for for that Mr chair
and I I I appreciate your answer
it's just simply the language
does not state that it that that
is not what this says I'm just
reading the the
the the the definition you have
here and what's allowed and
what's not allowed and and what
will I do appreciate Mr chair
representative the health of the
mother up post birth post
abortion whatever it is the
problem I have is that if for
some reason the other being the
baby comes out in in through an
abortion and and has not been
terminated at that point that
this bill would then give the
right of a health care provider
and let's face it would be the
rate of of the person directing
the surgery to to basically
extinguish that life is the way
I read that and I I just anyway
I wanted to point that out to
the committee and to the end to
the the public and the people
that are here today that that is
my reading of section C. that's
all I have Mister chair thank
you thank you.
Last page
Subsection
where it has in any action
brought pursuant to subsection
is section the court shall order
prevailing plaintiff plaintiff
reasonable attorney fees.
The costs to be paid by the
defendant I'm just curious Mr
chair that is not a normal
practice or a might be a hundred
percent backwards on this that
that we should strike that
language.
I know I I think I've had it
struck from one of my bills and
with.
Mr chair Senator or was that to
thank you Mr chair Senator I'm
happy to add to my experts to
explain it more likely that Mr
chair Senator we recognize this
is a deviation from the American
role right and it also point out
that and just this year out of
this committee we have passed
you we.
You'll have passed out and a
bill that that offers mandatory
attorney's fees in cases like
this is particularly important
because this is an access to
courts issue right when when
we're talking about the harms
contemplated under this act your
largely talking about dignitary
harms and we want individuals
who have been earned by our
public bodies to be able to hold
him accountable and in cases
like that where the firm is
largely dignitary it is
particularly appropriate to
award attorneys fees and that
also presumes a finding of fault
right this is after the
litigation has gone through it
there's been a finding of fault
finding out of egregious
violation of the law and so in
this case it's particularly
appropriate.
Mr thinking that answer
I'm not gonna move to strike
that but I I do have a question
and I think doctors metes.
doctors metes asked.
and I was hoping.
The answer was but is is
determining the standards of
care medical standards of care
our standards of care coming
from medical health
professionals or they come.
Body thank you Mr chair thank
you senator again oh not again
it's different body you know it
in this bill and how standards
of care flight or not I
political body which again we
don't want standards of care put
into our statutes as they are
evolving and the the the change
in that way so these are based
on Senator we can talk about
both gender affirming healthcare
and reproductive health care
which has a lot of work that's
gone into it as well
the other thing I would say
about the bodies are turning a
standards of care on their well
respected and they're not going
to be determined by a red state
or blue state which came of the
LESC committee and that I think
is a strength of determining it
be on this because again health
care really should be between a
doctor and their patients.
Mr chair representative might my
concern comes just from my
experience with COVID is you do
have a politicization.
Ation
Then you have some doctors who
say one thing doctors as
another.
but then it alternately came
down for politicians as to how
comment was gonna be treated how
the reaction to go treated in
many of your doctors are on the
frontline actually seeing
patients
basically more so you had
doctors to work operating state
and.
Issue.
Making these decisions whenever
doctors like doctors committee
representative who is an ear
nose and throat doctor kind of
an expert in that type of
infection essentially being
ignored you know screaming at
the top of his lungs as to a
we're making these mistakes but
being ignored so that's where my
concern comes from is where are
the standard of care coming from
are they coming from the doctors
that are on the operating rooms
or the coming from doctors in
positions of that that they've
been put in the position for
political reasons thank you Mr
chair thank you Senator and and
I think that's an interesting
comparison I'll be honest
because the standard of care
within the hospitals that we saw
during the COVID you know
intubation making those
decisions making decisions about
what kind of treatments that you
could be receiving on those with
the standards of care of making
the public policy in determining
public health regulations that
was regulations that we all due
to the body or or the governor
didn't that's a that's a
different conversation but the
standard of care we're talking
about or not does that and we're
talking about how people are
treated how their other
conditions how their health this
is treated by their doctor
within the doctor's room window
and when they're there for the
emergency room or they're saying
they're gonna college's student
with.
Services.
Yes thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I'm happy to bring up
our list of where we got our
standards of care little
referring to it as such.
Mr chair Senator.
Sorry.
As Mr chair members of the
committee as you all know
standards of care are regularly
determines hi.
Courts in licensing bodies.
The they're informed by evidence
but is there an important I have
it in space standards in
clinical guidelines that are.
Released by professional
organizations of represents sort
of the
the most expertise in a given
field in these contacts their
contacts there are many
professional associations that
really such standards in
clinical guidelines.
In the context of reproductive
health we could list American
college of obstetricians and
gynecologists we could list the
society of maternal fetal
medicine we could list the
American public health
association we could list
you know there are multiple
multiple bodies that release
these evidence based practice
standards in clinical guidelines
in the context of gender
affirming care and I regret that
are amazing expert Dr Malinga
claim wasn't here to talk to you
all today directly but she was
able to address.
Doctors maintenance question
Senator Smith he's question.
By pointing to a number of
evidence based.
Standards of care practice
guidelines that exist in the
gender affirming care space such
as those from the endocrine
society the W. path and UCSF
also released standards that she
and professionals in her field
goals out there as well get a
list of those thank you for the
question Mr.
Studies that he brought forward.
I had some concerns that may he
I some of those
Conclusions but a couple of
studies may push against what
she considers in her field of
expertise to be the absolute
evidence based standard.
She was able to poke some holes
in those studies suggest that
actually they were based on
much smaller sample sizes and
flawed evidence so I think we
have to trust the experts in
these fields and there is
consensus of the organizations
that I listed really do set the
standard in avid's based way.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for that I mean I'm sorry I I I
don't experts.
your universities paid to get
the results they want from
scientific studies.
It's just it's a fact.
and that's that's the reality we
do that today.
On a certain result if you pay
enough you get the results you
want that way the the
Person that's getting the
grant case of grant gets the
money.
So I think we the word expert
around a little loose.
I would like to think of myself
as for reforming.
But I definitely don't know
everything.
So I I I just I have a little
bit of push back whenever see
there's a consensus among
certain groups without seeing
all the groups obviously in the
medical field just just within
COVID because it's so recent
everybody's mind there was
probably fifty fifty in the
experts on what should be done
what was best practice what what
medicines were working what
which ones work
what was best so I do have a
little concert and just throwing
it out there like Hey you have
to agree with what these people
are saying because they're the
experts I want to hear that's
why we're the legislative bodies
it's our job to hear all
information not just one sided
so I would like to know if you
could point me in the direction
of some groups that maybe have
different thoughts of standards
of care so that way I can make a
better more informed decision
instead of just having one
thought and one frame of thought
put in front of me I don't I
don't know that that is really
neat needs a an answer but if if
you would like to Mr chair go
ahead but that's that's all I
have an because if I may as a
senator and chair you know
having to get hand that to later
but as you had mentioned earlier
it seems that your colleagues
from the doctors committee may
have a more robust
if the information on that
element as well I will say this
we typically rely on a doctor
and a patient to make decisions
together on and we we we do that
all the time whenever we go to
the doctor I kind I think I
trust my doctor to tell me what
medicine I needed for New I I
trusted his expertise I trusted
the standard of care that he's
been given there are multiple
studies I you know of course
there are the broader world and
there's so much a patients it's
a wonderful time to live in that
chair and and senator but I will
say that I would not feel fully
equipped in the same with a
doctor's committee will put on
the other side of that thank you
Here Representative if you don't
even question your doctor that's
that's where issues Madam.
My my son had tonsillitis to the
point where it was almost
closing offers his throat issues
they when we first got there
they drew's blood.
Extremely traumatized them
we weren't seeing the results
that we were wanting to see we
were still in the hospital after
two days in fact senator Munoz
and and
the president the Senate however
also execute by visit which was
a huge thing for him of Lucifer
but they came and kick the door
down at six AM EST we need to
draw some more blood now as well
as the father state will.
Not not going to happen.
And so talk to the doctor this
is what we have to have this to
see if X. Y. Z. and I push back
Senator okay got a question you
doctor what if the result is of
what you're looking for what are
you gonna do and this was all
we're going to double the
antibiotic then just double the
antibiotic doctor.
You know and that was coming
from a parent questioning the
physician to get best results
were for my child so I I think
there's a little bit here where
as individuals you know you want
to trust the professional but
even the experts that we use Mr
chair representative on our farm
when they put something forward
if you don't question it then
you're really not going to get
to the best outcome that you can
come up with because everybody
is only so good at something and
so if you don't have
collaboration there I think
that's where mistakes are gonna
be made so I think that's one of
my my biggest concerns with with
answers that thank you.
Others new pass as amended.
like to just wait a little bit I
I.
Really do have a little bit
concerned with the shift to the
English rule appreciate you of a
knowledge in that little bit
center pirtle brought up the
issue to.
We rarely depart from the
American rules this is the the
terms we use to describe loser
pays' right and.
News and as an attorney it's
always been my experience that
we really tried very hard to not
adopting visual English rules a
product of discouraging access
to the courts by people.
In this case.
The only prevailing would be to
a prevailing plaintiff I'm kind
of really surprised by this
because.
Right I don't hear any
opposition to this provision for
many the cities counties or
state government risk management
well I I would expect.
this could be very expensive to
cities and county governments.
Because there would be an award
of attorneys fees and costs to a
defendant against up
but I think it's a definitive
and it's going to be a
governmental entity right it's
gonna be cities counties
and state governments and it's
going to be for anybody who
brings a claim under subsection
AC go to subsection eight and
this is for any discrimination
against a person based on a use
or refusal.
To use reproductive health care
or gender affirming health care
services so
To help me to understand will be
examples of that
but that if we just give me a
you know how how would of how
would a person be discriminated
against me just take each of
those looks like there's three
things discrimination for use or
refusal to use reproductive
health care for gender affirming
health care so could you give me
just example of what those would
be what what would be a person
who will be discriminated
against for using reproductive
health care by a governmental
entity will be simple thank you
Mr chair thank you center when
they will notice that in the FIR
that looks at the cost of
counties as well as the state
they noted that the cost the
anticipated was nominal I just
want to mention that here but I
respect your concern I really do
in this case I think an example
would be is if people are able
to take time off to go visit the
doctor's office however on
individual was denied that
because they're going to seek
gender from health care or
reproductive health care.
Think of any other examples and
then again you're you're just
you to tell me that forces the
use would be nominal and by the
simple you just gave yeah that
would sound like.
Nobody's ever gonna sue for that
but but the person can sue a
city or not here here's why I'm
a little bit cautious about this
so I'm the guy who passed the
whistleblower protection act
and
in the city and county
governments have never let me
forget it you know the reserves
are fond of reminding me that
there frequently being sued
under the whistleblower
protection act for claims they
don't provide meritorious and
they feel like they're being
forced to settle cases and paid
settlements on non marriage
Tories claims because of the
scope of that act.
And so I I am the guy who gets
all of that criticism and
interestingly there's not been a
real effort to try to change
that act of so I I kind of stand
behind it but.
But I'm trying to figure out
what it what is going to be the
exposure like Wiley FY heiresses
is minimal I'm just trying to
think of any examples you can
think of what what what is
pertinent to sue let me use an
example one of somebody going to
claim that they've been
discriminated against based on
gender affirming health care
what would be an example of that
thank you Mr chair thank thank
you senator for that question
there's ready of them right so
so one examples if they were
denied services by the city for
you know for example if they
were if they were receiving
gender from health care more
specifically if they were if
they were known to go and get
data from health care and
someone at you know city paid
for facility that might be one
but I mean I think the direct
one that many of us are seeing
right now is individual
ordinances that are being
proposed and that that could be
in the way of someone getting
the healthcare they need often
times of life saving and as we
know you may not get health care
in the county live in so if
you're an individual making a
decision to go into Sandoval
County health care and if for
example your doctor recommended
you see and you were on if you
don't you're not scared is that
an abortion and I can be
prosecuted my own County for
that that could have real
consequences for an individual
so that is another example of
how that could be.
Be utilized in that way yeah I I
I absolutely appreciate what I
understand to be the purpose of
the bill which is to avoid of
each community city county local
governments been able to drive
on abortion policy which would
be and to me this is clearly
On why is.
yes you did want simple gender
affirming care in that sense I
can give that if that helps yes
so so give me so give me an
example how is the city yeah of
state this illustrious will be
an example of a person who who
is discriminated against for
gender affirming health care
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I think one of the
examples you could see also as
someone who is taking it is
seeking gender affirming health
care and them not being able to
freely testify before their
their their city for example of
you know going for that sense I
think that's an example of how
to my experts actually no the
inmate let me be more pointed is
is is your if you're thinking
that a city or county or local
government or state government
would be required to perform for
offer gender affirming health
care services and you're shaking
your head no but so so we're in
the bill is that precluded in
other words if it was individual
says I'm I'm entitled to a.
forgetting I I should know this
but I don't know what is what is
a surgical procedure that within
that it would involve.
Change in
gender ready needed transgender
surgical support but they Mr
chair and senator in that sense
it no they would not be the
affirmative in there which is
why we also have the
stipulations were discussing
earlier and I can for you okay
so give me the simple individual
says I want to have a surgical
procedure.
Important with my by the gender
affirming health care recalling
that that and I it consists that
the city or the state pay for
that is there is a thing and
something here that the.
Does not require that to happen
and of the state or the city or
county governments is no we're
not going to offer that then you
have a lawsuit against the city
county and what you're going to
recover attorneys fees and costs
for that lawsuit thank you
cheering section three E. on
going back to that part in one
it's basically says of the
healthcare director Miss Vigil
section section three.
P. three the one.
One
of the original it is on page.
On page three of the original.
Thank in that language it says
that a health care provider or
entity does does not otherwise
find or perfect they're not
sorry new act nothing in the
right in this bill shall be
construed to require health care
provider or entity provide care
that the health provider or
entity does not otherwise find
are have a duty to provide under
state or federal law.
Yes I was I read that line
that's part of us and reduce
amendment I think that's good
you're not requiring.
The health care provider or
entity to provide.
There's another was provided in
the at the same time how is that
not discrimination if you say
that you're offering.
Health care to some procedures
and not offering health care to
other surgical procedures house
and not discrimination thank you
Mr chair thank you senator for
the question I think the but the
bigger piece of this is that
we're looking at laws ordinances
policies regulations that get in
the way of people accessing care
so you're not necessarily
getting the ways one accessing
care if that's not of service
that you provide.
You just don't find that that
goes beyond your scope of work
Mr chairman senators then you
would have to otherwise I now if
I may I can't you can see.
Okay well I'm looking forward to
seeing how this plays out I I
can I can receive I I I think I
can predict that there would be
a number of lawsuits against
city county state governments
for not offering that help
gender affirming healthcare
service even though the bills
says there's nothing in here
that's intended to require that
but then we allow for a lawsuit
to be brought where there's
discrimination and I was I would
say about you know I get about
was an advocate for somebody who
wants to have access to the
house health care and save your
discriminate against me you're
not offering that health care
you love those if you don't have
to offer it and I don't see how
that's not discrimination but
but I I think I've I've covered
up for to my satisfaction.
On the subsection three
paragraphs the helmeted just one
other concern.
This is the the pages are not
numbered but but of.
This is a section on the looks
like the third page of the of
the New mexicana public body
of their.
so public body shall not just
gonna skip ahead there shall not
be prior to prosecution
punishment really means a
person's.
ability to act to refrain from
acting during the person's
pregnancy based on potential
actual perceived affecting the
pregnancy.
Help disabuse me of the
concerned got of a mother is
pregnant and we know is abusing
very dangerous drugs that are
harming her fetus.
she's her one addict and she's
Representative detained and of
the government.
Ask Yushin Health whatever else
wants to step in and say we're
going to.
Do something I don't I don't
know whether we do that now I I
gotta do we do something like
that in an interview those
circumstances that the mothers
put under some kind of health
care prohibited from from
continuing to use drugs
and harm to the fetus but this
would save that the public body
can't do that the that they
could not prosecute punish.
A person's act.
Based on the potential or
perceived affect on the
pregnancy that's the argument
that I would make is that I'm we
do governments need to intervene
in this pregnancy because you're
harming your child by your drug
use and what that language was
suggestions government can't do
that anymore in my how to how my
how my gonna feel comfortable
about that thank you Mr the
district this is really the
issue has.
Okay all right.
It was in your what first
and first of all you so you're
prepared and and you know second
of all when I hear comments like
center due to that's good
because different lines no
coordination no communication
but we're raising similar issues
and and so that cities should
suggest just maybe there's an
issue here so why should I be
concerned about that.
Well I a couple of different
reasons but I I want to frame
this a little bit more because
already in the state of New
Mexico there's a there's some
case law State V. Martinez the
state Tatian is one thirty nine
NM seven forty one and it
addresses exactly request and in
New Mexico and and frankly in
that the public policy related
to substance use while pregnant
indicates that the
criminalization of substance use
while pregnant leads to poor
outcomes full for you know for
pregnant people and alternately
parents and and so is the policy
of New Mexico and we've adopted
that that character Act into our
state law that creates non penal
non criminal interventions for
circumstance exactly that you
described because we know that
the criminalization of pregnancy
and particularly the
criminalization of substance use
solely based on that you know
that assumption about if and how
this will affect the pregnancy
doesn't actually get to whites
that the alternate goal is right
safe pregnancy and
and positive health outcomes
some units in there some time
interrupt you so there's no
doubt and I agree with that
ruling that thinking which is
this makes sense to criminalize
and prosecute a mother who's
continuing to use heroin and
harm maybe on the light for.
The state would be is.
I agree with the the committee
as from what's up with the
language here says that the
government can't do anything
rights as all other means.
Dozens it says prosecution
punishment but as as any and any
other means the government must
refrain from doing anything
based intentional actually
receive effective pregnancy so
the government comes and says
you know we're not gonna
prosecute you but we're gonna.
Hold you we're gonna have
subject to the mental health
evaluation or I mean what what
every This Is government can't
do anything about that the the
the the concern for the fetus is
not basis for the government to
take any action always that
says.
So like so many things this is
new ones right and so when we
talk about prosecution or
punishment or other means you
know holding somebody solely
because they're using substances
while pregnant is already not
permitted under the law the
mischief that we've seen around
the country you know that the
creativity that has gone into
punishing pregnant people is
astounding as astounding around
the country and we we we just we
just enter from what just help
me to understand the law real
quick what role if any does the
government New Mexico presently
play if any when a mother is
identified to be a one addict
and and the mother wishes to
maintain the pregnancy but the
realization that they may be
doing very serious harm it's not
permanent harm or injury to the
child is this the New Mexico do
anything about that at the
present time gentleman in there
any kind of interdiction at all
that we do may we headed to the
vice chairs that appropriate and
and and for that specific
question Mr chair for probably
as I on our Care Act is probably
the best person to expand that
that Mr Chairman look earlier in
the line you're you're focusing
on our other means yes the what
that refers to it talking about
depriving someone of the ability
to act to refrain from that
during the pregnancy right so
refrained from act was I'm gonna
stop you from using heroin.
Well and Mr Mr chair I says I
think Miss rush forth will
explain that is not what our law
currently S.
Maybe this is gonna does we
don't we we we cannot stop a
mother who's in her one.
So that really says a longer
school so currently when if and
when somebody presents and and
it's critically important that
somebody feel safe presenting
for state prenatal care if they
are substance use and what we
don't want to do through
prosecution through and at
canonization for that substance
use is make it so they can't get
health care so currently if
somebody presents at a
healthcare facility and they're
substance using a pregnant right
now because of the Care Act and
other
Other ways that healthcare
providers can intervene is
offering service offering
services providing advice on
either cessation of drug use or
really informing somebody of the
potential impact on their health
and so currently no we do not
criminalize somebody simply for
being drunk using for substance
using substance using while
pregnant because it is not good
public health policy we take
away from those issues you can
come back.
Me let me give the other simple
we're spending a lot of time
decision talking about CYFD.
I even the about the proactive
role of C. way if you getting
ahead of of situation overview
or the Vance of waiting for the
trial to be ordered.
So this the CYFD ever intervene
in the pregnancy.
Circumstance we just I we're
mothers identifies his or her
one addict.
Of doctors and medical providers
where the this is a risk that
because of that drug use you've
only we counsel the mother of
the suggests that there are
services available that the
extent of it or to see where for
the CYFD ever take.
More affirmative other than
prosecuting the mother.
Again I would refer and I
apologize I I don't purport to
be an expert on CYFD I see the
price chair flagging and the
that's K. you know that that's
the entire premise of care Act
and and Mr chair it is it's the
entire process of care so we
just have to care about in this
committee last week
and one of the reasons we were
struggling with that language
because care it is volunteer of
the law of this land is that
when you have someone in that
situation they are volunteer
their offer these services they
are encouraged but it is an
inherently voluntary program
because for all the public
policy reasons that miss rush
for has has already identified
but it but so CYFD under under
care went which would control
the situation CYFD could not
deprive through any of the as
well as a person's ability to
act requiring.
They can offer services they can
connect they can be navigator
they can there's all sorts of
stuff they can do all of that is
voluntary they do not have the
authority under our law to
deprive anyone of any ability to
after refrain from that under
care which is why this language
is okay that and because the
that was the first thing I
thought about when when I read
this was how to buy is the
interplay with hair Act and will
this interfere with the ability
to intervene and in those
situations but the fact is the
law of the land is a sense now
is that cara is voluntary.
So I understand that and I
understand the language I guess
you're so the scenario given is
that the and the answer is a
fact pattern once again you have
a mother heavily addicted to
heroin
he's got a baby was for the for
pregnancy the child put risk and
as I understand what I mean till
is we never of in in a way
intervene other than to offer
services and advice to the
mother and that's the extent of
it and so because that's all we
do now this language will not
interfere with what we're doing
already.
And so what I just want to make
sure is that we don't have a
circumstance where right now
somebody steps in and says
there's a court order the
mother's going to be
hospitalized
or put under in patient care so
she cannot use heroin in there
she's with a detox program we
don't do any of that and so and
we can't in the evidently what
I'm because we can't do any that
and so we're gonna tell the mom
of shouldn't do this and here's
some services and and that's the
extent of the state's
intervention and so that's all
we do now this doesn't interfere
with that.
That because we don't pause to
look at maybe other issues but
I'm and other outside school.
Bills.
It's still showing still
troubles me a little bit but I
know that's not the issue for us
today.
All right thank you very much.
So if you're looking for anybody
else to help all right one of
the best emotional viral.
Senator Baca.
So.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Wirth nope.
Senator when you yes.
Nope Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes Senator do yes
Senator lotus yes there's to do
pass on this bill we regrettably
we're gonna have to in the
committee's work today would be
called on for about thirty
minutes or so ago the other
sponsors here have my apologies
that we will get to the other
bills today.
Please stand by for the culture
will look for another
opportunity between now and
Monday afternoon thank.
Thank you.
