Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes Sir Mister chairman Senator
will be ready to go revise our
arm notary acts yes Sir so are
this bill.
And revise your from law I'm not
Sheryl acts.
One of the window in this bill
is we actually.
Are we strike two different acts
the Europe of the state on the
peril no a lot of public law and
the current you have a lot of
Carol acts in order to
You an act to revise uniform law
and Jarrell acts and among other
things this also allows
It allows remote online
notarization it updates on the
Republic laws.
On to the best practice is to
provide a higher level of
accountability than what we've
had in the past and with that Mr
Chairman there are several
people who'd like to give a
comment I will also quickly
yield to my co sponsor Alonzo
Baldonado if he has forty two
seconds to say on the bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senators I I have nothing to add
I will let Senator Ivey Soto
take the lead thank you Mr
chairman.
Very eloquent and on and so with
that Mr Chairman let me yield to
Steven I have first name only
and private so they learn her
long program and then District
column and then we'll send a
check for Mr.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Steven I am
the CEO The New Mexico
association of realtors and we
stand in support of Senate Bill
lot twelve and this will help us
facilitate real estate
transactions remotely and allow
for electronic the signatures in
fact this last year point my dad
just turned ninety two last week
and I have to taken two or three
times and to the title company
and had this bill been already
passed I wouldn't have had to
have done that so I'd like to
think that Senator Ivey Soto and
Representative all Baldonado for
bringing this forward thank you.
Liam please proceed.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is lan Kravitz I'm vice
president of government
relations for fidelity
investments here in New Mexico
and we are very much in favor of
Senate bill twelve remote
notarization technology is safe
it's proven and it's already
successfully in use on a
permanent basis in over twenty
nine states now especially at a
time like this when physical
distancing is a public health
necessity remote notarization of
financial documents provides a
solution that harnesses readily
available technology to ensure
that Americans have access to
the your savings when they need
it most ality and stand and
support Senate bill twelve and
we're very appreciative of
Senator Ivey Soto green for this
bill thank you thank you very
much
Mr grant thank you Mr chairman
members committee center Ivey
Soto Larry ran registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico land
title association of also the
New Mexico mortgage lenders
association we've actually been
working with the sponsor on this
piece legislation over the past
year or so we've had input from
both of the The New Mexico
organizations and also the
opportunity to work with the
American land title association
the mortgage bankers association
this legislation as part of a
national effort to to adopt
remote online notarization
statutory changes so that we can
so we can actually move into the
twenty first century so we had
significant input the Sanchez
been very receptive to any
changes or or any discussion we
need to have on it so we think
work we come to you with a good
and complete bills have a
comprehensive remote on the
Norges militarization Act in
place and we appreciate your
support of the legislation thank
you Mr chairman Mr caught.
There's only.
My apologies Mister chair
members of the committee thank
you for taking the time to
listen to us on this this is a
in my role as underwriting
counsel for a national title
insurance underwriter WFG
national title insurance company
I deal with over twenty
different counties and twenty
different reporting officers and
this is a bill that will make
the lives of two Mexican
citizens that much better in my
opinion it's one of those things
that the Sanchez wonderful about
listening to us on this and
working with us we're very
appreciative of their efforts
and that we would respectfully
ask this committee to move
forward with this legislation
there's no better example than
the current pandemic as to how
we wish something like this were
in place right now I've dealt
with multiple matters where
people are and quarantine and
nursing facilities without
access to a notary I people that
are other states that haven't
come back and we have had to
postpone many transactions
waiting for an in person
knowledge so we very much
appreciate everyone's
consideration and Senator Ivey
Soto is efforts and we really
encourage the movement of the
spill thank you.
Thank you very much Mr column
and finally Mr chairman Jack
Burton and after Mr Burton we do
have one very quick amendment
that Mr Burton picked up on that
should be added to the Mr Burke.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
Senator Ivy Soto members of the
committee Jack Burton I'm
uniformed law commissioner of
wants to thank.
The sponsor for a wonderful job
on this bill lots of work to
hard work lots of changes and I
in support of the bill and all
that it is passed by this
committee and.
All by the legislature it is
long long overdue thank you.
Mr Chairman one last thing and
that is on one thing that we
picked up our and I really
appreciate Mr Burton's our
diligence is on page twelve line
eighteen this is
within those general officer
under the identity of the
individual efforts verification
on over affirmation of a
credible witness this would be
somebody that does not
themselves have an ID just
simply ensuring that the
witnesses on related to and I'm
affected by the document
programs actions.
Are in that that is an important
piece of our diligence Mr
chairman I would I would move
the amendment that is on spring.
Second the motion on the
amendment so discussion on the
amendment further discussion
amendment.
The doctor the moment.
See non that amendments adopted
Senator Ivey Soto I did not have
anyone register in opposition to
the bill so we'll go to members
of the committee.
I'm gonna take that last
amendment of course is friendly
to the sponsor since it was
proposed by the sponsor no one
and no one in opposition members
of the committee with questions
on Senate bill twelve as
amended.
Sure.
Thank you Mr chairman
So.
You know I've been here waiting
for this and then I ran out to
get something from my car did I
miss an explanation of the
committee set up.
I am looking at an FIR where the
secretary of state says that she
would need seven FTEs to carry
out the provisions did we change
the set up so that that's no
longer accurate can we get a
little explanation and if you
already explained it that's okay
I miss madam chair let me very
quickly explain and actually let
me also yield very quickly to
Christina Travis if you can
activate your camera pleased on
secretary of state's office.
Because I think this up
resolved all of the issues that
they have in the bill
and mistrust.
This was it.
Members of the committee as
Senator Ivey Soto I yes I'm
miss yes has on the director of
business services by the New
Mexico secretary of state's
office
the substitution for the bill
does.
Previously the bill was
requiring the secretary of
state's office too
provided Forsman of the bill so
the substitution did change that
to where it would be the actor
X. commission that would that
would provide enforcement which
is what currently is under the
current statute right now so the
FIR is not accurate at this time
there will be some financial
implications but they would be
very minimal on the only
financial applications we would
have currently the way the bill
is written is going to be for
training at for any I know to
raise any education but that the
secretary of state's office is
fully in support of that and has
a position on the ethics
commission being enforcer of
thank you if you have any other
questions on here.
So Mister chairman do we have a
current FIR or current analysis
of the sub.
Mr chairman and senator sort of
the the
LFC does a and a revised FY are
once a committee stopped just
past packed Committee but it
does not do it beforehand I will
let you know that in
conversation with RLD are aware
of the investigations have taken
place as well as a conversation
with our the state ethics
commission
the R. the number of
investigations action over the
last couple years I've been
around half a dozen a year with
one hearing per year the ethics
commission would be able to
absorb that within that currents
our resources and the RLD does
indicate that while they have
been doing this it's always kind
of stuck out as as as as far
from because normally they
enforce licensure that they give
and this is not licensure that
they've there's a commission
that they don't have any
relation to so thank me that
makes estimate overflow.
so Mister chairman I appreciate
the explanations however usually
we have a committee analysis of
the substitute do we not have
that today.
This chart.
risotto.
This term I ask you a question.
Yes understood I understood the
question was whether whether
Senator Ivy Soto knew the answer
to that let me check with staff
program which arrived yet I
don't know although I will say
that that as to the the
essential aspects of the bill.
The between the committee soft
and the racial build essential
aspects of the have not changed.
In terms of in terms of the
scope of the act we did just
simply at some people's
suggestions reorganize certain
parts of it so that it made more
sense as it flowed through.
When you read it it also so for
example Mr chairman and senator
Stewart.
Previous to this section six of
the bill I think a section six.
The bills that which is the part
that talks about.
Having to be in person when you
will act I'm sorry section five
of six five of the building and
I'm on page six.
The requirement a personal
appearance originally as
presented by the bill had them
the remote notarization stop in
in a later section all together
and so it didn't really make
sense that that is the kind of
statement saying that someone
always had to be present and
then you have this other section
of law that so that you can do
it remotely so we just married
those up together so that it
flows nicely and it and it's
actually much more compatible.
So so those that was kind of the
difference between the sub index
and the ritual.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
have any other for the
questions.
Thank you Mr answer serving
there is not an analysis for the
sub to answer your question
directly.
Thank you I figured that out.
Other members of the committee
with questions.
Mr chairman of multiple.
No Sir doing with questions or
motion now Mr chair Senator I'm
looking at mission of identity
proofing on page eleven.
You just talk a little bit more
about what that would actually
look like.
for our remote notarization.
What are so Mr chairman and
senator do it so identity
proofing is as is the procedure
when when people do a remote
notarization are there are there
is required to be a video of
that transaction and and because
you're not in the physical
presence of the of the person
you're also required for example
them to take a picture in many
cases of a I'm and
identification also that that
can that is then are uploaded by
the people doing the remote
notarization into a database
second back and immediately
verify whether that is a
a counterfeit ID or whether it
is a valid ID and so that would
be at that identity proofing
service and does exist property
country as there are I believe
seventeen different states are
not doing remote online
notarization.
And.
And as Mr chair Senator I just
don't see that process that you
just described laid out in this
definition of identity proofing
hi and and it really there's a
reference to private data
sources.
I I I'm just wondering what what
where the process you just
described it is laid out in the
statute.
Well certainly are so Mister
chairman and senator
Thank the R. that process itself
we don't lay out that entire
process.
In the statute that actually has
done by administrative rule.
and so and so that and that is
the what's the factor takes
office we'll be doing and those
will be standards what you will
speed up Mr chair Mr chairman
and senator doing.
Is that the so they the identity
programs like I'm taking nine.
Our.
We'll begin by nineteen twenty.
Right is that of.
The secretary regarding
performance of the Carroll act
and the rules may establish
standards for communication
technology and identity proofing
so then all of that is is
resolved through the
administrative rulemaking
process
in terms of in terms of the way
that that is dot.
Mr chair that's all I have.
Yes thank you anyone else
already.
Great pleasure the committee
with motions please.
Mr chairman I would move a do
not pass on Senate bill twelve
and a do pass on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
percent above twelve point two.
Mr.
I was going to make the motion
but the Senator RD did.
Good thank you right program
only will still roll call vote
on the committee associate
percent bill twelve please
inform all.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
More.
I didn't see yes yes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you have a do pass motion of the
next bill here is Senate bill
seventy one we've
Since seventy one previously.
Hi y'all may recall it was on
the floor and then back into the
committee.
Senator Duhigg
we won't present the full bill
again or go to the public but I
would like for you to address
please the issues that you heard
on the Senate floor and what if
anything has been done to the
bill since then or may need to
be done on this committee to
address anything that was right
on the floor if anything.
Thank you Mr chair and I just
thank you senator to assist in
answering questions I have to I
will I have to experts Nicholas
Cordoba and sovereign Hager.
but yes that the the stock to
the side that you all have
before you is is the same thing
that was the more staff.
I'm not for sub was developed as
a result of extensive
discussions and negotiations
between myself our Senator share
Senator Moores was involved in
some of those and we created a
bipartisan approach to this bill
that resolved a lot of the
concerns and brought back to the
floor on the floor.
Senator Candelaria.
Raise some concerns and offer an
amendment that amendment was
emailed to you all just couple
out maybe an hour ago.
Of course now I can't find it in
all my papers.
But.
The main issue that he was
raising in that amendment was
that one of the many compromises
that I had come to
in getting to that floor sub
was out to take out a reference
that is made of the violation of
the patients that protection act
and the collection regulatory
act would automatically make a
violation of one of those a
violation of the U. PA
Senator.
Candelaria wanted to re insert a
reference to the U. PA.
And there's there's some
confusion because on the floor
he said that he wanted it only
to apply to the selling of dat
under this bill the the
amendment that he offered did
not actually do that it would
apply to all of section four of
the bill which was the
that the ban on collections.
But either way I.
It's a bad idea so his stated
purpose for wanting to put that
back in there was that there was
was a need for enforcement some
fortune capability what that
floor scrubber commit a
committee sub has in front of
you it has a private right of
action that that.
It doesn't specify any specific
ones so any private right of
action that you would have under
the facts of your case would be
appropriate to bring under this
bill so if you your if you meet
the test for to make a U. PA
claim you could absolutely bring
that claim now on the floor
senator Candelaria claims that
of because of the twenty twenty
U. K. dealing with the U. PA.
claims under this bill would not
qualify under the test for you
PA if you look at the U. PA
statute that specifically
includes debt collection actions
as something that.
Either this month or.
Senator Ivey Soto I think you
need to mute your microphone.
What's more in the it would also
even if there wasn't that
specific debt collection
language in there this would be
dealing with a a transaction
between any of the medical
providers and patients so you PA
you there there is an ability to
bring UP a claim if you limited
in the way the language the
senator Candelaria suggesting
you actually cut off folks
ability to make any other claims
to enforce anything under the
spell
and if you do it in the way that
he verbally sat on the floor
just to the selling of medical
debt you really cut off anyone's
ability to to bring any claim
under this bill other than that
very very narrow approach so
that would be.
That would both undermine the
agreements that I made with
center share and and and I just
want to say the the floor so
that you are seeing that is
representation of agreements
that I made was senator share
that that is my preference that
we honor those agreements any
any members that are offered to
the undermine the agreements
made between Senator share and I
will are deemed unfriendly and I
have committed to him to honor
those agreements and and I I
intend to do so.
Mr chair I there are other
things issues that were raised
in him Senator Candelaria is
amendments as well I don't think
they were the the main focus but
I can address them as you as you
lie all.
Thank you Sir doing
So there are there are not
amendments as I mentioned to the
bill before the committee today
is that right.
Not not prepared amendments.
I just Mr chair I have no
prepared amendments my guesses
Senator more styles.
Very good and I see he's the
first yes to recognize so we'll
go then to Senator Moores of for
the committee discussion Sir
Moores thank you Mr thank you
senator Duhig I do have to
members are I talked to him for
briefly about senator smartest I
can share with my screen but we
do work with a pretty easy I
think this which really make
this so a more bipartisan
efforts and also alleviate some
of the concerns of the bill that
really.
Lacked a lot of cooperation go
use the session for all those
affected include cited possible
so should should many others
my brothers would be that this
the study over the next year
actually a collaborative effort
to actually be brought together
because of the water.
I agreement about the debt
collection with the consequences
of my proposal.
on personal spiritual so but
what do members are pretty sure
all pretty straight for this
chart in our use of this record
we're going to ripple for first
was dealing with medical size
concerns that we talked about
for about the low threshold on
what the what the size of
practice is.
The bill has twelve million
dollars which to Sanchez circus
church was called to medically
increase but still Croucher is
much more of a mid size and
small practices that she
realizes and so more member with
striker page I want to the
twelve million dollars to take
up to twenty million dollars
which gets more improve wind
what she's actually on to.
J. age nine from Mr wrote share
I would propose to strike
section eight in its entirety so
starts on page twenty arms are
page nine line twenty four
through Page ten wind nine and
again what the error I'm sorry
one eight Mr chair yeah what
that does is to replace.
For this one particular
industry what is saying is they
cannot charge more than a
hundred fifty percent of
Medicare which of course are you
have the option the medicine
ready to accept your contracted
price you can accept to take
Medicaid which is less than
Medicare exec chair or you can
negotiate with your insurance
company regained negotiate with
exultation what this does
sentiment Christ by the power
will be to work what you're
allowed to except for health
care services even
of those that might not be
covered by insurance and one you
know
what you're doing you were so
simple so.
Consequences that are project
sponsored tended to well prevent
so would definitely have the
medical side sure sure sure much
premature member but it was for
the Superbowl Mr chair.
Mr chair Rita.
Servers I think the issues are
distinct between the German once
you've just described so they
make sense for us to discuss
them separately the first
amendment as I understand you
propose would be to page five.
One seventeen is that right I'm
going to Mister chair Mister
right twelve million dollars.
And then in certain Lujan there
of twenty million dollars in
both the numer the number at
first.
That relates to the definition
of a.
Provider the size of the
practice Mr chair yes.
All right.
center yes first question for
percentages that friendly right
from the moment.
Mr chair that's an unfriendly
amendments both because it
undermines the agreements that I
made with Senator share and it
also would it change the scope
of this bill this bill is
intended to exclude small
practices it is not intended to
exclude
mid size and large practices in
New Mexico a practice that has
with with revenue of twenty
million dollars is a pretty big
is a pretty significant practice
are I have.
So I've gotten I had I Clinton
Turner and LESC do a lot of
research on the different
revenue amounts for practices
both in New Mexico and
nationally and this even just
looking at the national numbers
setting a twenty million dollar
I threshold floor in that that
would be a a practice let's see
for pediatric anger and
endocrinology at eighteen
physician a practice that has
eighteen physicians practicing
is just using the national
numbers which actually higher
than than ours are specific to
New Mexico for for family
medicine.
I wanted to do some math here.
That would a practice that has
twenty five.
I'm physicians and it those are
big practices here in New Mexico
those are the practices that are
intended to be under the scope
of of the spells.
Senator Moores usual for thank
you Mr secretary I think and I
appreciate Senator says but
she's wrong she's actually
completely wrong our numbers are
wrong the data she has come
close to the reality of the
street I think that's an example
of why this bill is ready for
prime time is what we want is a
lot more studies because a
twenty million dollar practice
not huge those statutes are
just.
Really really well
your budget go through many many
practices with four five four
five providers specialist at
region of structural damage I
know many of when the state
because of an industry insider I
understand that threshold so
that is way off twenty million
dollars is more modest sized
practiced with about five so
we're kind of special issue.
so there's this is a member of
the large Egolf are practices
that use that term but her of
bills because it hasn't been
worked out of her.
Correct would worked on many
many modest size practice.
More than a more in your
amendment.
Sir anyone else on the proposed
amendment.
Senator Stewart on the
amendment.
So Mister chairman I cannot find
where this ammendment is I
thought it was page five line to
which is where sent word senator
Morris I thought said perhaps I
misunderstood.
Excuse me Mr chairman and
service to our are you looking
at the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for seventy
one or the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for the
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for someone.
Mr chair so proton the two oh
two numbers two two zero two
nine nine point two is the
latest one that was sent out on.
What was delivered to my office
so it's really unfortunate.
Mr chair Senator yes I realize
that earlier this morning and
that's why we had the the
correct version in fact and
actually I I believe that the
surgeon of our sergeant at arms
went around and and did pass out
the correct versions folks that
might be there somewhere.
Chairman what the sergeant of
arms drop me was eight four
point three.
And that's what was emailed to
me.
So.
I'll see if I can find it
somewhere
and Mister chairman Senator
work.
If you're looking at an older
version of the bill the relevant
part of the bill is
under the definitions in section
two is the definition of third
party healthcare providers and
it's simply the threshold for
the third party healthcare
provider that we're looking.
Even on an old version of the
bill.
And that would be on page five
line seventeen.
In the older sub if we had
received in person.
So.
This
is.
Mr Chairman on the old version
five seventeen right I don't
believe that it that's not
twelve million at step twelve
million that's been proposed.
Close to move up to twenty as
isn't that right yeah.
I think in your version Center
stored I would say five million
think that this this twelve
million in the bushes to make
it.
And Mr Mr chair.
I if I may well we're well we're
figuring out that the for that
different versions there
to ship.
I would find it so I I'm looking
at data that was a report that
was actually sent to me by
Senator Moores I about different
revenue levels nationally and
now the difference between this
data and and the one that
Clinton Turner found is that
this data is specific to what
these various positions are
producing when they are working
in a hospital so it's not it's
not apples to apples and not
fully on points to what we're
discussing here but even under
that data produced by Senator
Moores in a family practice with
with the twenty past twenty
million dollar revenue that
would be that would be about ten
physicians tend to family
practice physicians in that
practice using his data
although that data is is skewed
because it's it's on actually
talking about it's only
referring to revenue that is
produced based on admissions and
hospitals so but even then in
New Mexico that's a pretty that
is a the kind of mid size
practice that should be covered
under under the spell.
Senator Stewart.
I really believe you have the
floor and I just make sure we're
all operating on the same page
all right.
I'm I'm done with the floor.
We're on the one single proposed
amendment it seems to be limited
to the application scope.
Representative of the bill and
the size of practice that would
be involved.
is there any other discussion on
the proposed amendment.
Service center Baca has a stand
up and I had.
Okay very good Sir bye
considerably so thank you.
Thank you Mr chair actually the
settlement for temporary staff
raised a lot of my concern here
I I I don't have a current copy
the surgeon arms did not deliver
a current copy to me because
that would have necessitated a
hundred mile round trip and so I
don't have that we would have
been nice to at least have
gotten that by email
now I'm moving off of this copy
us to work to work a version or
two down the line and now being
asked to go back and and look at
amendments in a subcommittee
substitute that.
Doesn't exist so I'm.
An issue that Mr chair I'm gonna
chairman I'm sorry to interrupt
you but I found the subject to
in the email it was emailed to
me it was not what was delivered
but it was emailed and I have
found the two nine nine point
two version in the email.
Thank you Senator is us center
Baca I'm checking with staff
I've been told that it was
emailed earlier and is being
emailed again now okay thank you
colleges if I missed it I did
look through my email maybe I
just didn't see it so thank you
that's all right we'll go to
center Ivey Soto and and frankly
Senator Baca if you were others
feel that you need some
additional time to review the
email will we'll go as far as we
can with that we may be moved
out of the agenda for today will
still here today but I want to
make sure you have whatever
comfort you need to have you
have the bill in front of you
we're not going to force anybody
to vote on a bill that you don't
have the option to have the
funding all right Sir Baca.
Thank you Mr chair Preciado
under Ivey Soto thank you very
much Mr chairman Senator do it
with regard to the amendment
would you.
Reminder educate us as to as to
what a third party health care
provider.
What does that mean in the
context of this bill.
What difference would that make.
Yes Mr chair Senator all the
also and and that's a good
question because under this bill
third party healthcare providers
just someone who is providing
medical services with the and
one of the medical facilities
like hospital.
And we look towards your claim
to the Tory clinic things like
that so there find their third
they're a standalone provider
but whose providing serve
medical services within one of
those facilities and they are
billing a patient for
independently so to the extent
that it matters whether folks
are and are not where it's going
to retain what what will really
apply to them because the the
the ban on that collection that
applies to everyone that is
deprivations neutral place all
medical debt where this really
would make a difference would be
whether these are folks who need
to wait until they get the
results of the screening for
Medicaid eligible or or
insurance eligibility before
billing a patient or whether
section eight which is the
subject of clear Moores other
amendments which is the price
that pricing parity which would
not allow which would make it so
that uninsured patients are not
charge more than a hundred fifty
percent of Medicare whether that
would apply to them or not when
they are independently billing a
patient for services provided in
a separate health care facility
that is covered under the spell.
And so Mister chairman and and
and senator do it so I go in to
get surgery.
I wake up after the surgery I
get the bills from the hospital
and then I get a separate bill
from anesthesiologists.
Is that is that what we're
talking about here.
Mr chair Senator yes it is so
that anesthesiologists assuming
that they had revenues of
twelve million or more they
would be required to before they
bill you get the result of the
screening that the hospital did
to see if you're eligible and
and get you signed up for for
Medicare or Medicaid rather or
other our coverage so that
they're not billing you
inappropriately if in fact you
have secured that coverage and
if you are an uninsured patient
they would know that they need
to bill you at no more than a
hundred fifty percent of the
Medicare rather than any amount
which is what they can do now.
And Mister chairman Senator
doing is that.
So them if they get the results
back then is this the third
party health care provider have
to sign up for some up for
Medicare Medicaid.
Mr chair Senator no they do not
date all of that all of those
obligations those are on the
facilities themselves the third
party person just wait to get
the results of that process
before billing the patient.
Okay thank you very much that's
very helpful to know the context
Mr Mr chair Senator Ivy Soto
worked with your example yes you
all of this is correct which are
also not taking into account or
into why this bill is ready yes.
Point is for Sir oral surgeon
you our practice in oral surgery
or state plastic surgery he
doesn't do a lot of bill and
work at the hospital's
additional apps revenue up
twelve million dollars or more
of a might get called in from
time to time to go to where
after auto accidents in oral
surgeon to assess privileges at
a hospital so they're not really
doing very often to the hospital
other tool revenue would be over
the stressful so the one of the
unintended consequences that
oral surgeon wouldn't go to the
hospital anymore to ensure these
kind of patients this is an
example of how the school really
has been well thought out and
has been worked on with so but
the Sanchez with the with the
medical community order by
Parsons matter on so I think
there's a lot of untended
consequences forces number of
unintended consequences that
have sought out on just those
two just mention to reckon the
costs off on that.
You Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir I'm sorry to all
the floor consider Moores
amendment.
I'm I'm actually I'm done thank
you thank you others on the
amendment right now.
All right we were prepared for a
motion
roll call vote on the motion
production amendment.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
No.
No ma'am.
No.
Course yes.
Yes.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator to pass.
Is that what what checked up
again and we got a different
account.
Four six two six three yes Sir.
Or.
I believe it is five four five
four Mr chair.
Everybody on the committees
getting a five four vote in one
right.
Let's make sure we have it right
so we have their names right.
Welcome yes yes.
Well.
Right.
Soto yes I'm about.
Very good all right thank you
very much senator Morris you
have a second amendment thank
you so for chair of the second
amendment was on again everyone
has a committee of the two oh
two was two two oh two nine nine
point two no more
so more money or if you just a
moment absolutely Sir committee
members this version of the bill
was emailed to you on Thursday
at four fifty two I'm told and I
have the email I believe it's
got everybody on their
March fourth four fifty two PM
probably anticipating this might
be heard on Friday but I go back
and dig through your email
you'll find it of course I
understand agreement looks like
mine you're probably three or
four thousand behind us so it
maybe maybe trapped in there
someplace we've also tried to
just send it to you right now so
we're all speaking from the same
sheet of music okay but I I do
want to sure the committee were
trying hard to give you the
email and notice of of of bills
as are developing in the
committee all right Sir Baca.
Thank you Senator Moores on the
second amendment thank you Mr on
chairman Senator so again on the
committee substitute a committee
substitute two two zero two two
nine point two on page nine it's
basically section eight the
committee so restricted in its
entirety and then re number
accordingly it is the price
about the title is providing for
price parity one reality this
does this price setting use the
government power to actually do
a price lock to lots of
unintended consequences on this.
It would set the price of oil
anything that has a Medicare
clue at a hundred fifty percent
I was gonna using examples from
our own business on trial
recently was COVID yes Medicare
pays off hundred dollars for
COVID yes so many of you
received COVID yes risiko yes
you have Medicare was a hundred
dollars Medicaid pre will
glasses yet private insurance a
little bit more
right now under this bill so
someone is flying to Tahiti we
do travel testing also or flying
overseas in the the PCR based
test currently we charge a
hundred seventy five dollars
service southwest laboratories
number returns hundred ninety
nine dollars and ironically by
the White House currently
charges a hundred seventy five
dollars on to the media in the
White House with the city code
yes under this rule on that
would be trapped by two hundred
fifty dollars more
Inc you can go through medical
coat after coat after coat
tribunus fertilization some
Medicare covered our procedure
because it doesn't just deal
with the altar rituals railroad
workers dependents are you would
cap their fees so you can see a
lot lot of unintended
consequences because the stores
were brought out to the the
price parity is not a prosperity
is also talking about capping
fees for those who are wealthy
in our business we get lost
people who don't have insurance
to pay for it themselves calls
and try to negotiate on their of
medical bills which scientists
free market what this is saying
no matter how wealthy you are is
that you to the get into your
service for a hundred fifty
Madam chair there were previous
versions of try to address that
issue unfortunately that was
taken out but exam this is just
isn't so.
This bill needs more work in the
intro to get to work and speech
isn't that consequences will
soon so Senator Mr chair.
Ocean of center Moriches to
strike section eight beginning
on page nine members of the
committee Center good first well
is that a friend around from the
amendment.
Mr chair central amendment both
because again it undermines the
agreement that I made with
Senator share and to Senator
more Moores presentation of what
this actually does is not
accurate this provision only
applies to uninsured patients so
only for patients who are
uninsured would there be a
limitation on price so right now
if you are uninsured you can be
charged with anything you do not
get the benefit of insurance
companies negotiated rates and
it's not uncommon for folks to
charge four and five hundred
percent of Medicare to uninsured
patients also only for uninsured
patients would there be a limit
of a hundred fifty percent of
Medicare which is also the
average of what the
reimbursement is under
commercial insurance agreements
are insurance policies so what
this would do would make sure
the uninsured patients don't get
charged more than insured
patients are are typically
charge
And we all also.
Hello one second I.
Eighty five percent of uninsured
patients in New Mexico in New
Mexico are under four hundred
percent of the federate federal
poverty so yes there are
probably going to be a couple of
rich people who are uninsured
who might get the benefit of
only paying the same rates the
under the insured patients are
charged but the vast majority of
New Mexicans who are going to
benefit from not being paid
hyper inflated charges are going
to be low income New Mexicans
who can't afford to pay hyper
inflated charges.
So this is an unfriendly
amendment
and.
That's Mr.
Thank you so what so what's your
Mr chair the drafters of the
spilled on our standard medical
districts COVID tests and so use
that example you're traveling
getting on an airplane flying
overseas COVID yes I'm not sure
they're not covered by insurance
because your insurance does not
cover them because it's not
medically necessary on the
surface and sample so what this
bill would ban do with trap that
a hundred fifty dollars sauce so
families could fly which is been
numerous during the pandemic you
want to fly cross country or
overseas for many reasons we had
a test of our accounts active
since father passed away in the
call and have a protest in
seventy two hours from the time
he landed in Nepal circuits and
to we've been over backwards to
get that germinates fast Senate
students are results.
Got a personally Randy your
results in which are some
hundred seventy five dollars for
that this this bill would
chapter out of a hundred fifty
it was not covered under
insurance because you have a
travel internationally for
access so that's an example of
how this bill just doesn't
understand medical medical
industry needs are moving more
all work to actually get to the
attendant tension Sanchez wants
it to.
Correct and other misstatement
of Senator Senator Senator let
me let me trying to the side I
don't want to committee turned
into a debate between two
members I think we need to have
a little bit more order so what
I would ask it is they're doing
this collect your response one
economy propose an amendment
will let the proposed amendment
and we'll make sure we let you
collect your thoughts in
response but I I don't want to
have this look like a tennis
match
and so let me for me first of
all go to other members the
committee have Senator Stewart
and then a Centers new again
please hold the responses to
really to Senator Moores and to
to others except as questions
are addressed to you all right
please right Sir Sir Senator
Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator do
head would you please explain
why the last comment was an
accurate.
Mr chair yes thank you if you
look at the language I.
On line I Page ten this only
applies to the applicable
payment rates so if Medicare
doesn't have an applicable
payment rate for something and
and Senator Moores referring to
just one individual insurance
company not covering something
but if there is not applicable
Medicare payment rates for
service then this does not
apply.
I'm so would not so if in the
event that there is no plausible
payment rate for a COVID test
which I don't think it's
actually correct but but if that
were the case this would not
apply and it would not limit the
cost and and someone could hyper
inflate the cost of that if they
chose to Ford and current
patient.
But as written it would not
allow it what Senator Moores was
describing.
Chairman I thought he wasn't
supposed to be able to do that.
I've got to chair Senator you
have the floor Moores.
Thank you Mr chair
Senator Moores please recognize
Senator as a for awhile you've
called me Mr chair no I just
want to recognize their sort of
our our.
Start thank you Mr don't.
Mister chairman Senator Duhigg
answered my question thank you
thank you center Baca then
anyone else's hand at this level
of center Baca.
Thank you Mr chair just a
curious
in that section it says
emergency or medically necessary
care mode drive on so Mr chair
my question would be
is a preventative testing is
that considered emergency or
medically necessary an example I
would give would be a
colonoscopy here a breast exam
of for breast cancer or
something like that.
Mr chair Senator I will also be
or or mammograms and and and
breast cancer prevention exams
would be considered medically
necessary.
Mr chair what about what about
blood testing I mean some of the
stuff that concerns me is it is
it is so definition for
medically necessary or emergency
care somewhere in the bill.
Mr chair Senator Baca in one of
the many meetings that I have
with all of the the stakeholders
on this.
I'm a little over the lobbyist
representing the the various
medical interests.
I actually suggested that we go
ahead and define medically
necessary as a non elective
procedure.
And I wish Mr chair you could
have seen the panic on their
faces I because the truth is it
is the facilities that are
coding these things as medically
necessary are not and the code
everything is medically
necessary because that helps
them maximize their payments
from insurance companies
so it is to define things as
medically necessary in a way
that is not based on increasing
their recovery is
and and exclude some things
based on that and they could
certainly choose to do so.
Thank you Mr chairman I wasn't
trying to be facetious with that
Senator I I was asking a
straight question here I have no
medical experience of just a
person like everybody else is
going to be impacted by this
bill so and obviously wasn't in
any of those meeting so I I was
just curious because that that
term.
Maybe it's very general in the
medical industry Mr chair maybe
not I don't know it sounds kind
of narrow to me just reading it
here but
without a definition I just
don't know what that is but
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for answering.
We're from the minute committee
members others show hands anyone
wishing to get in on the
amendment.
Senator Duhigg I may have
questions or least observations
on this section of the bill.
This of I guess the first
question I have it really comes
about run line for were it says
that the restriction that would
apply here.
I use the words as applicables
so uninsured patients in amount
no greater greater than as
applicables so although I'll
start back with them well I I
think that's the number of
ambiguities to be honest with in
this section the bill so that
the first one really is the
prohibition that the providers
of the facility shall not charge
an amount.
I'm in my mind really the issue
should almost really be a matter
collection versus charge I'll
never get over I really
appreciate the purposes and
intention behind your bill I'll
never get over the medical
billing industry hospital
billing practices because I can
only imagine if I is a lawyer
build my clients twice what I
really thought they were going
to pay me just to just to see
what might stick you know but
that's that's always what it
feels like when I see medical
bills so they they'll the bill
one two three times what they're
actually willing to collect or
accept for the services and and
I I like I said I can only
imagine doing that in any other
business or charging a client
two or three times what the what
I'm really prepared to accept or
what I accept from others for
the same service so I really
appreciate you trying to do I I
have a number of of issues with
the bill as it's written but I
but I'm I'm so with you where
you're at but you're you're
you're living what should be
charging my mic it should almost
be what should be collected.
and then it goes on to say let's
in amount no greater than and
this is as applicables that is
one hundred fifty percent of the
applicables payment right so
what what is the meaning of the
words as applicables there what
what what is what is the purpose
of that language the first as
applicables.
Sharelines if you don't mind me
just read it in context yes Sir.
And and while I'm doing so if if
either of my experts would like
to address that question R.
please feel free to do so.
Absolutely thank you Mr chair
members of the committee so.
There are two references to Avid
at with the boring old
Representative separately so the
first one as applicable is
really intended to say you know
where there is a Medicare rates
the second one is.
That the Medicare rate shall be
the rate at which a charters are
limited Representative guess
hundred fifty percent at.
Yeah I think the first use of as
applicables probably unnecessary
in my concern is that it would
create a loophole for people to
avoid this provision because
when you're saying as
applicables some of the state
well this doesn't apply then it
goes on to say how to fifty
percent of the applicables right
payment right pursuant to
federal Medicare program if
state or federal law does not
otherwise that the amount.
Of so let me just ask Miss it is
there anything other than
Medicare in the state of New
Mexico not to not federal about
state law we're New Mexico has
set a rate other than by
Medicare.
Mr chair not to my knowledge the
reason that we have that
language in there is because
there are some other states
where they do they have
commissions that sits on
generally accepted rates which
and in the event that New Mexico
goes in that direction this was
drafted in this way to account
for that thank you I I assumed
that was true and I know the you
have the Health Security Act
introduced several times over
the past years which would do
that which would set rates for
really all services and
providers and I I just wanted to
know if there was something
other than Medicare but I they
did know about other would
otherwise set that charge.
in and then I and then I have to
somewhat agree with the thinking
that the term uninsured.
Transmissible ambiguous I I look
for a definition and did not see
one is uninsured the reason I
think that that's all
ambiguous as this as an employer
I provide health insurance for
my employees and I I have my own
health insurance there are there
is always on the any service
there is a deductible amount
sometimes it can be very high
deductible amount there's a
copay of that sometimes is a
high amount of certain medical
care may be insured and certain
medical care may not be insured
for for me even though I
consider myself to be an insured
person but but some of the
things that I trust me when I go
to get the service I get a bill.
And the and I'm never happy with
the bill in the in the insurance
company will sometimes say well
that's that's because that's
part of your deductible or are
your annual deductible amount
copay amount so we get into that
squabble so so the the as used
in this context I think
uninsured probably something
that should be very thoroughly
to find and I don't see a
definition of it in center you
may have a very clear
understanding and others on the
on the committee chair Sen what
that means but but
I assure you when my employees
go get the procedure and end up
with the deductible they don't
like or something I encourage
them to come see me so that
maybe we can get a better health
care plan going forward so those
are just my general thoughts on
this proposed section of the
bill I I do see some ambiguity
and and and maybe I don't know
where's Senator you've had
enough time to help me
understand why that as
applicables a first as apple
has has any purpose my concern
my concern is that it may be a
little room for somebody get out
of this section.
Mr chair I think would be a
friendly amendment to take that
first as applicables out on my
and if if I member of the
committee is willing to sponsor
I can quickly draft
definition to clarify the use of
the term uninsured patients to
address those concerns.
So
Let me hold off on insisting on
those moments for me right now
I'm I'm making the comments
let's see how the vote goes with
the committee on the motion
itself and then and then we'll
figure out what we need to we
need to do some work on this
section so others on on the
motion to strike section six
from the bill in its present
form.
All right we're ready for a roll
call vote on this which would be
the second amendment etcetera
pirtle did you have something
else I'm sorry and see you
Senator yes Mr chair I apologize
for that.
I had my cartoon hand up and
sometimes it's hard to see.
My question was it was mentioned
with the codes as far as
different procedures and things
what
doesn't have a code what types
of procedures or surgeries or
things don't have a code that
Medicare would apply to.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle are
great question because pretty
much everything as code like I
mentioned earlier IBS has a code
into being screwed Station
passcode most things have a
chair code because Medicare's
comprehensive health care we
think about it as just for the
elderly but it also covers
dependence on the real world
workers so many of almost all of
the medical procedures you can
think of.
Chair close so the optical
language of some serve on just
mention pretty much covers
almost everything you can think
of so for non surgical or non
Dental services are not covered
chair except for listed so oral
surgery in all school or job
replaced out the secretary sh
but cavities Marco so pretty
much of most medical procedures
you have a coach.
Mr chair as the sponsor that
that question was actually
directed to it to me so it it's
interesting to to hear this from
senator Morris because the
entire reason that we added that
applicable language in there was
in response to concerns from the
medical community that there are
all sorts of things that there
is not an applicable chair code
for and they wanted to make sure
that in those instances this
would not this one hundred fifty
percent rate of cap on
reimbursement would not kick in
and so that was actually added
at their request for the be all
with the opposite logic of what
was just offer from Senator
Moores but very quickly Google
Lee would shows me and that some
things are not covered by
Medicare either part a or part
B. R. long term care most dental
care eye exams dentures could
any cosmetic surgery acupuncture
hearing our hearing aids and
exams for fitting them and
routine foot care there might be
other things based on on but we
kept on hearing from the entire
medical community there were
there were many more things that
might not have come out.
Mr chair of the the question was
actually directed to the sponsor
of the amendment but I do
appreciate you you answering
So Google what what was the
source on your Google search
because I do have a little bit
of a concern.
With
you know presenting some of the
statements as as statement of
fact but yeah we have really
been presented anything by any
real expert.
in the field
with with regard to.
The issue that we're we're
speaking about.
Mr Chairman looking at Medicare
dot gov there's a section under
Medicare covers and what's not
covered by part a and part B..
And and Mr chairman and senator
has it been your experience that
cash payers pay more than.
Insured patients that I don't
know that I've I've ever even
seen that to be the case.
Mr chair I Senator it is it is
definitely been my experience
and I suspect that my experts on
can can address that as well
that that that that has been
there experience they'd like to
and and Mr chair if they'll.
expand on on their expertise
again for for my benefit.
Please Mr chair.
Mr chair
Senator alright also Senator
online poverty we represent low
income patients across the state
work with community members who
are uninsured in dealing with
medical debt and you may recall
it was national news when
Carlsbad Medical Center which is
owned by a large corporate
health care providers in the one
of the largest being knighted
states was aggressively suing
thousands of patients continues
to scale thousands of patients
across the state were uninsured
and the amounts billed.
To those patients were well
above Medicare rates certainly
double triple times the cost and
we're in fact at times above the
Chargemaster right which is the
gross charges that are listed in
publicly available in fact the
starting point for negotiations
negotiations with insurance
companies and so most nobody
pays the Chargemaster right
except uninsured folks who don't
have the benefit of an insurance
company or in the government
because they get Medicaid or
Medicare setting the prices for
their health care so that's it's
a nationwide problem it's one
reason why many other states
have moved to do price parity
and you know I know there's some
concern about in detail
fertilization and in California
for example because Medicare
only covers let me please
interrupt given our agenda given
the complexity of the bill we
have to cover up and ask we get
direct answers to direct
questions I believe the question
was stated pretty specifically
Senator Pirtle was your question
Center doing give you give you
to for experts Lee I'm gonna ask
you to please make sure they try
to be directing responded to
direct questions alright.
Senator you maybe need to
restate your question.
Mr chair it appreciate that the
question what was was simple as
if it was your experience that
the cash people pay cash pay
more than those who have
insurance and also if you could
just remind me of your expertise
quickly Mr chair and experts Mr
chair Center part also we are to
Chinese New Mexico St online
poverty and we work with low
income patients who are
uninsured and so at times that
means they pay cash and we
represent many many patients
who have been charged well above
insured patients even when you
apply you and I think you see
hospitals will when someone's
paying cash apply discounts
sometimes on to the bill that is
still in charge we have found
above what insurance folks are
paying or what would be that
apple will reimbursement rate
under Medicare and so that is
that is that are experienced and
and our work with national
experts on this type of
legislation which is you know
happening across the country to
answer your question.
Well in Mr appreciate that but I
mean I pay a thousand dollars a
month for.
Health coverage for a family
that's that's pretty healthy and
most of the time we don't even
make our deductible by the end
of the year and and a lot of
times if you were paying cash at
the Walgreens the the antibiotic
that my kids would need actually
less than my deductible so I
just I really don't understand
Mr chair and and senator and and
experts we're this is coming
from because it doesn't really
seem to be the real world that
we live in
it doesn't seem to be quite the
the situation is being
put out so I just for my own
personal experience it's it's a
frustration of money to be the
other direction that if I didn't
have health insurance and I was
paying cash it would cost me
less money so I think this is a
solution in search of a problem
that doesn't exist and so I'm
going to support the man thank
you Mr chair Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr Chairman just a
quick question for Senator
Duhigg
and I look as we're looking at
this this particular
Section of are we ensuring every
talking about just the uninsured
or what about the under insured
also because the under insured
of course also rack up bills I
know I've dealt with some
constituents over human MH they
had insurance that they were
severely under insured for what
they were paying for suppose it
coverage so that's one question
Mr chairman.
Mr chair Senator odd no this
would just apply to to uninsured
patients I you're right that is
a problem with under insurance
and under insurance and and and
I think that is something that I
I'd love to address with you in
the future
but that's not what this
provision I would address okay
thank you Mr chairman Senator
one more question and I'm always
you know we learned in this
committee of course there's
different ways of looking at the
different bills that come in
front of us and I was thinking
what about a set of saying of
what can be charged but if we
look at where patients are not
be more than.
So we're looking at here talking
about what the companies can
charge but now we're saying
maybe that patients shall not be
more than and you know and live
the in the the amount I mean
it's a different way of looking
at it thank you Mr chairman.
And I.
Mr chair Senator I don't know if
you want me to to respond to
that.
we think that that that's kind
of what with the chair was
getting at in talking about hi
collections verses billing
now my one concern about that is
that if you have patients who
are are not terribly
sophisticated patients and don't
understand that even though
they're getting it's this big
bill they don't have to actually
pay it
than than those folks are are
are probably going to think that
they are expected to pay what
they are built I think the if we
were to take an approach like
that it would require adding on
more disclosure language on
bills that would very clearly
give patients notice of of what
was what their obligations
actually work because otherwise
I think that most patients when
getting a bill will take it at
face value.
Representative up Mr on that
point.
No Senator I'm really reluctant
take on that point Mrs directly
answering a question for you is
that is that true yes
Representative center I'm so.
Just just operational so that
that if if it's.
If we allow them if if we have
the right to charge the rack
rate but you don't collect the
rest I guess my concern would be
that people get reported to the
credit agencies for unpaid
amounts.
Thank you back to.
Senator Lopez the for Blue.
Thank you Mr chairman I mean
that's that's a discussion we've
had for those of us to go up to
you animation other hospitals
try and help our our
constituents so I the way their
credit gets messed up thank you
Mr chairman.
Senator Lopez my missing anyone
else for discussion on the
proposed amendment.
The minutes before the
committee.
so strongly members Senator.
Mr chair just just quickly
something pop in whenever
Senator Lopez was was asking her
question.
And this will be directed at at
Senator
Moores but what what is the
percentage charge right average
percentage charge right for
insurance compared to Medicare
or Medicaid.
Mr chair Senator it varies
dramatically Medicaid is usually
much lower usually about ten
fifteen sometimes low seven
percent less than Medicare and
then insurance of our contracts
depending on the insurance
provider's are someone sometimes
considerably higher depending on
the the special lease specialist
region rural versus urban
what kind of network the insurer
past so those are actually
negotiated contracts that we the
provider and the insurance
companies.
So.
Mr chairman and senator then
maybe
A better way to write it would
be equal to the lowest
negotiated rate by an insurance
provider or something along
those lines.
Senator I think that's just you
know to her point was about on
the bill was to deal with the
billing aspect and with that
collection and it has expanded
to being price setting and other
issues that really don't along
the spill of this comprehensive
nature with unintended
consequences like this would
have she wants to come back to
work on this legislation which
are highly encouraged her to
because this bill just in its
entirety is not ready for for
prime time.
In in Mister chair I I
appreciate that because I think
if if the negotiated rates for
insurance are one hundred eighty
five percent or two hundred
percent of Medicare you know
we're we're we're setting price
at a one fifty without looking
at each individual situation
looking at.
Location some of those issues
that we see in New Mexico so I
would be careful with this
setting it up one hundred fifty
percent if you know the average
insurance rate is a hundred
eighty five percent or a hundred
seventy five percent of Medicare
thank you Mr chair.
Senator Pirtle let's see that
six percent Pirtle that I saw
Senator Ivey Soto Senator we're
still on amendment Senator Ivey
Soto then Senator.
I'm just very quick questions
Senator do it what was the
public policy reason for picking
a hundred fifty percent.
Mr chair Senator Ivy Soto is
because that is the average for
the of average amount that
commercial insurance companies
get is a hundred fifty percent
of of Medicare.
So it was like when you look at
all the all the price comes in
all the different insurances.
Mr chair Senator yes thank you
madam Christian.
Thank you center store.
On chairman us Senator Ivey Soto
just ask the question I was
going to just.
See no one else on the amendment
we're ready for a vote on the
motion to amend.
Emily.
Right for roll call on the.
Motion to strike section eight
from the bill.
Yes.
Now.
Senator Vogel.
Right no ma'am.
With no.
Yes.
Yes.
Your.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
That amendments adopted.
All right Mister immortal Rio
two amendments other committee
members discussion on the bill
as amended now.
Ready so.
Yes I was just hope that we can
have brief discussions since
that will likely come up on the
floor regarding the U. PA and
whether the UK should be
mentioned in the bill or not.
And and she let me just ask Mr
chairman
I think you have some experience
with UPS claims as well along
with the sponsor.
Public madam chair Dr practiced
I I have a little familiar to
customers chairman what is what
is your sense of of the of the
PIM and matching up in statute.
So Senator this was what part of
my questioning.
One now we got for the committee
members on this version of Bill
it seems to me that the
references
referencing the you for trade
practices act in this bill have
been eliminated I was that was
really a question for center to
do it but if I look at it look
at the title look at the bill.
I think those so those
references making violation of
any of these provisions in this
this bill to be unfair trade
practices act violation because
of all the eliminated if I may
Senator Ivey Soto answer your
question by asking Senator do it
to confirm my reading of the the
bill.
Mr chair yes that was part of
the agreement that I made with
Senator share those school.
But in Mr one since I was on the
floor at the time that the bill
was referred back to committee
though.
That's why I'm asking the
question because we may get
asked on the floor in fact is
the chairman of the committee
you may get us on the floor
about that.
Yes thank you Senator Ivey Soto
love is not a question directed
to me just yeah that's an
observation to discussion and
I've had Center Ivey Soto it's
good for the whole committee to.
Join I think you're in my chair
thinking on this it's it's
oftentimes easy as legislators
to.
Piecemeal thank you all heard me
talk about piecemeal in the
constitution the other day we
have an I was piecemeal statutes
by finding conduct that we think
is very egregious and and when
we find that agreed as we we and
act a bill on that conduct that
is easy to want to say well I'm
gonna put language in the bill
that says this isn't a violation
of the unfair trade practices
that we could do that with any
number of bills that are before
any of us this session.
With environmental pollution
water you name it the problem
for practitioners as lawyers is
if you do that you end up with
unfair trade practices language
all over the place all
throughout the statutes and any
number of different acts and
then before too long it could be
dozens or hundreds of places in
the law and and what happens in
that case is a lawyer or a judge
because very very hard to find
the law that relates to a given
circumstances so usually might
my practice as a legislator to
try and and leave the unfair
trade practices act itself so
that if there's conduct that.
Should be on the unfair trade
practices act that we amend the
unfair trade practices act
rather than taking every number
of different bills and putting a
violation of unfair trade
practices act in in each one of
those bills are throughout the
statute so that's the discussion
you had center Ivey Soto I think
that's better important and
better practices so I appreciate
the fact that that's been
removed from this bill it does
not change the fact that the
violations that could still
constitute unfair trade
practices it's just really a
necessary to put it in the bill
of that that's fine best way to
answer that Generoso General
thank you very much Mr chairman
I did I did and I tend to be out
an agreement as well action
might so the unfair trade
practices act was written in a
way to apply to.
Action.
Are that people take not apply
to specific
provisions of law and and I
guess for my my concern about
inclusion for triplexes Act in
in certain statutes is that that
would've could also lead a
reasonable dressed at some point
to look at chin that is taken in
a in a statute whether it's not
provided for.
And it and assume that the the
appropriate prices act was not
intended but that what and and
so for that reason also I I tend
to support that it's it is it is
best not added into any statutes
around but instead left itself.
And I see eye to eye center okay
others on the the bill as
amended now twice.
Okay Sir Baca then Senator
Duhigg.
Thank thank you Mr chair are you
able to see my hand when I reset
just curious Mr chair all of you
know that you know we haven't
had any light to your video of
their etcetera so I I am I am
I'm trying really hard my friend
but I I I do see it I see I see
your hand up and how many has to
have a well.
You have one over the other.
I'll just all I will welcomed
committee members if somebody
has a hand up that I'm not
seeing a recognizing a please
point out to me.
Senator Baca thank you Mr chair
I'm just looking at section ten
the waiver of rights Mr and and
senator
What things here could save
consumers will not be required
to exhaust any administrative
remedies it is necessary that we
say that isn't that already the
case Mr chair just seems
redundant language you don't
need in section eight because
section will go on to really
prohibit any such provision that
would contain that and in
section C. and D. again
reinforced section being
basically so I'm just wondering
section is necessary.
Senator Baca whose a question
directed to please to the to the
senator and the sponsor.
Mr chair Senator so because we
also have
a provision in here for
apportionment with the AG's
office that's why that languages
of their cause us someone might
argue that that that is that
that process would need to be
exhausted before bringing a
private right of action and
those are two separate on
enforcement approaches under
this bill.
Thank you Mr chair what it looks
to address that again though as
in paragraph C. and D. as well.
So Mr chair
And senator.
These are these are different so
so C. is talking about when when
a health care provider has has a
policy or or a contract with the
patients is often be in the
admission paperwork
Where it basically says by
signing this admission paperwork
you're you're waiving your
rights to.
To bring suit if we if we do
billing that would be contrary
to this or something that would
be unenforceable.
That's what what those are
dealing with.
So what
we're saying the consumer shall
not be required to exhaust any
administrative remedies provided
by provisions of all law read
the rest of it.
That it that would be the case
anyway.
You're not required to do that
we're not saying you can't do
that so yes you can you can
certainly
you can certainly use these
other Ramsey remedies that are
provided under law so that I I'm
not sure why we're seeing in the
negative of that do you do you
understand where I'm getting we
already have that right for them
why does it have to be
reiterated again in in section
AA that rate is already there.
Well is that well if if you have
another provision in here that
that would could potentially be
an administrative remedy then I
think you do need to clarify
whether that needs to be exhaust
first or not and and that's
actually something we see in our
statutes are quite often
I'm sure I could do a quick
search here but that language
clarifying whether or not you
need to to exhaust that remedy
or not we we often address that.
So perhaps on understanding the
question.
Thank you Mr chair AT and
Senator so okay let let's negate
the fact that it exists
somewhere else in statute
because we have many many issues
with in statute that are really
unnecessary in poorly worded and
what not and I guess that's what
I'm trying to prevent here so in
section it says a consumer shall
not be required to exhaust any
administrative remedies there's
no where that it says the should
exhaust them is my point so
telling in some part of the Cold
War within the statute that they
should exhaust those first then
they have the right.
Those and exhaust them if they
want to so why is that that that
all necessary section eight I I
just don't understand why it
would be.
What so this Mr chair Senator so
they could if if if a patient
chose to simply take the the AG
complaint route they could
certainly do so if they chose to
but but this is clarifying
language so that so that in the
event that this that are
practitioner out okay listening
hold on one second okay so under
the exhaustion of administrative
remedies doctrine where relief
is available from the
administrative agency the
plaintiff is usually ordinarily
required to pursue that Avenue
of rip before proceeding to the
courts and so unless that until
that recourse is exhausted so
additional premature and must be
dismissed so under that doctrine
exhaustion of administrative
remedies doctrine unless we have
this language in here they they
are going to because if this
comes up before court the court
is going to look to that doctor
and say no they do need to
exhaust that first so that's why
we need that specific language
in there because we don't want
to set people up to have to
exhaust that process before
being able to to bring private
right of action.
I understand what you're saying
senator and you know I think we
just have a a little bit of a
different opinion on that
provision itself I I think the
rest of it sufficiently covers
what you're trying to do I think
really in that paragraph you're
just a.
Enforcing something that they
already have and you know
obviously there you quoted a
general legal doctrine it
doesn't seem it doesn't seem to
be relevant to you know in case
are anything that I've seen
anywhere and I've dealt a few
times with this but anyway I'll
defer to you on it I will I will
make a motion to strike it is
just a curious that that the
whole paragraph kind of had me
The Wilder to some degree thank
you.
Thank you Sir Malcolm in my
missing anyone on the committee
so to speak.
All right before we take motions
Senator.
Senator Mr chair this is just if
if I may have a chance to to
close on the bill before we go
to about about you wait till I'm
done with my comments and then
will be able to address them to
that's correct ma'am didn't know
maybe I was going to speak.
We are near the committee center
doing I think it's I think it's
good practice of a chair to wait
speak last that's usually my
practice
I wasn't here unfortunately when
this bill was for the first
time.
Committee what I want to
reiterate what what I said
earlier.
Senator contract and I'm
thinking here you give me an
idea for a bill that needs to be
introduced I may try and do it
even with one of the emergency
bills.
And that is this those of us
that practice law that deals
with death cases are personal
injury or always confronted with
a very interesting dilemma and
the courts in our state are
entirely inconsistent.
How they rule on the issue the
issue is when you when you're a
and and a personal injury case
and you hire an attorney to
recover your damages.
Are your damages the amount of
money that was charged by the
hospital and the doctor.
Or are your damages the amount
that was actually paid for those
damages to the doctor the
hospital.
That clear the difference I'm
I'm making their you you're
going to get an ambulance and
you get a error lift and you get
to stay in the hospital in the
bill might be fifty thousand
dollars but it but that's what
the bill looks like but in the
end the insurance maybe pays
only twenty five thousand
dollars on the bill the question
is when you go to court and to a
judge or to a jury what is the
right amount.
With the right amount fifty
thousand dollars right about
twenty five thousand dollars.
We lawyers fight about this all
the time.
and and different judges come up
with completely different
interpretations of that very
simple issue so that makes it
not seem directly relevant to
your your bill but it is to me
because again this matter of
billing and and getting being
paid more or less than the
amounts billed so for the I
think is is very relevant.
I do have some concerns of with
the the legal and of the the
bill however so I'll just give
you some examples the one of
most important affirmations of
your bill with I'm sure you
would agree would be the
definition of what is a health
care facility because it's a
health care facility that that
is subject to your bill but if
you look on page three of the
bill of.
A health care facility includes
things like.
a freestanding emergency
facility a freestanding birth
center.
I'm not sure what those things
are a look for definitions a
freestanding hospice
home health agency I look for
those things and I I didn't find
definitions for most of them I
understand that would be a big
task but I think it's an
important one because because
that definition
of this site's determines who's
subject to the act and I found I
found that definition.
Of the ambiguous candidly in
terms of so in terms of any of
those things.
I found section three to be very
ambiguous to me if you look at
section three which begins on
page five it talks about the
first the first new language
there and program basically in
addition other actions required
by applicable state federal or
local government ordinance.
Health Care facility shall take
the following steps.
I'm very reluctant to put into
law.
Recognition by the legislature
that city and county governments
may be able to adopt ordinances
that determine amended think
you're trying to address this
bill but that's what the I think
that's what this language would
have to be interpreted to mean
is that the legislature
recognized the local governments
could adopt ordinances to govern
the payment for emergency or
medically necessary medical care
and I think right now that's
probably way beyond the scope of
municipal and county
governments.
That section goes on to say that
that the a of the facility would
have to offer and verify the
patient has health insurance if
they're uninsured offer to
screen the patient for health
insurance and the system to
apply those are all laudable an
important goals and and maybe in
the interest of the health care
practitioner in their best
interest to do that try to help
people get to insurance and then
apply for insurance and have
that insurance
but I I get a little concerned
because at the bottom of page
five in section three it says
that if the facility gathers
that information in trying to
help somebody apply for
insurance.
It's a reason that subparagraph
three there it's more of a three
it says that that in that in
doing so then they're there to
offer it requests provide of
this assistance to the person
and then in the next page the
program forces every third party
health care provider will bill
the patients and the information
gathered by the steps required
the section to the third party
health care provider I've been
real concern about that I'd be
real concern that that this
would require by law.
sending information concerning
income assets liabilities
financial means and may include
setting ensuring healthcare
information putting health
history.
So that that that section cause
me some concern.
The
Section six we would dress but
that had concerns for me as well
I share the concerns of Center
Bach on section ten regarding
waiver of rights.
and doing certain things as a
waiver or of affected near their
legal remedies.
So let me let me give an example
of that.
Some of this just comes after
doing this for too long if you
look at section ten subsection
C..
This is on my page twelve it's
as a provision and a financial
assistance policy written
agreement that violates the
provisions of section B. is void
and unenforceable I understand
that.
If there's an agreement that is
in violation of subsection B.
it's void and unenforceable but
then the next sentence as a
court may refuse to enforce it.
Well I don't think you can be
both I think if it's void and
unenforceable is not that the
court may refuse to force of the
court must refuse of course it's
unenforceable because it's what
it's just says in the prison
sentences as void unenforceable
so it doesn't make sense in that
sentence is that the court may
refuse to enforce it
and then and then just oddly at
the very as as as equity may
require so of course gonna say
well you're telling me that that
providing this language is going
on a forcible but I may decide
to enforce it anyway because it
has permissive language may fuse
reviews of course it and that's
as as equity may require that's
the broad language it lowers
choose court can do a lot of
things in in the interest of
equity so so I I I had the
issues there too and then last
on try to round up my comments
will bit but
The of page thirteen of your
bill section twelve relates to
that part of our law that covers
judgments.
Just so everybody gets a little
education here today when you
get a judgment against you it's
good for fourteen years.
My my recollection of the law on
reflection of judgments as it
used to be that you could revive
that judgment in other words it
could be the the period for
enforcement could be larger
extended but I think we've
eliminated that.
So I think you know you're
saying okay so estimates are
doing that maybe they may be
wrong there is a loophole due to
case law where the court of
appeals invited the legislature
to close that loophole which is
what we're doing right here okay
very good.
So so and I appreciate that
because that's what I want to
ask about that language on page
thirteen so the judgment
obtained through a common law
action on a prior judgment or
through any other means of
revival of a prior generation
not be enforceable after
fourteen years from the date of
the original judgment so.
So what I understand you to be
doing here is that a judgment.
If we were to drop this
languages sexual a judgment
would only be enforceable for
fourteen years and can never be
revived the on that is that
correct.
Mr chair.
Yes right now address can be
revived off forever
which I I again I can't remember
the name of the court of appeals
case right now I but where they
said that that was not the
intent of the law and.
And so that's what this is
seeking to address with so that
folks are not don't have debt
collectors I reviving the
judgments for their entire lives
coming after them.
Thank you to all of our look at
the case with you because that
would be something for me to
learn a chance for me to learn.
About an area that that has been
a little uncertain I guess you
and I would probably agree about
that if the court of appeals a
Centers a loophole there and
others and the Legislature
corrected them then we should do
so although I don't I don't know
that it really goes to the heart
of what your bill is really
about but I but I I do like the
idea that the that this that
would do that.
I'm thinking that there may be
an easier way to work that was
as a judgment of transfer common
law action on a prior judgment
or through any other means of
revival of a prior judgment
shall not be enforceable after
fourteen years I think they
provide you with the judges say
that it need not no judgment
shall be enforceable we on
fourteen years by revival or
otherwise that that probably
seems to say the same thing but
anyway I appreciate the chance
to share some of my thoughts and
the and again I applaud very
much what you're trying to do
here I think it's necessary that
we begin to really try and and
get our hands around some of
these issues but but I I think
the bill would still require
some work for me to support it.
Senator doing your we're have
the last word.
I thank you Mr chair I I will
note to that Mr chair you and
and I think every other member
of this committee who was in the
Senate in two thousand fourteen
voted for the state kind of
screening that we see in this
bill and also voted for what is
the most critical part of this
bill which is the collections
ma'am
and and is a part of this bill
that.
Is desperately needed especially
now when so many New Mexicans
who the number one reason that
they're going to bankruptcies
medical bills are in there
facing an unprecedented economic
and health crisis
that that this is something that
will make a really big
difference in the lives of New
Mexicans I and so just as you
did in two thousand fourteen I
would hope that you would let
those remedy is get a fair
hearing on the floor and and if
there are still issues to be
worked out on this bill then
then we have the opportunity to
do that
but so far this bill has not
gotten a fair shot on the floor
I and I would ask that you allow
it to get to that point and and
do do pass today thank you.
I'm sorry Senator Pirtle I'm
sorry with your hand thank you
Mr chair I move to table.
Tabling motion Emily please call
the roll of the committee.
Yes.
Now.
Program.
No ma'am.
No no.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
You know.
Yes.
What is that.
For no.
The question fails other motions
of the committee would do Pat no
I move that do not pass on the
first committee steps to do
passed on this committee
substitute to nine nine point
to actually be two nine nine
point three.
Mr Chairman.
Just for the simplicity of of
exploiting the what this bill is
in the future.
And we just simply strike the
first Senate Judiciary Committee
sob and make this as a guest
reported out committees up for
Senator seventy one.
Representative I think that
would be accurate and fair is
there any objection to recording
the action on this bill as
Senate Judiciary Committee
substantive percent seventy one
Senator Baca that I would object
to that and normally I think you
know that that might work but
just a lot of the objection to
this bill Mr chair has been that
it needed to be worked on an
item that I needed a little bit
more time to develop and I think
that in this particular case the
the title and the and and the
way the bill is presented should
reflect that there's been quite
a bit of back and forth and
quite a bit of debate as to
whether you know all the
stakeholders were brought in
whether the proper negotiations
were made research done that
sort of thing and so I'm just
for that was the reason I would
object to it.
Any other objection on the.
A recording of the bill.
As the Senate Judiciary
Committee substrate for seven
seven seven one Sir Moores.
We are exactly what those that I
think the body needs to know
that this isn't ready for prime
time what's going into at this
point the body should really
consider that the student
support worker for the concerts
are thank you all right so let's
do it this way I forgot who made
the motion was a your motion
Senator Ingle was a center
search storage for storage are
stored the way you state the
motion is the way the actual we
reported so if you if you would
restate the motion again.
and that'll will take the vote
as that motion is made with the
bill is now in our committee.
Mr chairman I move a do pass on
Senate Judiciary cuts subject to
percentages sherry Committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventy one.
We've already moved a long time
ago and do not pass on the
original one so I don't think we
need that.
That's that's the motion that
time entertaining that's motion
will vote on.
Give them with the motion
prevails that's the way the bill
will be reported out of
committee all right Emily on a
roll call vote please.
You're welcome.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
No would you pass on a six to
three vote of the committee.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee Mr chair.
Mr chair the gas let us.
And I I thought we were voted.
What the title of the bill Mr
chair and the because we have no
objection for that so.
So please record you know if you
would.
Well record your vote is a no.
Senator nonetheless you have a
do pass on affected by that
change.
Just to pass on Senate seventy
one all right the next item will
here is is.
Senator Lopez on Senate bill one
ninety two.
So Lopez your muted.
The usual words Mr chairman your
muted.
Mr chairman I do believe that Mr
Grayson areas.
And see.
My apologies let me get my bill
that Mr Chairman.
Allergies.
Okay Mister chairman members of
the committee I am in front of
you presenting a Senate bill one
ninety two which basically is
requiring law enforcement
agencies and peace officers to
disclose evidence that are
favorable to an accused in a
criminal case Mr chairman
members of the committee this is
known as a gag Leo amendment and
if I could Mr chairman allow Mr
Grayson to give more background.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is James
Grayson I'm a deputy district
attorney in the second judicial
district I've been a trial
prosecutor for sixteen years
before that.
I worked in appellate law for a
little over seventeen years so I
bring a public perspective this
president based to trial
practice.
And I would like to let the
school committee no Mr chair
members of the committee that
this bill concerns issues of
transparency and accountability
for law enforcement officers it
also protects the due process
rights of a criminal defendant.
Prosecutors have an ethical and
constitutional duty to disclose
favorable evidence to to the
accused.
Favorable evidence includes
impeachment material and that is
information that can relate to
the credibility of a witness.
Law enforcement officers are
part of the prosecution team for
purposes of just constitutional
duty which is created by
ready versus Maryland thank you
we overseas United States.
And as members of the
prosecution team the prosecutors
charged with knowledge of
information in the possession of
law enforcement.
So the prosecutors performance
of this constitutional duty
depends on the cooperation of
law enforcement.
The currently prosecutors have
as I mentioned an ethical duty
to comply.
Hi with this constitutional
requirement and officers must
cooperate but that's not spelled
out by statute and this bill
would include those requirements
by statute and also impose
consequences for a knowing
failure to cooperate with that
requirement.
Thank you members of the
committee Mr chair thank you
Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr chairman I will
stand for questions.
Thank you Senator Lopez I don't
show anyone to have registered.
in opposition or other support
well I do have a Crist bal Zano.
Chris Baldonado.
In the call.
Well not in the call.
I have no one else registered in
opposition will go to members Mr
chair.
I'm.
Excuse me I'm sorry to
interrupt.
Hello without interruption was
from we're with members the
committee.
The committee with questions
comments.
Senator Ivey Soto
this gentleman that was Steven
Curtis who I think was wanting
to comment on this although he
is no longer there was an orange
I do however I do even is in the
room you'd like to.
Mr Chairman a I I think you may
have had some of public comments
if we could a lot of just you
that so Representative ninety
seconds or so that we have.
Mr Curtis had not registered as
a proponent or opponent on the
bill I don't show his name.
I'll recognize him for one
minute only because the sponsor
took a little time in the
presentation so what will take
an extraordinary step of
allowing someone who did not
register to speak to be
recognized for one minute Mister
Curtis.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I appreciate the
opportunity I registered this
morning obviously after the fact
that I was provided with the
zoom link so I appreciate the
opportunity I'm an attorney and
labor and employment attorney hi
Representative among other
people ask me Council eighteen
the representative themselves if
you're police officer units
throughout the state of New
Mexico.
I'm our concerns with the bill
actually technical they've asked
me to address some legal issues
that we have one police
departments typically have
standard operating procedures
were by police officers
themselves submit evidence to
the Department we suggest
therefore that the language
should find that the is the
department's obligation to
ensure that the prosecutor has
the requisite information to
although impeachment evidence
and exculpatory evidence are
both required in the law the
definition provided here and for
impeachment evidence is brought
in off and on thank you just
enough that the resulting
consequences for not providing
the information I a loss of the
officer certification it is
pretty dire.
Three there is no exception for
at pending in that I A.
investigations which sometimes
return a finding of no no
problem no clear the officer and
also tend to be shielded and
tell complete
We think that's important and
lastly and this is a minor point
and this subsection six where it
talks about knowingly refusing
to recognize the legal advocacy
for enforcing any provision of
the constitutional authority
executive orders etcetera makes
a lot of sense in the abstract
but the way draft the way it is
drafted it would appear to mean
that any time a police officer
fails to get a speeding ticket
but instead let someone off with
a warning they would be failing
to enforce the laws of the state
and therefore subject to losing
their certification and I think
we should recognize a certain
amount of discretion on the part
of the office thank you very
much and I can appreciate the
extraordinary opportunity for
thank you Mr Curtis all right
Senator Lopez for a while up to
one minute for responsible to
members the committee.
So Lopez I think.
Would you like to respond.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee in terms of the the
first first point about having a
police departments have the
obligation to respond the
problem with that is that
sometimes the department has
information that the officer
doesn't have and sometimes the
officer has information
department doesn't happen so
typically prosecutors trying to
filter giggly obligations will
seek information from both the
department and from the officers
themselves.
In terms of the second the
second criticism
there's no no exception for
pending I investigations the
bill is consistent with Carl's
persons with the which is five
fourteen US for nineteen
nineteen ninety five and because
what the United States Supreme
Court says the prosecutor must
retain all evidence that's
favorable to the accused from
the law enforcement agency and
so it's is the prosecutor that
determines what is favorable and
this bill would allow the
prosecutor to make that
judgment.
It doesn't necessarily include
or exclude I investigations what
does allow the prosecutor to
make that decision.
Thank you members question
members the committee.
Members of the committee are you
hearing me.
Yes okay.
Sometimes the screen pops up and
says you can't hear me.
You should all right
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you Mr chairman
So I I first of all a Senator
Lopez thank you for bringing
this.
Our forward
as I understand the structure of
them.
It is it is the responsibility
of the law enforcement agency
and the peace officer work
actually.
Right here Mister Kurtz of
saying about it should be just
on the agency but I I don't
sometimes the agency doesn't get
the information lots of this off
surprise impression the HSD
but the so my understanding that
is that it's for the law
enforcement officer in the
agency to provide the
information the prosecutor and
that is clearly established in
law but the prosecutor provides
that to the defense is that
correct.
I'm Mr chairman Mr Grayson.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Ivy
Soto those correct.
And
I I do I do think.
propose number six.
In the.
Both number six regulate we just
simply drop the or in forests I
would be okay with proposed
number sex.
Right now we're here to
recognize legal efficacy of a
provision of the constitution
laws executive orders or rules
of the state that would that
would clarify that we're talking
about they're simply refusing to
acknowledge that they have a
duty on something that I don't
think that was impinge upon the
officer's discretion.
And and so.
Which which I do agree it's
important that but also Tempest
Russian in terms of.
The importance.
If they do their job but but but
that's in the context of
recognizing the efficacy of
those laws also Mr chairman and
Senator Lopez Mr Grayson would
you feel if we were to write the
words for imports but then Lee
and the rest of sex.
I'm out Senator because you've
just muted yourself.
Sorry Mr chairman Mr Grayson
plays.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Ivey
Soto right I agree with the
senator that that that would be
an acceptable change however I
think that officer already have
the duty to enforce
and what this is what what this
prescribes is a knowing refusal
to enforce that doesn't refute
remove officer discretion
instead picks up the officers
sworn duty to enforce the laws
and the constitution of the
state of New Mexico which they
already taken us to do.
What a I'm and I understand that
I think about that I think that
could be read for three
different lights up and so and
so just for clarity sake Mr
chairman I would move on page
three line eighteen that was
strive to respond for us.
Right the motions proper first
of all ask the Sanchez Senator
Lopez.
You want to call that from your
own family.
And there you go take this this.
Mr chairman I would.
Stay with what my expert
witnesses said to leave the word
in so unfriendly.
Members of the committee on the
proposed amendment sure I was
what I know you gonna repeat one
more time for me please page
three line what again line
eighteen just write words or in
force.
Right members the committee.
Looking for show hands anybody
on the committee.
Saying non will take a roll call
vote on that proposed amendment.
Yes.
Right now.
Yes ma'am.
No.
No.
Yes.
No.
Senator Paypen.
I'm sorry did you record of
for central no no no he did not
answer all right I will know.
Madam has not adopted.
My County correct Emily.
Bring it back on the bill sorry
sorry so the floor and I think
it's.
I'm sorry center.
On that okay thank you and
anyone else on the bill.
Seeing no other hands for
discussion purposes.
Senator Lopez you have a motion.
I move it to pass.
Senator Stewart probably has a
second.
Why do you Mr chairman.
Other people it's a terrible
assumption you're right I
shouldn't do that I do you just
look you look eager and in the
moment so what I look like that
do we do we have do we have a
second.
Also.
Senator Duhigg the second.
Emily please take a roll call
vote on a do pass motion.
No.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
No.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Yes.
Lopez yeah would you pass thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you I was next scheduling
take your Senator Padilla as
alternate business things but I
don't see him in the meeting.
So we'll roll over Senate to to.
Mr chairman if I may say Senator
Padilla syntax right now all
right well I see Senator Ortiz
panel which is fortuitous so
let's hear Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
on Senate bill two nineteen
center no citizen ship crew for
occupational licenses previous
to nineteen.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
have an extra reduces me
Young orders.
Sir Senator long Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino.
These old differently this
session.
It's a freezing zoom
conferencing so
we're allowing proponents up to
fifteen minutes to advocate for
their bill let's see what else
we have that time.
To recognize any proponents
anybody in the public or any
experts you wish to identify all
note for you that I have nobody
signed up by our record in
opposition to your bill today
normally I would give the
minutes of opposition but right
now we will begin and that's for
twenty three you'll have up to
fifteen minutes.
Mr chair Senator I do not have
missed tors in the room.
So you don't have who.
At that point thank our current
they're not in the waiting room
our senator and chair.
Thirty Pino do you have anybody
else.
Well I.
Issue written she just needs to
have you center the zoom are at
a I mean Mister Roberts that
leads that you did and she said
she was in so I just assumed she
was for.
I don't understand how this
process works so.
Senate Bill Mr chairman.
They're they're not in the room
they're not in the room.
What will will look for them and
if they if they try to join us
will recognize them in.
Senator Ortiz good.
Mr chairman this bill central to
nineteen the recent work three
million two years ago or J..
It was just last year I think
with the bill that opened up
there was just a year ago.
So I'm I'm getting things from
my.
My.
Thanks for witnesses say she's
not being allowed to join so.
I do not have that many I have
an iPad if.
By that.
You.
Okay.
This is beyond me so I I just
just present the bill last year
we started was a bill that
permitted those students we
referred to as dreamers that is
young people who came to this
country they were brought to
this country by their parents.
When they were children.
In this country they live chair
they went to school here we
provided for their education we
provided for.
Any number of the.
Opportunities and they even were
able to take advantage because
of our legislation on the love
the lottery scholarship the
action is the University Center
one graduation they couldn't
practice their professions and
to leave the state to cracks in
because we had in our laws some
barriers some some stipulations
this and you had to be an
American citizen in order to be
a lawyer or a doctor or.
Any of these professions and
they were there something like
sixteen or seventeen professions
with that barrier existed so
we've invested in our youth we
we provided opportunities for
them and then when they when
they
graduated and we're ready to
practice they were not allowed
to practice in in the states and
to go elsewhere practices or
investment basically benefited
other states last year we fixed
it for those with with
legislation that identified
those in which the barrier was
in in regulation rather than in
the law.
We've come this year when I see
the maestro in this has been
able to join we've come back
this year with some this bill
which completes the work in
which goes through the statutes
where there were statutory.
The barriers and and and so this
bill simply opens up additional.
Sessions for those young people
to be able to practice in the
state and this point I would
like to let my thanks for
waiting as an attorney with the
New Mexico Center for immigrant
law.
To speak at our.
Thank you secretary on mute
yourself the ana.
I am sorry I don't know
happening to sound.
I'm.
Turn off the.
Yes.
No just just go ahead and and
and explain.
Okay thank you so much Mr
chairman members of the
committee I am so sorry for my
delayed response there's
something going on with the
sound on my hands.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Sorry I'll just.
technical difficulty.
You are receiving this torrez
the reason you're having
problems the reason I'm problems
is because you are both in our
zoom conference and you were on
the web up with of this
committee at the same time
they're not on the same time
first thing you need to hang up
on the
Yes yes and stay with the zoom
conference only to understand
yes thank you so much I figured
it out thank you so much Mr
chairman and members of the
committee thank you so much for
the opportunity to visit as the
two nineteen before you today as
senator Ortiz minority mention
this Senate bill two nineteen
simply expanding on the progress
that we made on the law that
passed last year last year SB
one thirty seven passed
unanimously in the Senate for.
In the bill removes
Barriers to professional
licenses for undocumented
immigrants this year we're just
expanding on that
I'm not law by amending fifteen
statutes and removing proof of
legal residency requirements or
allowing submission of a tax
identification number in lieu of
the social security number.
There are numerous benefits to
giving undocumented folks access
to professional licenses first
the increase in wages that would
result from William point
transfer professionals that
millions of dollars in tax
revenue in New Mexico.
And as many as many of you know
New Mexico suffers from a
shortage of professional.
in this my passing this bill you
would be opening the door for
more people in the state of New
Mexico to stay here and
contribute their professional
services to the state
many of the people who will
benefit from this bill our young
adults who have gone to a
Menteri middle and high school
in the state of New Mexico
they've also gone to
universities here locally since
two thousand five local young
undocumented people have been
able to access the lottery
scholarship and been able to
access.
In state tuition.
Mexico has already invested in
these young people.
by passing this bill you will
allow those young people to stay
in the state of New Mexico and
contribute to their communities
and you will also allow New
Mexico to reap the benefits of
its decades long investment and
and these young professionals
thank you so much I hope you
consider this bill and I will be
standing by for any questions
thank you so much.
Senator Ortiz you know.
Mister chairman Senator
question.
Very good as I said we have no
registered opposition on this
bill will therefore go to
members of the committee Senator
Pirtle Senator Moores.
Thank you.
Mr chair thank you senator for
bringing this up again I was
hoping you could remind me how I
voted last time I think I did
support this I'm on the floor
but I have a question does this.
Bring it in line with other
state because I I I I seem to
remember where we did this to
compete with other states that
have similar similar policy they
were basically taking all of our
dreamer doctors and lawyers and
such and they were leaving the
state so business although some
of the other states are or we
adding language that other
states don't have.
Mr chairman and senator but I
think you're absolutely has to
nail on the head.
Many of the people we invested
in had to go to other states to
be able to practice because
those states include the
barriers that are at the doors
said this should make it
possible for us to retain the
kids with invested in so
heavily.
So Mister chair this this tracks
what what other states are doing
this new language.
Mister chairman Senator Pirtle
yes I'll let my expert witness
responded she has some specific
information about the states do
or don't have restrictions.
I'm Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you so much for
question
yeah and we sent here is there
have been other states that have
acted to reduce barriers for
immigrants to access
professional licenses ten states
in particular have done this
already this includes California
Florida Illinois Minnesota
Nebraska Nevada South Dakota
Utah West Virginia and Wyoming
and we're just following in mind
I want to add that as you said
Senator a lot of people have
left the state and to go pursue
their careers elsewhere because
other states
do you give them that right
thanks to SB one thirty seven
last year a lot of those
professionals have state and
they are now practicing as
doctors and nurses here in the
state we hope that we can retain
more professionals by passing
the still.
And and Mr chair of this gonna
just gonna state you know what
as a state as we've done with
the driver's license issue the
feds need to fix immigration
policy and things these are
issues that come about because
of their lack of action so
whether you're for dreamers not
dreamers not the argument that
we're having the fact is that we
have professionals with skills
that the that we need and budget
if if they need to fix policy
they need to work on that but as
a state this is something that
that we can do we actually have
the authority to do some of the
support this today thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Senator Moores.
Thank you Mr chairman
I to stand in the strong support
of this.
I supported the last year
Senator Ortiz he can remember
senator Sanchez so you'll you'll
probably appreciate this store
we actually have a doctor that's
all just more string of
specialists there are that was
dreamer I want to make feel high
schools Senator some artists
that want to New Mexico state
she wised up went to medical
school at UNM what are states
for fellowship inching back to
Los crucis recently last year
said so long just to practice
now we're trying to everything
we chose Legislature driver back
out the state with our medical
all suits but that's a different
story that's a perfect example
of what what we're talking about
the New Mexico best a lot in her
she great great to the community
leader down there in Los crucis
are providing great quality care
for heart playsets to recruit to
and she's definitely in New
Mexico and data across global so
what this is going to build a
support Senator Pirtle said
defense you're not gonna get off
your tail and work on
immigration issues but as a
state we need to support our
soul New Mexicans and our the
doctor referred to as of New
Mexico and doing a great job and
makes us all proud so I was just
trying to keep in the state
dollars shows up to work for
Medicare right seven dollars
malpractice insurance in rural
but also several bills in
response is doing the same issue
dealing with former felons that
Representative Romero and I are
working on that we just passed
the house so we'll get that
schedule would have the same all
similar conversations are doing
with balance you can get
licensure to work thank you Mr
chair thank you Sir for in the
stores good of the committee
members questions.
Well before we go to a vote I
want this.
Look might be Soto.
Senator Ivey Soto yet Mr
chairman I was of of actually
the sponsors of the bill last
year are and are all part of the
discussion we had was that we
were laying laying the
groundwork for the policy that
would dealing with
administrative rules which we
did last year and that there
were some cleanup to be done in
statute.
And on and so that's what we're
doing it's it is interesting as
you look through what we have in
this bills so under the current
law as it stands right now for
the last year you can be up of
all of this M. D. in New Mexico
up without without
I have a social security number
but you cannot be and and and
osteopaths in New Mexico without
having such your number.
And so
You know that so that's what
this is doing in terms of in
terms of cleaning up within the
statute that also includes
you know things like like home
inspectors and and our certain
other professions where we just
randomly have this in statute I
don't and in fact some of these
are bills that I supported back
in the day and we just didn't
think about it at the time and
so it's a it's a good policy
that we've gone to and and I
think this is good clean up and
what it does is that it it it
further what we did last year
which was occupational licensure
in New Mexico is based on
qualifications.
When that provokes it thank.
Senator Ivey Soto they will also
committee before I call for a
vote I've been given a list of.
For individuals who want to
recognize and support from the
bond the jazz mean Ruiz L. L.
and Lynn Martinez those who are
Campos
as supporters with you senator
Ortiz Y. Pino I see no other
hands of the committee Emily
were on a do passed motion yes
we have the best motion already.
Hi.
Senator Lopez.
Mr Chairman Senator Duhigg all
right there's a new pass motion
wanted to pass motion on Senate
to nineteenth Emily which you
please call the roll.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Course yes.
Yes.
Sure.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes you have a do passed Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee.
Senate roll call Senator Ortiz
panel I regret doing this but I
need to do so with our committee
schedule today have you have a
second bill on our committee.
That I hope we'll be able to get
to but I it's a lengthy bill
with a considerable amount of
complexity and so I'd like to
schedule some of the quicker and
easier bills first can we call
you a little later.
Certainly certainly Mr chairman
all right we we have a if you
get that the right number to our
staff I think you know how to do
that or to me yes he is just
called me so he's got an.
Okay good yeah.
Yes Mr a lot of work to says
he's got your number so we'll
we'll call you fifteen or twenty
minutes before we're going to
get to your bill okay.
Thank you very much okay yes go
take off your coat and tie and
put it back on later.
What what are we were one of the
other options.
Well that that might be a good
reason for me to roll over your
bill entirely there.
We'll see in a bit I hope thank
you all right we're looking for
thank you to the tax center.
Who's committee waiting for a
vote but I try to do something
quick Senator Ivy Soto you were
the next on Senate bill two
eighty five if you can do it in
three minutes.
Five minutes that may be tough
for you but I'm I'm gonna ask
you to see if you can do it
quickly on Senate Joint.
It goes easily separated out
real quick set of bills
committee I as a bill
at the so current law allows a
peace officer to transport
somebody for and received mental
health evaluation are the
problem as peace officers when
they transport somebody they
always want to put him in
handcuffs the one part of the
fact that are.
The person then who's and crisis
feels like they're being
arrested
and that oftentimes results in
kind of freaking out and so what
this bill does is it allows them
it is allows the the emergency
medical technician for mercy
medical respond or you'll be
able to transport at the request
of the police officer or at the
request of the individual and
and so with that Mr Chairman I
do have a very quick I think
Amendment of that I just like to
Jim Jackson from disability
rights are formally disability
rights New Mexico suggested.
That is so if you look at the
the at the last section of the
bill we have a section that's
that the peace officer
transports shall not require a
court order which is weird
phrasing to be reimbursed by the
referring County
so what I've done here is in
terms of the people who get
transported pursuant to the US
is replaced that with this
officer is in the report that.
How much the medical technician
or medical respond are grants
point shall be entitled to be
reimbursed by the peace officers
law enforcement agency I'm the
person transported shall not be
health finance responsible for
the cost of such transportation
we want people to get emergency
medical
evaluations and help off and so
I think this helps to protect
them in that process financially
as well so Mr chairman that
would be my amendment my next
post number.
All right you're gonna.
Characterized that as a federal
amendment etcetera I will do my
amendment differently from.
All right so we'll proceed by
action on the amendment itself
is there any question on the
adoption of the amendment.
The questions any waivers.
So I'm I'm puzzled by the
amendment etcetera Ivey Soto all
wait to see if anyone else has
the same puzzlement the
The peace officer by your
amendment the peace officer is
reimbursed by the county so what
if the peace officer transports
individual there a university
police city police been as well
please they're gonna be
reimbursed by the county I'm not
clear about that number one
number two by your bill then the
anti is reimbursed by the.
Peace officer or that or by the
law enforcement agency I guess
my concern there is that the
anti expenses might be pretty
pretty costly and I would
imagine that the law enforcement
agencies within discourage their
officers from relying on EMTs
for transport when the officer
transport the individual it's
free
when and the anti is called to
transport the individual there
will be substantial medical
costs and the transport costs of
in it with the interior
ambulance I presume in which
case that's gonna be a bill to
the law enforcement agency I can
remember the third part of your
proposed amendment but but my
concern is only that by having
somebody else pay the bill with
of the third one area with the
third one of the other person
transporter shall not be
financially responsible.
That kind of gets back to one of
our earlier bills about
insurance and non insurance and
so for that I don't have so much
a concern about the third one
but I do have some concern about
the fact that in that in any
emergency medical or medical
responder in in Los crucis
that's a private company a
private company contracted
County if they're transported to
request a peace officer the
reimbursed by the peace officers
law enforcement agency help me
to feel comfortable that law
enforcement simply then we'll
call for an immediate BMC or
medical response because they
don't want to get settled with
the cost.
Certainly Mr Chairman so there's
a difference and the difference
is when they're talking in
number one doctor a proposed
clients to evaluation facility
that actually
that actually refers to
R. subsections C. and D. in the
bill where they where they
Yeah then actually half as well
where where where the press is
being transported normally from
a county jail to a mental health
facility and so and so that's
the context that's why the work
proposed client is used in that
in that paragraph here and it is
used to it currently in the in
the statute are they oversee
medical technician however is
being asked to do so at the
request of the law enforcement.
HSD our officer and so
consequently them the agency
would be the one who would
reimburse because they they
don't write to be reimbursed for
the transport but we just got to
make sure Representative doing
it so for example this was
brought to me at the request of
the City of Albuquerque the bill
itself and so are you know the
City of Albuquerque has a has.
There's a there is a
This tax for
mental health for for behavioral
health there's also within the
city as they're trying to deal
with this they have a
relationship with EMTs and so
that would simply be part of the
contract if it were the city or
be paid for out of that tax for
the county.
In terms of in terms of being
able to do this but
and and and so then the the
pharmacist clarified who not to
go after let me but I do want to
make sure that they so they
don't get stuck with something
so that's why I provided number
two and.
Very good.
Thank you for the answer to my
question I gotta tell you I I
still have my same concern if
the goal of your bill is to have
law enforcement and they should
be encouraged to lead a medical
respond or transport individual.
In particular where there's
concern about anxiety or the
person being been anxious about
being placed into handcuffs in a
police vehicle I would think we
would want police officers
should be encouraged to do this
but I have a sense that there is
a supervisors in the higher ups
are going to tell them not to do
that because and I don't want to
have it come out of their of
their budget that's remaining
concern of mine but we'll go to
the other members the committee
Senator Stewart.
And can I see any other hands
please are stored in the others.
Mr chairman I I just needed to
have the amendment back up and
now that I've read it again I I
don't have a question now.
Anyone else on the committee in
connection with the amendment
Senator Lopez on the amendment.
Your.
What was your muted.
That's it and then it just okay.
So you're not muted.
Oh my gosh I'm thank you Mr
chairman and senator Ivey Soto
so I think this is trying to get
also to the issue that
association of counties has had
over the years of transporting
people right with issues from
one part of the state down to
wherever there's a facility
where they can have someone
admitted so did did I hear you
say correctly then that this
language was brought forward by
the city
is that correct Mr chairman Mr
chairman answer Lopez but bill
was brought forward by the city
not the.
It was suggested to me by Jim
Jackson formerly of disability
rights New Mexico.
Okay and and Mister chairman
Senator so the concern was just
making sure that either there's
reimbursement or making sure
that the
of us EMTs to come in and
transport.
The the bill is about asking him
to become a transport the
amendment is about making sure
that they don't build up the
speaking out for I just wanted
to clarify thank you very much
chairman.
Anyone else with me on the
proposed amendment right now.
Is there any above Wilshire roll
call on the amendment please.
No.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
You know.
No.
No.
It is not adopted we're back on
the bill without the amendment
Senator Ivey Soto.
us with several questions Mr
Reagan Center o'neill on the
bill.
Yes thank you Senator Ivey Soto
and Mr chair and you know thank
you for bringing this forward
US senator Daniel Ivey Soto
because
you know often times the people
first they are the first
responders the police you know
they're trying to do escalated
situation and we have a real
problem with suicide in the
state this actually I'm
increasingly in tune with these
kind of bills because so often
the especially in a rural parts
of our state the police for
example are the first responders
or the first people bear to to
deal with a suicidal person and
I have a bill Senate bill one
twenty eight that is heading
towards respond committee and
it's all about suicide
prevention in our state and it's
turned out to be a very wide
reaching bill and it's been a
real big learning experience for
me so I just want to thank
Senator Ivey Soto for Karen this
bill because it's really
important right now I mean we
lead the nation and suicide we
do and that's not acceptable in
this bill really has an impact I
think with with helping to
prevent suicidal situation so
thank you Senator.
Any other discussion members of
twenty Center course thank you
Mr are quickly because I know
our time is tiresome for all of
us quickly what the medical
personnel be required to do this
or work are comfortable with
that.
Mr chairman and senator Morris
of the language is that is used
on page two line twenty two is
may okay and what training are
we going to find them the
escalation of protection so
that's been an issue since
beginning of our consciousness
on this Mr chair.
Revised the the minutes with
some significant training.
Mr chairman and senator Morris
that at issue is not addressed
in this bill but it is so first
of all what we do do is that
there are certain triggers that
eight he's officer can make a
determination of the person
needs to be transported this
bill does not give the EM team
that same authority to make the
determination it simply allows
him to to do the transport at
the request of the peace officer
when the peace officer has made
that determination so we believe
that the the determination the
bill where it has been in
existing law we simply give an
option for for the transport so
that you don't have to have
somebody Hanko search for
weapons but in the back of a
police car was already starting
to freak out here are going to
listen I just wanna make sure
those are those are medical
personal are forced to do this
or feel compelled that they need
to do it then they're also in in
in a sticky wicket because I
feel like we should do it also
peer pressure emotional desire
to do it but then they're also
stuck in a situation at all of
the training to do it so do as
reduce New Mexico we are funding
available to make sure they have
the training needs to do this.
Once.
Fours anymore.
The members the committee.
All right we're gonna do it was
Senators stored.
Wanted to pass I would make the
motion Senator ready for the
past right this motion.
And the second Senator gonna do
passed motion Senate bill two
eighty five.
A roll call please only send it
to eighty five.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
Course.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah would you pass Senator Ivey
Soto rostrum of the committee
will next year's Senate bill two
forty four would Senator Hickey.
Sen bill two forty four Senator
Hickey give me just a moment
please.
Your bill's.
The commission.
This.
Senator Hickey.
I show no individuals
registering to speak in
opposition your bill please be
mindful of that in your
presentation this being your
first time we surprise how many
senators have a unanimous strong
support on the bill only
managing to talk it through to
the defeat.
So I don't I don't see that
happening I see that you have
one expert witness Linda Siegel
on this bill there being no
opposition like to recognize you
in your expert for up to ten
minutes to advocate for the bill
and then there being no
opposition will go to the
committee all right.
Senator.
Senator Hickey here thank you
your muted.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Senator to make this
very re this bill changes
language to our it into
contemporary practice of
medicine it allows a nurse
practitioner to certify that a
child is medically at risk for
receiving a vaccination right
now that individual has to have
it can only happen with the
authority of a physician who may
be working or whatever so it
simply allows sent and I'll turn
it over to the single to give
any further explanation.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee our Linda Siegel
representing the New Mexico
nurse practitioner Council and
periodically we find these
places and law where it says
only a physician can do
something that is and within the
large scope of practice of nurse
practitioners so this happens to
be one of them there are about a
thousand nurse practitioners
that live in practice in New
Mexico about half of them are in
primary care they have their own
clinics they work in other
clinics and so this is really a
patient access issue to so far
we've it at that thank you thank
you members of the committee
questions.
Or the sponsor expert.
Senator Ivey Soto is asking Mr
Chairman hi Sam.
Thank thank you Mr chairman and
A doctor Senator Hickey New
Mexico I'm I'm wondering
Well I agree with you completely
on certified nurse practitioner
I don't know that this isn't
necessarily limited.
edition limited service
providers practitioners and and
I'm wondering if if instead of
saying.
A licensed physician or provider
for additional if that would
work suicide or other licensed
primary care provider operating
within the licensed within the
person's skull upset or other
licensed primary care provider
operating within the person
scope of practice.
And that way if you've got
somebody else providing primary
care and their scope of practice
will allow them to do so we
don't have to keep coming back
and amending.
This bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Ivey Soto
that might specifically include
physicians assistants but R. I
would ask that we not include
that in the bill on the reason
are as follows
the the scope of practice is
always a difficult issue and
because we're having difficulty
retaining practitioners in the
state
sometimes it we might want to go
further to a pharmacist
given that however pharmacists
doesn't have a lot of the
overall medical training that
others do and so if they were to
come forward done next year the
year after I I'm I would expand
that but I want to be able to do
the analysis as I did on this
bill and the understandings I
have of nurse practitioners and
their scopes of practice within
the state so rather than jumping
into that and simply ending up
in something that could become
even a longer list that really
needs a lot of reflection I
would prefer to limit that
at but I will ask my expert if
she has any other thoughts on
that those are my personal.
You Mr Senator.
And Mr chair.
Mr chair.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee the only thing I
would say about that is we do
have nurse practitioners
specialists who who might not
fit into the primary care arena
I was just providing that as an
example and of course any
physician regardless of what
kind of practice there and can
find that exemptions so I would
be concerned if we limited it to
just primary care though that is
where most of the need occurs.
Certainly well and and that's
and that's fine I won't I will
proceed with that with amendment
that that this time I would
encourage you to consider it and
I'll be happy to send to the
language that I but I'm
suggesting because it does it
does the lease license position
into seven after that other
license primary care provider
that would exclude for example
pharmacists and and ensure that
their operate within the scope
of practice regardless of the
fact that their primary care
providers you have to have both
of those present at the same
time and so I would encourage
you to consider that as this I
can do is to travel forward but
I don't want to stop at the stop
thank you.
Thank you very much Mr I'm sorry
I would welcome that and I
after I get through my newbie
here I'll be happy to
investigate that so that we can
get the right the right now yes
thank you thanks on her thank
you so much that's what reminded
us up as a second chamber we.
There's no Motors almost
permanent from Ivy Soto Sir I'm
so correct practice interracial
reached on the floor I'm gonna
pass there's a motion for do
pass any other committee
discussion.
Second.
Senator Lopez with the second
Emily would you please call the
roll into passed motion.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
You.
This yes your would you pass
under Hickey thank you thank you
very much Mr chair well that's
your Senator Pirtle on Senate
bill two sixty five Senator
Pirtle with us or is he gone so
there is I Senator next bill's
up yours two eighty five.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I have before you
send a bill to sixty I believe
most of you have seen this bill
before passed out of the Senate
unanimously to different times
just to fall victim and house
Judiciary public them to the
fact that we we little cramped
at the end of session so this
bill simply brings our statute
in to alignment with the
constitution of the way that the
law is currently written as a
police officer is allowed to
cite you into an adjoining
county and it landed joining
magistrates.
Jurisdiction and this simply
says if if that's going to
happen that whoever's being
cited has to consent to that and
and the logistical problem here
is even.
if whoever is cited under
current law disagrees with it
they would still take off work
and go to the magistrate court
in the adjoining county to
challenge that and have it moved
back into their home County but
we also thought that it was
important that we leave this
flexibility in of the officers
from Carlsbad in the person
cited isn't from Carlsbad the
citation happens in Travis
county they would have that
ability to move it and so I will
stand with stand for questions
Mr chair.
Thank you Sir Senator Pirtle.
Just a minute I'm trying to look
up your bill and see if we had
anybody registered on it.
Two sixty I know registered
opponents or supporters.
Members the committee on to
sixty five.
Professionals say one.
Motion of the committee Senator
Ivey Soto motions.
Love this bill to pass.
Do pass.
Senator Lopez.
A second Senate bill two sixty
five Emily do passed motion
please.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
service yes.
So poorly have a due pass thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee we're overdue for a
break in late in the staff have
a break but before we do that
I'd like to see if we can make
progress with Senator Padilla is
Senate bill two oh two Senator
Padilla we've heard this bill
before we had the quite a bit
committee discussion you were
going to work on an amendment to
address some of that do we have
an amendment Mr Chairman
actually we wanted doing at a
substitute to make a little
cleaner because it added several
pages to the document to the
bill and I do have to experts in
the waiting area of the
webmaster can let the men
Christina Chavis and fill in the
blank the secretary of state's
office.
There's going coming in now and
there's Christina.
I'll just very quickly catch
them up to where we are very
quickly Mr chair once there and
you have a Representative tribe
and who also and that Dylan Lang
so Christine is the director
business services there and
landed on this the legal counsel
or counsel to the secretary of
state's office he still
connecting
what I'm connect please Senator
I show the time and I six you'll
have a ten minutes to advocate
for your bill recognizing
whatever expert you wish and any
other proponents go ahead.
Okay thank you very much others
Mr laying out so so what I with
in light of Senator Ivy Soto
those comments yesterday but
they were very good so instead
of going through it an amendment
that would have been a little
confusing to follow week we went
to a substitute instead when
asked Mr lanky worked with the
director and Christina Chavis
also work the director just walk
us through the substitute very
very quickly we only have about
nine minutes left guns thank
you.
Sure Mr chair.
Senator is.
The COVID we heard is that you
would like this provision to to
apply also if there is an
amendment so.
The substitute in front of you
the only additions we've made is
on section to section five and
section eight and so what we've
done is with the individual
entities we've allowed for if
you do make it amendments
with the name you must also
include.
I any name under which you
propose to transact business in
New Mexico if different and so
again it is a relatively simple
change in each of those sections
to to include the the Senators
Ivey Soto is comments to require
the inclusion of your doing
business name.
If you do amend your your your
corporate.
And that's essentially what the
sub does Mr chairman and if I
don't remember the committee
wanted to not there go to the
proper motions no we have no
additional committee members
have the proposed committee
substitute we'll go to questions
from committee members.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for two oh two this
is the five three eight point
two version I believe that
correct that's correct.
Hi.
Senator Ivey Soto I thank you
very much Mr chairman and thank
you so Senator Padilla I really
very much appreciate the
responsiveness and the.
around particularly since the
things more difficult in COVID
and yet somehow you managed this
done and get this fact the
committee are and so not not
wanting to forego other debate
Mr chairman I would move a do
not pass some sensible to a two
and a two thousand seven
district was released up to
percent of the look at.
Good I'll take the motion is
there any other discussion
committee members on the bill.
All right want to pass motion
Emily on Senate bill the
committee substitute for to to
Senate bill two oh two we'll
call vote please.
One star quorum.
I'm sorry center I'm sorry what
was that we have lost our
quorum.
All right I had intended to take
a break I don't know whether
we'll have a look rounding up a
couple more people.
When we see them as we get this
one vote done give me just a
second.
What is sure they are.
The motion being pending in the
presentation having the may
perhaps we could pick up there
when we would come back from the
break and reception for I don't
think the US sponsored
necessarily need to be here for
that at that point four.
Yeah I'm I'm hoping that we
might go to get a vote before
the break because I'm not sure
how we'll get the word out we're
taking a break and come back
from a break but Center do exit
a committee we're trying to I
know Senator o'neill had a prior
commitment
We've lost our Republican
colleagues I believe.
So there being no quorum center
Ivey Soto I think that's
probably the only alternative
we'll take a break till.
Five thirty.
Long break twenty minutes but
please make good use of that and
we'll come back and see if we
can re establish a quorum we
have still quite a bit of work
to do this evening thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you everyone for me in
behalf of the staff to have a
break.
Get ourselves refresh a little
bit.
Yeah.
We were what about before we
lost our quorum we were on a
vote.
On Senator Padilla is Senate
bill two oh two.
and I want to make sure that.
Anyone who is not present at the
end of that discussion or
debate.
Can ask questions but otherwise
I'm prepared to take the vote on
Senate bill to to on a do pass
motion.
And just so we're actually sure
I'll make to do pass motion and
look for a second from someone I
go Senator Lopez we may already
have one but just to be sure.
We
has motion hi Emily were ready
for roll call we have
requirement.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Two passed on to to.
Will next year Senate bill
fifteen Senator Ivey Soto.
Mr chairman of the Senate bill
fifty at this actually commits
up to percent of the fifteen and
Senate bill one ninety nine
under districts mission.
It is and and the services
redistricting commission that
does the work in advance of our
special session they submit the
product the legislature it is
our it it moves us in that
direction and yet it is also
constitutional under our current
structure with that Mr Chairman
I will stand by.
Thank you the
This indicates there are for.
Our representatives in support.
Proponents for the bill Richard
Mason Melanie majors Mario
Jimenez and
Okay.
Closest I believe.
Mr on three of them are here and
I would ask them each to give
about thirty seconds each are
beginning with
is majors that Mr Mason and Mr
Jimenez was still connected by.
Senator Ivey Soto control Lee
presentation and we'll go to
committee after that Senator
Ivey Soto well.
The measures.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee good
afternoon Melanie majority stake
second director of the New
Mexico foundation for open
government representing the
thousands of New Mexicans to
support open transparent and
accountable government I would
first like to thank those
lawmakers who collaborated on
the substitute bill I ask that
in all aspects the redistricting
process transparency and
therefore accountability be
front and center we asked the
bill included language that the
district effort follows the open
meetings act continue to let
sunshine in and inspire
confidence in the process and an
outcome that is recognized as
fair transparency insurers trust
and as we all know the public's
trust in government is more
vital now than ever thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr Mrs.
Members of the Judiciary
Committee my name is Dick Mason
and chair the action committee
of the league of women voters of
New Mexico I want to thank
Senator Ivey Soto Morrison or
need to pay no for working
together to develop the
substitute Trey SB fifteen in SB
one ninety nine and we're here
to do pass on just be.
Fifteen we want to keep thank
them for keeping the core
functions of the citizens
redistricting committee what is
the building so one would like
to following to be considered
the C. R. C. is required to
deliver three maps for
consideration in the legislative
special session and revive
written justifications each of
the recommended maps would like
to see requirement of the
legislature be required to
provide a written justification
should they choose to amend a
recommended that so with that
thank you in here to do passed
SB fifty.
Senator Ivey Soto your muted
sorry so.
Thank you Mr president Mr mass.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee
monarchy equipment was coming
because New Mexico and a member
of the redistricting task force
which is compromised of
bipartisan members nonprofit
organizations thank you members
of communities of interest such
as the New Mexico native
American Community I would like
to thank the bill's sponsors of
Senate bill fifteen for
retaining key sections are
Original Bill and for
considering suggested amendments
I also like to ask that the
committee closely look at adding
language to the bill that would
eliminate incumbency protections
while creating new district
boundaries lastly Mr chairman of
the committee I'd like to
request of the committee Adeline
wages that would mandate
justification for the maps that
are chosen by the legislature
thank you Mr chairman I urge for
to pass thank you.
About us Mr Kate.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee I'm
K. losses I'm a student from
Albuquerque seven Colombian
diversity and a member of the
twenty twenty New Mexico First
reducing task force I'm
representing fair districts for
NM and forty thousand New
Mexicans Representative
coalition I'm also a member of
several organizations of
civically minded students and
recent graduates I feel a deep
sense of urgency around the
issue of redistricting.
The circles I run in as well as
coalition of twenty six point
organizations strongly advocate
for substantive changes to the
mediation process in New Mexico
through the adoption of finding
raise criteria and an
independent we distinct mission
SB fifteen is an important step
in the right direction the grant
process is suboptimal for
everyone the process breeds
unnecessary cynicism towards our
volunteer state legislature and
gives many of my peers the
impression that they are not in
reality choosing their
representatives it's clear that
our representatives sacrifice
dozens of hours into
thoughtfully drawing lines and
yet the inherent conflicts of
interest in the current process
needlessly it so it out into the
ability of the outcome.
Furthermore the state is forced
to use its resources in
litigation and in the end the
lines are liable to be John by
the courts at great expense to
New Mexicans no dentist Bill
Davis as Mexico New Mexicans
like myself have very much to
lose this is why we are as a
committee to take decisive
action towards a fair and
transparent we additional
process moving forward with SB
fifteen thank you so much.
Thank you Mr rose to questions
thank you committee members with
questions.
On the committee substance
percent fifteen the questions.
Saying no questions of the
committee pleasure the credit.
Senator.
Mr chairman.
I will do passed on the.
Which is called committee
substitute for.
Senator also Senate rules
committee substitute percent of
those fifteen and more ninety
nine.
That.
And seconded by Senator Ivey
Soto.
All the all your Senator let us.
Senator was with the second all
right.
Emily roll call please.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes that's a do pass on Senate
fifteen thank you Mr chairman
members with good.
He wants to contract Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino has asked us to
roll over Senate bill one
nineteen.
And as I and we will also roll
over.
As I announced earlier Senate
bill two forty two.
We have about forty minutes
left.
two of the remaining bills are.
Money.
In what I'd like to have the
committee take up listening
Senate bill two twenty I think
some of the others are gonna
evolves more discussion so I'd
like to turn the chair over to
Senator Ivey Soto so that I can
present Senate bill two twenty.
Mr Chairman absence was I
strongly happy to do so our
server Sanchez please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee members the
committee will recall other than
our new member of when we met in
special session this summer
there was.
A great deal of attention to the
issue of body cameras and the
fact that we had most of laws on
New Mexico's law enforcement
officers using body cameras but
there were some exceptions we
passed a law to require body
cameras we put a very strict
deadline on and I'm pleased to
report that our legislation had
the intended effect and I
believe Bernalillo county
subsequently adopted
RT cameras as well.
One one consequence of enacting
this law in a special session
and not having the public
present due to the COVID
restrictions and doing so
admittedly quickly as we
overlook some opportunities that
that the bill should have been
and maybe a little bit better
this bill intends to correct
that namely Senate bill two
twenty recognizes with the new
language that you'll find on
page three that body cameras
should not be required to record
to events that have been brought
to our attention one under cover
operations which seems pretty
evident to me that undercover
operator officer should not have
to have a body camera and the
second one is recordation of
notification to members of a of
a death law enforcement have
asked us not to be compelled to
record of that event I also have
an amendment to the committee
that is the product of a great
number of meetings and efforts
to try and find consensus on
this bill that intends to define
a prescribed by that amendment
when the recording begins and
and through when the recording
must must continues so Mr
chairman with the with
permission and with your
permission out of the committee
I'd like to propose an amendment
to Senate bill two twenty which
should be two two zero one zero
to point to.
This president explained the
amendment hi Mr chairman I move
that amendment this amendment
simply prescribes when the the
cameras must be activated to
begin recording and so you'll
see the new language both in the
title and then paragraph two
inserts the language it says so
requiring that body camera
automatically be in begin
recording without a manual
activation one one of several
things happening you'll see that
subparagraph a B. and C. there
I'm all of those are good and
intended to take away the the
discretion of an officer to
decide when to activate the
camera but requires it to be
activated one one of those
events happen the the last page
simply adds a definition for
energy economic to refer to what
we might commonly called tasers
although an energy weapon is
just defined to to be more
broadly than a than a brand name
device but but you'll notice in
subparagraph C. by a paragraph
B. that the the camera is
required to be activated
activated when a law enforcement
officer a poll of cultures a
firearm or energy weapon but by
that to mean once they engaged
or begin to engage with them a
taser like economic the
activation must begin
automatically and that's the
amendment before the committee
and the bill explained in the
context of that amendment Mr
chairman I'll stand for
questions from our service right
as on the Medical Center storms.
Mr chairman I do not have this
ammendment it was not delivered
to my office and I do not have
it in email can you please share
it on the screen would you go to
support the number again.
I believe you have it on your
screen now in the two oh two
numbers two two zero one zero to
point to.
In center Stewart let me
apologize for that I'll try and
find out why they didn't get to.
the effect of the moment is to
create a new paragraph one.
I think it was the second page
please of the amendments.
That's a plate inserts and New
Generic.
Definition it appears.
So are you on the floor.
Mr chairman I don't think you
talked about the Senator
Cervantes something to talk
about energy weapon are I was
fine trying to find the
amendment what what I don't
understand this part of that.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
apologize again for not having
that usually in front of you so
if you look on the amendment it
will go to the first page
please.
Of the first page of the moment.
So the first page of the
amendment a bill look on
paragraph two of the proposed
amendment this prescribes when a
camera must be automatically
activated so if you look at part
paragraph to any of you see
subsection wanted says requiring
use of body worn camera that
automatically begins recording
without manual activation when
what when the police officer
does one of the following three
things so these are the
circumstances when the camera
must automatically activate and
you'll see some program pay when
the officer response to call for
service or assistance.
Representative you when the
officer up posters of holsters a
of holsters a fire arm or energy
weapon or C. engages the
vehicle's lights the focus here
of that definition the rest
about center store is
subparagraph B. E. which
essentially says that the body
worn camera must begin
automatically recording when the
officer removes their fire arm
or an energy weapon from its
holster.
The the energy weapon then as
defined on the second page and
energy weapons to provide in a
way to to make it generic so
we're not referring to it as a
taser even though that's what
most of us would the term we
would use a taser is a brand
name.
We see the second page again.
Right so Mister chairman Senator
Cervantes how does that
automatically began.
Mr Chairman and Mr Stewart when
you're saying it are you're
you're referring to the camera
itself yes.
you Mr chairman and Senator
Stewart to be honest with you I
don't know the technology well
enough to know except to tell
you that this is the industry
convention standard that the
vendors of the various body
cameras have developed their
their technology their equipment
in such a way that
that the.
Anyone of these various events
will automatically trigger the
activation of the camera.
So so we're putting Miss Mister
chairman Senator on his are
putting this in staff to run and
I I support it but.
I still don't I just don't
understand how it automatically
begins so.
All right.
From the health that Sean will
be the president Albuquerque
police officers association is
with us F. R. well we're gonna
yield to him real quick I think
you may be able to explain that
process with Willoughby.
What practically.
We can hear you better now yes
this process.
Okay thank you so much for the
opportunity I will stick to the
question at hand I would like
the opportunity to speak in
opposed later but it's all
connected to a Bluetooth so
there's a Bluetooth device that
is connected to the camera it's
usually connected to the whole
store the firearm I know that
there is technology that can do
so with the lighting but the
problem with this technology is
every single camera system has
different options it's like the
difference between buying a
Lincoln or a Honda not every
camera system comes with the
options to be able to do that
the options that do provide the
technology that is requested in
this ammendment are very very
expensive.
That's how it works it's a
Bluetooth device thank you very
much appreciate that Sir short.
Those are all my questions Mr
chairman thank you very much Sir
portal.
Mr Chairman yes yes Mr chairman
if I may because you're just
sitting in for me in the chair
right now I would want to alert
you that before presentation of
this bill Melanie majors did
register to speak in opposition
of the bill on behalf of the New
Mexico foundation for open
government I certainly hate to
have the foundation for open
government not be recognized to
speak in opposition to the bill
and in fairness they should be
recognized by the chair for some
period of time on your behalf I
kick them out of the zoom
onsite admitted them to the zone
and so we will get to public
comment in just a moment Oscar
prolonging on.
Thank you Mr chair Senator so.
With adding this language we
don't.
Include the requirement of of
operating the camera when
they're engaging public I think
that's my only concern is you
know there's a lot of times that
officers may be state standing
guard somewhere and they didn't
necessarily receive a call but
yet they're going to be engaging
the public how do we ensure that
the their cameras on and
and recording when when they are
engaging the public even if say
they were called out that they
were standing guard out in front
of the capitol as as we've seen
the the officers out front they
may not necessarily receive a
call but if if they are on guard
in in public were to come up to
the gate and they engage them
how how do we ensure that that
we get that footage and and
before we get the US would you
please go back to page one on
the screen please yes thank you
thank you very much okay Senator
service thank you for so the
bill before you that includes
some new language and again the
new language is intended to
create some exceptions to
exceptions of the the answer to
your question comes from the
bill that we enacted this last
year which provides an existing
law that says each enforcement
agency shall adopt its policies
and procedures governing the
body worn cameras and then it
goes on to say an existing law
requiring activation of the
camera whenever responding to a
call for service for at the
initiation of any enforcement or
investigative encounter between
a peace officer member the
public also transfer your
question the existing statute
requires the camera be active
when interacting with the public
or what we call to in a counter
or investigative encounter
between the officer and the
public so I believe that to
answer your question a an
officer standing guard would be.
The interacting with a
potentially interacting with the
public and with we required to
have the camera activated but
the the bill before you does not
change any of that existing law
the bill before you does really
to two things one is principally
at a projects under cover
officers from having to comply
with the law which they would as
we wrote it and then allows the
other exception for notification
of a death.
Then last of course with the
amendment of the committee
adopted.
Greater specificity
specification about exactly when
the camera has to begin rolling.
And if I could just one of
several that one of the effects
of the amendment with regard to
the existing program one.
Is that it would require manual
activation with Spreckels
outlined in three separate
require manual activation by one
camera at the initiation of the
law enforcement investigative
encounter this bill at this
moment passes will go back and
remove the work other that would
not be needed anymore but some
project for and Mister chair I
appreciate that I just want to
make sure that we didn't
unintentionally.
Remove that language or that
somehow officer standing water
guarded they were engaging the
public or in the line of duty
that that
we were going to.
Not have that section in place
we're just adding some language
which I I still kind of.
Trying to figure out how it's
gonna work logistically
To be automatic I know what with
the squad cars I have seen that
but I visited my sheriff's
department and you know it's
it's quite easy when they flip
the switch for the lights that
it's all tied together the car
camera comes on their body
camera comes on but it would be
interesting to see or hear from
somebody with with regard to the
holsters and what this is going
to do what kind of costs this is
going to add to to our rural
communities that have just a
handful of officers so I I do
have some concern with with some
of that
you know that we have some
police departments that have
just a handful of of officers
and this is going to be a huge
cost and how how they
administer.
this I I don't know that they'll
be able to hopefully they'll be
able to work through the state
police but it there's no
requirement here requiring the
state police to set this up to
them I I think I do a lot more
comfortable if we did something
along those lines.
and have the state police in
charge of setting up the systems
for these rural communities but
but this language does cause me
a little bit of concern thank
you Mr.
S. R. Pirtle anybody else on the
amendments.
Our motor a service run to some
some of those appointments.
Yes.
R. so are are on a motion source
Reuters did make the motion to
adopt the minutes or seconds.
Second from Senator Stewart and
anybody else in recognition on
the moments.
Staying are no one in that case
are
only please call the roll and
after that we will go to public
comment.
Public please call the roll and
after that we'll go to public
comments.
L..
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
Now.
No.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes I do not that Senator
o'neill is present center now
we're voting on an amendment did
you want to vote on that or yes
yes.
Yes.
Along a sixty three that
amendment is adopted we now go
to public comment on this and I
do have to people that I'm aware
who would like to speak in
opposition to the bill now as
amended one is Melanie majors
from from the funding for
prevent the other one Schardin
will be the president of the
Albuquerque police officers
association.
Mr
Roberts are there other people
who signed up to speak on this
bill.
Mr chair members of the
committee I have no in house and
COVID.
Very well in that case we can we
can go ahead and and do a couple
minutes each with regard to I
would have the bills so I will
begin with as majors and then
we'll go to
detective will be.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you I'm not with
you today so much to oppose this
legislation however I wanted to
share with you some of the
information we have received
over the fog hotline we received
approximately five hundred phone
calls from people throughout the
state on an annual basis with
questions about the inspection
of public records act or the
open meetings law and in the
last few weeks I received
several calls from law
enforcement officers themselves
and they have expressed to us
that one of the most dangerous
things that they do is to
provide information to someone
that a member of their family
has passed away just on Thursday
and gentleman told me when he
had to make that.
presentation to a family that
the individual in the family
picked up a dining room chair
and beat his partner with it
it's a stressful situation we're
not here to say whether one
thing is good or bad but I did
tell them I would relate some of
their stories to you and I
appreciate your time today and
thank you for listening.
Thank you very much miss majors
detectable the Representative
Richard number available to do
so your last.
you can see me and detective
will be Albuquerque police
officers association president
Mr chairman thank you for the
opportunity to speak today our
distinguished committee members
I am not opposed to a body worn
cameras as everybody on this
committee should know
Albuquerque was the first
Department of their size in two
thousand twelve to go Department
wide with board body worn
cameras but we learned a thing
or two about this technology the
there's a difference between
theory and reality and I think
that the legislature has a very
very
big opportunity to make law that
that will actually work the
technology involving cameras is
constantly in the development
stage you have to be very
conscientious of your rural
areas where you may not have as
much internet connectivity as
you do in major cities when
dealing with Bluetooth devices
that are connected to firearms
and connected to electronic
control devices for your law
enforcement officers especially
when in the narrative of the
bills it says that there is a
presumptive ideology that an
officer is acting in bad faith
and opened up the municipality
or county to the tort claims act
simply because they may have
that internet connection there's
also a huge a red herring of
this particular legislation
Albuquerque has one of the most
restrictive if not the most
arguably restrictive on body
recording what on body recording
policies in the in the nation we
were constantly struggling with
technology it's very expensive
to retain this data and hold
this data for creative time the
actual technology of the camera
itself is very expensive so what
you're doing in this be
particularly legislation though
I personally agree with it
is that you have an unfunded
mandate which becomes an
unfunded liability for every
police department in the state
of New Mexico I I just think
that we need a little bit more
work I.
Was under the impression that we
were going to be able to fix a
lot of the inadequacies of this
particular legislation in this
session because it was in my
opinion rushed in the special
session the other red herring is
that we get information from
confidential sources on a
regular basis a confidential
source whether they're
documented or undocumented it
may be a neighbor that calls a
police officer and says my
neighbor is dealing drugs and I
I I need your help they're going
to be reluctant to give us that
information if it's done so on
camera mandated by state law
you know we have four bodies
that are in Tupperware at the
some point that were severed
just yesterday and we need to
obtain information for people
who are willing to give us that
information and that may not be
wise to have it bad the by law
on camera because they will
speak to us it right it's very
it's very consistent of the
reason why I believe that local
law enforcement should be asking
illegal immigrants their
citizenship upon obtaining
information or responding to
calls for help we want people to
engage with the with the
community police we want people
to ask the police for help and
we don't want them to be fearful
of of of of criminal allegations
by doing so is this is this is
an opportunity for you guys to
really make this work it's an
opportunity for you guys to make
it work for the state of New
Mexico would be a leader in this
industry with on body reporting
have devices and this bill
doesn't meet that my expectation
or threshold or police officers
of the state that are forced to
do the heavy lifting and the
actual work to make this happen
thank you so much for the
opportunity all thank you so
very much will be we now go to
the just verify once again miss
Roberts nobody else to sign up
to get a additional comments Mr
chair there is no one else very
well and and this will be I will
ask.
To remain in the summer I'm just
in case our technical questions
that come up and I do appreciate
your willingness to responded to
questions notwithstanding your
position on the bell centre.
Thank you Mr chair and senator I
was going through some of the
existing language and noticed
that
we didn't include.
Non salaried officers I was
curious why we only include
salaried officers.
In the definition of peace
officer.
So Mister white what Senator
serve on this yes Mister
chairman Senator I I would I
would respond that way which is
that's not at issue in this
particular bill the question of
why salary versus non salaried
was.
Part of the original bill
but I'll just tell you that
there there's been no discussion
sense that this since the
adoption that law with regard to
whether she applied a salary or
non salary so that really goes
beyond the scope of this bill
and I I don't have an answer for
you whether it should include
salaried on salary within the
scope of the of the bill itself
all all know that the the
argument was made throughout the
summer when we pass this law
that it was on funded mandate or
that it would be very expensive
and cost prohibitive for law
enforcement agencies to do this
of course we heard the same
thing principally out of
Bernalillo county again not to
become really County as a
sheriff's office but but they
are the largest in the state and
they indicated they did not have
the funding to comply with the
state subsequently a managed to
do so in I commend them for for
that.
And thank you Mr chair and
senator I mean it does exclude
the.
mounted patrol maybe you know
since they are volunteer.
And have to buy their equipment
that's that's a okay policy
another doing the best they can
we we had
the deputy chief I believe here
saying that they they were
complying with even though
this doesn't apply with apply to
them they they want to head
involuntarily we're doing the
best they could with trying to
record in and do everything they
can when they're working with
Another agency so that's going
to bring that up in a even
though the the mounted patrol is
not included in this they are
doing their best to fall the
spirit of the law and I think
that's important that some of
that don't ever receive funding
are doing the best they can but
we just need to be.
Percent of of how we.
Right this and how we do it that
we don't
Really.
To heavy of a burden on our our
rural police you know for for
Bernalillo county to do some of
these things or our state police
it's it's it would be quite
simple but maybe some
flexibility on our of world
please but I I don't I don't.
Have any issue with with the new
language I think you know
sometimes we have unintended
consequences and and this was
One of those one of those
situations that you know these
are very private moments that
probably should not be stored or
if rebel so I do appreciate that
alright thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much Sir Pirtle
senator Morris.
Hey guys
thank you so much Senator
question when I read under cover
operations section about with
that of the excluding the
governor security detail.
Senator Moores I don't believe
that definition would include
the governor's security detail.
I don't think there would still
be required to have.
Members of their in the details
we could get a in order from the
the chief surgeon that are
always under cover and just
disappointed munity them from
the requirements.
Of course I I'm not spoken with
the chief of the state police or
otherwise to determine whether
the governor security detail is
considered to be an undercover
officer but but that we do with
that that definition would not
seem to wide plank planes close
might be that for what they do
but we we we've defined this in
the new language in the bill
it's a it's an undercover
operation and that and that's
where we use so it's as
undercover operation sanctioned
in advance while law enforcement
agency that that would not seem
to this qualifies of the
governor's staff.
Although
the more that would know that
they have not had much contact
with the public and lost.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
chair and maybe local to step
forward with more thank you.
well other questions or comments
from committee.
What is the part of the
committee.
Our office is moving to pass how
more productive federal office
for the second center starts.
Saying no member of the
committee seeking recognition at
this time I am going to say it
just just real quick I I I do
take seriously some of the
comments that the tech will be
out was raising and I do think.
Senator contest of because I
will have time.
On it it sounds like we're
pretty close when I heard
particularly from him was that
he supports the bill and I'm in
concept but would like a little
bit of work on the language and
I would encourage you very much
to work with detected will be as
this bill continues to proceed
to so when that gets out of this
committee.
Thank you Mr chairman I and I
would want to committee know
that there have been a great
deal of many meetings and
discussions.
Between those who work with the
the the manufacturers those
fires of this equipment and and
committee staff another so
that's good suggestions.
Thank you with that I believe
this call the roll.
but wasn't.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
Hello.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Is there any objection to
accepting the have all cast on
behalf of senator Morris.
Thing
is.
Discuss it what was the the
vote.
How it was about
six very well congratulations
Center sirventes on a six to
three of a depressed
recommendation on need money as
amended.
You all
have a bit of an objection you
know we're gonna start letting
cute children come cast votes
and tug at our heartstrings and
so forth you know.
I really I'm gonna have some
just give me a chance once in
awhile.
Q. this is going to work out I
have no chance around.
Well this is what the issues
voting as he was very very are
but the data she presents a bill
wrong gonna have a tough time
against.
So.
Mr a
Mr chairman that's you also have
Senate bill one eighty two Mr Mr
Mr chairman well while I'm
sitting outside the the roll
of Senate bill one eighty two.
We created a new level of crime
for threatening harm to an
elected official in I don't know
that I have to expand re much on
this one of late we certainly
know what has been happening
nationally.
and even in our own state I've
had conversations with our
governor she's been threatened
we've had the legislators and
our own chamber
feel threatened by individuals
we've seen a very violent threat
to our congressional members in
Washington we've seen it the
governor of Michigan with an
active plan for right to kidnap
her and harm her family.
I I really.
Regret very much we have to be
having this conversation of that
this this law may be necessary.
But I do believe it should be a
crime to threat threaten
physical injury on elected
official with the purpose of
keeping them from being able to
perform their duties and so
Mister chairman that is the
purpose of this new language.
Thank you very much
Mr Roberts revenue but it was
signed up to speak on this bill
well Mr Kantor no one registered
to speak.
Currently the the the people
who'd like to threaten public
officials did not sign up to
speak on the south.
R. so and that this bill was
In was amended all public figure
but we're at the in the open
public affairs committee.
Our.
Well but physical harm on page
one line on these two up but
with that Mr chair members of
the committee our.
What is the other question the
council committee on this.
What what is a partial
Committee.
store.
Yes.
Well we're
working for us.
I'm sorry are sure to get to the
mute button Mr chair.
But.
Okay let me get a second first
real quick and then we'll get to
here Senator Senator Lopez.
Our discussion on the motion
Senator Moores what is the
penalty I can't find it in here
as a school.
But as a petty misdemeanor as I
I think right.
I don't see it in your.
Mr chairman that's correct.
H. three lines thirteen forty.
Okay look at there are two in
contacts or was able there is
thank you Mr chairman thank you.
so this is serious slap on the
wrist.
It is a self administered
etcetera Baca.
Thank you Mr chair
My question I guess is on the.
First page
line twenty three item to place
the public official in fear of
great bodily harm isn't that
like just a feeling.
The you know it's the house that
measurable I guess Mr chair and
sponsor Mr chairman and senator
that language borrows from a
similar related criminal laws
that relate to assault and
battery and we that that is
that's the way with that we
generally describe an assault or
battery is placing somebody in
eminent fear of harm and and so
you're right it is a subjective
standard where prosecutor would
have to prove that the victim or
victim to be had a genuine
reasonable fear of imminent
harm.
The the the the simple with of
that what we require that that
harm or that that fear of harm
but it it but you're right it is
a it requires a subjective
standard of reasonableness on
the part of the victim that's
part of the the burden.
Google graduates a difficult
burden center.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
chair thank you senator for the
answer.
Anybody else on the committee
senator Saraki's I will make an
observation.
That
I'm not a member of the public.
Senator causes actual harm to
me.
That either makes a battery
which is a misdemeanor or a
parts was very probably harm
either a full misdemeanor or for
three felony.
But as I read this from a public
official.
Mr Miller no matter what's.
If I'm I'm not a member of the
if I'm not a public official.
If I'm placed in here of an
immediate battery.
It's a petty misdemeanor but if
I'm placed in my life it's a
full misdemeanor or third degree
felony.
and circumstances.
and then FY
Well so I just I will I will
tell you that I do have some
concern and and I would.
Are some concern that that we've
actually be lowering.
The level of crime.
If it's if it's something that
is that is a committed on a on a
public official band if it's
committed on member a member of
the public.
This.
Mr Chairman in the context and
the with the penalty provision
you you you may very well be
right and so we may need to
provide for a specific panel T.
that relates to the threat to a
public official has to pull up
where we put it on with other of
other crimes that would make a
petty misdemeanor so you're
right we may need we may need
to.
Not relocate this in a way that
maybe brings it up to a full
misdemeanor right to our our our
suggestion at this moment but
Would you be amenable amenable
to rolling this over to the
next.
A hearing so you can work on it
a little bit yes it was yes Mr
will do that.
Well in that case there so what
wanted to will be rolled over to
the next hearing
so that we can make sure that it
doesn't diminish of the crimes
of a public official press of
non members of the public and
with that Mr chairman I will
return to table back in.
I thank you Senator the will
turn next to Senate bill twenty
four I know the hour is six
thirty.
This is a complicated the bill
but I'm gonna take a stab at
trying to see how far we get
about the next thirty minutes so
probably be our last item for
the evening Senator Padilla
let's take a stab at it I know
you've been on the calendar for
quite some time.
Yes Mr chairman thank you very
much for about minutes to get on
this one I do have an expert
witness Leo Baca in the waiting
room and I think we may also
have
Tim Goodwin
in the waiting room also so what
weather center before you begin
let me just let you know while.
I believe you are rules but what
will allow you up to fifteen
minutes for a for support and
proponents there are also of of
half a dozen or so persons in
opposition that would take about
ten minutes that probably gets
us near the end of our hearing
time to seven o'clock tonight
I'm so we'll see how it comes in
but if the committee members
have questions and it takes is
bound that we what we may just
do the input and the experts
presentation tonight and then go
to the committee at our next
meeting but let's see how far
can we get I just want to alert
you that you've got a but again
about a half a dozen registered
in support and about a half
dozen Russian opposition so the
time is six twenty four you have
fifteen minutes under all right
thank you very much Mr chairman
efforts on that percent of I
love the schedule are going to
handle it so essentially to
Senate bill twenty four it does
seek to clarify what we all did
as a legislature in two thousand
seventeen you might remember
call and Senate bill fifty three
that you're that was a three
year effort for me and probably
another ten years before that
the internet appropriated to you
know what group leaps and bounds
and so we had not really revised
and modernized our
telecommunication laws here in
New Mexico since before the
internet came along I came to
the legislature started working
on a lot of the stuff and then
we want to bring that build that
year we gave the PRC two years
to implement the rules related
to to promulgate the rules
related to that legislation and
they they did they did take all
two years to do that and they
had every right to do that
there's nothing wrong with that
but it's unfortunate but they
read some of these these rules
are to be this law on rules of
employment it almost in the
complete opposite intention of
the law the
the Senate bill fifty three
really was intended I met Mr
chairman members of the
committee to right size
regulation on telecommunication
companies here in New Mexico we
we wound up with that more
regulation when when you when
you look at what they wound up
doing there was a court case
that that.
they believed told them that
they could do that and so that's
what they did and and so we're
here today seeking to to right
size what what occurred there
I just want to share a few more
items with you that I think that
are really important here and
and again that Senegal twenty
four makes it clear that the
commission still has the
authority to regulate service
quality none of that changes
they just have to apply the
rules equally to all local
exchange providers and that's
where you're are primarily for
the PRC surface qualities
quality statistics are are
excellent for the one company
that this piece of legislation
happen to affected the time the
commission standard to judge the
reliability of the network.
Trouble our report right sets
and standards of no more it's
it's a standard within five
trouble reports per one hundred
lines
each month the one company that
this affects is lumen that
they've changed their name
CenturyLink is now known as the
men and women of the average
less than one Mr chairman a
report trouble report per month
into two thousand twenty sits in
a tire twelve months worth of
performance there at why did
less than twenty percent of what
is allowable in terms of of
trouble reports SB fifty three
back in seventeen was intended
to establish regulatory parity
was one of the big words I was
using that here on on what will
help when I was explaining that
bill of parity within the
telecommunications industry and
and perhaps because of a lack of
clarity the public regulation
commission didn't do but what
we're hoping to do with that
legislation so here we are again
today trying to clarify this
with the commission believed in
the court actually agreed that
the changes established in
instead of a fifty three in two
thousand seventeen again the
commission room to increase
regulation on just one company
and seriously hamstring them on
their ability to innovate and
create and and and and and to
look for a broadband and that's
what this is really this is all
this effort is to continue
investment in broadband due to
this lack of clarity the PRC
impose more regulation as I
mentioned just a few moments ago
initiative imposed less
regulation and right size the
regulation for this one company
Senate bill twenty four this
year is designed to resolve
these disputes and make it clear
to both the courts and the
commission of what was intended
when we rewrite all virtual
communication was back in two
thousand seventeen I'm gonna ask
a Mr chairman with your
permission to have the box it
just a few words so that we can
maximize our time Mr Buchan.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Leo Baca on
the director of regulatory and
legislative affairs in New
Mexico Senate bill twenty four
is not a deregulatory bill it is
a regulatory parity bill that
maintains the commission's
authority to regulate service
quality and consumer protection
equally to all providers there
is a charge that if we could put
up the chart I wanted to show
the committee this is a a trend
of access line gain an access
line loss.
Compared also with the New
Mexico population are you see
the lines on top and the
numerical values are down in the
in the chart at the bottom so
you can see how the bottom three
lines is a combination of
CenturyLink access lines a total
and then broken down by
residential and business lines
and then at the very top that's
the population and then the gray
line upward trending is the
growth in wireless lines this is
all considered the voice market
in addition what's not shown
here is the voice over internet
protocol but you can see that
steadily since the year two
thousand we have lost access
line CenturyLink is lost a
considerable amount of access
lines.
Over the past twenty years.
And in twenty nineteen we were
down to about two hundred and
fifteen thousand at the end of
twenty nineteen and I just
received some data yesterday
that shows our total access
lines this is the voice market
again is down to about a hundred
and seventy five thousand in the
year twenty twenty we lost
another forty thousand access
lines and this is the regulated
part of our business that is why
this is such an urgent issue for
us and that we have this need to
level the playing field and to
create a fair regulatory
environment not deregulatory but
a fair regulatory environment so
that we can be able to compete
and be able to focus more on
broadband thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman and that's
our our presentation introduced
the legislation again the the
entire effort seventeen insight
was sent about fifty three in
the entire effort this year in
this particular case legislation
is to promote a broadband
focused investment environment
here in New Mexico thank you Mr
chairman.
Mr chairman we can't hear you.
Supporters to register in
advance include
Jeff Byrd Ashley Wagner.
Mexico chamber of commerce
Dennis on COVID comedy.
New Mexico Alliance for retired
Americans Jason Espinoza and M.
I. D. E. A. and and rusty Tyree
network solutions I see
I also have a letter from A. R.
P. New Mexico in support of this
legislation thank you.
All right
Do we have to we have Ashley
Wagner.
No I don't see here in the room
I don't know if she's and then
you're just Connery.
No.
Jason Espinoza I see
mistrustful stress but also very
recognize up to one minute Sir
okay chairman members of the
committee thank you for your
time today I am the registered
lobbyists with both the New
Mexico technology council as
well as New Mexico idea which is
the statewide association of
economic development
organizations both organizations
Stannis wrong supported the
legislation the internet's a
vital tool for people's access
information empowerment and with
the rapid evolution of
technologies demand for data and
the rapid growth of internet
things up both of our clients
believe the policymakers should
promote greater broadband
connectivity large component of
incentivizing investment
broadband is to ensure that the
state has a regulatory work
environment that tracks
investments New Mexico's
competing for investments in
broadband with other states are
regulatory structure needs to be
competitive so that investments
are made here in New Mexico we
need to reduce the regulatory
overhang create parity to
compete for broadband investment
dollars thank you Mr chairman
thank you.
Mr rescues migrants in the right
strappedwith administrations.
That is correct can you hear me
OK yes Sir you're recognized for
one minute Sir I thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee names address guess on
the principal and owner of
integrity network solutions I've
been working in the area of
telecommunications for over
thirty years
and I worked a lot with and for
different telecommunications
organizations throughout my
career and we do provide quite a
bit of services in New Mexico
our strong support of SB twenty
four because we feel it
clarifies the law to ensure that
all companies are treated
equally when it comes to the
regulation of telecommunications
and voice services in New Mexico
by leveling that playing field
this bill will allow for all
companies to compete fairly into
drive real competition for more
modern services specifically
internet broadband build out
specially in the rural areas in
the underserved areas of the
state's expanding that access to
broadband is critical for the
future of educating children and
supporting work from home
initiatives and expanding the
economy and we urge you to
please vote yes on SB twenty
four thank you thank you still
all registered in support Geoff
Burke please admit Mr Burke for
one minute please.
Good evening Mr chairman members
of the committee this is Jeff
for commissioner district to be
Garcia I am in favor of this
bill it does reduce some of the
burdensome regulations on
CenturyLink alone it gets some
closer to how we handle the
other telecom companies and so I
am favor and I don't need the
full minute thank you Sir for
your time thank you for being to
saying Ashley Wagner do we
refine Ashley Wagner in the
group.
Mr chair actually work not hang
the waiting right now I also see
the rapid Richard Dennis Conner
doing.
And I see him in the weight room
please recognize Mr comedy
you're recognized for one minute
please.
Thank you Mr chairman hi this is
miss are registered to speak
against the bill not for the
bill all right.
Well I believe that completes
those who registered in support.
Mr chairman but with your well I
do believe that secretary John
sellers are well these he was
online and thank you just
Senator here is here okay.
You so within your time Senator
of the Jewish to recognize
Salazar.
That Mr Salinger.
Salazar you recognize up to one
minute Sir please thank you Mr
chairman and committee members
my name is John Salazar on the
cabinet secretary for the
department of information
technology I would like to thank
senator but he of course work on
this bill do is supports the
bill because it provides an
Avenue for broadband X.
infrastructure X. expansion
desperately needed in our state
thank you Mr chairman and we
urge you to pass on Senate bill
twenty four.
Thank you.
Senator but anyone else.
I believe that sentence on Mr
chairman hi very good we'll go
into opposition.
We have for five individuals who
registered in advance.
And
We'll have the zoom house
recognize you have the same list
I do so if you'd recognize each
of those individuals which we
recognize up to one minute in
opposition.
Our first starting with the
woman Hey that day I do I
believe.
They are the communication
workers of America are they in
the room.
Yes Mr chairman either three
members that are going to speak.
Hi my name is who then had IT
and I I am with the
communications workers of
America speaking against SB
twenty four the recollection of
CenturyLink customer consumer
protection and service quality
regulations in New Mexico first
I wish the commission had given
more than three hours of and
that the commission I'm sorry
the committee had given more
than three hours of no this
yesterday for people to register
to testify many people could not
do so because of the short
notice.
But I am against SB twenty four
because this is not a broadband
bill it does not increase access
to broadband or investment by
CenturyLink it is a get out of
jail card for CenturyLink to a
band abandoned rural and less
profitable area communities in
New Mexico.
This will not hold CenturyLink
accountable to auditors and
customer complaints
CenturyLink's sale to prove a
finding of effective competition
at the PRC and again on appeal
at the New Mexico Supreme Court
so I urge you to reject this
bill and protect me protect New
Mexico consumers who do not have
alternative service providers
thank you thank you do you
recall one of your in the room
your next on my list followed by
Joe parks and Erin Callan in
that order Mr McMullen.
Mr chair the next person and I
have capital here that need to.
Current please admit her thank
you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and thank you for
allowing me to speak today I'm
coming here today as a professor
of professional economist I'm in
public comment to oppose SB
twenty four.
Jobs you study help rural react
in different situations and if
if everyone in New Mexico needed
a landline removing these
regulations would make economic
sense and it would be an
economic parity issue but we
called that of a perfect market
and this isn't a perfect market.
I'm a lot of people in rural New
Mexico need land mines and this
means that the market is on
balance and removing these
regulations for CenturyLink
would remove that that service
of last resort for so many New
Mexicans I think about forty
five thousand Mexicans.
There's a reason re regulate
public services that we know so
well water natural gas household
waste collection services even
the US yes for example the
USPS's held to different
standards than UPS or fed ex
there's a reason for that
because now service is so
important and telephone service
is the same way I agree that we
need to move towards a more
competitive broadband network
but this bill doesn't do that it
is simply a way for CenturyLink
to reduce it it's costs that's
my professional music Armistead
SB twenty four would hurt New
Mexico and its hard working
citizens bank.
Thank you Mr chair is all right
that I believe exhaust those who
register to speak in opposition
Mr chair we have Dennis Conner
the mistakenly label by the
proponent here to speak in
opposition well we just yes
thank you for money without.
Mr chairman he yet he spoke
first.
All right thank you for that too
late in the day for me and and
Mr chairman I'd die now Mr
beyond support comments page on
the knowledge Ashley Wagner did
join the meeting a few months
ago and any chance I can just
addressed a little bit of what
was just said.
Well let's make sure that I've
heard from all the opponents.
Have a member from the for the
zoom zoom so we heard from all
the opponents Mr Kerry yes all
the I have budget contribution
aching is had
Mr Connelly can you speak are
you on your.
Yes the service will be already
spoken so I had to wait thank
you.
One minute please.
I apologize Mr gone at that you
spoke a little while ago about
this yes Mr gonna you're be
recognized for one minute Sir
thank you thank you know I I
know it's been a very long day
for all of you thank you very
much for sharing this
opportunity I am the president
of the New Mexico alliance for
retired Americans had retired
telecommunications workers
without forty five years of
experience
yeah thousands of retired New
Mexicans I want to register our
strong opposition to serve
twenty four.
This is not a board bills.
Which it is clear to rescue our
to support our expansion as we
have we'll call this to the
house bill.
Which is part of the two house
committees.
Senate bill twenty four.
Is just trying to circumvent
existing legislation we just
decided century the ability to
undo restaurants findings are
PRC and held by the New Mexico
Supreme Court in January of this
year.
This is the second time that the
Supreme Court has ruled in favor
the US inspired X..
Senate Bill towards will becomes
more which is super less recent
CenturyLink to take care of
their customers and
responsibilities which would be
devastating to Mexicans thank
you Mr.
Thank you misconduct all right
now we've gone through the
opponents are really have joined
is a registered in advance.
Senator Padilla all recognize
you for two minutes to respond
we'll go to the committee.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
I'll be very very brief yeah I
just wanted to acknowledge my
good friends from C. W. A. when
we were in two thousand
seventeen well really two
thousand sixteen that leading up
to two thousand seventeen
is met with that all the
president's several times at the
you all to try to find it is
much
compromises we could we were
going through the process of
Senate bill fifty three as you
know as I mentioned earlier I
was a three year effort I'm I
just have to respectfully
disagree this is completely a
broadband focused bill I know
that there have been comments of
you know the investment will not
be there that quality this and
that none of that changes in
this with this piece of
legislation this further just to
pick further clarifies how to
regulate accompanied that is no
longer eight hundred and fifty
thousand.
Next in line to start out as you
heard I think a hundred eighty
seven thousand because that
market is going away and we need
to find a creative way to to to
bring large scale investment in
New Mexico to drive broadband
but I I again I just wanted to
thank the three individuals
spoke to CWI this is how we
learn exactly everybody you know
feels about these things and I
know that Mr Carty was the
retired New Mexicans retired
Americans I just wanted to
reiterate that the American
Association of retired persons.
Hi to me with this very strong
these yes stick letter of
support for this piece of
legislation and and I do want to
say that you know simply make
this change in two thousand
seventeen Mr chairman.
CenturyLink themselves look now
DeMint has invested forty six
million dollars into New Mexico
since two thousand twenty so we
talk about is this going to
generate additional investment
in New Mexico absolutely and
right there it's proof positive
forty six million dollars in our
stable on thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir all right we'll go
to committee members.
Committee members with
discussion questions.
Moved to pass.
There's a motion let me first
recognize debate discussion
center doing first place.
Mr chair I think if your
intention is to end of seven I
have I have quite a few concerns
about consumer protection issues
on the spell so I don't want to
keep us all here late at night
on a on a Saturday
but I I if your intention was to
continue hearing this bill
rolled over to Anna and in
another meeting then perhaps
session addresses issues that.
Senator do it let me let you get
started and begin to hear some
of your comments of the sponsor
has an appreciation for that
we'll see how far we get all
right in about the next ten
minutes or so.
For thank you Mr chair.
so yes Mr chair Senator.
My concern overall and and and
right sizing regulation I'm all
for that but I don't I have
concerns that this would.
Make it impossible to respond
regular regulatory way to
consumer protection issues that
come up it and it would it would
essentially hamstring.
Efforts to to address those
issues as they arise so.
So.
Can you talk me out of that can
can can you point me to
something in this bill that
would still included the kind of
flexibility to respond to
consumer issues
that that I would need to see in
something like this thank you Mr
chairman Senator do that again
and yes the standards by which
complaints are filed and how
those are are are are taking a
look at and reviewed by the
public regulation commission all
that remains all right it's
simply regulates that right size
the regulation for this
particular company like any
other telecommunications company
in New Mexico and as the PRC was
going through their efforts
through seventeen eighteen and
nineteen you look at two
thousand twenty I review this
awhile ago the the allowable
number of complaints or or or
trouble tickets that are allowed
R. five per one hundred or five
percent
lumen formerly CenturyLink is
now down to the point nine seven
per month for an entire year
which is less than twenty
percent of what is allowable if
the PRC wants to change the
what's what those requirements
are well that's one thing but
they are more than meeting those
requirements I'll ask Mr Bacchus
a few words on that as well.
Thank you senator Mr chair
Senator Duhigg wanted let you
know that there are still a lot
of service quality requirements
that would remain in effect if
this bill were to pass
requirements such as.
Requirement about tariffs
billing rules cramming and
slamming rules would remain in
effect resolving customer
complaints discontinuance of
service requirements to resume
arrangements for payment for up
payment plans that's just one of
about four pages of the rules
that I have in my hand that
would remain in the fact if if
this bill passes because they're
in effect today for all of the
local exchange carriers and so
what those would stay in effect
if this bill passes unless the
commission wants to revise
revise those rules and apply
them equally to all the
providers they have that ability
to do it.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Mr
Baca.
What I'm.
I'm looking at page five
subsection II.
We're insane isn't that the care
should be placed.
Under essentially can be placed
under under greater part
extensive regulatory
requirements
And so.
So thank me how if if if any of
those those rules that you were
just addressing if those are if
protections in those are
increased in any way with this
language not.
Keep them from applying.
In this situation if that
there's if we have such for
language that says they can't be
placed under up.
Than any other local share I'm
sorry I'm is right that I
apologize.
Think about.
And and maybe this is also
because I I wasn't here when
you're doing that the
legislation that you were
talking about before but can you
explain to me why I understand
that this only applies to
CenturyLink right now but why
going forward these changes
wouldn't apply just generally to
to broadband carriers.
Mr chairman and senator do they
they would actually they would
reply to anyone with any company
that would be within that
regulatory sizing or whatever
framework
I guess I don't understand your
your quote what we don't.
The PRC doesn't have the
authority to oversee and
regulate broadband and and the
FCC is is funded that so we have
to do things here in the state
but but so Mister Baca can you
just give us a little more
clarity that.
Senator and Mr chairman and
Senator Duhigg yes of the the
PRC does not regulate broadband
that is actually a perfect
example of how we still respond
to the PRC on broadband issues
there are several times where
I've recently had to respond to
a commissioner in Corey where
customers were saying they don't
have fast enough broadband or
they don't have broadband and
and even though the commission
doesn't regulate broadband we
still address those issues and
respond to the commission so
that that's just one example of
of how we can do that but the
PRC does not overall regulate
broadband consumers have a
choice if they're not happy with
one providers broadband there's
other providers that are out
there as well.
And I and I apologize I and
maybe it's just the end of a
long day is the PRC doesn't
regulate broadband that how is
this bill right sizing broadband
regulation.
Thank you Mr chairman that's not
right sizing broadband
regulations right sizing the
things that the PRC has the
authority to regulate you you
heard the numbers before in
terms of how the lumen or or
CenturyLink is being held
accountable to the standards
that were in place when they ran
eight hundred and fifty thousand
customers or or or or or land
line or fourth line excuse me
the company now that there are a
hundred eighty seven thousand
person operation we need to
regulate them differently so we
don't want to change any of that
but we we also need to get that
the PRC direction on how to look
at this very companies are still
looking at them as though
they're you know this almost one
million customer company and and
Leo would you like to and so.
Mister chairman Senator to heck
and Senator Padilla your act
absolutely right.
Back in the day when we were the
the big fish in the pond you
know there was quite a bit of
regulation and in that chart
that I showed you all at the
very beginning we did have quite
a bit of regulation back in
nineteen eighty five but after
the year two thousand when
competition entered the market
this is the voice market plain
old telephone voice market that
we're talking about.
with competition entered we were
losing customers annually and
we're like I said before we're
all the way down to a hundred
and seventy five thousand
customers if we don't find the
best price the best service to
those hundred seventy five
thousand customers we're gonna
keep losing them even faster
than we are and where they're
going to they're going to
wireless competitors who are not
regulated by the PRC they're
going to voice over internet
protocol competitors who are not
regulated by the PRC so all of
our competitors for those last
few customers are not regulated
at all by the PRC and so that's
why we need some relief possible
in that arena so that we can
compete there and still focus
more of our attention on
broadband because that's our
future the the old landline
business as you can tell it's
going away broadband is our
future and that's what we would
like to focus on as a company Mr
chairman and senator Duhigg
regulate that regulate lumen I
mean that that's not at all what
we're we're not trying to say
take all the regulations
regulate them like a one hundred
seventy five customer or or or
connection line company don't
regulate them like they're the
same hundred fifty thousand
connection company because of
the back before and I apologize
for that kind of going through
the history of all this but but
the New Mexico
telecommunications act prior to
two thousand seventeen had three
sizes of carriers there was the
large carrying the only wanted
that apply to at the time was
CenturyLink at the time there
was a mid size carrier that was
probably when stream and I don't
know of anybody else on that
court category eighty five so
one of those and then there was
everybody else in this New
Mexico rural telecommunications
Act we implements I believe was
in two thousand staff I
and that's the that's another
bill that I I brought you know
we just got to the Senate a
couple days ago because there
was that one company that we did
a how to regulate that because
of you know when they were
created so so because of all
that that you know but lumen
like stays in this vortex Office
regulation appear as though they
were the large carrier in the
state it was.
We trying to regulate them like
the size of company that they
are today.
Mr chair Senator thank you I I I
understand what you're saying
there I have a question on on
page the bottom of page ten
and end up going to the bottom
of page eleven this would make
it so that rather than than
filing applications with the PRC
for authorization I as I
understand it the the telecom
company would would hold on to
it these individual contracts
but then on subsection C. it's
talking about when the
commission would deny the
contract but if they if these
contracts are being filed with
the PRC.
How what what would happen to
make them review them did not
deny them step in and anyway.
Thank you Mr Bacchus Senator
Duhigg a I'm sorry Mister
chairman Senator to a Mr Bach.
Okay having trouble in meeting
their this involves individual
contracts and so this this area
on section three individual
contracts.
There's been a process in place
for many years and we have
always had to file these
contracts whenever we have an
individual contract with a
customer we had to file that
contract with the commission and
I'm not kidding you in twenty
years we never heard back from
the commission as to whether or
not the contract was in question
are you did something wrong or
anything like that this is an
old outdated process.
Other other local exchange
carriers are also supposed to
provide these contracts and
we're not even aware that anyone
else is filing the contracts we
continue to filing however and
it's a it we've never been
challenged on any contract in
twenty years so what this
section of the bill is doing and
saying okay let's go ahead and
do the cutlass streamlined
process do the contracts but we
keep the contract on file
because of there's a issue that
arises and something's brought
to the attention the commission
or maybe the commission just
wants to call us and ask us
again what contracts to be done
in the past month you know we
want to take a look at a couple
of them we have on file the
commission to look at on make
sure that they're still not any
non discriminatory pricing and
just ensure that they could even
do that are periodic process
under this new method it's just
that the old map that is
outdated it's intensely it's
it's a process that is working
tents that if we could just keep
a copy of the contract short
anytime they want to prove that
there's no non discrimination we
figured this would be a good way
to streamline regulations in
this regard.
Mister chairman Senator there
was actually a.
Over this discussion back in
seventeen there was there was
one contract between two
thousand three two thousand four
that was questioned by the PRC
CenturyLink submitted as they
requested the PRC requests they
met all the requirements and the
issue was was handled right
there in that so there was no
there was no no no difficulty
handling that but again outdoor
outdated policy that we thought
we could simply just cleanup
there's.
Mr etcetera I appreciate that
explanation
This one but this is requires
that the context be held for
kept for two years after they
expire terminating
just because the secretary
limitations on breach of
contract claims of six years of.
Would you.
Would you consider holding on to
them for six years just in case
that the claim was raised that
would require.
Access to that contract Mr
chairman and senator I can't
speak for the legislative
company bear from the company
Senator public company entitled
anyway Mr Bach.
I think six years is is fine
that we don't have an issue with
hanging on to those contracts
it's more the process that would
be old process that we're
dealing with hang on to it for
six years is not a problem
Senator.
I would move that amendment then
page eleven line eighteen.
Right to an answer six.
Friendly.
Segment.
Discussion on the proposed
amendment amendment is page
eleven.
Changing.
To the right two years.
Yes Mr chair one eighteen.
Other discussion.
In the Sanchez said Senator
Padilla choose that's a friendly
amendment that's fine.
Yes that's a very lukewarm
friendly amendment I stated
friendly before maybe sorry Mr
might not apartments the
friendliest.
That's fine.
Committee members discussion on
the proposed amendment.
Discussion at all all right
we'll take a roll call on the
amendment family.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
That amendment is adopted.
Senator do you still have the
for all that the time though is
six fifty nine I did have a
commitment to the committee to
have you out of here at seven I
also remember the last time that
I exceeded the time that
committed to you I was reminded
by Senator Stewart of the breach
of my commitment to which I
responded by summarily recess in
the committee which I think some
folks thought was the sudden and
unexpected so I don't want to do
so quite so suddenly tonight but
I'm gonna ask Senator Padilla
that that you work with Senator
doing again the next day or two
if possible and that will but
this up early on Monday.
With our remaining Senate bills
we've had all the public hearing
in the so we should be able to
go right back to the committee
and look at any proposed
amendments to try to make some
quick swift progress unless
