That's the more than that we
might have time for today so
time to do that
I I've talked with committee
members those of you here's a
rural today all this let you
know those of you watching on
soon.
We've been asked to this session
with the have assistance due to
the crime issues in Sydney
Mexico and with some of this is
on Bernalillo county is part of
that effort I wanted to try and
hear from the people that are
key to the criminal justice
system we heard on Monday from
representative of the district
attorney's office the district
attorney himself we heard from
our LFC staff on their study
report of the the chair maybe of
disagreement with its inclusions
that report after you have that
opportunity we also heard from
the public defender's office
today we're gonna hear portent
information I think for use by
the committee in our policy
making from others who would
invite and so today we have the
most recent of retired chief of
this police department whose
agree graciously to be here
today we will extend the
invitation to the current of
police department representative
for the City of Albuquerque we
also have Representative for the
county here that for the county
manager of the detention center
and insert data for the criminal
justice county criminal justice
system again all because of the
counties important role in
administration of the detention
center that we were a little bit
about from from of the assessors
and families on Monday as well
so there's a lot of pieces that
are more prone justice system
want to make sure we try to take
as many of them into account as
possible.
I also want to share with you
the in the efforts that I've
made over the last several
months there's a couple things
that I've noticed one is that I
think a lot of information from
police officers a lot of
information from the judiciary a
lot of information from district
attorneys prosecutors public
defenders most of whom do not
want to appear in a public
setting and do not want to
discuss the things that they'll
discuss private we in in a
public forum and we can all
understand that in some respects
for or at least understand why
that maybe that may be the case
that makes it hard for us to do
our job it's a very hard for us
to do our job when when folks so
feel that they can discuss these
things in public and I'm I
persuaded that lies at the root
of our problems.
Marks on Monday was a failure to
communicate.
So I welcome Michael Dreyer of
please.
Fire starter thank you of to
come forward we asked him to
give us a twenty minute
presentation on.
What is to be a cop in the in
Albuquerque these days with some
emphasis on the.
Implications of the department
of justice oversight the
McClinton decision or or
settlement agreement and and
anything else the things we
should know about the fact the
administration of justice from
the street from law
enforcement's perspective so
welcome to the committee you
have you have our attention.
Thank you Mr chairman if I'm not
allowed of please let me know I
intend to speak softly begin
within this masters now matters
but I do want to address some
current issues and challenges
that are faced in the metro
areas especially with the
Albuquerque police department
I'm gonna ask you to try to
speak up a little bit okay
that's what
maybe one of these little closer
but I do want to address these
issues that I saw during my time
as well as with the continued
into the the current state of
affairs in the city I think that
one of things I want to mention
is violent crimes in the city
are much more nuanced and crime
numbers themselves are willing.
Full story is not always made
public a violent crime as many
components and there are many
tools and private partners and
stuff that help Albuquerque and
I'm grateful for that that
assistance including from bodies
like yourself
AP has its own unique set of
challenges issues stakeholders
and available resources.
One of the first things you
mentioned it is the court
appointed settlement agreement
the cost of
this we when we when I started
in twenty seventeen we created a
how to create a whole new bureau
in the department at time it
started with less than ten
minutes well over sixty sixty
five people now just to address
the consent decree you can
imagine how much resources and
money and even officers and
stuff that are invested to that
effort.
The cause consent decree itself
informed chief but the issues
with when you have two hundred
seventy six paragraphs that we
have to have a ninety ninety
five percent of compliance
rating in order to pass on came
compliance also the strict
disciplinary standards that are
coming from
people that are subjective you
need to opinions and they're a
really don't have a familiarity
with the help help the cookie
police department policing in
New Mexico.
There's a lot of issues the
department is very limited
flexibility interesting nose and
so we're kind of stuck with that
process and paid into it for as
long as possible
I think in the Seidler bar with
the same issues is McClinton and
I've worked with our policy in
order to work with them to get
that that finally the settlement
agreed during my first time in
when we were there in the
office.
With the problems with that is
officers carry around in your
pocket chart it talks about all
the charges the LESC you know
non violent misdemeanors that
ticket their disposal avoid
physical rest and they have to
do citations or diversion and
again that's a good prices we
don't need to over little
details we put people in and and
not punitive positions if some
other issues can be addressed
through a diversion programs
such as substance abuse and
mental health.
At the same token it's we're
seeing as we're we're giving
these people opportunities for
those diversion programs it's
becomes of get out of jail card
free officers complain all the
time is the big do the paperwork
to initiate that process.
Three four days later week later
monthly or whatever it is
they'll get a notice that that
person did not comply with all
the provisions and now they have
to re arrest and go through the
the system again.
that's a big complaint one of
the complaints and I know this
is probably little bit more this
is there is an obviously a
shortage of officers for variety
reasons.
They just did a it had a wee bit
for the the staffing because of
some of these issues the initial
bit started last summer give me
a bit I had to reschedule and
they had two hundred eighty two
nine probation officers bid
ninety four probation officers
for total of
thirty two hundred eighty total
for total three hundred seventy
six.
To give you a perspective of ten
years ago we were bidding
between three hundred and twenty
five in three or four hundred
twenty five point fifty officers
that prepared for the these are
the uniform positions in the
field.
on top of that because of the
shortages they had to redo the
scheduling and officers located
over the four ten hour shifts
there's now twelve hour shifts
in a handful you get our ships
if you can imagine being in a
patrol car going car to car
called the call for twelve hours
fifty shifting goals six of
ninety six in the morning our
offices are exhausted and their
their ability to be self
initiating a proactive is
limited
what I saw on the department
started before I left and I
verified is without number of
officers that I've talked to
census there's almost like a
lack of unity there's a subtle
effect between bureaus and
divisions because people trust
each other they feel that
they're certain people whose
agenda are gonna lean toward the
consent decree and try to you
know use that to their advantage
or to management within the
department nobody trusts anybody
there's a lot of lack of
communication and apartment and
that you know that unity
actually the the commitment of
officers working together and
using their individual talents
in the areas the work makes a
big difference in crime fighting
efforts.
What we see now is the shortages
in the dispatch center critical
mass as far as I'm concerned a
nine one one calls are going
fifty rings without being called
answered officers is not enough
officers to respond to these
calls so priority one call and I
just this person into experience
with the family member that was
there during a violent encounter
in a Walgreens between a
homeless person was stealing and
attacking the the the manager
and destroying the property
he had been in a day before the
nine one one call they were told
that officers would have never
no officers available to respond
to that call.
The issues with nine one one of
the officers the dispatches that
are there are still short of the
working day of the roof mandated
by contracted work double shifts
to ten hour shifts as a long
shift with a behind a dispatch
Council and even have their
director had to take calls and
we can to help out.
Currently the officers the blue
piping cops they want to do
their job there's no proactive
and you know unfortunately they
don't have the time of the call
they don't have enough people to
be taken off the street to make
an arrest the man puts an undue
you arrest.
No traffic enforcement which is
leading to more traffic percent
facilities and other other type
of issues for potential for her
public.
And then obviously the rising
homicide totals five crime
homelessness drug activity and
just a blatant politeness of
some of these offenders walking
into like lows and steak and
coming out with two thousand
dollars in merchandise nobody
can touch him low suffered three
million dollars loss and they're
not even making reports anymore
so we don't even have data as
far as a people to be able to
deal with that.
But maybe there's no singular
status six Representative Lujan
the violent crime.
I want to give you a unique
percept perspective that
combines both my personal
experiences and long career in
law enforcement and then
observations with best practices
in the field today.
I don't intend to point fingers
or place blame instead I've had
like this issue in assessing
overall capacity and answer the
question where do we go from
here.
I briefly to want to discuss
seven oh several critical
elements in it will speed
Parities and workforce and
current could capabilities
limitations in its fight against
planned crime.
But I have to say is not
intended to be prescriptive
definitive but merely an
assessment at a starting place
the challenges faced today by
all law enforcement
represents a constantly changing
unpredictable environment that
demands oversight and over going
over I'm going analysis of
what's working and what's not.
And maybe import more
importantly why is that
happening.
the first critical element in
this is Stephanie some of the
studies I was reviewing
in recent months is the success
of any leave the price Reggie's
leadership the executive staff
on the police department have to
be strong and respected leaders
both in the department and the
community.
The top leaders in the police
department must ensure the COVID
commitment to reduce violence by
everybody in the community and
all police personnel will serve.
Recent polls by the AP away
which is the police association
Albuquerque police officers
association.
Reveal that ninety five percent
of the PD officers do not
support the current chief.
Two hundred officers left AP and
twenty twenty one the average
amount is usually seventies
seventy officers to retirement.
Morales at all time low in
officers to not feel supported
by their leaders.
The department is top heavy with
many new command officers being
brought in from the outside.
AP officers are not happy with
the situation that they feel
that their commitment to the
city is not appreciated in their
career advancement opportunities
are now reduced.
Their commitment depends on
officers commitment depends on
their willingness to follow
their leaders.
And if we also pay for the
appointment of an experience
leisure and command staff if we
had to the confusion and the
problem within the lack of
communication and the
department.
The second critical element is a
very important problem cation
basically a problem
identification and analysis it
should be based on accurate
crime stats critical incidents
and community input.
AP should be responding to
emergency trans but it focuses
on single trip dramatic
incidents and events and
generate public opinion around
for that generate public opinion
on specific probably require
special attention.
This is the you know reacted
kneejerk reaction it's kind of
like the if you go to an arcade
the economic okay that's one
problem pops up you get it
another one pops up and goes
full circle right back the same
problem.
The PED law enforcement must
develop effective responses to
these challenges that provide
outcomes that go beyond an
immediate Rabb remedy just a
previous piece of public.
You see this in examples which
shoplifting there's been the
tension drawn to it they're
still shoplifting and we're not
seeing any long term solution
the river lights pedestrian
accident with the employee and
fortunate incident was immediate
response to the.
On license ATV vehicles riding
and things like that but three
weeks later the public and
newspaper will identify that
nothing's been done.
Gun violence is a big problem in
the city the majority of the
sites related to with many many
causes drug related gang related
domestic violence opportunistic
violence with your like personal
feuds and and and fights.
Violent crime strategies will
only be effective if they're
aimed at the causes and not
merely the symptoms and this
requires careful analysis and
I'll say this and I'm gonna have
a size this at this time right
now more resources staffing
analysis and review is devoted
toward achieving compliance with
the department of justice
mandate tend toward crime
fighting public safety.
Thank you to.
More resources resources
staffing analysis review has
devoted toward achieving
compliance with department of
justice mandate tend toward
crime fighting or public safety.
Another critical element is
community engagement fighting
crime in Albuquerque has to be a
block by block neighborhood by
neighborhood city wide effort.
AP does not have the staff to
meet this critical need without
positive community engagement
success is impossible.
If you look at some of the apps
that neighborhoods report like a
social media.
forum they're always reporting
crime and and even state and
develop those reported because
officers are going to come for
days even odds of serious
property crimes so tracking and
reporting on citizens fat
satisfaction of key components
of the party's performance yet
there's no consistent method in
place at this time.
AP need to set the tone of
transparency and expectations
for the entire department.
Partnerships that we need we
need to expand on the current
traditional government you know
traditional governmental part on
partners but we also need to
identify engage more
opportunities to go into the
nontraditional nine government
of partnerships years ago when
they're they're very was in
place he had developed a
property crime initiative in
itself they had many groups
within the different components
of the city the construction
group
the rapper retail group
hospitality group's restaurants
and hotels and financial
institutions and small
businesses all have their own
little groups and met regularly
with officers are with the
department of the tough
discussed problems and work on
solutions.
AP is very good with mental
health crisis response victim
act see another social service
but the command staff needs to
start actively participating on
project teams include components
other components of the criminal
justice system sources reentry
trauma informed care workforce
development youth engagement and
mental health services and we
what we do that to some extent I
think some of the should be done
through the provide through and
you so there is some that
commitment that will last for a
longer time and provide
sustainability.
one thing we need to do is use
research partners like they're
dealing with different things
like pre trial detention that
help with the with the
effectiveness of our violent
thanks the strategies it's easy
to be here your own critique you
know provide you okay taken it's
always going to be biased but I
think independent thank you will
help us be better in our
enforcement efforts.
We need to continue with our
criminal justice partners on
task force and other strategic
and capital operations
has a chief I met regularly with
U. S. attorney district attorney
to discuss strategies and
protocols to deflate the federal
charges for crimes because
that's where people really go
away for long periods of time
I remember every unit
our members are pretty much out
of control for awhile the start
appearing with the FBI task
force that federal prosecution
and the serial offenders went to
jail and I'm a property strapped
for medically.
And this is a type of strategic
effort in terms of better
prosecute because we we were
trained how to submit their own
reports now we have a special
unit of paralegals that develops
and presents that the DA which
makes it much more efficient
process and they can prosecute
cases in a timely manner
the sharing of strategic and
tactical information real time
we have the real time crime
center I think the information
that there could be expanded to
other you know we could be the
example that for other other
parts of the state as well we I
don't know if it's going to
affect we have got a grant and
was delayed with a gun crime
intelligence grant from the on
the health of the American
firearms the federal government
basically were there's a system
there for identifying casings
and they keep a database just
like fingerprints and any gun
that's recovers ones through it
and now we we get the gun to
sometimes we can identify a
pattern of code with that
continues and if we can identify
offender we clear to release a
couple more supporters with the.
technologies in every fiber of
Albuquerque's source hardware
software communications with
policing in general is just
getting into the twenty first
century we're way behind private
sector in that regard and that
that's a force multiplier in
terms of things like identifying
hotspots locations green and
analytics analytics one hand
hand with technology put camera
systems integrated with you know
businesses license plate readers
gunshot detection systems the
knives which is that that
identification system for
firearm evidence one one example
of how we were lacking is.
We have we collect a lot of
evidence fingerprints and stuff
of crime scenes.
Program where it was headed
antiquated equipment we when I
was there we are to get get it a
fingerprint would be not to be
identified for up to sixteen
months sometimes and you can
imagine how many times a person
got away with the crime so we
had to address that and I'm
hoping that that still exists.
And I think that the federal
partnerships and establishing
protocols with that helps us in
that regard to.
training and tactics and
resources and sustainability and
we again the ATF the federal
bureau investigation the program
for twenty ministration and any
grants that are available and
state funding as well to
appropriations have been very
helpful
I think you know some of the
things from the operation of
legend and relentless pursuit
and thank god crime intelligence
center is going to be huge in
that regard we continue with we
need those those people there to
help
and then the less critical
element that I want to talk
about is just the accountability
you know we don't have an
ability to really develop
something to you know from
planning to actual education.
So any every intervention over
series intervention control and
crime need to methods for
evaluation as well as
accountability it's kind of like
a report card.
So how how is what we looking
for we are going for run numbers
just how many arrests we make an
operation know the answers
really we're looking for
outcomes so this data should be
able to identify did that our
efforts to limit the problem
where they just reduce to a
manageable level it may be a
situation where we find that
there's more effective ways of
managing the problem and their
development process or the
seriousness of the infants might
be reduced.
There has to be those
performance metrics for city and
police leaders measures of
effectiveness of interventions
should be based on the outcomes
not just run numbers and help
with.
Right now propose initiatives
like the metro court on the ship
or are well intended and I
picked those up but they need to
have performance and indicators
and that is enough from start to
demonstrate effectiveness to
documented outcomes I just feel
good intentions or worse yet all
talk no action.
you know officers look at these
is you know from their
perspective in terms of doing
the work in the field of trying
to protect the community as
smoking wares with smoke and
mirrors with no really long term
solutions we had a plan that
kind of addressed the four
disciplines of execution which
the starts with identifying
priority goals you can't have
twenty goals you have to
identify your priorities you
still address the rest you have
to have different ways of
addressing those goals measures
to attack it hoster to tech
plans of patrols or whatever
those operations are to address
that.
You have to have a compelling
scoreboard
the people play pick up
basketball they don't play very
hard but if there's so as you
start point for score the same
thing in police work is if you
engage the officers and and
bedding and the slide into what
they're doing they're gonna work
hard and if they see the in the
area commands that third command
is lacking in their ability to
reduce gun violence they'll step
it up and that's what we need is
that's not a top down
perspective but it is getting
the officers involved in
unfortunately less proactive
ability because of the state
shortage of staff that's that's
going to be a problem for a
while.
Accountability efforts city PD
does is it's a system based on
New York constant which is
called Duke city stats.
they changed the format after I
left the issue is the type of
down and again getting tied in
with the press of the consent
decree because we started
holding the accountability
sessions that should have been
just for crime fighting in the
area commands and an
investigative units to include
things that are already done by
the complaint fields such as
reviewing the I sort of turned
into police reports or or twenty
their body cameras and the staff
at the end of the shift things
that were already under you know
audit by the compliance bureau
duplication of efforts but with
the DOJ people listening in in
the monitors on those meetings
too so I think the effort was
just trying to make sure that
they they saw that we were doing
it.
I mean basically that's that's
my overview I talked to
probably.
Officers on a regular basis they
still reach out to me
you know they're going through a
hard time and and they need your
support as well as you know the
support from the community and I
think the community is starting
to see that officers have taken
a bad you know get in the last
few years and
they're really the difference
between you know maintaining
public safety and making a
community safe and so I hate to
see them separate to see them
leave
and basically it's really all I
appreciate the offer from that
perspective.
There is a professions.
One of the most of the General.
But more thank you thank you Mr
thank you Judy from I don't have
a lot of questions also I think
I'm what was the other committee
members kind of silence by your
your testimony and
we need to talk to the officers
of the lot of us to appreciate
what they're doing what's going
on I guess and all of the
challenges they've been facing
inspection are very but
throughout the Mexico
protocol questions are I had is
that ever understood is the.
It's not like our use of state
city for the DOJ
okay then after that shooting up
in the mountains and the many of
us were not and were that they
got a lot of ours attention
since there that should and so I
think there was a lot of
the tension that needed to
happen but I would Roose dangers
before the end of the week that
added fuel to the fire
we can you address that some of
the lower what was going on
before the OJ there was a danger
City of we are figuring around
time sure.
Yes Mr chairman senator Morris
and and and up within a certain
part of that Miss Mister chair
is you know the look at
Albuquerque in business since
nineteen eighty eight
but that a lot of places like
Tucson el Paso the other sister
cities in the region.
If you would think suffer the
same kind of challenges that all
has but you get on a path also
here in Tucson or even bigger
cities like for work you don't
have that sense of the crime
that you have in Albuquerque
just have the same drug issues
but they seem to be addressing
better have all the same issues
social economic issues that we
have but the addressing those
issues much better for so we
just address those two issues
from the appreciate.
Senator Moores I started in
Albuquerque in nineteen ninety
four.
On my first assignments was in
the southeast and at that time
there was a game goes for New
York thirteen and in the first
few weeks of that I was down
there there were like eight
times shootings with drug
related to cocaine trade
the violence has been there I
worked in the gang unit over the
years and there was a lot of
games violence you know up until
two thousand is I think when
getting started changing their.
The one so visible the one on
the street corners inflation
signs they renounce it sells
making big money working with
cartel so you still have that
it's much more subdued in terms
of the parents but it's still
there I mean it's the there was
an article in the paper not too
long ago we the rest of the
federal budget arrested some big
drug dealer he had all kinds of
guns and weapons and things like
that and his comment would be
just what you need all this he
says L. because of dangerous
city so even the offenders
themselves recognize that and it
is a dangerous city because the
violence.
It's hard to explain like I said
is charted gonna find you know
by certain people commit crimes
and some of it makes sense
sometimes both it seems like
there's a lack of respect for
human human life at this time
you have a lot more young people
to have access to weapons and
the minor few turns into a
retaliation incident and I know
we're trying to address that
with the violent crime
intervention programs and I
think that it's.
You you hit on the head I mean I
was in Denver recently and
talked to some officers of their
and much bigger city much bigger
metro area and it's it's has
less crime in Albuquerque and so
that that speaks volumes in
terms of what we need to do to
bring people into the city for
economic development more
importantly make.
Your own family members and
friends and anybody lives of
work within the city in the
metro area safe I mean between
drive by shootings and and road
rage incidents.
The driving and everything and
we all put our life and so
there's it's just a city as well
on the problems of grown with it
so I I I think years SSS number
is accurate it's just it was
better before and it's still bad
and maybe in different ways than
it was before.
There are.
Thank you Mr chair I appreciated
that report and I I in there you
prefaced it with the that it
wasn't intended to be
prescriptive things like that
and you were avoiding obviously
pointing fingers or anything
like that but I'm gonna ask you
for a moment to if you would to
to be prescriptive and maybe
maybe offer a couple of
suggestions that would
Would make life easier for
police on the street you know
and and the be effective to to
reduce crime and you know just
give us a help us as legislators
to just give us some ideas and
maybe what directions that we
might be heading that would that
would be of some assistance to
the police officers on the
street.
Mr chairman and Senator Baca I I
mean I think the biggest problem
and and it really shouldn't be a
problem but the officers do not
like the consent decree
it's it's confusing the
amendment of its limited their
ability to the job it's caused
discipline and being targeted
for things which made for them
from being promoted or have
opportunities on some basis the
the suspensions eighty hours to
a hundred twenty hours it takes
a big chunk of money out of
their paycheck and they're
they're doing families I think
that.
Somehow and I know the federal
government is doing something I
had actually signed a request to
Congress to release that we're
going to pay monitors over
million point two dollars a year
and they're still here after
sixteen years on the most people
there was a private consultant
we would fire them there's no
accountability for them we try
to get at least a grant and some
kind of accountability for those
grants to pay for having the
monitors in town I think the
sooner we get past that stage we
were close many times I felt
with the going to move back if
we can get that I think officers
would regain their ability to
feel like they can safely do
their job because I'll be a
hundred percent honest.
They are very afraid to be
proactive when the chances they
can fund if they can as as
evident by the fact that four
officers were shocked because
only five losses were working in
a very economic that they
basically you know wasn't
indication of the can't you know
there's not enough officers to
be there for everybody I think
the state not hiding behind
trees per se but we're putting
blinders on but they don't even
have the opportunity to stop an
address of minor violation or
traffic violation were that's
what the F. is you know it's the
deterrent therefore the state
like to be able to be visible I
think that the current effort
reduces crime they don't do that
anymore and so you're taking
away with most of them that's
the lifeblood is they came here
to make a difference serve the
community and make people feel
protect people considered their
nature and they can't do that
and I think that that coupled
with this outside oversight and
other restrictions and again the
department has become.
You know that can the data
wasn't wasn't being able to set
there was there was you know if
somebody was doing something
wrong about kind of need to get
out doesn't want to be in the
profession we don't tolerate
unethical or immoral or criminal
behavior or constant misconduct
brings us all down with the
office I know that I've seen in
the department in recent years
dedicated professionals they're
there to do their job and
they're they're being cut off at
the ankles if there's anything
that could cost pressure from
the state and the monitors I
know the DOJ's a separate
component but the monitors are
the ones who do this objective
reviews and they actually push
this back push this back we're
we're getting closer but we
never get that goal line I think
that would be a huge morale
boost for the officers and I
think if the department and with
back away from.
Hey we got a piece the monitors
in the DOJ at all costs they're
really throwing officers under
the bus and they really
inputting them of the
sacrificial lambs and a lot of
cases and it's not everyone but
everyone talks and so with one
person got a bad deal and he
leaves to go to a Texas
department everybody else starts
talking maybe it's time to leave
and two hundred officers.
Issues I mean that that kind of
presence alone and then the
price of the.
Itself has become you know like
a.
The disease I don't know how you
would classified but it's grown
to such extent as we have so
many people working in there
just based on the the provisions
of the costs of the twenty seven
twenty or seven X. two hundred
seventy six paragraphs.
And so if we have to meet all
those for example C. I. T. now
has.
And it's good I mean this
impaired we have twelve
detectives working C. A. T. and
that's more than we have
homicide detectives okay we have
a swat team that's down to a
bare minimum now we have sex
crimes and again the field these
are all to invest in the and so
you can they can do their job
the way they used to be able to
do it and I think Miss Alexis
are free to go on positions that
are high profile to going to get
in trouble so you feel officers
go call the call they don't like
being just reactive but it's the
you know and they need that
support I think to be able to
say that there's hope on the
horizon of the calories coming
the kind of bail them out of
this situation because the brass
known I know because I was there
you have to concede to those
problems you have to consider
what the monitor seiner the the
deal today would have those
records status conference with
the judge.
Was a no win situation in many
cases and we really had no
recourse but I think an outside
voice coming from a government
body
Discussion I mean if you just
for an opinion or kind of a
prescription but other than that
you know this comes down to that
thank you give the office as
motivated and more out there
time will tell.
Well thank you Mr chairman thank
you for for your answers I I
think you know I I was gonna ask
you a about that pro activeness
and and what that meant what
essentially it means when your
demotivated to be proactive and
what doesn't occur but I think
you kind of answered that as
well and so I think you all
given that you've given us all a
lot to think about and I do want
to thank you for your service in
law enforcement and think of any
previous law enforcement
officers that are sitting in
here today are listening to this
committee hearing that you are
truly appreciated in this
community even though sometimes
it may not feel like that and
the there are people that are
sympathetic to your plight and
you're really of a vital part of
this state both economically for
safety reasons for really just
that you know the basis of of
law and order and so I want to
thank you for that that's all I
have thank you Mr chair second.
I think restaurants and thank
you.
Two factors here
would speak I you know one of
the frustrations that I've had.
Last year's.
The number of times that I've
talked to officers or
authorizations.
With express their frustration.
At the actions taken by the
legislature.
That stop them from.
Rescue people almost right away
within the.
Our actions taken by the
legislature that.
If people back out onto the
street.
when there are no conditions of
release I think that we didn't
do that either jobs could help
people in positions of those.
And you know there's it's a.
I I think you're right there's a
complex problem a lot of issues
the state.
Part of is also recognizing what
the barriers are.
because wants to identify the
barriers.
you start focusing on the.
move for me and I'll send
Albuquerque you got.
Certainly the federal lawsuit
couple others that are very or
something.
and then and then the.
Frankly I'm I'm a little mixed
on the DOJ.
Consent decree.
Hello next on that because of on
on the one hand my fear is that.
This is lasted for for a long
period of time because there's
been some.
Some resistance from of they
could be.
And and on the other hand it
seems to me that it's lasts a
long time because there's no
incentive to get it done.
this is you know with all your
time in law enforcement.
we lawyers only actually do
something when there's a that
left.
And if there's not a deadline
we're not gonna get around even
if we want the funds on the bill
for.
provided to secretary right.
Watch the football game.
On Sunday where they have.
I I yes I was in the last four
three of three four yes of the
last two minutes of the game.
We're saying is this is just
like the last of the legislative
session.
couldn't couldn't get a ball
down the field and also to get
this done in about eighteen
seconds.
But the
you know but it's it's is the
ability to have this kind of
conversation so that that helps
reveal where those.
Where some of those barriers
exist thank.
and I guess part of.
Part of my question is.
In terms of.
Compliance with certain things
such as the DOJ.
A consent decree.
How much of the of the
compliance issues.
Our revenue from external forces
and how much them are driven
internal.
In terms of of how how either.
Resistance from officers or or
how.
Administration faces to handle
certain things.
For example I've been.
I've been told I think there was
probably a little bit of.
sarcasm in this but maybe not
the that there's at least as
much of not more.
paperwork involved and
interviews involved.
If you use force.
That if you have all the in a in
a failed instead of.
And you know it's it's.
There are there still seems to
be a lack of personality.
On on some of the the procedures
that exist.
But if you could just kind of
give us a sense of the extent to
which some of this is.
Is intransigence from from
officers never done it this way
before why are people outside
counsel to do and how much of
this is is perhaps.
external forces or for internal
forces in terms of how things
are being.
administered.
Yes Mr chairman Senator Ivey
Soto Soto
Here the prices with compliances
is.
Complex and a lot of different
ways
on each paragraph there is a
review by the monitors on in
order of of having a system in
terms of saying you are chain
attaining this ninety five
percent compliance so they'll
look at certain things in the
use of force and of the three
levels of compliance are a
primary which is first of all
did we develop a policy to
address the concerns of the
department of justice has a line
in there the paragraphs so
there's a paragraph the only use
of force.
Did we do change the policy and
address all their concerns
regarding use of force.
Whether it's the
You know was it necessary was a
improper was it appropriate and
was it within policy they'll
look at all those factors and
the way they do it is to stay do
an audit where they'll take
somebody sample cases and a look
at it so with the required
ninety five percent so they took
ten cases and nine were in
compliance with one wasn't we
would not achieve Annette
monitor's report at the end of
six months we would not chief
complaints in that particular
paragraph inducted ginger has.
These pages a quarter page
reports the dresses every one of
those and so then there's a
compliance report of compliances
you want to have the policies do
you train and and actually get
that out there to the to the
officers into the investigators
and everybody that's affected by
it including your internal
affairs investigation because
agency contacts and things like
that also reviewed so that's the
second you know the secondary
compliances did you do that so
AP headed the ball before care
prices for use of force it took.
Several different efforts three
different policies in that
regard and and the last one
involves forty years so what
you're asking too is
you know that all use of force
is the same you know it could be
you know just benefits of these
are behind them are taken to the
ground with all the way up to
the fatal shooting.
so there's a we had to create
units called the force division
that goes out there and sense
people used to go through the
arguments which is going to
cause some serious sometimes
senator going to take care of
their officers and be more bias
and we try to do the same thing
in the I want to say rubber
stamp but that was part of the
problem of the Energy pointed
out is there wasn't the complete
and was unfair if somebody would
go to one area command because
they could get away with
something more to be honest so
the last one is is then you have
to this is the hardest one to
achieve is are you actually
doing and when they go out
they've been finding that as you
mentioned sometimes there's been
resistance and whether it's
going to from the officer level
with the commander the
department have started dressing
animals we were going to get
compliance and then.
And so the officers would you
say to those misconceptions of
what they see in the they feel
that they're being targeted
the press isn't that difficult
it's just that the.
I don't know they always manage
to find the cases that are are
bad I don't know how they always
do you know they look at a
hundred cases and they'll pick
out the five there Mexico
problematic.
Look at the draw I guess but
there the you know the system
itself we had I want to say
exactly was twenty nineteen we
were ready to have to move out
to self assessment in seventy
six paragraphs means that we
have done in compliance for I
think it was at least two years
you know several those
components involves wind and
some of the other technical and
other areas of apartment.
We were all ready to do that and
then you have outside influences
with the consent decree call to
make a group center field public
input into reviewing what AP
does every policy now.
Years ago chief with the final
say now it has to go through
review prices were different
community groups look at it they
have to approve it as well.
So that brought in put a delay
on the staff of us being able to
self service we would have
purpose even more imperative
just removed.
In the building is now since are
so many cases being targeted the
recent report by the monitor
identified six hundred sixty
some seventy basis and that's
what it's going to they're
hiring tons of civilians to
address the backlog cost and
it's gonna take probably two
years ago through that so you're
looking at these delays it
almost seems like there's no
light at the end of the tunnel
so I mean the problems are
internal there were officers we
we determined to monitor
referred to this counter because
castle and influence on.
You know you have the APOE
constantly fighting the battle
from the other side as well
although there you know part of
the process trying to help rural
sense but those kind of exist in
your organization right now and
I think it's for offices the
card privy to the exactly what
goes on in those meetings in
those hearings and the
conversations we have conference
calls with the monitors.
I mean from a I'll be honest is
an officer industry to three in
the morning is you have a lot of
rumors and I think they're
rumored control you know just to
instill because you know they'll
not do their jobs for fear of
getting in trouble and that's
the perception it goes on so I
mean I think we have to break
that cycle I think something has
to be done to for the monitors
the realize that this is going
to end in the state make an
effort to to please directors
more you know they won't offer
they offer technical assistance
the never say this is what you
should be doing and so it's very
general very day and I think
that that's where I had problems
because I would just require K.
shaped several times before I
really as a chief understood
what they wanted.
So we we try to keep the
questions will Schardin answers
will sure we can play.
Capitation I apologize and I
just I didn't wanna make sure I
get the least were you working
on now is like trying to table
side I get everything else but I
was hopeful that are just have
one last question that is a for
the rest of our functions and
functionalities we have within
the city and but we also have
the civilian oversight
committee.
Yeah is there any reason for us
to continue to have that
civilian oversight committee in
the way that it is.
Mr chairman and senator I do so
it's required now by the casa
and it is the police oversight
board and the the CPA is a
citizen police oversight is a
priority for HSD they do the
investigative questions you know
they're the ones one complaints
community handle civilian
initiated complaints and some of
them are of serious nature
enough to go to internal affairs
so I think we do need that you
know I mean if we had a total
fair is investigating somebody
said whether officer was
speeding or an officer was rude
or might I mean these are
serious complaints but that
series in terms of priority
are we never be able to keep up
with the more serious so I think
to some extent and I think it
does provide that oversight
that's independent from the
agency it gets away from the
thinking that the police are
policing themselves and I think
it's reassuring to a lot of
members of the community so I
mean.
You know it is a change in and
perspective in minor Law
Enforcement and so I mean I
would say yes we would have to
do that.
At options thank you very much
thank you for
coming in and make yourself
available to us for questions of
thank you.
So of
okay I'm just some questions and
I'll try to keep the questions
of the type and short.
We are unlimited time this last
interim the courts corrections
and justice committee met in
Albuquerque center sort of learn
me to a policy would be under
city policy or perhaps four
order they were later learn how
the name McClinton
by which evidently there's a
the fourth quarter remained for
which certain crimes and I would
figure not addressable crimes
and I believe you for to some
part of the officers carry
around the list those crimes
which are not a restful.
This peak my interest because of
course this session we're being
encouraged to and we're always
every session we're encouraged
to pass more more laws
and and and I was perplexed to
learn that we can pass laws of
here but there may be orders for
the law enforcement officers not
to arrest.
Enforcing those laws and some of
those laws of things that I've
I've passed it a red flag law or
whatever may be we we can debate
and and struggle with laws in
passing laws but if there's no
enforcement or or discouraged
force within and we're really
wasting our time.
but when Senator alerted me to
the clinic Senator.
In a few things that puzzle me
more some McClinton as I
understand it.
Originated because of
overcrowding of the detention
center in downtown Albuquerque.
As a result of overcrowding
certain crimes within the not
arrest what we want to have
people in the jail because we
didn't have a way to hold them
you have capacity.
But even though we moved out of
that attention downtown
detention facility to a new
facility with greater capacity
in the state of the art of some
of the time it was built plan to
remain in place and we still
have that today.
And I believe that as much as we
we want to maybe not acknowledge
it I've got to believe the
people the the the lawless parts
of our society no very full well
the things that you to stress
that they can walk into lows and
and take whatever you know up to
a certain amount of money and
they're not going to see an
arrest report of things so can
you just give me ninety in terms
of retail because we talked
about that and private this year
there's a retail condos somebody
going to Best Buy somebody go to
Lowes somebody going to home
depot and and take up to what
that is a non wrestling fans.
Well.
Committee your in some of the
things that thousand dollars I
mean it's you know a few of the
hi you know tools and things
like democratic tools the the
take a shopping mall full of
thrills it's a roll over the
phone the amount but Chattfield
and so I mean we use the site
you know somebody stole a few
items from your grocery store
whatever we would citations for
that and arrests because they
can those people to jail
sometimes wasn't the most
effective use of our time but I
think under this McClinton and I
can hopefully I'm right and so
correct me if I'm wrong get off
track Clinton was with from a
twenty five year old case that
was finally settled you know in
twenty seventeen and we had to
do policies and a video training
and everything as far as what
could be done.
Basically the dress of non
violent crime but when you talk
about situations with the
homeless now it's problems like
trespassing it affects
businesses
we so I don't but you know we
can't yeah we take the jail you
get away from at least the
situation at the request of the
problem and officers are
frustrated is the the issue the
site or in some cases they can
go to open a window and then
post bail on those offenses but
they don't go to jail and then
the same thing with the
diversion programs the aspect of
as well we're not gonna take you
to jail in lieu of you go into
this this program for diversion.
You issue a homeless person a
citation for doing.
Methamphetamine in a sport where
there's kids and they get their
diversion program we're talking
felonies now and the officers.
Well that you know those
agreements but done you know
like I said two weeks later the
guy specter and the you were
having to pick him up because he
didn't follow the rules and
finally the orders so yeah
there's he wouldn't apply to
retail theft William lower
amounts but I mean the bleakness
of you know filling shopping
carts and wheeled and then your
car with you know security won't
do anything to the stores they
they fear for their employees
even the police are instructed
you know don't intervene so if
that's the case.
There's organized shop of the
rings that go out everyday and
still from different stores and
they're starting to get caught
now with when you think about
that is that affects all of us
in terms of pain your payment so
what we pay and merchandise and
I and I'm always of concern
about that and contributed to us
that certain businesses lows and
others want to report the crime
anymore
but it but it always concerns me
more than the loss of of
property to the the potential
risk of somebody her
and and I've been in those I've
been in the home depot when
somebody says something and and
the folks in the store chase
them out of the parking lots and
I'm realizing Mexico fab.
Vector that the person as a
weapon of for the the
circumstances escalate so so
that that's always a concern
among to but but I I do hope and
I've and I've had a chance to
talk to some of the elected
officials in Albuquerque I hope
will always stay open to
reevaluating the plan and try to
and trying to rethink that
because it it it.
It's got to be a difficult on
morale of police officers to
realize that the other crimes
that they're just required to
turn a blind eye to
by court order in some cases or
by lack of resources and I've
got to believe that leads to
this again the perception of
Albuquerque as as perhaps being
a problem you you mentioned that
the.
Nine one one calls may you may
you may bring fifty times before
you got a of pick up on a phone
call the nine one one discussed.
I can't imagine being of a
person in prices and domestic
case or something calling nine
one one and then having the
phone rang.
Without being answered one nine
one one call so we we've got to
really be looking at that are
revert resources in Albuquerque
up on the specifics of the
circumstance in the last a year
or more at times the governor
has tried to assist the
Albuquerque PED by sending in
state police resources for
periods of time I've got to
believe but I want to hear from
you.
is that is that something that
you perceive to be helpful I
can't imagine that it would be
and and what are the end result
of of that wanted to for do we
need to do more of that Miss
Mister chairman yes they did a
search they called it back on
when I was there and obviously
that presents the police is a
very in a deterrent and if we're
got out pretty quickly that
state police were there and they
were still making a lot of
traffic so I've been very
proactive actually got into some
real shootings when and the time
they were there.
We did notice crime went down
in that special areas the focus
in in in the in the
international district one that
you noticed when the state
police it came in at the
governors of a request for a
search the crime went down so
how do you measure that have had
issues says the crime down when
when this the state minimums
resources available at that time
we were under the uniform crime
reporting system with the FBI
property crimes some violent
crimes like robbery I believe
homicides as well to what we're
gonna focus in on specific areas
that were hot spots where they
were actually.
Devoting the the most of their
the resources so during that I
think it was a month or fifty
days something like that the
first one we noticed that during
those periods there was a drop
in crime I mean that completely
off the board but not so that
you know I don't think it took
awhile before people realize
that they were doing do share
some top so to speak but I think
later on
the problem was that I know
channel seven did a story on it
is they researched what happened
to those people that were
arrested and the majority of
them were released within a
relatively short period of time
and once they left things went
back to normal so I mean it's a
great effort for temporary
fixing the help and and and
again the the sheriff Gonzalez
have done that as well with
helping with iterations.
But go to look for
sustainability and long term is
because people realize this
state police are patrolling the
streets anymore you don't see
them gradually the word gets out
and and those networks of of.
You know crime crimes prevalent
rugs are prevalent in
homelessness is a big big you
know catch on pretty quick too
but it was helpful and we
definitely appreciated the
amendment made a great relief
for officers working there one
of the topics of the forefront
this session is the pre trial
detention process and adoption
of presumptions for detention.
can you just tell us tell me a
and I understand it.
The extent to which cases in
Albuquerque are not prosecuted
or unable to be prosecuted
simply because law enforcement
officers are not showing up for
proceedings of in the
prosecution process because that
we hear about those cases
dismissed for officers not a
very is this just simply a
matter of manpower.
Mr chairman it's always been a
problem court is not always an
enjoyable experience when you
work late hours and things like
that and and officers to get
disciplined for that we have you
know we would get reports from
the courts and that case and so
I mean that was something that
we had to address I think it's
really hard for me to address
what's going on now
but I think it is the shortage
of officers I think that in some
cases
officers just forget or whatever
but I know that with losses in
place is this a huge concern in
the they definitely don't want
to be seen as having the usually
happens not so much with the
phone cases because that's a
little different but look at the
wires which is seriously gets
dismissed that could result in
net and going on in causing a
serious crash or something and
they could have been prevented
the top of your regular part of
their work consequences for and
follow through with officers who
didn't.
How did it Mr chairman of the
Republican example as a
commander in the southeast area
command I would get
Representative reports from MPD
from a misdemeanor court from
traffic court say in such
decisions should be shown I
would check and we would assign
it to their search and there was
a and you get a range of excuses
some justifiable most just
for the show in some cases
this is a really it was a big
problem with the W. I. officers
is the offense but the defense
attorneys were scheduling
hearings for them to be multiple
places the same time and then we
do pre trial as well as a court
hearing is that Census because a
lawyer.
Is.
We're but I I know I am
concerned not to make levy was
you know I am concerned by the
the answer act appreciate your
honesty in it but you know what
when it's just well a the
legislative shoppers you know
three
not a lot of us in in private
sector law or business get a
chance for our employees just
kind of forget about showing up
for work or showing up for
deadlines are we're doing things
so I am glad to hear that that
that there's some effort to try
and minimize of that kind of
thing well last if I can the DOJ
I hear a great deal about that
I've got to tell you some of
this is so concerning I hope
you'll disabuse me of it some
other time maybe when we're out
of Canadian tire from a law
enforcement officer from
Albuquerque a lot of experience
in person I respected great deal
of who suggested to me that in
order to avoid the consequences
of potential DOJ report and so
forth that officers will
deliberately response lowly to
infants so that they're not put
in a situation where the use of
force is more probable in other
words when there's no there's a
of an incident in progress the
the there's a reluctance to to
be on the scene too early
because of the the likelihood of
an altercation the use of force
that's gonna and jeopardize
their job career reporting
suspensions all of those kind of
things I hope you can understand
how concerning that would be to
hear of but this committee from
a law enforcement officer and
and I I would imagine the public
would be alarmed.
To to hear that and I'm sure
that's not a policy for those
not the something that you would
have allowed to happen under
your charge but but I do think
that when we when we create
morale problems.
Which you're describing it seems
to be a very significant problem
within the department there that
we're gonna run these problems
my understanding is the DOJ
oversight was was three or four
year.
oversight were known in the
seventh year my understanding.
And what I understand from the
press accounts is there were
only still at about fifty nine
percent of the required
performance measures and that
we're actually sliding backwards
of the the the last year we did
not make progress but when the
opposite direction are are there
is that information in the press
accurate.
Mr chairman it is yes that is
accurate I've read the last
monitors report we're still at a
hundred percent compliance in
the policies all those are in
effect for it in the nineties
percent as far as you know
dealing with the operational are
secondary points which means
that supervisors are enforcing
the policy and you know finally
like you said there was some
resistance and things like that
the areas that we dropped were
in the that compliance level you
know to what extent and so we
dropped in euros terms of that
operational compliances we're
everything we're now you did
that we got the policies that we
got a train but everybody's
doing what they're supposed to
do sorry to see something wrong
the reported if in infants
reported that bows use of force
investigative team reviews that
and reported accurately and you
know from the straight up
straight up perspective calling
the shots as it is we fell back
and part of that was that
backlog of cases that you know
that they saw that if the case
is going to the timeline to you
as a country collective
bargaining agreement ninety days
to conduct investigation and
another thirty extension if it's
not done no action is taken
against the officers and that's
where the the monitors it
serious heartache and we fought
hard to make sure that the there
were not people and I hate to be
able to do those cases that's
what we do and we as of reasons
I mean I can see when I was
there at the end we dealt a lot
with the former backlog that we
had to deal with but I guess
that this just and they have so
many people doing it now which
is but that's what happens
officers do their job every day
get into my to use of force and
called out on it and there's
turbulence but as far as the the
of you mentioned that responding
to calls I've heard you know to
the grave finder senior officers
that just don't want to under
career in on a bad note and they
do the X. I don't want to their
credit that also they don't
respond the thank you said is
there's a delay or they put the
blinders on the to.
Really want to go take a report
but the they'll be reactive in
that regard and it's not total
because the young officers are
still very.
You know excited about the job
and they want to do can be
police officers and catch bad
guys and things like that but
after awhile you know they get
more seniority they get a little
tainted in the systems that they
can call up with rate in half
ninety cameras statement held
accountable for every little
mistake senator came some leeway
if they were good officers and
they made a mistake here and
there that doesn't exist so
senior officers are kind of
concerned I do have one and I
don't want to give you would
miss courses
I did the dresses and high it's
that would catch officers
sometimes that.
Grandmother died several times
and the they had so many for the
plight of flat tires is excuses
one in this court so the
officers are creative in that
way for find excuses and it's
it's not humorous by any means
but the would irritate me that
when I would catch me doing that
in call now and I hope you look
at the disciplinary action
because there was a picture of
what the presentations of our.
On the thank you for being here
today appreciate this and wish
we had more time.
One two of what will look for
the opportunity to bring in
other law enforcement
representatives from Bernalillo
county in the state as a whole
so thank you again for being
here thank you for the
opportunity I appreciate.
All right we need about the
three minutes of operate to get
ready for next presentations
these are going to be by zoom
presentation for trying to
different topics different
perspective presentation so.
We're gonna use.
Thank you there's a gentleman
here is that.
It is it is
I'm a hard stop at six thirty
this evening so we've I've asked
the next presentation to
present about twenty minutes
national of the pandemic
professionals I'm I'm trusting
your bill will take a lot of
time.
Yeah that's what I hope so I
tell you sit tight.
Okay thank you for your.
So of if you'll know when we're
ready to go.
Yeah.
The.
Well.
For.
Thank you.
Or.
The.
Yeah.
All
right all.
This.
The.
Yes.
So.
Right.
Well it's presentations are with
of our friends from Bernalillo
county we have I believe on zoom
available to us
Julie borders Baca County
manager achieved great right
Richard some photos achieve the
tensions Center and gave them so
those coordinator from
Bernalillo county criminal
justice.
So we've invited you to be here
today and we're open to brought
discussion with you but also
some specifics that the I was
hoping the committee could hear
some of up one of them I hear a
great deal about these days is
the difficulty attracting people
to staff the detention center
and what that means because when
there's a as I understand it
there's a difficulty staffing
the detention center that means
the capacity of the detention
center must be reduced in
corresponding to that pin means
fewer people being detained and
then as a result of that perhaps
future but your people being
arrested for crimes that will
require attention so it seems to
be a contributing consideration
we talked about crime in New
Mexico so with with that
introduction miss Baca I have
you first on my agenda usually
begin with you.
Thank you Mr chairman of as you
said my name is Julie for the
spot of the county manager and
with me is T. right
Representative forces the chief
of the metropolitan detention
center and into my writing
statements are criminal justice
coordinating council for maybe
so first of all I just want to
say thank you so much to for
your willingness and Tatian to
meet with us and have a
discussion before you begin
looking into the various
legislation of legislative bills
that that will be presented
before you sell.
as you know we're it's been
really challenging taxes
challenging times LESC
metropolitan detention center we
this is often a challenging
place to where the dealing with
the you know the population uses
which we addressed that staffing
issues well and then comment the
ransomware attack in as you know
we experienced are are all
crying she was crying hundred
billion satellite so lots of
lots of things going on we were
down but I always tell staff and
we feel that you know we're
we're up.
Stronger than ever and and
willing and able to do some of
the best in the nation our
citizens so you know the
legislative longstanding
tensions facilities and
correctional facilities of
thousand family income community
that the staffing shortages of.
Very very fast to address them
we have a very.
A Harvard educated staff prepare
a lot of times yeah this is
almost amounts when you know we
we get paid for students most of
the people there are very good
hard working people that just
want to ride by every one of the
things we want to let you know
about is getting this the
intersection of crime now and no
one has asked burgers are health
initiative with criminal justice
initiative so we actually have
offices in my office that's
located at all over on a square
near the Senate floor with the
staff working together to
address these issues did not
access there was nobody to get
into these programs so that that
is appropriate and the right to
do so with that I also want to
let you know that the county I
I do we have the very best
criminal justice coordinating
council made up of our media
partners for the city for
District Court federal court
public defenders the district
attorney the chairman eighty
they all have representatives
who attended meetings and then
also we have a very subcommittee
so we try really really hard to
be inclusive and I pride
ourselves in rural county to to
basically what the top find most
of the funding for that and
we're happy to do that
legislative body to assess the
point of the public
with the district attorney's
feel that it is the right thing
to do so that I want to to stop
and to if you don't have
questions or would like we need
to do.
Session on some of some of the
new development and can do that
but I'll defer to you Mr
chairman.
Whether you're from the chief
refusing to give you most of
this for us awesome device to us
as policy makers and and and you
all know there are some numbers
on one of the let me know how
that for us for years.
She bridges.
sure this is a Christian then
the state I know that you are
looking for update on the
Clinton I'm trying to guess is
history on whether the claim was
originally filed back in
nineteen ninety five in the
federal courts to address for
the overcrowding at the of the
downtown location
at that time it was currently
it's not on the side of the
brown of federal judges and
oversees the losses for
as a result of that is that if
you know the the the
metropolitan detention center on
the west side and he needed to
address the overcrowding problem
with that a lawsuit so I
continued still continues today
the most recent settlement
agreement was that two thousand
and sixteen so with that
everyone has approximately two
hundred fifty individual
requirements for this round
iterations medical care mental
health each requirement is
related is rated as compliance
our phone line we're not
complaining one of our reform
monitor director so the forward
we're listening to to to try
that one more on order NEC has
three court orders we've always
had people report more than we
reporter that our side on a lot
of cases we work with
in order to.
Navigate the lawsuit
of these expertise you rating
report colleagues here to us
early in the C. as a result one
hundred three of those domains
related to jail operations and
currently we're trying to get
out of this engage through the
rain was really fast food we
need to appropriations the way I
would population to make six was
just two thousand segregation
currently right now we're still
working on one of the few would
revolve around mental mental
health.
Maybe three we're going to
disconnect amendments to forward
to appropriations the main for
we're still working on that one
as well maybe I would say to
also would be very very get em
um disengagement the way seven
were just to increase sexual
misconduct we're working with
that I'll close to that getting
through there and then to
may hate which eschewed the use
of force in the office of
federal standards we are
applying their.
The time for our so we reduce
management layers.
So that everybody on Clinton is
an with that I would like
because I know you have some
questions and thank you better.
I think it's important to find a
better information I have
questions presented to me and
some of the there is concern.
And and and thank you Mr
Richardson Mr them did you have
a presentation for.
Of.
There are several common issues
what are kind of manager has
already sort of addressed around
the committee and on the part of
the county and our fellow
stakeholders here in the second
judicial district
Committee gauge in a
collaborative manner through the
criminal justice coordinating
council.
so for those who are perhaps
aware of the CDC is a model of
collaborative decision making
and problem solving the earliest
County the criminal justice
coordinating council has been in
organizing some of in some
fashion for at least seven or
eight years it's come around by
statute statute and or or order
under different names but most
recently recognizes the CDC or
following a national model for
criminal justice coordinating
council center
in jurisdictions all over the
country in fact Bernalillo
county is a member of a national
network of criminal justice
coordinating council the select
group of peers that are
organization very jurisdictions
similar to our some larger some
smaller but all indications
similar activities around of
funding solutions COVID
solutions for to make
improvements in efficiency and
effectiveness and fairness of
our criminal justice system is a
complex systems complex problems
associated with those and most
of the times those problems
cannot be addressed by one
single component of the system
alone they require a
collaborative effort would be
input impeachment and expertise
of all stakeholders call.
CDC data track record dressing
the same in the second district
for a number of years taken on a
lot of kind of big picture
issues but also a lot of smaller
issues there that are confront
that our system and our
stakeholders are confronting on
a regular basis some of those
could be operational in nature
in the sense of just opening
up a line of communication
between stakeholders that maybe
didn't exist previously to
achieve some efficiency or a
minute away information passes
from one entity to another but
they can also call bigger
picture issues that are
interacting everyday residents
in our community whether it's
public safety or mental health
major health issues folks
are expected as a crime or are
individuals with experience who
are trying to do our criminal
justice system.
so you know to give you some
background there the
collaboration is the sort of
special sauce but it must be
invested in it takes effort and
Bernalillo county with support
from the City of Albuquerque's
well is providing that
investment into the
collaborative table because we
know that works and it's a
require us to engage in that way
and not just by the state
statute but out of necessity to
ensure we are able to manage
ideal population
and I was one of the so the
primary motivating reasons for
collecting this stakeholders
because to look at our operation
of the ways that that
populations affected by
practices and policies and
programs that are currently in
around system.
And so having a place for to
converse and dialogue come up
with solutions and then entities
are able to implement those
within their organizations and
to see some effect on the system
we always collect data and
monitoring and tracking of of
the performance of our system
sort of front and center so we
can make data informed decisions
best possible.
There are associated with that
data is hello
in silos we've been into the
Pacific editing systems it's
hard to put that all together so
we can learn new information and
make good decisions so one of
the areas of focus of our
criminal justice coordinating
council member County in recent
years has been around
improvements to the ability to
access data to members can put
it together and deploy data to
use
for all of our entities to
consume and and bring them to
their own systems so integrating
data center and creating an
environment where data from
various sources is it
of gender and situation we can
maybe do informed decisions
about that and about the I think
it's the existing programs or
things like to do is really a
critical priority for CDC and
for the county and into the next
couple years.
and the late chief rejection to
my left here are.
We stopped there and less you do
have to have more to add to our
conversation you need to see the
respond to questions that the
committee may have.
Very good and thank you Mr lives
and all of you for making says
available for questions we have
a little bit of time for that
the committee members have any
questions the Senators
questions.
Senator Moores.
Think about
Mr chair Julia that the previous
pro presentation talk about a
card
and Mr correct me was the thank
you.
I'm just going to Clemente card
we get a copy of that our staff
get it get us a copy what the
crimes are that
aren't being detained right now
at some point in future July
thirtieth I'm asking you
probably you probably have it
more readily accessible with
anyone else.
Now this Mr chair since much of
that can you address the
question that senator chair
representative office had about
why we're still doing it after
we built a new R. hi General
Spencer that Jill was on that
we've built are we still doing
that huge creatures that issue.
What I'm gonna be C. for
approximately we're going on
five years now Sir and as far as
the market is has been given in
the
This part under offenses that
are not addressable that was
news to me today as far as jail
and NEC we don't have anything
or anything along the lines of
the Clinton that is not a
restful fence high stakes
statute ordinance whatever case
might be if it's a restful
fences around school friends
longer lawfully arrested and
brought to the facility that the
facility that point we don't
turn individuals whether the
arrested
there are the only time in my
tenure that I've been there
where we looked at working with
law enforcement for them to
use a little bit more officer
discretion if you will was at
the beginning of COVID because
we you are often federal
requirements on COVID we didn't
know you know we're we're trying
to develop processes and with a
different mitigation strategies
in place and so there are some
of the differences for the
payment processes for lenders
traffic citation being issued in
lieu of replacement tension
center that was something that
we asked them to look at limits
us to look at that doing it
actually came out that you know
that's what we're requesting and
and improvement of its own if
you are expanded but there is
nothing to my knowledge that I
know since I've been there of
that there is a quarter of
fences that are not arrested
will offenses that will not be
accepted at the detention
center.
I I thank you I think we need to
get to the bottom of that Mr
chair if we get staff look at
are you good hearted soon but I
was actually shocked by that
statement and I heard a couple
snickers and laughs of surprised
by that so I think we need to
get to the bottom of that
ourselves on this ended so all
us our staff researchers or if
we can find out what's going on
with that that's something
that's a very important thing
for us to understand if it's
happened or not
what crimes are not being picked
up in terms of like people deal
with the who's been picked up
you know anything about it so
All of their Mr chair thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr men's could you with the CDC
says could you give some.
Some specific examples of some
outcomes that have come from the
C. P. C. C. they're just looking
at some of your equipment from
from various meetings earlier
today and and it's clear that
there's there's a lot of
discussion of it goes on and
you're saying that that one that
one communication is is one of
that the point of Council about
what.
What are some of her from the
the communication water some
concrete outcomes that that we
can that you can describe for
us.
Mr chair and doing it maybe.
Senator Duhigg that is asking
the question we have a we're not
able to see.
everyone on the panel there so
I'm taking a guess that's what I
was going to your question in
terms of the actionable items
for the dentist Kerr over the
years of the seventeen CJ CC's
activity so the the strength of
the State JCC very
relies upon you gauge mint and
commitment of all to extend
require.
So when not all individuals are
engaged
there are times when
discussions can involve more
discussions rather than action
items that can take place but
over the years all point to a
couple of specifics often times
much of the conversation in the
CDC in action is taking place in
the subcommittees underneath the
car with us coordinating council
which means on the basis of for
membership body there are three
Senate committees a diversion
and re entry subcommittee
focused on that intersection
space that
responses mention with regard to
the examining those individuals
that have major health disorders
or complications that are also
critically justices mall that
sentiment is looking at ways to
improve and the bridges between
the criminal justice system and
our health systems and
programmatic responses that are
set up in.
so for instance looking at a
program like law enforcement
assisted diversion which is an
attempt to intervene with rules
with the substance use and
mental health disorders at the
time of the rest of the field to
divert those individuals out of
the system and into services and
supports thank
help in state cases and operates
in and take care of some
prominent hello.
So conversations are happening
that subcommittee and in
addition to the number of years
ago as to we are law enforcement
assisted diversion as a solution
increased about our community
and in a through the efforts of
the county and others even the
support from the state
legislature Bernalillo county
now has is functioning on our
assisted diversion program now
operates both with the CSO and
EVP.
Another subcommittee of the
CVCC and I'm sorry I'm sorry Mr
knows what kind of before you go
on to ask you a question about
eight
because and the LFC report I
recall it saying that it was not
fair utilize that very few
people were referred to leave in
fact only two officers for
making any referrals at all hi
all the referrals have come in
have come in from just two
officers and that that a lot of
the reasons that wasn't one of
the reasons that wasn't being
used is because it it's only
operating during normal business
hours not when
the officers would need someone
there to.
To in order to do the referral
and that there was a lot of
paperwork involved so is.
Is the CDC see is it will is it
looking at ways to make leave
more accessible and more likely
to be used as an option this
sounds like at least from what
was in that report well it it
sounded like a really great
option if it's not used Senate
how much differences and making.
Mr chair Senator doing.
So the two parts your question
I'll try to answer
although I hate it I am not was
just the information gathering
that LFC conducted around the
program will not.
but when I understand is that
there are concerns that there
have been incidents about the
utilization of the program and
how much law enforcement
opportunity more or thank you Mr
rose into the program I know
that it was some concerns and
current over the summer the
leading into the fall but the
involved parties go on RigCount
side law enforcement side as I
understand it has since been.
Pursing and trying to resolve
some of those complications are
challenges the program and I'm
understanding at any point eight
months referrals the program
increases mistaken.
So and that is sort of examine
those dialogues are not in the
future this is within the
ballpark in specific meetings at
our current there
I think my my nieces that
example was that the this is
the emerged and was put forth
through conversations other
currencies in that time.
Years ago.
Where it could still come
forward is that in further
discussions where where the
CDC's current have
subcommittees and even that our
for our the meeting is to ensure
that that program any other
diversity programs their
expecting the target population
work.
We do want to ensure that
they're affected and we also
want to be looking for solutions
to make improvements in the
program so that is kind of the
format the.
the.
Have.
Able to almost a quarter parks
is not this and we would not
know about the problems and try
to rest so the idea is that we
have to have a table for she can
be reached and dialogue to the
current solutions to be found.
Thank you I appreciate that.
Well so I I like senator Senator
office
Think centre doing that together
we started looking through the
minutes of the C. J. C. C. for
the last year.
To try to assess what the group
has been doing in in the sense
of what what proactively we
should be doing here in Santa
Fe.
To try and combat within the
epidemic of crime in in New
Mexico the statewide but a
particular of Albuquerque
Bernalillo county.
If I missed something please
tell me this is probably a
question for Mr Nunes back to
the points Senator was making I
looked as you all know this is
this session.
Of the hot issue the big topic
is should we have presumptions
for pre trial detention.
In other words should we presume
certain individuals should be
detained because of the crimes
for which they are charged and I
look to see whether in all of
these meetings with in many
cases twenty or thirty the key
stakeholders and Bernalillo
county involved the law
enforcement the courts
prosecutors defenders all
present I looked at all of those
minutes to see whether the there
was a recommendation coming out
of the C. J. C. C. that we
needed to do presumptions for
pre trial detention to try to
address crime in Albuquerque I I
didn't see those in the minutes
that I missed something.
Mr chair.
Centers around is a yes I
understand the what you're
referring to and I will
explain the dynamic and and
first start off by saying that
any member of the panelists and
many members of our legislature
are invited and welcome to
attend the STTC meeting to
see the dynamic and understand
the dynamic and understand the
how we operate
The rebuttable presumption issue
is a hot button issue and you're
not seeing it in the minutes
because it hasn't been put forth
and has to be put forth by any
one of the members that hasn't
been a topic that the council
has decided to take on and
therefore you're not seeing it
reflected in any equipment or
anything it can okay and I I
appreciate that and appreciate
the invitation to to come in and
participate act probably won't
do a lot of that from Dona Ana
county but I do appreciate his
willingness to make it open to
us and and is that your this
committee I probably should ten
when you meetings I hope to do
so but but you didn't answer my
question there at the end which
is a course of the this is a hot
issue this is the way the that
is been advance this session is
one of the best ways to address
crime in Albuquerque has to
assume certain crimes have a
rebuttable presumption that the
individual should be detained.
I hope you can understand I look
to this group that is supposed
to be the lead group of bringing
people together in the areas of
criminal justice to see whether
this was a recommendation first
of all I didn't see
recommendation for this and then
second I didn't even see that
had to be even discussed as a
consideration or topic and I
think you've confirmed that the
this that this hasn't been
proposed discussed debated much
less agreed upon as a way to
combat crime and I I just want
to confirm that that I wasn't
missing something in the minutes
for perhaps a decision that have
been made a recommendation by
one of the subcommittees that
would be in the minutes that I
was reviewing it and I think you
confirm this just hasn't been at
the forefront of ways to fight
crime in Albuquerque is what I
understand you're telling.
Mr chair I will agree to that to
the extent and in my previous
response to senator do you
believe that what I was
mentioning the subcommittee
structure we we have another
subcommittee that is referred to
as dual subcommittee which is
dealing with a lot of judicial
processes in the policy and has
that is that's a committee made
a recommendation that we need to
adopt presumptions for pre trial
detention.
Mr chair no but but resumptions
has been
brought up and discussed among
those in attendance are working
members of the committee meeting
I believe health in December of
two thousand twenty one there
were no specific policy or no
Representative specific bill
discussed and it was really more
generalities about
Representative concept and not
to make any recommendations back
to the larger body it's
important to size the CDC is not
a policy making body it is
really a body more about
recommendations and in fact
trying to get consensus around
because policy or specifics stop
policies particularly hot ones
is a very difficult challenge
given the variety and range of
member participants so it there
are
Participants on the CDC that
they have opposing views so the
thought of coming to a consensus
about Taylor happened issue is
problematic and I appreciate had
appreciate and understand that
That the that you know you've
got prosecutors you got public
defenders on the same group and
and that's a good thing that
they're both fair that there may
not reach a consensus I I think
that's all understand what I
appreciate your time it's not a
policy making organization I
just want to know whether this
had ever been considered and
debated and discussed as even
for advice purposes before
December this last December
select some sometime in the last
month we're now in in January so
so that in the last month was
the first time there's been even
talk about rebuttable
presumptions for detention
purposes I understand even not
in the CCJ I'm sorry C. J. C. C.
as a whole but even in the sub
committees and and that's what I
understand you're telling me is
that accurate.
Mr Chairman believe that would
be accurate yes I and then to
change topics of what is the
what is the of planned were
designed population for the
metro detention center.
So.
The the detention centers table
of housing in two thousand two
hundred fifty and mix of with
the kids with Brooklyn and the
captain said that nineteen
hundred fifty and right now
currently we are operating
between about eleven fifteen
thirteen hundred inmates of
progress of the so.
Hi and thank you for that
because of course one of the
things that the LFC report
pointed out in this drawn some
interest I know from me and my
colleagues is that is crime is
going up incarceration
populations are going down we're
we're imprisoning less people of
with more crimes being committed
and and that of course you know
raises some questions in and of
itself the one of the questions
I I
That's that's perplexed me is is
right now would you agree that
the population of the detention
center is a purposefully being
trying to try to keep down
because of the shortage of
staffing and available resources
such as the health care and
other resources does it does
that in turn then require you
all to try and keep that
population below certain
thresholds of less than the than
the design population of you
said I think two thousand two
hundred and fifty you're you're
now if you tell me between
eleven fifteen thirteen fifty or
so so you're you're somewhere
around you have the capacity for
itself like maybe as much as a
thousand more individuals than
than you have presently being
detained is that right.
Yes
but also let you know also that
because of staffing that isn't
does not correlate to keeping
people out of the facility or
not having people cars right
after this.
the only measure that have been
taken well we're looking at
Representative for it's easy
which is community because the
purpose of pretrial services may
look at something where people
released back on the community
of with COVID in a way that is
rubber over the last two years
all with a lot of the you for
looking at looking after charges
that individuals have been
brought in on and the other
minor charges where they need to
be in facility again looking at
ours or another Avenue where
they need to be and that along
with probabilities but again
until I know and I know
according to release and based
on what I do is if I request for
less request list soldiers sent
to county legal and from there
those are discussed with the
district attorney's office the
office of the
the or the public defenders and
taken to the district judge of
so those releases are based on
that in no time at the George
say well we don't have the staff
so we can't accept additional
individuals one thing also even
though it looks like we do have
a lot of space in the jail
I don't I don't know this is
public knowledge but you know.
With COVID I keep referring back
to that
that is change out iterations at
the facility that's changed the
way that we can actually house
people and where we have to keep
that while the rest of the
community is over don't know
CVCC is coming up with creative
five days for program with the
detention center not only in the
C. for all intents and senator
Wirth operating like day one
back two years ago when public
it so when you're looking at
COVID because of the days when
inmates come in advance of
testing today for the fraction
of coming up with to pop up to
negative tests in order to move
inmates
we're having to open up
different areas to house inmates
based on those dates and those
testings arrival so that opens
up sooner we're in the past we
could consult a little bit more
that are also expected we also
sent to the White House
initiation to enable
consolidated made to me with the
pass a would would probably
react with classification can
house violent offenders with
nonviolent offenders so those
all have a on an affect on the
facility and it's just been this
further and maybe talk about so
be as well thank you so K.
thank you and I hope you'll
forgive me hope everybody on the
committee and those in the
public will forgive me when I
sometimes enter up to you all
know you all would like to
expand more and speak more and
give us more of an education and
it would be value but we have
time restraints so all hope
you'll not find that the
impolite of me up this what I
understand it in short chief
Richardson is that the it is not
a lack of capacity at the jail
of the it is keeping of law
enforcement from a charging
arresting and detaining
individuals you're you're you're
not having to release people let
people go or not to take people
because you don't have to pass
is that fair.
That's for okay and then on a
different subject my
understanding one of the issues
that's come up in the last six
months or so has been this idea
of or discussion about the pre
trial release using ankle
monitors
my understanding is but but help
me to understand that that that
you all are an integral part of
the process of of of the ankle
monitors being placed and
monitoring the the information
from those those monitors are
eight you were until recently in
prep service and changes made
can you just help me to
understand what is the role of
the detention center with regard
to all of the Courts ordering
that individuals be released
after they've been charged and
while they're awaiting trial but
but doing so intending there to
be some compliance with
restrictions on their their
behavior their location where
they go whether they drink
alcohol of these drugs all of
those things are being monitored
by these ankle monitors and and
I understand that you all have
again in a role that could you
explain that for me please.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'll try to address
the range of questions there
briefly.
Thank you are referring to the
felony pre trial supervision
program which it operates
partially in metropolitan court
and more completely and District
Court second judicial district.
The
a component of the pre trial
supervision program involves
the.
Recommendation placed by a judge
on the definitive released in
community subset subset of those
defendants are assigned a
public.
Monitoring device.
Electron monitoring devices
supplied by Bernalillo county.
until recently the after hours
monitoring of individuals on the
devices was being conducted by
the community corrections
program officers under NEC
in reaction to some concerns
about the way all of that is
being done.
The administrative office of the
courts in partnership with
District Court opted to stand up
its own monitoring for twenty
four seven after hours holidays
and weekends monitoring of those
individuals on supervision.
So that has been occurring for
I think three or four months and
I'm not entirely sure of the
time line on that is ABC you Mr
of office of the courts has been
toward managing that
so I guess I would leave it at
that and see if there's any if
that answers your question good
appreciate the shorter so ups so
so as I understand correctly
until about three or four months
ago when a judge would release
an individual under supervision
using electronic monitoring
device I guess first of all
would you just confirm it for me
electronic monitoring devices
the technology allows for
recording reporting in real time
of individuals location and even
some biometric information
things like maybe hard Rader
polls and also whether the
individuals consume alcohol in
my correct that the technology
is that sophisticated that all
that information is monitor real
time with these devices.
Mr chair to my knowledge there
are two different products
Senators Lloyd in the program a
sober living device which is
related to monitoring all
consumption I defended we're
individuals required in some
cases to breed into a device
periodically or when commanded
by the by the device the GPS
ankle bracelet monitor location
and monitor individuals who may
enter a restricted zone that is
set up by the pre trial officer
at the time the braces put on to
an individual's angle so it
learns the defendant and the
monitoring officer if an
individual work to go into a
restricted some and I may be
incorrect and all of my fax but
if there are some devices and
I'm not entirely sure of our
devices have this feature but
that can record alcohol
consumption through the actual
braces itself and notify
a monitoring officers that is in
violated but that may not be the
type of device were employment
not yet is what I understand
from chief okay and so so the of
the case for me of course our
we're we're looking once again
the session at the notion of of
detaining individuals who commit
certain crimes presuming they
should be detained the the that
would be in contrast perhaps it
would judges maybe doing now
which is releasing individuals
and saying they have to be home
at home at all times or they
have to be home within certain
hours except they may be
released for work or perhaps
retention two things of that
kind but but these these
electronic monitors in the past
were monitored by the county or
more by guess the some some
group within the MDC but it but
as I understand it the
monitoring was not done after
hours.
At night or on weekends is that
accurate.
Know that that is not a good so
how that works is if you Disley
Monday through Friday pre trial
services monitored there
individuals are on the program
Monday through when Monday the
Nestle was Monday through Friday
and then after hours and
weekends holidays NBC we're
gonna have a monitor I think
it's important to note that
NBC's there officer Gerald was
really to observe and report
they they were not responding
they were not responsible
responding to review the
information of information is
well as to restricted areas and
what that individual was able to
do or not to do if they observed
that the individual or that was
on pretrial services was
violating the conditions of
release they reported that to
the appropriate individual with
pre trial services and at that
point it was a pre trial
services to make a projects that
they needed in order to address
that that individual had been
released into the community.
Right now again all those
responsibilities have not been
taken over by pre trial services
we still will assess if they
come over to happening with an
ankle bracelet or the GPS
monitoring but other than that
they're taking over the their
own responsibilities thank you
and then when when moment ago
you said that my information was
incorrect let me clarify the
question the the monitoring was
taking place Monday through
Fridays
and was monitor on the weekends
and at night but not reported is
that firms are not reported and
acted upon at nights or during
the weekends.
What I can only attest to what
my officers on a producer that
would be that effective date for
something that wasn't
Dishes they made the records of
pretrial services to let them
know of the violation if you
will and at that point it's a
pre trial services to take
action.
Yes clarifying that distinction.
You are correct that the
violation occurring after hours
will be observed and reported
and notified to the pre trial
officers but the receipt of that
notification may not have been
received by the pre trial
officer of pre trial HSD Intel
business day.
Started again.
So the difference now is that
no on the violation occurring
after hours is monitor and then
if it's a willful violation as I
understand it in a see can speak
to this more specifically if
warranted and immediate warrant
for arrest for the violation can
be issued after our.
That's the sort of X. factor
change between the way things
were happening previously to the
way they I understand them to be
happening now good thank you and
I I don't you know I want to
commend you and everybody was
part of that process and and the
the Supreme Court and and they
see because.
Because before the last three or
four months an individual who is
on a home ankle bracelet and and
confined to home by court order
who violates that on a on a
Friday happy hour at six or
seven o'clock the information
would be processed until Monday
and and the violation process
that time and and god only knows
what that individual be doing
between Saturday or Sunday
particularly of the individual
knows the information is not
going to be acted upon for for
two or three days so I think
this is a good thing that the
reason I'm emphasizing it
somewhat is this is a good thing
that's working right now
Bernalillo county this winter
were brilliant cat is doing
something that's that's of
exemplary and we need to figure
out a way to do this that and
the rest of the state because
we're we're agendas are relying
these ankle of electronic
monitors.
Confining people to home or to
allow them to go to work in lieu
of putting them in in jail but
but I don't know that we have
the same monitoring the same
sophistication in the same
attention.
Statewide that's taking place in
Bernalillo county so I hope this
committee and and all of us will
begin to think about the need of
expanding this technology as an
alternative to to filling the
jails and making sure that has
some meaningful impact of an
individual's ankle monitor and
told to stay at home or to stay
away from a certain householder
from an individual in and if
we're not gonna force that for
days at a time I I think that it
it loses of its potential so
thank you very much any other
questions for anybody else
before we complete this
presentation center do just very
quickly just on that point and
that and and I don't know if you
all have this information if if
you're not doing modern anymore
and only professors as as I do
you know if there's been any
change in the range of
violations sense is there has
presumably been shifts to the
the.
Information being hopefully be
acted upon in real time rather
than the next business day.
Mr chair Senator doing.
We do not have that information
is information that is either
from the felony pre trial
programs.
Again themselves thank you.
Thank you Mr judges quickly the
DA the other day made a comment
about trying to get the data on
the the ankle bracelets and
having to get it April
requesting going to the court
system to get that commute
expand or tell us why that was
why the DA was able to get that
information and where to go to
the effort of doing it ever
request.
Mr chair about a.
I think we're in a position to
comment on that matter all that
appears to be an issue between
the courts and the district
attorney's office.
Sure.
The my thing for the session
what we have here is a failure
to communicate right so if
once again Senator Moores as I
understand again to your right
we have a lot of data we have a
lot of information but somebody
use the word earlier today I
like to the information is silos
by various groups organisations
and parts of our government and
the and some of them are very
protective of it and that
information and not very readily
able to sure it will insured so
that's the goal of this
committee this session is to try
and knock down some of those
silos and get some of this
information into the public
debate and discussion so thank
you very much for those of you
from the county I appreciate you
very much for your time today
and working late with us and
thank you for everything you're
doing for the citizens.
We're working with that
presentations today we have one
bill for consideration Senate
bill thirteen will move to that
I I did the want to reemphasize
something I said earlier will
continue to reach out to all
parts of the criminal justice
system and I'll take suggestions
and advice from the committee
and others about who they would
like to hear from.
General and will reach out to
the City of Albuquerque current
law enforcement administration
welcome them to the committee as
well to the address some of the
issues that were raised here
today just as at our last
meeting we had LFC make their
presentation of the report and
and the the district attorney
thought the information was
inaccurate or incomplete we we
welcome LFC to reevaluate so
we'll do the same this committee
all right Senator Lopez
Representative last business for
the day Senate bill thirteen.
And I had told the committee we
do a hard stop at six thirty
with unless there's objection
I'm gonna take a little bit of
liberty there but much because
maybe go to six forty six forty
five okay.
Thank you Mr chairman and I do
believe on zoom Senator Pinto is
with us also.
I I don't see any effect hearing
you know she's calling the five
phones.
No the.
Really Texters State.
I'm Mr chairman and while I'm
doing out there
I just and also with this and
soon Mr chairman we should have
also joining us Stephanie
Salazar from the Indian Affairs
Department.
Or and Regina check on who's
bureau chief with the department
of public safety.
For the with us also more okay.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee I sit
here for the presenting Senate
bill thirteen missing in New
Mexico invent.
Mr chairman what I
again as part of my introductory
remarks in the previous
committee I will say the same
here.
eleven years ago many of you may
remember
In the southwest quadrant in my
neck of the woods there was a
eleven bodies that were found
buried.
there in the southwest mesa.
Westgate heights and
As as more of the investigation
unfolded with regards to the the
women who were during their.
it was determined that each one
of those women have been
listed as missing reported as
missing.
in the ensuing years and I Mr
chairman you were in the house
at the time we had a discussion
with bill Richardson about what
we could do and of the ten
governor Diane Dennis at that
time how we could begin to tweak
the issue a missing persons on
what persons are reported
missing etcetera.
So I I offer that Mr Chairman is
just some of my opening remarks
because for me that was my first
entree into really looking into
an understanding what we're not
doing with regards to missing
persons and how they are
reported and how they are
investigated all the other
process these so we've made some
changes over the years.
Mr Chairman I've been honored to
be part of the
Missing murdered indigenous
women and relatives task force.
And as we as you know I'm here.
In New Mexico we are at one of
the top stays that do have a
large number of
MMI W. ours because this is
commonly referred to missing
murdered indigenous women and
relatives Albuquerque is rated
as number one in the country.
So when we talk about a lot of
these issues part of it also
lends itself to border towns in
Albuquerque is still considered
a border town also.
but Mr chairman members of the
committee as part of the task
force
We
You through much conversation
investigation looking as to what
other states have been found.
Putting together that we have
this bill that's in front of you
and what it is proposing Mr
chairman essentially is to have
a date designated for the state
of New Mexico where there is a
tension giving to missing
persons again it's coming from
the M. I. W. task force however
this is encompassing for a lot
of the families all families in
the state of New Mexico so it
highlights gives an opportunity
for some families relatives to
come together find information
other things it's listed here
feel Mr chairman that I believe
is is part of what we can do to
emphasize coordinate and work
with the different
jurisdictional issues and
agencies about how we can help
our families.
So with that Mr chairman if I
could I'd like to do for you
Senator continues with us if I
could defer to my co sponsor
Senator Pinto.
and then after that if we could
for miss Salazar in Mr Klein
also to add some of their
presentation to.
Senator Pinto.
The Mr chair members of the
committee can you hear me.
Yes we can.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
members of the committee since
the inception of the task force
in twenty nineteen.
that we haven't really done much
but this is one of
recommendations task force came
up with it so I full support of
that and I'm hoping to make
progress and as we have other
bills to related to the issue.
An attack trying mmhm as we move
forward so instead of full
supported a to answer your
questions thank you Mr chair
Senator Pinto.
Micelles are.
Is item number members of the
Senate Judiciary I need the
Salazar answers general counsel
at the Indian Affairs Department
I've supported the NM identity
where task force since two
thousand nineteen when the
initial legislation is actually
not task force was passed.
Among her accomplishments I just
want to note that we have issued
a final report in twenty twenty
the number of state agencies
have come to rely on to improve
their processes and practices
within our organizations
because of that initial report
review continued and expanded
our task force from a fourteen
member task force to now eight
the forty members and and an
additional thirty volunteers who
were from different tribal
communities state agencies
different law enforcement
agencies including some of the
folks and injured from today.
So I just want to New Mexico.
Is that data will center around
missing persons and their
families in today to bring a
number of public safety
resources to fund locations so
that we don't have the science
so that families can talk to
different agencies and and work
through their missing persons
case by updating existing report
filing a report if they haven't
had that opportunity at as well
as submitting familiarity going
to a national database too
hopefully matched with some of
the unidentified and unclaimed
remains I also just want to say
that the state will be hosted in
collaboration with the national
missing and unidentified persons
system which is a federal
database funded by the National
Institute of justice and so it
really is an incredible resource
and they are ready and willing
to partner with the state of New
Mexico to host this important
thing to do thank you SO of our
Mr Kong.
Good morning.
I
feel the same.
It.
but I wanted to think of the
members of the committee for
hearings Senate bill thirteen
and I want to thank the
Indian Affairs her and
hi you are task force and
Senator Lopez for sponsoring
this legislation is a much
needed day for families to to
meet with resources and law
enforcement in New Mexico to
start building that bridge so we
can we can all complete that one
mission which is to bring our
loved ones home so thank you and
I I I well at anything else and
and keep you guys for the night
I thank you for.
For hearing bill ninety and we
appreciate your.
Thank you Mr Cohn all right Sir
what was gonna go to committee
questions question twenty.
And it Center Moores thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Senator I guess it's also a
great event
But the public safety here or
there or what the other one
absorb the cost of this.
Mr chairman if I could Mr Cohen
is from the department of public
safety you Mr Kirk if you could
answer.
Right chairman Senator Moores
yes I'm actually with the
department public safety in your
teeth that and I oversee the
missing persons clearinghouse
that's one of the units in my
bureau and and we are sort being
the cost of the of the van we we
do put on events throughout the
year smaller events and we have
a missing persons clearinghouse
staff.
that that we utilize along with
myself and and staff managers
and so the department of public
safety has agreed to absorb that
cost Mr from Mr chair what kind
of costs are we talking about
some more how big of an event
are you looking at having.
We were estimating that.
Your chairman as senator Morris
we are estimating that the event
will will cost around twenty
five
twenty five thousand and that
act really since we never had
any.
This line that that the cost for
the maintenance in like if we
needed to do and in fact
I don't cost we can also because
it's in the missing persons
clearinghouse statutorily we are
able to accept donations and
into the clearing house and so
we're hoping that that we can
find an event that of that space
that is big enough to to hosted
by but that's generally what
we're looking at Mr Deputy
Mexico that's actually you know
expensive putting on conventions
if you're looking at doing lots
of other convention center or
something like that you have the
rest of the higher coordinators
a consultants in Irving also
part of those so how are are you
to coordinate that are you gonna
plan that.
Mister chairman Senator Moores
we're so because it is and I did
the math versus clearing house
we do have staff you to planning
for me these events and at as I
said I I'm also a member of the
missing and murdered indigenous
women and relatives task force
and so we we are also going to
be coordinated with the task
force we're also going to
coordinate with with Indian
Affairs Department and and we're
and you know there are there are
other resources and law
enforcement agencies are willing
to help it's really going to be
a community and state federal
and local events.
So Mister misconduct on a five
thousand dollar does not count
all of the government at the
work that's going to put in this
on.
Ford is that I see that there
was an amendment that would
allow for a virtual event.
Is that the idea I just seems a
state this damage to have a
physical convention is on about
the bar organizations most
people are going to virtual
resources and actually have a
meeting three Purcell's that is
that the desire.
Quite frankly of Mr this is a
lot of staff time organizing
conventions is a big deal and
thanks a lot of time that the
the PS as strapped as it is so
we're not asking for resources I
cannot was Ernie junior money
put into this R. S. reference
for the supervisory
I'm sorry I've I've I know of I
took off their
but if you if could answer the
question about the virtual again
planned to a virtual meeting to
cut down the staff time.
And more for yes we are and then
for the virtual and we are we we
we are planning on holding
virtual if that is possible.
Thank you thank you Mr.
Senator Moores other professions
Senator o'neill in senators
service center the the the of
occupational has been by your.
And what's that so well for so I
just want to thank Senator Lopez
for relentless commitment to
this issue I had the opportunity
of going to the opening of the
park on the west side it was
powerful it it's a beautiful
park thank you for all you've
done and whether it's remember
that when you're you had a poet
read about that you know so
thank you thank you for keeping
us right in front of us because
it really needs to be and right
in front of us and I strongly
support this issue and I don't
know if it's time for motion but
I I would like to move to pass
chairman
on this on Senate bill thirteen.
Thank you federal mail Senator
issue so that's a good question
moved past as well Senator gravy
two one one four the discussion
of the others were ready to take
the motion with just one
question Senator because from me
you mentioned earlier a number
one statistic Albuquerque being
statistics for one what is that
number one representative please
I'm sorry miss what that means.
Number what that was Mr chairman
and I I apologize I don't mean
that other information but
Albuquerque
is number one with regards to at
the end W. issue for missing
indigenous women we are the
number one of the issues that
mean the number just numbers of
individuals for missing.
And as soon that's up on a per
capita basis basis right yes and
and I appreciate you don't have
the numbers and I'm catching up
or but I would like to see what
those numbers look like
comparison North know how how
far ahead is perhaps Albuquerque
to in comparison to other cities
for missing individuals right is
is that something were
extraordinarily different than
others comparably sized cities
and so forth okay and and I will
Mr chairman and and you know
from other.
Again dealing with the other
issue that I mentioned earlier
to you know Albuquerque's the
crossroad right interstate
twenty five interstate forty so
there's a lot of traffic that
comes and goes and we are
considered a border town also
so you have a lot of other
pieces moving pieces and parts
that that part of I think this
whole issue that we're talking
about.
So I make sure I have the
information for the for and and
I appreciate that because when
my interest would be looking at
what is Los crucis on part of
the committees I represent
because like Albuquerque they're
at a crossroads white the bill
passed so Dona Ana County Los
crucis is a crossroads of
interstate ten for the pretty
busy interstate as well too and
I twenty five right so we've got
the same and we're my district
is on the border with Mexico my
district is on the border with
Texas so I'd like to compare the
the the the problems that may
exist in in my part of the state
as well and in the district that
I represent so Mister chairman
Senator.
I have Mister chairman Senator
both you know also for the women
of what just to me that's a huge
number as we talk as to where
again crossing the border and
such but that's a big issue on
the second part yes that's
precisely why the question is
you know there's all Paso have
this problem this lots of this
problem I I don't want to make
you feel like this will picking
on Albuquerque and when you say
it's number one is the number
one of the nation's number one
of the state number one in the
region and what what these
numbers mean and so I'd like to
dive a little bit more if you
make that available to us all
right well I'll have that for
that work for you well do pass
motion is there any objection to
do pass motion we do have a
quorum right and we've got a new
passenger so to pass all right
reserved for those couple of
things of you give me just a
couple more minutes we have
adopted Representative years for
the committee once again I hope
you'll get your hands on those
for the public and others in the
audience we're publishing these
on our website these are
procedures for the committee to
try to streamline the zoom
process we're trying to ask
individuals to sign in in
advance to have presentation so
that if there are exhibits we
can put them up on the screen
and do so well and it's got
people in and out of four of the
way it's also intended to help
me as the chair to make use of
our time and Madam times that I
can have strict time limitations
on presentations and and
consideration of anyone bill so
I can realistically get you in
and out of here and and also
here's many bills as we can the
session so please let yourself
to those and then I think that's
the business for the for the
committee today right so thank
you all very much.
