45 of the 47 states that
implement through primacy, the
clean Water Act, uh, do a hybrid
of a permit fee plus some
general fund. So we changed the
word pay to support so that it's
clear we're not just seeking
this be done through fees. I
think California and New Jersey
are the only states that do it
only through fees. It needs to
be a hybrid. We'll talk about
that and uh send it finance when
we get there, uh, several
changes, several changes in
section 7 on page.
13, uh, involve a clarification
that the Attorney general has
authority to enforce the
criminal provisions of the bill.
It aligns the mens rea standards
for criminal penalties with
those currently in the New
Mexico Water Quality Act, and it
applies a knowingly standard to
the felony violations and
includes provisions under the
Clean Water Act allowing for
criminal fines for certain
negligent violations. Mr. Chair,
I want very much thank your
staff, Ms. Martinez and Miss
Profer, for working with.
advocates and the department on
this bill, these were things
that were flagged, those changes
have been made.
Uh, finally, uh,
Well, it's, it's under one final
thing. The, the big one is this,
this substitute no longer has a
state private right of action.
That's what caused, I think, the
most uh concern from a variety
of different groups, including
municipalities and local
governments, so under the
primacy provisions with EPA, the
federal rules require us to
choose one of two options,
either a private right of action
or.
Um, the second option is public
participation, and we've added a
new sub subsection C in section
5, that requires the department
to encourage public reporting of
violations and investigate,
respond to all complaints and to
allow for public comment on all
proposed settlements for
violations. So we had to have
one or the other, uh, the
department agreed uh to not put
in a private right of action.
There's still a federal uh
private right of action, uh,
that will still be there. It's a
different process. It's narrower
and it's federal court, not
state court. So Mister Chair,
just given the time, that's what
21 and 22 do, and we can get
back into the.
21, and if, and if you want an
amendment.
A motion on 21 to to put the sub
in play, we can do that, uh, but
at that point, I, I'll, I'll
leave the experts to answer
questions that come up from the
committee.
Thank you. Uh, so, um, I've got
a list of a number of
individuals identified as
supporters for the bill, um,
you've got probably about 10
people on here, uh, you're gonna
manage that for us?
So Mr. Chair, I think there's 6
speaking in support and then a
whole list of organizations that
are supporting that won't speak,
right, and I'll, I'll just read
those right now while we have
the chance. So organizations in
support, um, include Aleanza
Agricultutura that
house
American rivers, amigos Bravos,
Audubon, Southwest Communities
for clean water conservation
voters of New Mexico farm to
table, he a resource information
project, Green Latinos,
Hispanics enjoying camping,
hunting in the outdoor
interfaith power light, New
Mexicosea Association, New
Mexico food and agricultural
Policy Council in New Mexico
Wild, protecting Mexican waters,
Rocky Mountain Farmers Union,
sovereign Energy, Sierra Club,
the Samia Project, Trout
Unlimited, Western Environmental
Law Center, and Western Resource
Advocates and um I won't count
that against your timeenor, but
now you've got the the time for
the 6 who you identified in
advocacy, and then um if there's
time left, we'll go to others.
So I can go ahead and call him a
Tanya Trujillo office state
engineer and then governor uh
Harry Antonio Junior from.
A la Laguna
He's virtual.
Ready?
Good, good afternoon. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Tanya
Trujillo. I'm the deputy state
engineer from the office of the
State Engineer, we work hand in
hand with the environment
department on implementing
several different elements of
the governor's fifty-year water
action plan agenda, and this is
a very important part of that
agenda. This, this surface water
protection program will be
essential for
Communities throughout the
state.
Especially now, considering the
historic drought conditions that
we are seeing in our region, we
are well below average with
respect to the snowpack
everywhere that affects our
communities.
The report from the Upper Rio
Grande basin this morning was
that we are at about
approximately 12% of historic
average. So we need to make sure
we can protect the surface
waters that we have, uh, because
they're diminishing as we speak.
Thank you very much.
So listed next as governor
Antonio Junior by Zoom for the
Pueblo of Laguna, but we're not
finding him on Zoom, Senator. So
we'll keep looking for him, but
we'll go next to Anna Hansen,
and you have about 3 minutes
left.
Pablo walking.
Um, good morning or good
afternoon. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chair and committee members. I'm
the registered lobbyist for the
Pueblo ofuake, and we stand in
support of these bills and these
especially the amendment, um, SB
21 transfers permitting
authority to the New Mexico
Environment Department which has
20 field offices located across
the state. This enables us to
account for the needs that are
unique to New Mexico, including
the needs of New Mexico's many
tribes.
communities, including the
Pueblo of Poake.
By passing both these pieces of
legislation concurrently. New
Mexico can lead the way in
addressing the challenges posed
by federal rollbacks by
wild Pra prioritizing the health
of its community and ecosystems.
I just wanna remind you all what
Senator Shindo said on Native
American.
Day that water is in our songs
in our dances and in our
prayers, and water is the
lifeblood of New Mexico. Thank
you very much for the
opportunity to speak. Thank you.
Next on my list, Senator Worth
is Vidal Gonzalez and the
Victoria Alcor Macias.
Mr. Chair member of the
committee, my name is Vidal
Gonzalez, and I work for the New
Mexicoseki Association as
director of policy and planning.
I'm a registered lobbyist. I'm
here to speak in support of
Senate Bill 21. This bill would
bring permidine for waters that
still have federal protections
under the Clean Water Act, home
to New Mexico. We believe that
this creates more streamlined
process and together with Senate
Bill 22 for which I have
additional comments creates a
complete permitine program for
the state of New Mexico, issuing
permits here in New Mexico where
the people who depend on these
water.
live, work, and survive on makes
sense to me as a New Mexican
that comes from a traditional
New Mexican community that
relies on agriculture to put
food onto the table.
Thank you, Senator Wirth,
Representative Cortez in the New
Mexico Environment Department
for moving this effort forward.
I urge you to vote yes on Senate
Bill 21. Thank you for your
time, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee. Thank you,
Victoria. I'll, I'll call Maas
for the Sea project.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Victoria La Comacias,
advocacy fellow at the AIA
Project, I stand before you
today in full support of Senate
Bill 21. 1st, I want to extend
my gratitude to the sponsors of
this bill and to the New Mexico
Environment Department for their
leadership and vision in
protecting New Mexico's wetlands
and streams.
Clean water is not just a
necessity, it's a fundamental
right. It sustains our drinking
water, agriculture, outdoor
recreation, and cultural
ceremonies that are deeply
rooted in our communities.
Yet changes to federal clean
water protections have left many
of New Mexico's waterways
vulnerable to pollution.
Currently in New Mexico relies
on the EPA out of state to issue
water permits, meaning decisions
that affect our health, economy
and the environment are being
made by regulators hundreds of
miles away. Senate Bill 21
changes that. This bill allows
New Mexico to take control of
its own surface water permitting
program, ensuring that permits
are issued by regulators who
know our.
communities are ecosystems and
our needs.
I urge you to pass Senate Bill
21 to safeguard our waters for
all New Mexicans now and for
generations to come. Together,
Senate Bill 21 and Senate Bill
22 will establish a
comprehensive state permitting
program, ensuring strong local
protections for New Mexico's
precious water resources. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, we've exceeded
the 15 minutes for advocacy
center work, but um, you did
have listed also Ralphie uh for
Rachel Rachel Conn is part of
your advocacy group is um Msha
here.
That she here, yes.
All right, uh, I'm gonna allow
some additional time to center
work because we're doing two
bills and um but I'll make sure
the opponents have a
corresponding additional time.
So I'll allow one minute for
everybody else, we've gone
beyond the 15 minutes. So, Miss
Conn, you have up to one minute,
ma'am, please.
Cheer Cervantes, committee
members, my name is Rachel Khan
and I'm deputy director of
Amigos Bravos.
Last year, New Mexico's
waterways were named the most
endangered in the country, due
to the reinterpretation and loss
of clean water protections at
the federal level.
Together, SB 21 and SB 22 will
establish the framework
necessary to once again protect
New Mexico's vulnerable streams,
rivers and wetlands. SB 21 lays
the foundation in statute for
the state to take over
permitting from the federal
government or waters that remain
federally protected.
There are many benefits to
having the surface water
permitting, uh, administered by
the state instead of by EPA's
Dallas office. It streamlines
permitting under enemyD and
provides more opportunities for
local solutions tailored to New
Mexico's unique water issues. In
addition, a state administered
permit program provides a buffer
against upheaval and potential
staffing reductions at the
federal level.
SB 21 is not introducing any new
protections. It is taking the
surface water quality permitting
program that is currently
administered by EPA EPA.
And transferring that authority
to the state.
The bill retains the same
exemptions and provisions that
are currently in place the EPA
administering the program.
New Mexicans should be writing
and issuing the permits for New
Mexico waters. Please vote yes
for SB 21. Thank you.
Thank you.
A number of other individuals
were not part of the organized
uh proponents or recognized uh
your name and you being here
present Ralphie Hill for New
Mexico wild, uh, Sophia Jenkins,
Nieto with Earthcare New Mexico,
uh, on Zoom would be uh Leron
Johnson Center for Biological
Diversity and Annie Hannah,
also, uh, wishing to appear by
Zoom, the, the time for advocacy
is expired, however, we're now
well into about 1819 minutes,
we'll hear from
I, I guess we don't have um
organized spokesperson for
opposition or or coordinated
opposition, so we'll allow a
corresponding we've gone about
18 minutes for advocacy, we'll
go for um 18 minutes.
Oh, we do. Oh, I'm sorry, do we
have an, do we have an organized
spokesperson, coordinated uh in
opposition.
What's that?
was there a spokesperson in
opposition?
No
246.
We do, so, uh, but we're gonna
see everybody on that list and
everybody's gonna have 2
minutes, that's the way it's
gonna work, the the reason I do
the, I assume you all know this
by now, the reason I said a
block of time for opposition is
you may want to have one person
an expert really dissect the
bill and spend a lot of time
with it, but we don't have that.
Um, that's fine, but then
everybody's gonna get their
corresponding limited amount of
time is the is the last speakers
found themselves with as well
too so um.
I'll just go through the list of
oppositions, everybody will get
uh 123456789. there's 9
speakers, TJ Trujillo, Tom
Patterson, Liz Taylor, Kelly
Fajardo, al Muhlenberg, Terry
Cole, Alison Riley, Jason
Espinoza and Laura Riley.
Everybody will have 2 minutes.
Mr. Trujillo, you're the first
on my list, but um.
You don't, you all don't have to
go in any order if you want to
do it differently.
Mr. Chair, committee members, my
name is Tom Patterson. I'm a
cattle rancher from Catron
County. I serve as
president-elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association. We oppose the
publicly available bill.
We asked the sponsors to amend
SB 21, Section 11D, to include
the agricultural exemptions and
the Clean Water Act.
We understood that they had
agreed to do so, which we
appreciate, but we haven't seen
that amendment yet.
Uh, as an example of why it's
needed, manure that floats into
one of our thousands of dirt
stock tanks, uh, and then out of
spillway would require a permit
that makes no sense. We also
wanted to know how the
enforcement provisions under SB
21 compared to enforcement
provisions under the Clean Water
Act, I asked the enemy for their
analysis several times, never
received it. I did my own
analysis, my own comparison with
the bill that's publicly
available, it showed a
consistent
pattern of SB 21, treating New
Mexicans more harshly than the
Clean Water Act does, that
applied to administrative and
civil enforcement to criminal
enforcement, to appeals, to
judicial review, and thankfully
you've deleted the right of
private action.
We don't think New Mexico should
treat our own people more
harshly than the feds do.
Respectfully, we're waiting on
that e exemption with respect to
enforcement the provisions are
not fair. Thank you.
Luz Taylor Mak.
Good afternoon. My name is Liz
Newland Taylor and.
OK, and I've been a water lawyer
in New Mexico for about 32
years. I also am a director of
AMAFCA, which is the Albuquerque
flood Control Authority, which
uh protects about 6,650,000
people, or about 30% of the
population of New Mexico.
And the flood control authority
stands in opposition to this
bill or for several reasons, but
I'll highlight two legal
reasons, um, for the judiciary
Committee.
One is that on one of the
additions on a, an amendment I
did see that's not publicly
available. It says that no
permits shall be issued when the
regional director, meaning of
the EPA has objected in writing
pursuant to the Federal Act.
And so my question is, does this
remove the primacy altogether if
the regional director can still
veto a permit.
Um
I don't know the answer to that
question, but I think that needs
to be resolved before we move
forward. The second legal reason
is that the bill says that a
permit will be denied if it
would, um, violate downstream
standards of water quality, and
the problem is that today, above
Albuquerque and in Albuquerque
without any additions, the
The water violates the, the
water quality standards for E.
coli for Islata Pueblo from time
to time. So how would uh
currently MAFA does have
permits, city of Albuquerque has
permits, but under this, I don't
know how they would get permits.
So those are two legal big
issues with this bill. Um, we
also have practical problems,
the funding, the fee schedule is
still not at all clear to us how
much we would have to raise our
taxes or take on additional tax
burden for
The taxpayers that we represent,
um, and then how do we get all
the professionals that will be
needed to do this work in New
Mexico. They're estimating 50 to
60 FTEs will be necessary, and
AMAFCA has direct experience
with not being able to fill the
professional positions it has
open. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, oh, sorry.
And so I see behind you, yeah,
go ahead, I'm sorry.
Uh, good afternoon, chair
members of the committee. My
name is Alison Riley. I'm the
public policy director with the
New Mexico Chamber of Commerce.
And while we understand the
importance of safeguarding New
Mexico's water resources. We
believe this bill as written
will impose significant
challenges. The first being all
New Mexicans will now bear the
financial burden of this
legislation. Small
municipalities, public safety
agencies and other taxpayer
funded service agencies that
currently pay nothing for these
federal permits would not bear
the financial burdens of
state-issued permits.
Also the funding and
implementation for this program
is still unclear. NMED has not
provided a sustainable funding
structure for staffing,
enforcement, or rulemaking. The
bill also raises serious
questions about overreach,
provisions that allow NMED to
enter private residences to
investigate potential water
discharges goes way beyond the
federal standards.
Such measures only add to the
confusion for businesses and
public services without
delivering meaningful
environmental benefits.
Therefore, we respectfully urge
the committee to vote no on this
bill and seek solutions that
balance environmental
stewardship with economic
viability. Thank you.
Thank you, Ms. Riley.
Be.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members, uh, my
name is Dale Mullenberg. I'm a
registered lobbyist for, uh,
Freeport McMorran, but I'm
appearing here on behalf of the
New Mexico Mining Association,
as the chair of its environment
committee.
Um
At the outset, I would like to
mention that the bill has been
improved due to the removal of
the private right of action as
previously mentioned, and the
rewriting of the criminal
provisions, however, we believe
that the criminal provisions are
uh still broader and stricter
than necessary for delegation of
the program, particularly as it
relates to incarceration of
individuals.
Um
There are a couple of related
technical issues, one section of
the bill, uh, suggests that the
department could file criminal
actions.
And uh there's also a provision,
uh, suggesting that uh there's a
violation unless you have a
permit issued by the program,
which is the state program,
which doesn't recognize that
federal
Uh, uh, agencies can issue a
permit in some instances.
Uh, we do have concerns about uh
the fees program funding and
staffing, particularly, we think
that fees should be generally
proportional to uh
Uh, the services provided by the
agencies for.
Uh, at least categories of
dischargers.
And uh uh we're concerned that
the bill changes the
long-standing practice of having
uh.
Uh, enforcement related charges,
uh, deposited in the general
fund.
Uh, there's also some
administrative procedures issues
in the bill, including a
provision allowing the
commission to adopt uh federal
rules perspectively, that is
sight unseen.
Um, uh, and a few others we have
put those into a, a written uh
comments to the committee and
would ask the committee refer to
those or the details. But for
these reasons, the uh mining
association remains in
opposition to this legislation.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Espinoza.
chair of the committee, Jason
Espinoza speaking about half of
the Associated general
contractors in New Mexico and
the San Juan Water Commission,
uh, while we do appreciate
several of the changes,
including the, you know, rid of
the private right of action in
the legislation, we do still
stand in opposition and have
concerns, especially for the
financial implications for small
communities, as we mentioned
before, the burden of permit
fees, so many small
municipalities currently covered
by federal.
MPDES permits do not pay permit
fees under the legislation, they
will face new costs. This could
financially strain communities
already operating on limited
budgets. Additionally, we're
concerned about funding gap
risks that the legislation puts
forth, although it does rely on
permit feeds to support the cost
of its administration creating
unstable funding structure. What
happens if revenue of the fee
revenues fall short. Does this
jeopardized program continuity
as we've seen with air quality
permitting.
Does this lead to excessive
action by the agency in order to
secure funding for its program.
Additionally, as mentioned
before, just staffing
challenges, you know,
administering, possibly over
4000 permits will require a
significant number of trained
staff.
The department already faces
staffing shortage, how do we
ensure that there's the
necessary personnel to implement
the program in a fee fund, a
fees fund higher salaries to
attract staff in the
municipalities and small
permittees really do bear the
burden of those costs we have uh
several concerns with the
legislation. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Fajardo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, members of the committee,
Kelly Fajardo on behalf of the
New Mexico Farm and Livestock
Bureau. We acknowledge the
efforts made by the sponsors for
SP 21, and notably the
amendments that removes a
private right, the private right
of action. But despite these
amendments, we maintain
opposition to the legislation.
Our concerns are primarily
centered around the
implementation fees and
additional fees. These fees
intended to fund the program may
lead to unnecessary overreach by
the agency. To ensure and to
ensure its own financial
security. Additionally, there
are significant
doubt regarding the agency
agency's capacity to effectively
staff at the division and and.
Have qualified personnel.
The legislation poses a
particular challenge for smaller
producers, many of whom are not
qualified for these exemptions
or may not be qualified for
these exemptions. These
producers face the prospect of
being disproportantly affected
by the enhanced regulations and
the fees, surpassing even the
current federal requirements.
Although we value the hard work
and the intentions behind the
legislation, we believe there's
still work to be done. Thank
you.
You
Mr. Trujillo.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is TJ Chari.
I'm a registered lobbyist on
behalf of the dairy producers of
New Mexico.
Um, getting to play cleanup, I'm
not gonna repeat any of the
previous comments that were
made, however, I will tell you
that, uh, the dairy producers
have several of the same
concerns that were expressed.
Um, I would like to follow up on
one particular issue, I would uh
ask Mr. Trump members of the
committee on Peach 7.
Of the sub and before I get to
that point, I, I do wanna say
something about the sponsors.
The sponsor's been very
receptive to sit down and talk
with us and all the, the, the
folks that I represent and
really appreciate all the
changes that have been made, um,
and I'll get to that a little
bit more in a little bit, but
I'm Pete 7, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, uh,
on, uh, line 18 is where I would
direct your attention. This is
this particular subsection deals
with the way fees are done with.
And, uh, this is a continuing
problem not just in this bill,
but in other bills, but it's,
it's the issue of what
constitutes a tax versus a fee.
And in order to make sure this
fee remains a fee.
Uh, what we would encourage is
where it says other costs the
commission deems appropriate. We
would encourage the committee to
instead say other costs to pay
for the cost of administering
the program. Here's what's going
on, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, is when fees are
assessed, they're swept into a
fund, and that excess money that
sits there isn't is basically
used to pay for other things
that are unrelated to the
particular program like in this
case, in order to prevent that,
we think it's necessary
statutorily to make sure that
it's
clear that the fees only be used
to pay for the cost to
administer the program at issue,
so we would uh encourage the
committee to potentially look at
that issue, uh, finally, Mr.
Chairman, getting to play
cleanup, I would tell you that,
uh, if we had a request, we
would, uh,
Request that the bill stay
separate and not be wrapped into
one complete sub. Um, I think a
lot of progress has been made on
21, uh, SB 22 is a lot more
problematic and just to talk
about the process, I think a lot
more can be done if we just look
at SB 21 separately as opposed
to combining everything into one
sub. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Also registered to
speak in opposition was uh Terry
Cole, the Albuquerque Chamber,
and Laurel Riley. I don't see
either one of you here.
Um, also organizations in
opposition include
Ashley Wagner for the Mexico Oil
and Gas Association in
Winchester for the Permian Basin
Petroleum Association and Mike
Miller, Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico. So,
yes.
Oh, hi Laura, I didn't see you.
I'm sorry, Laura Riley, yeah,
I'll recognize you for just 2
minutes, Laura.
Did you want to speak?
I
They didn't register in time.
And Terry Cole did did register
in time, but.
The staff is telling me they
don't have her.
No.
You sure?
Waiting to be admitted.
Reps
Um
Are you saying on Zoom?
That
But he's not here, he's not
there now, is he?
OK.
Right. Nothing back there.
Right, uh, regrettably, Miss
Cole.
Shane, you may be listening.
We'd like to have you, but.
When you take your chances with
Zoom, you take your chances with
Zoom, um.
I appreciate the
Kind words for the staff of the
committee, uh Ms. Martinez is
proper and now we're working
with you. Is that worth?
Um, unfortunately, they were
part of the group that thought
that was a good halftime show,
uh, yes, yes, yesterday, in, in
the office, so we're discounting
their opinions today to a large
degree, um, in any event, we've
got everybody in opposition and
support on the bill. We'll go to
committee questions, and if I
can just see an idea those who
wish to speak on the bill.
Does Mala you give me the look,
right? Is that right? All right,
let me get you on the list, just
a second. Anyone else? And Mr.
Chair, would you like me to make
a motion substitute.
Well, and that's right, and then
you had, you had, yeah, and then
you had actually also reserved
some time center where I'm
gonna, yeah, I'm gonna assume
you don't need that too, so go
ahead and uh why don't we get
the proper motion, so go ahead.
I do not pass on Senate Bill 21
and do pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 21 for discussion purposes.
229946.4, correct? OK, very
good.
Right, I just show hands anyone
else I'm gonna get you, Ms
O'Malley first, so.
Senator Masti, anyone else,
Brantley?
Stewart.
All right, we've got some time,
uh, Senator O'Malley, I'll
recognize you to 5 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So my understanding of this
floor substitute is you
mentioned the term status quo.
A couple of times, and I
assuming that
The list of pollutants is part
of the status quo when it comes
to the federal guidelines or
their list of pollutants.
the lands.
Mr. Chair, senators, my name is
Shelly Lemon. I am the surface
water quality bureau chief for
the New Mexico Environment
Department, uh, the pollutants.
This program currently exists
under the Federal Clean Water
Act. It's administered by the
EPA, so we are requesting to
take control of that as a state.
So in that regard.
It is status quo. We're taking
over the program. OK, I, I just
wanted, Mr. Chair, I just wanted
to be clear about that because
um
It does, um, so I guess I have a
question about that.
Um
So you had removed uh
contaminated water that's,
that's well produced water.
from the original bill.
Uh, I guess my question is, are
there any regulations regarding
produced water as it enters into
Our streams.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, the
language for pollutant, the new
definition aligns with the
federal definition, so they are
the same.
Uh, I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, that
wasn't my question. I was asking
if there was.
Uh, are there current, any kind
of current regulations
regarding?
Water that's produced or
contaminated.
That flows into your streams or
in groundwater. What are those?
Are there?
The state have any?
Mr. Chair and Senator, uh, yes,
but it's separate from this
bill. Yes, I get that. I got it.
Thank you. No, I, I understood
this, though, that what you're
trying to do here is status quo,
but originally it did have that
list, right? And that was
produced water was on the list
of pollutants. So you move them
so that you keep the status quo.
So this really is about the
state, as you mentioned, taking
uh taking over, essentially, uh,
the federal, uh,
Responsibilities, if you will,
or lack of, uh, for, and so it's
nothing it's status quo is what
I'm trying to get to. OK,
this can I just say that is
exactly what we're trying to do
and to the extent that there are
places that we went too far or
didn't get an exception, we've
been open to the lining it up
and this is something that
that's allowable under the
Federal Clean Water Act and
again, all, all but 3 states
have done it.
Thank you, Senator. Mr. Chair, I
just wanted to know, is there
When you do, because we just got
this really. Do you, is there a,
a way to look at something like
this with tracking red redlining
it all to find out what's what's
changed.
So Mr.
Chair, there is, there is, that
is something that you can ask
the council.
I can ask for it, OK. Uh, they
don't like to do it. I'm gonna
tell you, um.
But again, I think that to the
extent that that's helpful, I, I
certainly would be willing also,
since we're not going to take a
vote on this today to ask them
to give us a.
A red line on 21 and 22 because
you're gonna get another sub for
22, so to make it a little bit
easier to track, I can ask if
they're willing to do that. OK,
and then, finally, um,
There was some language in the
bill that, and I can't find it
now. I was trying to scan as
quickly as I could. It's like
the environment or courtall
consider how serious a violation
is.
As well as the economic benefit,
if any resulting from the
violation, is that still in
there?
Unquote
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, do
you know what section it was in.
Yeah.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, what
pages?
OK.
Thank you.
Yes. Thank you. That's correct.
So that language is still in
there, Mr. Chair, I was just
wondering what does that mean?
Um.
I guess, you know, my, my
interpreter might mean, you
know, in a company lu water as
long as they can establish
there's some economic benefit.
Um, Mr. Chair, senators, uh, my
name is Zach Oaks. I'm the
general counsel for the New
Mexico Environment Department,
uh, Senator, to your question
and I grab that. Um, we wanted
to include language that
required the consideration.
Of, uh, the seriousness of the
violation, uh, we want to make
sure that we are tailoring any
kind of punishment, buying fees,
uh, penalties, uh, in accordance
with the crime. You know, there
are a number of potential of
violations out there. Some are
greater than others, um, you
know, some could be a first-time
offender with a massive uh
gluten discharge and some folks
could be uh on the other end of
that. So we wanted to make sure
that uh before any kind of
punitive or enforcement action.
is taken that at the very least
some kind of uh consideration
given to the the the magnitude
of the defense of the defense,
sorry. OK, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and I'll just briefly just make
a statement about that, and that
would be my concern, uh, having
that experience in Albuquerque,
where we had a polluter that
contaminated the groundwater for
about a quarter mile, and there
are their argument was that they
provided a lot of economic
development because of what they
did.
So, um, I think that I've just,
I'm very concerned about
My guess is Kiko like the
halftime show last night. Well,
he, no, he, he's, he's gonna be
great at the zoom, but the fact
that he doesn't know who the who
is, and I had to play like a
number of songs, it's like, oh,
yeah, that was guys. Uhenator my
just for 5 minutes.
OK.
Thank you. Thank you, Chairman.
Senator Wirth, thank you.
Experts, so.
Thank you for the substitute.
I'm just trying to go through
the
The original draft and then the
substitute as quickly as I can,
but on, on page 4, section 3. I
know there's significant.
Changes
Section 3 starts at the bottom
of page 4.
And this is the permit.
Required
And on the, uh,
On the original bill, it's on
page 5.
Uh
Line 6. So in the original bill,
it's about 10 lines long.
In the substitute
T10 minutes it's uh
2 pages.
Uh, so first quick question, Mr.
Chairman Senator, it says the
person shall not discharge a
pollutant from a point source to
waters of the United States.
We're not
So the Supreme Court didn't
change the definition of waters.
Of the United States, right,
those are just waters that that
cross state lines.
So much of the Supreme Court
interpreted that definition and
basically narrowed it
substantially to free flowing.
Rivers and lakes. I read that up
front, so they did narrow it
substantially, so this bill is
only going to apply. 21 is a
standalone applies to what.
under the under the sacks
so that Miss Sherman, so that
definition.
is consistent with that court
ruling. In other words, we're
not trying to twist that around.
OK, great. And then, so what is
the difference, Mr. Timmerson
was the the permit required in
the first draft.
And the permit required under
under the substitute what
Are we requiring per permission
essentially for much more.
Much more things.
What is the difference? So Mr.
Chair, this is, as I understand
in.
These are the except this was
the amendment that was adopted
in conservation. I see line up
to make it task wall with the
exceptions that exist in the
exemptions that exist under
The current.
I understand. So thank you, Mr.
Chairman. So Senator, so, so
these actually make it up.
He lessened the need for permits
in a way like I, I get it, OK,
cool. And then, um,
And then just a quick comment,
Mr. Chairman, on, on page 7, and
then again, it's, it's again on
uh.
I think a subsequent section.
Money is collected, deposited
into the water quality
management fund. I know in the
first draft there was money.
Put into an education fund, for
the fund you're suggesting now
is simply the water quality
management fund.
Uh,
Mr. Chair and Senator, that's
correct, um, unless other.
Otherwise required by law, so
if, if there are, um, no other
laws that require
Funds or money to be deposited
into a different fund, it would
go to the program, to the water
quality management fund.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Worth, and then I just want to
make the point that the, the
gentleman, Mr. Trujillo talked
about fees and the legalities of
peace, he actually, he's
actually litigated that, that
issue.
Uh, so I think he may be correct
in terms of um.
Money collected for fees going
to other purposes, so we should
definitely.
take a look at that.
Lastly, Mr. Chairman, the, the
criminal enforcement aspect of
it, it's on page 13, section 7.
And it talks about um a person.
A person, uh.
Is criminally liable.
But a person also can be
interpreted as like a.
Like a legal entity.
And so we can't send a legal
entity to jail, just an
individual, so we're suggesting
that workers
Uh
The workers, the actual person
that
That
Discharges the pollutant is
criminally liable.
Mr. Chair, Senator, that, that's
correct, and we wouldn't be able
to hold a, you know, city liable
criminally, we wouldn't exactly
drag the the mayor and all the
townsfolk in, but, uh, you know,
to your point, it may be a a
good uh amendment for us.
No, thank you, sir, thank you,
uh, Chairman Senator Worth,
gentlemen, just keep in mind the
um
This is pretty broad, pretty
broad liability.
Uh
You know, a false statement, um.
You know, there's a, there's a
lot of stuff here.
Failure to monitor, failure to
report.
Uh, I understand the, the
importance of it.
Um
I know you worked with staff,
but is there, um,
I don't think there's legal
definitions for things like
this, like, for example, on page
14 lines 8, 18 and 19.
Uh, thereby causes a substantial
adverse environmental impact.
So I don't think that's defined
in criminal law, what is a
substantial adverse
environmental impact.
And then, uh, down on that page,
Mr. Chairman, lines 24, 25,
creating a substantial danger.
Of death or serious bodily
injury, I don't know if that's.
Um
I don't know if that tracks with
like willful.
Wilful and wanton disregard, I
know those are words used in
reckless driving or second
degree murder. So I don't know
what that would mean and what
the prosecutor would have to
prove.
Ring of substantial danger of
death or serious bodily injury
and then.
And then also, um,
Also on the first draft, it
mentioned that the department
could
could prosecute was that taken
out?
Is it simply the local DA or the
attorney General could prosecute
these crimes.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, um, you
know, what is a practice here at
NED is that, you know, we
actually don't prosecute
criminal cases we refer and
discuss with the Attorney
General's office and our, you
know, local district attorney's
offices, uh, you know, they're
the ones generally who have the
the prosecutorial discretion and
the know how, you know, with the
criminal aspect, but, uh, yeah,
that's, uh, again, to be clear
that, you know, the NED
currently does not, you know,
prosecute anyone. OK, OK, no,
no, thank you for that cause it
was, it was kind of mentioned in
the first draft and then lastly,
Mr. Chairman, thank you the.
Yeah.
I know the the private right of
action is taken away.
Uh
Which is probably a good idea,
but there's also some new
language.
Uh, talking about how a private
citizen can and reports on page
10.
The department shall encourage
the public to report, develop
procedures for receiving.
Information, things of that
nature, so the public does have
a role in in enforcing this act,
wouldn't you say, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, uh, Mr. Chair and
Senator, absolutely it does, and
as I mentioned up front,
basically under the privacy
application states either have
to do.
One or two things, either a
private right of action, which
we initially had in there, or
this language comes right out of
that that process for.
Stepping up and having that
public.
Roll with the department.
And then thank you, Mr.
Chairman, thank you, Senator Wor
for listening to all sides. I, I
don't know about combining 21,
22.
My fear would be, you know,
sometimes we look for a reason
to vote for a bill, sometimes we
look for a reason to vote no, so
I think there're somewhat
distinct even though they're in
a.
Same section of loss. I look
forward to the dialogue on 22 on
Wednesday. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator Werth. There
are some significant changes in
the sub, particularly thank you
for moving the uh private right
of action in here.
Just to clarify, if the
intention of this, the goal of
21 is to transfer regulatory
authority, um, from the EPA to
New Mexico Environment
Department, who would be.
You know, overseeing this and
ultimately responsible for
enforcing compliance.
To, to clarify, does the
committee sub returned the
regulatory framework to the
status quo, and you, you
mentioned status quo. Does it
grant any
Expanded authority from what we
already have.
From the federal.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I do not
believe so. Um, this, this, uh,
bill SB 21 is modeled after the
Clean Water Act and um
provisions in the Water Quality
Act for things like
administrative and civil um
enforcement. So, um, we have to
have those types of authorities
from, you know, to
In order to get primacy from the
EPA. And so it's modeled after
the EPA program with existing
state authorities for those
types of actions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Wirth, and I appreciate that
answer.
Then I would follow up though to
what Senator Maestas line of
questioning is, cause I looked
into this on section 6A though,
it's authorizing enforcement for
violations, but currently the
federal CWA does not allow for
that. So that would be a
deviation and an overreach from
what federal
Already allows, correct?
Mr. Chair and Senator, that's
incorrect. The EPA can enforce
the NPDS permits.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that clarification. So
with the enforcements of the
state be an exact mirror then,
can you confirm with what the
federal government is already
allowed to do?
Mr. Chair and senator, it would.
be a mirror of the federal
enforcement process.
But it is also um using existing
Processes and authorities that
we have to align with the Water
Quality Act.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
I, I'll move on, Senator Wirth,
to one of the questions that was
asked during public comment.
Does the substitute now include
agricultural exemptions that
were expressed.
As concerns during public
comment.
Mr. Chair and Senator, the
exemptions that are listed in SB
21 are the exemptions that are
currently existing in the Clean
Water Act.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
know that in 22 there were some
agricultural exemptions. So
currently uh is not exempt in
21, so am I correct to say that
they are not exempt in
This draft, the substitute.
Mr. Chair and Senator, um,
The discharge composed entirely
of return flows from irrigated
agriculture is the exemption
that is currently in the Clean
Water Act for these types of
discharges in SB 22, we have
additional exemptions for dredge
and fill exemptions, so it's a
different program. Uh, we are
not asking for primacy of the
judge and full program from uh
the Army Corps of Engineers who
currently administers that
program here in New Mexico.
Thank you for the
preemptions. Are there any
exemptions for municipalities
and counties.
And the substitute.
Mr. Chair and Senator, no, they
are not municipalities and um.
Counties are if they are
Discharging a pollutant into a
surface water, um, into a
Water of the United States, they
will fall under this permitting
program. OK, thank you, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, thank you all
for the clarification a little
bit for us to review further the
substitute.
I want to shift just a little
bit about
Really kind of the capacity of
this agency to administer this
program. It wasn't that long ago
before LFC Secretary Kenny came
before us, um, really asking
for, because there was such an
increase in air quality permits
that he needed additional
funding and the, the amount of
stuff that he needed and he's
really expanding.
That branch of his
Agency. He had stressed that air
quality staff needed to be
doubled. He, he suggested
increasing fees for the air
quality standards at that time
to pay for the program, and yet,
just a couple of weeks ago, he
announced that the department
was permanently delaying or
pending those air quality.
Permits, and in fact it
triggered a letter that all
legislators were copied on from
the chair of Senate Finance to
the secretary.
Saying that he was in receipt of
that, he expressed deep concerns
in my view, the department
should continue to review an
issue air quality permits as
required by law, I vehemently
disagree with the department's
unilateral announcements of
delay to review and issue air
quality permits, this delay is
entirely inappropriate to the
LFC's bar objection. There's no
apparent reason why the lack of
additional funding should render
the department and Tyler
incapable of issuing air quality
permits in accordance with law.
If you are already struggling to
properly administer and manage.
But you were statutorily
required to by law, how can you
assure us that by a great
expansion and duties that you're
able to administer further.
Permitting abilities.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Brantley.
Jonas Armstrong, the director of
the water protection division at
the Environment Department. I
Really complex question. Uh,
Senator, and the Environment
Department is a complex
department with programs that
regulate from air quality to uh
solid waste, hazardous waste,
water issues, also OSHA, uh,
food service safety, pools and
spas. There are a number of
different programs across the
department, and they're all
independent in terms of their
permit fee funding.
Um
The Air Quality bureau, you're,
you're right, there was a
proposal last year to increase
fees, that was denied by the
Environmental Improvement Board.
My understanding is the board
directed the department to come
back with additional evidence to
support that increase, um.
Pending that
Request for additional funding.
My understanding also, you can.
Uh, for the air quality bureau,
which is bureau.
But
They
Requested to increase use of
fund balance while they
wait for additional revenue from
increased permit fees.
All that said, this water
program would be completely
separate from that.
And one thing that that you've
alluded to and then I heard a
lot from the opponents was, uh,
questions about capacity at the
Environment department. We're
really grateful for one, the
legislature stepping up to the
plate last year and increasing
our funding for personnel
significantly.
That has allowed us to drive our
vacancy rate down to a 5% level,
which is really significant, uh,
progress for a large agency like
NMED and 5% is.
Typically the natural churn
you're going to see anyway. So,
you know, one, thank you all,
and 2, we do have confidence
that we'll be able to staff up
and implement this program if
given the appropriate funding.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate that answer, but it's
not really that complex.
Because when enemy and the
agency comes before the
legislator, we continue to hear
that you're understaffed and
underfunded.
And yet the request then is to,
to
Greatly expand the authority.
By administering an additional
program when the legislator has
sent to the agency great
concerns.
That you're already at bandwidth
and you're not properly
managing.
The permitting responsibilities
that you have now before we
would extend this. I think
To wrap up, Mr. Chairman, I
would say that not only does
this seem to be an overreach of
the state, but it's an overreach
that we can't afford. The agency
can't afford, the agency doesn't
have staff for, and if we're
turning back to status quo, I
would say that we don't need.
We're asking to administer and
take over a program that's
already been done by the feds,
and we don't have the capacity
within this agency to do it
would be my argument, Mr. Chair.
With that, I will.
He
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
desperately trying to understand
what's going on here.
Um, so center worth, I, I just
think there's things in this
that you might wanna look at
section M needing help. But
here's my question.
If we're, if we're essentially
Uh, just trying to
Um
Do the same thing that was done
by the feds in the state because
the Supreme Court says
You know, we're out of it. I
don't, I just don't understand
what was happening before the
2nd decision.
I don't understand why so many
people are against this. If you
essentially are trying to take
the federal statute and do it in
the state, so how did this work
before Sacket. Maybe that would
help me understand how this
works.
OK,
uh,
Before sackets.
The 95% of the waters that were
deregulated were covered for 50
years. There was a program in
place. Uh, there is a
difference, and I think Senator
Brantly, you know, correctly is
noting that the federal
government has paid.
The full cost of this.
The vast majority of states.
Do have some hybrid fee
structure, and that's a
discussion we're gonna have in
The Senate Finance Committee for
sure, uh, there, there have
monies have been appropriated
the last number of sessions to
begin this process to go through
the collaborative process I
didn't even talk about that that
6 meetings that went into this
on the front end, but you're
right.
For 50 years from 1972 until
2022.
These waters were all covered,
the federal government did it.
Even under that interpretation
of the Federal Clean Water Act,
the vast majority of states
exerted primacy. They wanted to
be the ones that are.
Doing the control over these,
how these are applied. And so
New Mexico is one of the few
states that didn't do it.
Um
You know, where there serious
consequences under the federal
regulatory scheme. I think
Senator Cervantes.
In the Senate Conservation
Committee walked through what
his family's
The farm went through and
compliance and the penalty that
was paid. So, yeah, there was
serious stuff, and again, this
is modeled after the serious
stuff that was at the federal
level.
But I think the difference is
for the last 3 years, 95% of
this has been deregulated.
And ultimately, that's the
policy decision that this body
really needs to think through.
Do we want to have 95% of our
water deregulated.
Or do we want to put in place a
program that I would argue does
what everyone was just fine with
for 50 years until Sackett came
along.
And change the the way this is
done.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman can, can,
can you give me an example.
Of pre-sacket.
Uh, what was done by the feds. I
mean, just, just one example of
what they did for New Mexico
that we're now trying to do
ourselves.
So, Madam Protem and and Mr.
Chair, I think that the
The argument that's not the
argument, the story that Senator
Cervantes told in Senate
conservation. Yeah, so and and
he can, he can certainly do it,
but, but again, there was
discharges that were done, uh,
there were some fertilizer on
the farm product that was being
washed that went down into the
river and there was a action and
a fine that was paid, uh,
against similar type thing that
would happen here.
All right. I'll give it up. So,
uh,
Why are so many people against
the bill you're doing?
Is it the fees, I mean, that's
it, it's just this again. So.
Mr. Chair and Madam Protem.
So initially in the first
committee, it was the private
right of action. The world was
gonna end if individuals could
go to state court and that was
the huge outrage. I heard that.
I also heard it from
Suki Pueblo that I represent, I
heard it from the city of Santa
Fe that I represent.
Uh, I think those were
legitimate.
Legitimate issues and again, so
we've we've taken that and we've
stepped back from that.
And so now we transition and the
fee issue is a big one. You
know, when I said to Senator
Reel and Senate Conservation,
this is why this bill's got 3
referrals, because these are
tricky issues, and I really, I,
I fully respect, I don't in any
way minimize the points that
Senator Brantly is making. I
mean, this is a, there's a
policy decision and ultimately
this is a policy decision. Do
we?
As a state,
Want to have protections.
For a 95% of the water that's
currently not covered.
And then do we as a state want
to have.
Control over the decisions
involving our water, or do we
want to have the federal
Environmental Protection Agency
located in the Dallas, making
those decisions.
So, Mr. Chairman, that's who
makes it now. The guys in
Dallas.
That isn't, didn't say they no
longer are making them for you.
They're making them now for the
5% of the water that is free
flowing in New Mexico, but not
the 95% that they used to.
That, that, that would be that
if, if we don't pass the the
second piece of this, uh, 22.
Basically, we've just
deregulated 95% of New Mexico's
water.
Well, maybe that's why so many
are, are against these bills,
they want to deregulated.
Shame on them. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I, I just
want to clarify one last time. I
know we've heard this, I just
want to make sure.
Uh, with respect to the
definition of pollutant, you're
saying that there is no
difference between this current
bill and the Clean Water Act. Is
that correct?
Mr. Chair and Senator, that's
correct. Uh, it is the same
definition that is in um
It's in actually the federal
regulations and 40 CFR 122.2.
Thank you.
Um
So
Moving on with respect to the
permitting situation.
What are the specific
requirements if this bill were
to go in place, we would no
longer have to go to the
regional office for permitting,
is that correct?
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes,
that's correct. OK.
I just wanna make sure I'm clear
on this. So what's the time
frame now for permitting going
through Dallas.
For approval.
Mr. Chair and senator, it's
variable. They do have a backlog
of permits, and I know that some
permits are currently
administratively extended since
2019, um, so it's been a while,
um,
It some permits go through and
some permits so it's, it's
variable is what I can say.
Thank you. So, Mr. Chair, given
the expectation that
You, you're gonna be requiring
additional staffing to support
this effort.
Do you expect to have that
timeline improved or not?
Given the fact that you don't
have the folks in place right
now.
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes, we
expect to have greater
efficiency in the permitting
program. We're currently
developing a database with some
of the appropriations that we
received from the legislature,
um, last year and the previous
session. So we're developing a
permitting database that you
will be able to apply online,
um, and submit fees or develop,
um, communicate to the
department through that
electronic.
systems, um, so we are trying to
create efficiencies, uh,
typically, uh, for NPDS program,
which is what Senate Bill 21 is
covering you, a permittee
submits their application 6
months in advance of um before
it's set to expire and the EPA
is supposed to issue that new
permit within that 6 month
period.
That doesn't always happen.
Very good. Thank you. Um,
That's one last question with
respect to enforcement and
penalties.
Uh, it says that
Penalties can vary depending on
whether the individual or
company violates.
Willingly or negligently.
How is that determined, uh,
whether or not a particular
violation was negligent or
intentional.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I mean
that that's a essentially it's
called a mens rea question,
right, negligently doesn't
require any kind of intent, uh,
knowingly certainly does, you
know exactly what you're doing,
you know something is against
the law and here you go, you
know, you you're engaging in
that activity, knowing that this
is a, uh, you know, that you
shouldn't be doing it. I know
what knowingly means, and, and
but I'm wondering how that is
determined in the, in the
criminal law, I guess is the
question I'm really trying to
ask is how would, how would one
determine that?
Um
Criminal law. Someone can say,
I, I know I only did this, but
I'm gonna tell you like
negligence Mr.
Chair, Senator, one thing that
helps us determine, you know, if
there is that intent. A lot of
times we look at notice, you
know, have we given that party
notice of uh this type of
activity being against the law,
you know, against regulation,
um, you know, if a party has
been put on notice, and then
they continue that behavior
despite being put on notice, uh,
then that will certainly get us
up into that woefully.
Category.
Thank you, mister. That's all my
questions for now.
for them
So Mr. Chair, I think because
there is a new sub.
22 that just came out this
morning in fairness, and I think
I, I appreciate Senator
O'Malley's question. I'm gonna
try and get a red line version
which I can hand out for
tomorrow to both bills. I just
think it would be more.
Do it that way. OK. But it's up
to you, and we'll schedule a lot
of time to allow for that, um,
kind of the, the two. I don't
have anybody else, so I'd just
like to offer a couple of
thoughts. One is, um, the
importance of this, I, I, you've
made the point, but I've made it
before, I'll make it again. The
fact that you as the sponsor,
give your bill 3 referrals is
telling, I think the most people
here consider 3 committee
referrals a kiss of death to a
bill, but the fact that you've
um invited the scrutiny to your
own bill, I think speaks.
Well, the fact that you're the
person who makes the assignments
to community referrals. So I
think that's important. I think
it's also important that you
recognize that that we're living
in a time when I don't know
whether the EPA is going to
exist, uh, a year from now, um,
or what version of it exists or
what Mr. Musk thinks it should
look like, uh, but, um, I, I do
think that it's important that
that some of the points that
were made in conservation, I
repeat here too. So one of them
is you said that this is about
primacy. If you look at page 5,
11, I'm sorry, 1011.
This is sub uh subsection 3D,
says no permit shall be issued
when the regional administrator
has objected in writing.
of the federal act is that an
absolute, in other words, do
they, does the Fed does the
federal regional administrators
essentially have a veto on on
every permit.
I see there's, there's there's
sections of the bill that
provide for appeals from orders
of the department or from the
commission actions and so forth.
But in this, this language says
that when there's a permit
application, the regional
administrator objects, um.
It no permit shall be issued.
Uh, Mr. Chair, that is, uh, from
the federal regulations in 40
CFR 12329 requires state permit
programs to provide that no
permit shall be issued when the
regional administrator has
objected in writing under the
procedures outlined in 12344. So
there are procedures for those
objections with our, which are
defined in the federal
regulations, but we did not list
them all here.
in the bill. OK, so I understand
that. So you're, you're trying
to make sure you comply with the
federal requirements for us to
do this, which of course you
need to do. At the same time, I
think it's worth noting that
they essentially have the
essentially a veto, right? of
issuing a permit still retained
at the federal level. The, the
other couple of other points
that that made in conservation,
we're talking about um
pollutants discharged into from
a point source, that's
important. The point source
language and then to the waters
of the US. Was the US includes
principally, uh, the Rio Grande
River, right? And I used the
example of our farm, which you
pointed to center worth where if
we have agricultural water that
returns into our ditches and
fields and so forth at times, it
gets back into the Rio Grande
River, and in our case, water
that was used to wash chili
coming in from the fields was
considered a pollutant, um,
after it washed the chili.
Because it contained certain
biologicals and then also
included fertilizers and
insecticides to get washed off
the product, so if any of that
reaches the waters, and I, I, I
realized the implications of
this to me anyway, get to a say
is and anybody, uh, the cities,
municipalities, everybody
discharging into the Rio Grande,
and there's a lot, there's a lot
of people discharging into the
Rio Grande, oftentimes treated
waters.
Uh, there, there is an exemption
for agriculture, but I don't
think it's gonna apply much
cause it says it exempts
discharge composed entirely of
return flows, and that's the
point that I made earlier is the
federal government said that
once the water has touched any
plant, essentially it's not
composed entirely of return
flows, now it's now composed of,
of a potential pollutant, no
matter how diluted it may be,
um, but, but, um, that was the,
that was an issue there. I do
still think there's a lot of
opportunities for surplusage.
To be eliminated from the bill,
but I also realized that I
probably have to work with you
and and others about what has to
be retained in, in the bill, um.
So I'll just give you an easy
example. The, if you look at
section 8.
Let's see, well, I it's.
It's Section 9 on page 17 on, on
pages 17 and 18, you've got a
procedure there for appeals to
the Court of Appeals and so we,
we used to, I thought, and I
still think we used to do a
cleaner job of this, which we
would just say that that an
appeal would be pursuant to the
rule, and we'd cite the rule in
the statute where the appeal is
taken. I see some people nodding
their heads affirmatively, or we
would say an appeal is taken
pursuant to section, and I can't
recall the section, but there's
a section in state law that
refers to
Appeals from administrative
decisions. So when you do that,
you don't have to, uh, include
things like an appeal, she'll be
on the record, uh, the action
show only be a set of a side of
arbitrary and capricious, not
substantial levels, all of that
kind of language is in that
section. I think can be tidied
up quite a bit by just referring
to an administrative process for
appeal and I continue to work
with you said of worth on on
that, on, uh, that do.
There's a, there's a critical
part of the bill.
Which I don't know if I agree or
disagree with, but, um, on page
15, a single operational upset
or event that leads to
simultaneous violations shall be
treated as a single violation.
That's going to be a really
important part of your bill
someday somebody, and I see you
nodding affirmatively from the
department. I guess the, the,
the mining, uh, spills that
we've had right when you have a
mining disaster, um, a single
operational upset or event, I
don't know what that's gonna be.
If you've got a
been leaching uh material into
the into an assay river or
tributary of the Rio Grande, and
it gets into the Rio Grande.
Is that a single operational
upset.
Uh, or event that leads to
simultaneous violations, you
know, the language there is
pretty, pretty hard for me to
discern and when it says this
will be more than one violation
or not, that becomes pretty
important when you've got
violations that are in very
substantial amounts of money, so
a violation is, I don't know
what some places, uh, $20,000
per day for violation. And then
you got criminal penalties too,
so, you know, I want to spend
some more time with you talking
about that between here and
there.
Um, I also think that, um,
again, when you're looking at
surplusage.
You've got information, you've
got actions in here that again
to me seem pretty self-evident.
Um, in terms of access, you say
all of this information shall be
accessed or available to the
public. I can't think of any
reason why it wouldn't be um
under IPRA.
Uh, so I don't know that we need
to say that that all the records
and submissions can be publicly
accessed, so that's, that's, I
think, well, an area to look at.
Um, that's in section 11, so it
just says all records of
applicants, permits, etc.
Um, shall be available to the
public, right, in in section 11.
I don't know that we really need
to say that are you saying we
need to say that because the
feds say so. So I wish we didn't
have to say it, but again, I
think we need to look, this is
all laid out specifically and
what we do need to say, so we
need to track and I'll spend the
time with you and um and with
Rebecca, despite the fact that
she doesn't know who Bruce
Springsteen is, uh, to, um, to
she is, she is getting, she is
supposed to get the lyrics to
Thunder Road and um I
Um, I think Thunder Road's
probably the place for her to
start.
But in any event, uh, I will
want to visit with you all about
what language has to stay in and
to meet the feds requirement
and, and not, uh, the only other
thing that I think will cause
some, some consternation. We
should talk a little bit about,
and you'll have to tell me
whether the feds are requiring
this is um access. This has
always been an issue for us in
the past, so your bill
essentially gives the department
right to access of private
property, right? Uh, with
effectively no notice.
And that, um, sometimes causes
those of us in the private
sector, a lot of um
Of concern. So if you look on
Page 8, it really begins with
section 5 on page 7, but it
essentially says the department
shall have all certain duties
and it says, but those duties
and authority are, that's on
page 8. It says, authority to
enter into any site or premises.
as subject to rules adopted,
which I appreciate they'll adopt
rules, but it essentially says
they'll they'll have the right
to access any site or premises,
uh, relevant to program
operations for records, and it
just says upon a reasonable time
and presentation of credentials
is that as broad as I think that
sounds like you can come into
anybody's um business or
property and access the property
and access their records and
documents.
On request or on demand, really,
I mean, I certainly can see
reading it that way again, this
tracks exactly what's in the
federal.
Statute and again, we just need
to sit down and show you a
language that's already there.
I'll just read it uh federal,
uh, this section B8 matches
122.41, which requires a
permittee to allow the director
or authorized representative to
access the Permits premises.
To inspect the facility activity
or records or to sample or
monitor. So and again, I, I, I
don't wanna, I think that
Senator Thornton and Senator
Brantly both correctly.
If there's things in here that,
that exceed what's currently in
the federal statute, we need to
tighten them up. And so I'm open
to that and I heard some things
in the audience, and again,
we're not trying to do something
here that's expanding. So, but
that's, that's the language that
we were working from that came
up with the language in the
bill. Yeah, and what I what I
understand is, is the federal
government requiring this
language as part of a state
administered programs that that
what they're essentially saying
this language has got to be
there.
Uh, Mr. Chair, yes, that's
correct. OK. All right. Well,
we're going to have to make the
feds happy as long as they
continue to exist, which again
I, I watched the news every
night. There's still a federal
government? I don't know.
Right, um.
Hey man, we're not gonna take a
vote today. We'll, we'll roll
this over until Wednesday, see
where it takes us from there,
but Senator Ward, thank you for
a good presentation. Thanks for
all the proponents and opponents
to give the sponsor some things
to talk about and think about.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yes
Bill 47.
Uh, committee members do, do you
all wish to have, I assume you
do wish to have the committee
sub for 22 passed out right,
we'll, we'll do that now,
keeping it all straight.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee.
OK
Bill 47, Senator Jaramillo,
thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, land grants
are a major part of Hispano and
Nuevo Mexicano culture, common
lands that were given by the
king of Spain to families who
came up the Rio Grande to
northern New Mexico. Then when
Mexico became the country that
ruled in this area, land grant
meeds were recognized by the
Mexican government, families and
heirs were kept on these lands,
uh, today, uh, we work with the
New Mexico of making them, um,
political subdivisions of the
state. Two years ago, Mr.
Chairman, you heard in this
committee and it passed
bipartisan of naming the 26
active land grants to be covered
by the general provisions found
in chapter 49, Article 1 of the
New Mexico statute. Now what
this bill does is it adds a
2-seventh, which is the Santa
Cruz La Cannada land grant,
which is one of the motherland
grants established in 1695, and
with me today are two.
Members of the land grant, the
president, Don Bustos to my
right and secretary of the land,
Brian Martinez, and to the left
is our expert witness, Arthuror
Archuleta of the New Mexico Land
Grant Council, and with that I'd
like the president and the
secretary to make a few remarks.
Thank you.
Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Don
Bustos, and I own a small farm
in northern New Mexico. I named
the farm after our land grant,
Santa Cruz de la Cannada land
grant and I named it after our
church.
And we believe that this is a a
very good way to help protect
our land for future generations.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Brian
Martinez. I am the secretary of
the Santa Cruz de la Cannado La
Grant, and I'm prepared to
answer your questions regarding
our uh pursuit of political
subdivision status.
And with that, Mr. Chairman,
we're ready to entertain any
questions. Thank you, Senator,
for being concise.
Committee members with
questions, please. Anyone?
Ma.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Jaramillo, gentlemen, how was
uh?
Merce de Pueblo de Santa Cruz
currently governed.
There's a board that's selected
by the heirs, and so the errors
come together to elect the
leadership team. They meet
monthly with every air, and
elections are held every 2
years.
And chairmanen Hardy mill that
the board is how many members?
There's 5 of us on the elected
board.
Thank you, sir. And, and
Chairman, the, um,
Currently, how many acres is is
the land grant.
Today.
It's approximately 4600 acres
that are recognized by the
state. Thank you, sir, and Mr.
Chairman, Senator Har, Mr.
Bustos, how many, uh,
How big was the Langran?
Back in 1695.
Uh, chairman Senator Maestas, uh
there was approximately 46,600
acres originally and then it was
whittled down about 4600 acres.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
I neglected, uh, to recognize
Camila Romero, the state land
office. Are you here?
proponents, all right, she had
registered to speak in support
for the land, uh state land
office or anyone else in the
committee with questions?
No.
All right. Um, I'll be ready for
a motion in a second. I just, I
appreciate it, Senator Armi
this, but when I, when you
pronounce this Santa Cruz de la
Cannada.
There's not a, this is gonna get
into the weeds, but there's not
an ina in the spelling of this
word, is that right? So, so
without the Ea they would read
Canada and, and I thought,
Oh no, Canada, again, another
Canada like issue, are we taking
over, yeah, we taking over
something for another state or
like what is your bill about
because it relates to Canada
these days that we're all pretty
tense about that, it it was it
it's it's canalla, is that
right? That is correct, Mr. Cha
and should the should the
country formerly known as Canada
really be Kenyatta. So I think
without theenia they're safe to
be Canada, Mr. OK, all right, I
got it, I got it straight. All
right.
I'm having a little fun with
this administration, but um I'm
trying to, trying to find
something to smile about.
Senator O'Malley with a
question. Oh, I didn't have a
question. I just wanted to move
it to pass
pass motion, is there any
objection?
Oh, I'm sorry, Senator Stewart
missed you.
So, Mr. Chairman, don't you
think we should amend the
spelling of Kenyatta?
I mean, it would just be a
couple of little
little days over the Ns.
And I don't, and your documents
and your official documents, is
there an end yet? That's a good
catch, Mr. Chairman, Senator,
yes, the Enya is in there. We
should make the change.
OK.
All right. So, Mr. Chairman, I
propose an amendment.
Page one, line 12.
Proper pronunciation of
Canada
Uh, so then, did you say? I did.
Well, because it it's before the
end yet. Oh, I see. OK.
As you said.
Yeah
Well, let's just say I'll make
an amendment to change this
proper spelling with the NA on
it throughout the bill
any discussion?
Uh, I have just a little
discussion. There's a buzz going
up here, the thinking is this
may be the first time we put in
and yeah in state statute and
I'm looking at Mr. Larigoerte,
he's worried that there may not
be a printer who can put in and
and yeah, um, it'll do it on
your phone. Well, I, I agree,
and if we haven't been able to
do it, I think it's protected by
the treatyreaty of Guadalupe
Hildargo, I think, I think that
they're required to put it in
you on the bill, so Senator, I
assume that's a friendly
amendment, right? If we can do
it in you, we're gonna do an I.
Thank you, Senator
Senator Stewart, you know she's
a school teacher, you can always
tell, right, get it right. So is
there any objection to the
adoption of that amendment,
right, there's none, and then we
had to do pass motion by Senator
O'Malley to pass as amended
Senator O'Malley, correct?
Is there any is there any
objection to do pass as amended.
Seeing none, please show all
members present voting in the
affirmative. Senator Armi and
gentlemen, thank you for being
here today.
You have a pass you on behalf of
the heirs of Santa Cruz and La.
And Senator, uh, you had the
court emergency property reserve
Fund Senate 301, uh, the only
other bill is mine and I'll be
around here for a little bit,
sorry for those that are waiting
on online, but Senator Jail, you
want to put on your Senate 301.
I consider Paul, yes, Senator
Paul's here too.
Oh yeah, oh, this won't be easy
at all. I thought so, but maybe
not.
Oh.
Yes,
yes.
you
hurting?
We, we have a
How many proponents.
All right,
uh, Senna Jamiel.
Uh, and Senator Paul, I know
I'm, I'm not just you, I'm, I'm,
I'm really counting on sending
me to stand aside and let Sen
ball. Take the, take the reins.
Let's see how he does. Mr.
Chairman, I'll be here just in
case.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
committee members. Um, so today
before you, we've got Cin Bill
301 and um along with myself,
I've got a good friend Senator
Jaramilo, and then we also have
Cynthia Pacheco. She is the
director of court operations
division, who's our expert
witness, uh, for this bill, um,
as you all can see in just
reviewing the bill, the bill
would create a fund administered
by the administrative office of
the courts to pay for emergency
and unforeseen repairs.
in court-owned property, um, and
speaking with, uh, Mrs. Pacheco,
there's uh been a number of
instances that she brought that
she could speak on it a little
more detail where they really
get into a pinch, they have
issues that come up that are not
in their budget, and they have
to quickly scramble to figure
out if there's a way that they
can make those repairs to these
facilities, um, I know just been
personal experience walking
through the district district
court in A.
Gordo for the 12th Judicial
District. It, uh, has seen its
better days, and so, um, just
as, you know, from my local
experience, I know that, uh,
what she had brought to our
attention was not something that
uh isn't um that she isn't
experiencing, so.
Senator Harmio or Mrs. Pacheco,
if you have.
Anything else, Mr. Chairman, so
the public depends on an open,
fully functional court
facilities postponing necessary
players that leads to more
severe damage over time, which
results in higher costs on
emergency fund allows for timely
intervention and prevent small
issues from becoming major
repairs, and as we see in some
of these areas, budgets are
already tight, so to waste time
and have the issue become
larger, becomes more of a
financial.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, I would just add, um,
Well, first of all, I want to be
really clear that I do know who
the who is.
I've seen the rock opera Tommy.
I also know who Bruce
Springsteen is, um, but I will,
I will confess that in my
handout I forgot to put the Ea
in Donana.
Oh
OK, so, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, the, the only
thing that I would add is that
in 2023, this was Senate Bill
374, which passed a Senate
Judiciary, Senate Finance,
unanimously, um, also passed
the, the Senate floor
unanimously, so
Everyone except for senators
Thornton, Paul, and O'Malley
have had an opportunity already
to vote yes on this. Some of you
even got to OS twice. Thank you.
Where did it get hung up last
time?
Uh, Mr. Chair, what
This, this is just my opinion.
This was introduced in the house
on the same day that the Senate
was voting on House Bill 2. So I
think it just got there too
late.
Anyone else? Senator, uh, we
don't have anybody registered in
support or anybody in
opposition, right? So many
members' questions, say a word.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, senators. Uh, and
this is a legitimate serious
question. I'm not going to mess
with you, Senator Paul. If
you're gonna get some of that on
the route, on the route for
this.
Just curious of the, the
counties currently, I mean, you
mentioned go walking into your
local district court.
You know, we went through a huge
issue 10 years ago here with a
new courthouse in Santa Fe and
We tried to provide the
furniture, the furniture got
vetoed. It was just a mess. But
the counties have the
responsibility for the courts.
So how does this, so if there's
an if there's an emergency in
the first judicial district
court. Don't they go to the
county to get funding? I mean,
how does, what's the overlap
here? Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Wirth. Uh,
yeah, I'll defer to, uh, to
Cynthia, but I, I would say
that, you know, just in my
experience, uh, with our local
county, they're also restricted
by the funds and monies that
they have available and all.
Let Cynthia go ahead and expound
a little more.
Mr. Chair and Senator Wirth,
yes, the county does have the
responsibility for the district
courts. This bill applies only
to the courts that are the
properties owned by the
judiciary. So right now that's
the Supreme Court, Court of
Appeals in Albuquerque Metro
court, and then we are in the
process of building multiple
magistrate courts that will also
be owned by the judiciary.
Good. So Mr. Chair, so that
answers that question and that's
helpful. So,
Is there a Mr. Chair, is there a
process now for
I mean, so let's say there's a
leak at the Supreme Court.
Uh, is there a process to go
through board of Finance or
what, what is the, or what
happens if there's a a million
dollar, I mean, it's a
significant historic building,
some act of God, lightning hits
or something. What's the option
now? What does the court do and
how do they deal with it?
Mr. Chair and Senator Wirtz, so
we would have to take.
Um
Going to board of Finance,
taking money from other areas
that that we have appropriations
in, and most importantly, what
it would mean is that the
Supreme Court would probably be
closed for a long time while we
figured out the finances and
figured out how to get it
repaired.
And some just a board of finance
is an option for the courts
though currently. It could, it
could be, yes. OK. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Other questions?
And
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just how
did you come up with a figure of
450K.
Uh, as we need. In other words,
is this too small or would you
prefer more? How, how was this
number arrived at?
Uh, Mr. Turman and Senator
Thornton.
So when I talked about Senate
Bill 374 in 2023. That ask was
actually a million dollars.
And what we've done in the
intervening time is look at the
amount that we're spending on
emergency repairs so that we
don't have a giant pile of money
just sitting around, but I
anticipate that over time we
will have to come back to the
legislature and ask you to, to
top it off or, or add more money
to it.
Thank you, Mr. So how long, Mr.
Chair, how long would you expect
this uh amount of money to less
than 1 year, 2 years, it's just
like when will you be coming
back? Mr. Senator Thorn, I would
expect that if it was passed at
450,000, that would probably
last us around 3 years, assuming
that we don't have a major
catastrophe in any of the
buildings that we own. But
again,
Um, as we continue to build
buildings that we're gonna own
instead of renting. I think that
we'll draw on the fund. Thank
you. That's all my questions.
Questions I really have, which
is how we've been doing this so
far and just kind of just
finding a way to do it. Is that
about the way it goes?
Mr. Chairman, that's, that's
correct. OK, and I see it's a
non-reverting fund, so you might
build up a pretty good balance
or something catastrophic at
some point in time too.
Um, that probably is useful too.
Um.
On a lighter note, there has,
there's the, um, are, do you
work in the AOC, um, let's see,
AOC is now in the old.
Santa Fe, New Mexican offices,
is that right? Are, are you,
you're over there you're not in
the Supreme Court building. No,
sir.
Uh, the Supreme Court building
has been in bad need of such an
emergency repair for 2 or 3
years for the bridge that
crosses the Santa Fe River, uh,
they've been working on that for
2 or 3 years to repair that
bridge, um, if I got a few of my
friends from back home, they'd
probably do it in an afternoon,
uh, but this being Santa Fe,
it's gonna take 2 or 3 years. I
hope we'll get that bridge
repaired, uh, with the emergency
funds that that don't get done
here, but the bridge determine
me too in fact our facilities.
is here. We offered to go out on
the weekend, he and I, and, and
take care of it. I'd really like
to see that bridge repaired.
Well, everybody tells me they
want the bridge repaired and
there's nobody repairing the
bridge, so I don't, I don't know
whether that's AOC, City of
Santa Fe, but I'm with you, you
and I'll go up there some
weekend and we'll get it done
right so
all right, I know the bridge is
important to the court, so worth
your dying to get in on this,
aren't you? Well, I mean, I
have, I have the facts, and we
certainly have your your chief
of staff here is one of the
biggest lobbyists to repair the
bridge along
with the former Chief Justice,
Justice Bacon.
And, and I did out of Capital
Outlay along with one other rep,
I think we appropriated $250,000
to do the design.
That doesn't even, that's 1/5 of
the cost.
$1.2 million to redo that
bridge.
Well, like I said, let me in a
couple, couple of my friends
come up on the weekend, the guys
on the farm will get it done in
an afternoon for about for about
architect, you have a rocket
scientist on the committee now
at the facilities guide in a
toolbox we could do it over a
weekend, $20,000 max max, but,
but this being Santa Fe, I mean,
this is where you can, yes, oh,
that's a historic is, yeah, this
is where you can hamburger can
cost you $50 here, so um, yeah,
this bridge, I'm just delighted.
chair that you're gonna help
with some capital outlay to fix
that bridge, I think we've got
$450,000 in this bill that'll
take care of the bridge, so, um,
I have heard from the justices
on the Supreme Court and, and
many folks and I'm just watching
that bridge every day as they
come to work, wondering, well,
what's going on? So I'm glad to
know that it's because it's
gonna cost the price of, yeah,
anyway.
We're on a do pass motion, are
we, do we have a do pass motion
center. O'Malley, you want to
make a do pass motion for me,
please? Sure,
Mr. Chair.
All right. And uh Senator Paul,
congratulations, there is there
any objection to the do pass
motion, send me, Senator Paul,
thank you very much. I would do
pass.
Without objection 301.
So let's, uh, let's come back to
order. We're now on a Cenville
282, Senator Joseph Cervantes
and Miss Kelly Stout Sanchez
presenting Take it away.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is
a, this is Bill's intended to
confront a serious problem that
I'm really surprised we've never
talked about and never seen
before.
Which is that it's oftentimes
true in a wrongful death or
personal injury case, medical
malpractice or that the parties
will either negotiate or agree
to what's called a structured
settlement.
Structures settlement refers to
a type of settlement or a
payment to somebody that's going
to be paid out over a period of
years. And so, for example, when
you've got a minor child who's
injured, may have a structured
settlement that the funds are
not accessible to anyone until
the child reaches an age of
majority.
Uh, you also have structured
settlements for individuals who
have long-term medical needs,
injuries are going to take a
long time to pay out.
There is a business, um, that
I'm gonna call unscrupulous, um,
and, and that, that business is
to purchase structured
settlements at enormous
discounts.
Um, from individuals. So an
individual who's expecting to
maybe not see money for 20 years
over a period of time, annual
payments will be approached by
one of these businesses so I
have missed uh Stout with me,
who's gonna give you a couple of
examples of what has happened in
some of these cases, and then
what we hope to accomplish with
this bill to try and redress
some of these uh some of these
practices, so.
Is that
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, thank you for
having us, um, and a couple
examples to sort of put some
context into um what Mr.
Chairman is is explaining, um.
Brandon was uh a child who was
abused in a group home.
Um, and he dropped out of school
when he was 14. He got into a
cycle of not being able to keep
his employment had substance
abuse as a result of his abuse
in the group home, he had legal
claims on which were ultimately
settled. Um,
At that time, uh, $100,000 was
put into a structured annuity,
um, for his future use and
benefit, um, the annuity was
planned to pay him out $500 a
month for 30 years. Um, and the
total benefit to him over time,
um, through the guaranteed
interest rates would be about
$200,000.
Um, JG Wentworth, um, after he
became an adult and was still
struggling, um, offered uh
Brandon to sell his annuity for
$28,500.
That's a 27% of its value.
This is just one small example
of of what um happens regularly.
Um, and currently the statute
requires that you come into the
court in order to sell it, and
it has to be approved by by a
judge, um.
But the judge doesn't have the
ability to, um, sift through the
circumstances. What's actually
going on in this person's life,
these people are people who have
had um significant adversity,
whether it was through the abuse
that they suffered, or maybe it
was a traumatic brain injury
that they incurred when they um,
were in a drunk driving
accident. Um, either, you know,
in those circumstances, they're
they're getting preyed upon.
These are vulnerable people who
are getting.
preyed upon, um, by, by these
corporations and um, and the
courts don't have a lot of
ability and time to dig into
what's actually going on here?
How can we help? Is there
another way to assist this
person.
Um, so thank you. Um, so what
the bill proposes to do is we,
we've already put in place and
we did this a while back, the
requirement for a hearing in
front of a judge to approve
these, and again, I, I've been
given examples of cases where an
individual is expected to
receive upwards of a million
dollars over their lifetime,
and, and are offered and take um
offers of less than $10,000 as a
lump sum in present value, so
what happens is, the companies
that are buying these are taking
that obligation that's over a
period of maybe 10 or
20 or more years, and they're
discounting it to a present
value, so they take that
discount, and then they take an
additional discount just as
their fee for doing this. We,
we've tackled here title loans
and any number of other
predatory lending practices.
This is another one of those
predatory lending practices
where, again, you have
individuals who frankly are
maybe not financially literate
or astute, and they're offered a
lump sum today when they reach
18, for example, you've got an
18 year old who's supposed to
get a, a settlement, um.
I've done some of these in the
millions of dollars where an
individual, especially a younger
child, is supposed to receive a
certain sum at age 18, uh, so
they can go to college, and then
another some when there a little
later, so that they might be
able to manage their money at 25
and at 30, and at 40, and you
set up these milestones
intending to protect them from
creditors and bad judgment and
uh others who may prey on them,
but a company can come in and
tell them, hey, instead of you
waiting until you're 18, it's,
or they probably have to wait
till they're 18 anyway, but
instead of waiting.
you're 20 or 25 or 30 or 35, or
these lifetime of payments,
we'll pay you now. We'll pay you
10 number of dollars, and we'll
give you the whole thing in a
lump sum, and many people, um,
say yes to that, and the goal
here would be to require the
court to appoint a guardian ad
litem. This is somebody whose
job is entirely to look out for
the court, a guardian ad lite is
really to be a messenger, a
reporter to the court, advising
the court whether the age, the
consideration, the medical
needs, whether they're spousal
support, whether there's
Um, uh, um, child support, uh,
do over a period of time to
advise the court on the
economics of the proposal before
the court before the court
approves them of doing this,
doesn't put an end to the
practice, but it tries to assure
that a judge and the person
who's being offered the buyout,
the lump sum, is really well
advised on the financial
implications of what they're
deciding to do. So I think that
summarizes it and we'll send for
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank
you. So, um.
I don't think uh we need to do
the 1515 minutes, but is there
anyone in the audience who
wishes to speak in favor or
against the bill.
Anyone online signed up.
Thank you, members of the
committee.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So,
So the company comes in here is
a.
Young man with uh
a billion dollars laid out.
So they talk him into selling it
to them, and that means that
they are the ones that are then
getting the 25, 30, etc. so
they're OK waiting for many
years for their money, which
wasn't their money.
that the way it works? That's
pretty much it, these are
sophisticated companies, so
they, they take actuarial
studies and they, they
essentially purchase annuities
and so forth and you're right,
they'll they'll pay somebody
money today, and they're buying
the right to receive that stream
of income for however long it
may be. Again, it's just, it's a
very sophisticated practice. So,
Mr. Chairman, you're proposing
that uh
To help make that not be so
egregious. It's the courts that
will weigh in this Guardian ad
litem has to be part of that
process, just that selling
process.
That's correct, um, Mr. Chairman
and Senator. So right, right
now, we have already put in
place, and we did this
ourselves, you and I and others
a few years back, uh, we put in
the requirement that there has
to be a court hearing.
So that's already in the law,
but, but, um, in speaking with
judges, they would like to have
a sophisticated guardian. I'd
lied to appointed, who could
really look at the economics,
run the math, even higher,
you'll see in the build the
right to hire a CPA and and the
company that's buying the right
to collect these streams would
be responsible for those costs
up to the court's discretion so
the court could say, we we're,
we're gonna consider you buying
this right to an income stream.
For in exchange for a lump sum,
but you're gonna have to pay for
a CPA or somebody to advise
this this person that you
realize you're giving up a
million dollars in future stream
of income or $2 million and, and
you're going to give it up for
$10,000 or or $20,000 today, and
um again, the judge will have
the ultimate say in deciding to
approve or not approve that.
So that, that was my last
question, Mr. Chairman. So the
judge has the ultimate say at
the end.
So this could be a way to stop
this from happening, is what
you're saying.
Um, I, I wouldn't say that it
becomes a way to stop it, but I
think it becomes a way that the,
the person who's who's doing
this does so knowledgeably, and
the judge has full knowledge of
the circumstances. Um, there's
nothing really in the bill that
that would change the court's
authority, but the court always
has authority to approve or
disapprove this, and, and they
try to do so, but you've got
judges who may not have a lot of
financial sophistication as
well. And these are pretty
complicated, uh, transactions,
um, I'm looking at center.
Senator Worth and I have done
one of these.
and they can be very, very
complicated, and they're they're
done again to try and protect
people, to make sure that that
they have the the income overall
duration of their lifetime if
it's medical needs or at least
until they're of a maturity
where we think they're gonna be
uh a property stewards of their
own money.
Uh, so much from my last
question is, how much is this
happening in New Mexico?
Um, I don't, do you have any
idea?
Chairman, uh, Senator, uh, I
can't testify as to exact data,
but I, I do work a lot in this
area and it is with great
regularity that that these uh
companies are coming before the
courts, um, to try to get these
sales through. It is, it is a
frustration in, in the court
system.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, how, how
often are they successful?
In getting the money away from
who oh who needed the money to
begin with.
So they're here a lot.
How, how much, how successful
are they?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, um, I
I, I can't say how frequently
they are successful, but I will
say that.
You know, I think as, as, um,
Mr. Chairman was explaining, um,
This, these are very complicated
and it takes a lot of
investigation, and that is time
that our state courts do not
have right to actually go in and
look into all of these issues
and so I think pretty regularly
they come before them with a
person who's in distress and
thinks that they need $10,000
now, um, and, and these
predatory lenders and so with
just that information in front
of them, and not enough time to
go into it.
More often than not, they
probably are approved.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm, I actually think this is a
great deal. I appreciate you
guys bringing this forward, um.
Inner Cervantes, I, I think this
is, uh.
As not being a lawyer, I'm, I'm,
I'm learning so much just
sitting here in this uh.
In this new position that I'm
The words of uh Guardian ad
litem never had heard that term
before in my life, so now that I
have an understanding of what
that means. I appreciate the,
the fact that I'm learning more
every day by sitting here at
this, but I believe this
structured settlement Protection
Act, um.
I think it's very important
because I believe there are
predatory practices occurring on
a regular basis and people who
are not financially literate can
be easily taken advantage of. It
always sounds better when you
said I'll give you 10,000 today,
um, you know, not understanding
how interest rate, how interest
works and over the period of
time, you're gonna get so much
more and it just sounds like a
better deal when someone who's
who's.
Got an immediate need, not
understanding that they're
actually sacrificing a lot of
money by doing that, and so I
think bringing this bill forward
is extremely important.
Uh, I have no questions, I just
want you to know that, uh, I'm
supporting it, and I also, uh,
continue, we'll continue to as
you add new Latin words to my
vocabulary, I will appreciate
it.
Thank you very much.
Yeah, that's right.
Thank you, Senator Thornton.
Senator Worley, thank you, Mr.
Chair. So I was just looking, so
this was passed in 2005, so it's
been on the books for 20 years
and currently the court has the
ability to say no, correct.
So, so basically what we're
doing is just putting in
A guardian ad litem, I've served
in that capacity.
Um, and, and I think one of the
key pieces here, uh, on page 4.
Line 9, all costs and reasonable
fees for the Guardian Atlanta
shall be borne by the transferee
in an amount to be determined by
the court.
So again, that's also gonna
I mean, if it's
It could be, there could be
some.
Significant cost if you've got
CPAs and you've got guardian ad
litem, so it also just.
Elevas.
The review process and the cost,
which that in itself might stop.
One of those
$5000 purchases. So I think
that's another provision that's
good and initially I think we
sent this also to this to the
finance committee thinking who's
paying for the garden have
items, but when you look in
there, that's what happens, and
I just want to flag that cause
again, you're just giving, as
you said, you're giving, most
importantly, you're making sure
someone's there looking out for
Who's really being impacted, and
if it's someone who doesn't
have.
You know, full capacity. I mean,
Senator Brantly, we were talking
to someone who's 18 and is
making that decision and wants
to do it and has good reasons
for doing it, the court can take
that into consideration, but if
it's all those other factors get
flagged, and then I just think
by, by the other point you made
Sara Cervantes, it's just good
to emphasize that giving the
courts the information they need
to be able to make a smart
decision, because these are, I'm
sure tricky things for judges
to, to deal with when you have
someone who comes in and says, I
really need to do this because
I'm gonna lose my car.
And so, or my house.
And
So again, I, I, I, I agree with
Senator Thornton. I think this
is a really
good addition to an already
important.
Bill.
Thank you. Before I take the
motion, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair and Senator Cervantes
to follow up on what Senator
Wirth was thinking, saying, I
too think that this is
disgusting practice. I didn't
know anything about it and I'm
sad to hear that it happens that
often, but I wanna appreciate
and thank the sponsor that
instead of having a knee-jerk
reaction to say, well, let's
outlaw the practice entirely is
to allow an avenue that if an
individual at a time in their
life in which coming across
$30,000 or a lump sum of money
would bring more value.
At that time in their life, then
waiting for an extended period
of time because there's a
medical crisis or whatever their
situation may be that there is
an avenue for that to be
considered and that, and so
thank you when you created
legislation like this, that it
wasn't a blanket outlaw of
something so that we're, if
there were cases in time in
which.
There could be a reason, a just
reason, and wanting to enter
into a contract like that that
you've, you've allowed that
avenue to still exist. So I too
will be supporting the bill and
I thank you for that. It's not
just a, a, a blanket outlaw of a
practice, so thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you.
They're doing
Move a new path.
Thank
you and I have a couple of
questions as well.
Let me just tell you, um, I, I,
I think we have the support, but
I want you to understand what
you're doing is important.
Uh, so Senator Worth and I
worked on a case about a year
ago, a young man whose father
was killed.
Uh, images as a result, as a
result of his father's death.
The young man was maybe 7 or 8
years old, I think at the time.
He was living with his mother.
Um,
who had not married the
decedent, the father who was
killed. They were not, they, but
they were living, he was living
with his 78 brothers and sisters
in a two bedroom apartment. They
were cramped and they, they were
very modest. She worked very
hard, the mother worked very
hard to support the kids, but um
this young man was going to
receive a $4 million settlement,
but it was a child, and so the
issue is how do you make the
resources available to him at
that age without risking that
the mother will go through.
The proceeds and use them in an
improper way, and we had no
reason to think she would do so
at all, but that does happen.
Um, and, and there's a lot of
noteworthy cases in New Mexico
where that happens. So we, as
lawyers try to protect,
sometimes people from
themselves, that that sounds
condescending, but there's not
an easier way to say that.
And, um, and so Senator Worth
was appointed by the court as a
guardian ad litem, uh, to
essentially be the guardian for
this child.
Over the interests of the
mother, not that the mother's
interests were improper or
needed to be overlooked at all,
but, but the court wanted to
know, I've got somebody looking
out just for this kid alone,
cause mom would have liked to
have had that money to buy a
house, you own a house. Um, and
we had to come up with a very
complicated structure where the
court allowed again with
That are worth acting as that
guardian, a limited amount of
money, so that they could rent a
house, as opposed to a small
apartment and a stream of income
monthly so they could get into a
house and then, so that when he
was 18, he would have certain
resources to consider applying
to college and going to college
and certain resources to buy a
car at age 16 and so forth. And
again, very complicated
structure, but again, good to
have a guardian like centerator
Wirth, looking out for just
purely the interests of the
child in devising the judge.
Judge, I think this is right or
the wrong thing to do.
do for this young man without
regard for the mother's
interests or the lawyer's my
interests, financial and
otherwise. And so this is all a
good thing and, and to your
question, I, I think this, this
is a common practice. I really
do. The these, any type of
settlement these days in
personal injury, medical
malpractice, wrongful death, or,
or more and more involving
structured settlements, and, and
we do it and we approve it as
plaintiffs lawyers. We like
them, because we're trying to
protect our our clients
ultimately, we really are. And,
and that's good for them. It's
also good.
for them. I'll be very frank.
It's good from, from a tax
perspective as well too. We do
it to to try and reduce their
tax obligations, every chance we
get. So, these, these, I would
say anytime there's a, a million
dollars plus settlement, it's
probably involving a structured
settlement. I think that's
almost fair to say, almost
every, every case involving a
million dollars or more is gonna
be a structured settlement case
and um and I've got to believe
everybody who receives those
structured so is probably
approached by somebody offering
to to buy it out from them. So,
this is probably a good thing
for us to.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Couple quick
questions, the um.
Procedurally uh
centers that run this on the
current statute.
You have procedures.
And then on the bottom of page
two, you have a.
You know, or the top of page 2
rather line 3, you know, at
least 2 days before the date of
the scheduled hearing.
And then paragraphs 5 and 6, you
know, notice, time and place.
And then on your bill on page 4,
you, you go with 33 procedural
paragraphs, F, G, and H.
They, uh, coincide.
Do or do they contradict each
other in any way.
Um, Miss Sherman, members, yeah,
yeah, they worked, they worked
well together, so you're right,
right now we got a 10 day
deadline, a 5-day deadline, a
2-day deadline, all to make sure
the judge gets the report with
least a couple of days before a
hearing, the hearing that's
required in this process. So,
uh, we also, we, you'll see one
of those deadlines allows for a
response, so the report is
prepared and somebody can oppose
and object to the report. um,
and, and we may see that.
Somebody may say they disagree
with the guardian ad items
assessment that the structured.
So it should not be approved or
the conditions on it, should we
approve them. Again, I, I've
seen that in my own practice
with, with the parents. The
parents would like to sometimes
have their, uh, children have
access to the funds earlier than
that a court might deem
appropriate.
Uh, so, yeah, those dates and
deadlines. OK, thank you, and
then.
I think it works the way it is,
but
You may want to ask yourself,
does, does FG and H?
Should it be 789 on the
procedural thing. I think it
works now cause it kind of lays
the groundwork for a garden let
him, but is it, is it fair to
say 99% of these settlements are
are minor children that
Folks that receive a settlement
prior to their 18th birthday.
Uh.
Mr. Chairman, uh, I would say
yes, most of them are generally,
uh, having to do with children
that have claims settled before
they're 18, um, also, uh, adults
with disabilities, um, as well,
I would say, um, in addition,
however, you know, it's.
For larger settlements now,
there's no bar in terms of you
have to be a child to to use
this type of financial vehicle
and so there are at times adults
that are receiving large
settlements that will, um, opt
to have, um, either a portion or
all of their settlement sort of
put through this annuity
process.
Thank you, and I think the the
guardian of light and when in
doubt use Latin, you know,
that's always a good rule of
thumb, but the guardian at Light
on my understanding is for uh
for minors or an incapacitated
adult.
This would be presumably for
someone in their twenties, so
we're kind of.
Adding a nuance to the to the
term, do we wanna?
Just say the, the court shall
appoint a financial advisor or
or do we want um.
You know, so anyway, just
something to think about is this
winds on, but anyway.
We have a motion to uh or do
pass.
Anyone
Anyone object to the DuP pass
motion, please show by raising
your hand.
All right, you have a, you have
a Du Passenator.
Thank you very much 282. Yeah,
and we're done with our work
today, just before you all go, a
couple of things. One is, uh, my
daughter's sitting back over
here behind me. She knows who
the who is, right?
Yeah, and, and, uh.
And, and she's here, uh, in
support of this bill as well
too, and I, I
Yeah, what do, what did she
liked the outcome of the score,
uh, did anybody dislike the
outcome of the score? Oh, we
will, we will probably have
hearings on a Wednesday and uh
Friday.
And I appreciate the ranking
member Senator Bradley's
suggestions for topics and
everyone anybody else who has a
particular topic, or one of the
topics that I think merits a
hearing is fentanyl, uh, some
discussion about the fentanyl
and the efforts to try and
combat that, that's concern the
governors expressed repeatedly,
I think so, and we see some, we
have some bills on fentanyl,
including Senator Brantley has a
bill on fentanyl as well too,
couple of them, right? Um, and
so it it seems like a topic
that's timely to spend a little
bit of time on and
else has other suggestions,
we're open to doing them, right?
And we'll be, uh, we'll be
finding a time to to to show the
movie Tommy for the sessions
over. Tommy, yeah, Pinball
Wizard. People think that's
Elton John. It's the Who, man, I
mean.
Oh
