When I talked about called
Deepfakes, Um, you know, because
of the mask, Senator, you're
gonna have to, really
You can leave the mask. You're
just You're just gonna have to
try.
Yes.
You just have to punch it up a
little bit short. So, Mr Chair,
uh, this bill seeks to deal with
a situation where someone uses
Artificial intelligence to
create an image and audio or a
video that depicts someone doing
something or saying something
that they haven't actually done
or said.
In a campaign, uh, campaign
advertisements.
And so it doesn't say that you
can't use deepfakes. You can't
use a I, but if you do you have
to include a disclaimer so that
voters aren't misled by those
materials.
Um, that's the
Basically the short version of
it. I have here with me. Lindsey
Bachmann from Secretary of
State's office, Um, leader Che
CI think is on her way. She was
the the, uh, Primary House
sponsor of this legislation.
But with that there's I believe
there's one person signed up and
support who is online.
And before we go to that, I will
ask, uh, leader Chasity to make
a comment or two.
Well without having heard what's
happened, Mr. Chair. I don't
know where to begin gave Just a
very brief overview. Okay? And
who do we have?
Melanie Moses is available on
June, Okay?
Um, Mr Chairman. Uh, we've been
working in the interim, the
science and Technology
Committee, courts, corrections
Injustice on, um
Issues regarding artificial
intelligence. This bill is
fairly narrow, actually, in
terms of trying to
Avoid any dis materially
deceptive use of AI without the
consent of the person who's
being depicted in her campaign
situation.
So, um, it's under the
jurisdiction of the Campaign
Reporting Act.
And the enforcing authorities
would be the
The secretary of state reports,
too.
Did.
Attorney general.
And that the State ethics
Commission
Okay, can initiate an action on
its own.
So, um, I had to tell him
anything about what's
That's good. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Complete it all. And I don't
believe that we have anybody
registered to support or oppose.
Do you know very
Just an expert witness on this
is Mr We have Melanie Moses,
right?
Anyone else?
No. All right. They're just
trying to judge time.
Um alright, Mr More. Don't you
come forward here and we will
recognize you for two minutes.
Mr Chair. Senators. Thank you
very much for considering this
bill. I stand in support. A lot
of state legislators around the
country or trying to get ahead
of this technology. There are
laws addressing different
aspects of deepfakes in Georgia,
Texas, Virginia, Hawaii,
California, Illinois, Minnesota
and New York.
Some of these focus on political
ads as this one does some of
them are also cover private
individuals and the creation of
deep four deepfake pornography.
Some of them even give
individuals the right to sue
someone who who creates images
or videos of someone doing or
saying something that they
didn't actually do or say.
So this bill is one of the
narrower ones, But I think it's
very good and we're certainly in
line with other state
legislatures around the country
If you pass it today. Thank you
very much.
It's okay.
Melanie Moses.
Terrible if she's an expert on
the bill. Hello? Yes, Miss
Moses, you're coming through.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Senators
and leader Che Si. I'm Melanie
Moses. I've been a professor of
computer science at U. N. M for
the last 16 years. And I think
that it's important at this
historic moment where a I has
advanced to the point that it
can generate deepfake images.
video audio that the voters will
not be able to distinguish from
reality.
Now is the time to put sensible
guardrails in so that in this
very focused and I think
sensibly defined and appropriate
way. Uh, we put in guardrails
that require disclaimers
notifying the public. If a I is
used to generate images or
videos, um, that indicate that
an individual said or did
something they did not say what
or do. Um, As I said, this is a
new moment in history. This has
not really been possible.
For the last two years.
Um, And so we're in a unique
moment where we can actually
take a step forward. I think
this is a very careful step
forward to regulate this
technology, um, to put in some
initial safeguards. This is
similar. I think to moments with
that we had opportunities that
we had to regulate computer
security, social media and put
in some sensible guardrails
because we did not do that We
now have pervasive problems and
spam and fraud and targeting of
Children.
Um, that could have been
anticipated.
This bill is an anticipation a
sensible way to anticipate some
harms that will come to the
voters and to the democratic
process if we don't require
these simple disclaimers on on
deep fake media in political
advertisements, so I encourage
the committee to vote for this
legislation. Thank you.
Thank you, Miss Moses. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you,
Representative. I guess you
know, there's
One struggling with US one
representative because I know
this has been a big issue in the
national press what artificial
intelligence means I don't think
that way you actually have been
defined what that really means.
Moving forward. Can you tell me?
Does your bill actually define
what artificial intelligence to
find it right now? Mm. Mr.
Chair, Senator. Yes, it's on
Page three.
Subsection C.
And then, and I guess that's
where my concerns was, Um
Just
I mean, that's artificial
intelligence really means to me
Just in the layman's terms is
that these computers are
actually starting to think for
themselves and produce things.
Um
You know, growing up, you think
sky net things like that. This
is just like a simple algorithm
or computer generated thing.
One of those halo video games
kind of things that isn't really
a turning artificial internal
intelligence as thinking its own
from its own. So I'm just this
is more just a computer
generated process that any kid
and teenager in the
In the basement of their parents
having out and including them
into this definition, when
they're just trying to be silly
and fun. You know, with all the
concerns that how we're
preventing those those kind of
folks are just expressing their
Their political free speech
versus what we're really talking
about. What you guys are assume
are targeting is like the road,
you know, videos of the
President, which really aren't
him. Um what we are, really, I
think works.
Mr Chairman and senator. What
we're trying to do is
Is, um, limit. Um
False depiction of an individual
without the individual's
consent.
And in the context of a campaign
reporting it
And the definition of artificial
intelligence came from our
experts.
But nothing keeps somebody from
doing it.
In any case, as long as they
just close it and offer a just,
um, just claimer with the ad if
they
If they have it. If it's a radio
ad, it's a voice disclaimer. If
it's a television ad, it can be
both boys and text and it has to
be readable.
And it has to be in the same
language as the
As the original ad.
So it's
Their free speech is protected,
but they must say that they used
it. And and Mr Chair, Senator,
This doesn't cover things like
memes on social media. There
there. Satire is specifically
excluded. Social media sites
aren't part of the platforms
that are covered by this. Um so
so
I don't think this is a
situation where someone's going
to do a meme insulting someone,
and then they're going to be by
have a violation under the
campaign Reporting act, Mr
Chair, Senator, Um Madam Chair,
Um
Madam Chair. Um
But isn't that really where the
target market is for these kind
of things is social media and
what's happening in Ukraine with
telegram and some of the that's
where the stuff is spreading on
social media. Does this just
limited to television and radio,
actually, old school stuff that
you and I grew up doing? Um, as
opposed to what? Really
And and because you buy the ads
on Facebook or whatever limits
of what is it 1000 $500?
Whatever it is that you have to
disclose it. Once you spend a
certain amount about there on
social media, you're saying it's
not covered under this and goes
viral and and Mr Chair, Senator,
I misspoke. Social media is
covered. So if you're buying an
ad on social media
Yes, you would have to have the
disclaimer on on that ad. I
think of a private citizen
shares a meme. I don't think
that's something that's going to
be covered under this act
because you see those like I
mean both sides do it. But
lately you have the president
Biden pointing to the gas
station, saying I did that. You
know, both sides do things like
that.
That theoretically could be
included in this. Um uh, Mr
Chair, Senator. I don't think
that would be included in this.
So it has to be for the purpose
of
There is a specific intent
requirement in this bill.
Uh oh. And it has to be an
advertisement unless it's an
advertisement. It's not gonna be
covered under that. That's I
guess where that's what's going
to be. My next line of question
is how do you distinguish
Because a lot of this a quote
unquote a I What we're calling a
I is
Really disguised as viral. But
the algorithms and not a ad, but
it's really designed to go viral
and be pushed out by bots The
Russians are doing, um, previous
elections here in the United
States and definitely do it in
Europe. Right now in Ukraine,
Um, that create these bots push
it out, and they're not buying
the ads, but they definitely
have cracked the code of how to
Get this disinformation out, and
I don't think this address is
what really is the big concern.
So, Mr Chair Senator. That
assessment would be the same
assessment that has done already
about app, so the definition of
advertisement is not changed in
this bill. So the same way the
secretary of state would assess
that situation with bots putting
stuff out even if there was no
deceptive, represent
misrepresentation.
It's the same analysis they're
already doing around political
advertising because they're
obviously spending millions, if
not tens of millions of dollars
or rubles or
Trillions of rubles to influence
elections, um, getting just
using them because it's in the
news lately, kids in their
basements, putting together
keeping Putin from metal doesn't
And Mr Chair, Senator, at least
now, if there are ads that have
would have, uh, misleading
images or infirm or audio at
least now, under this bill,
there would be a disclaimer
telling the voters this has been
manipulated this pain, so the
KGB and Vladimir people that
All right. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you. Majority Leader,
Madame. Sure. I'm just wondering
What are the consequences for
not
Being compliant with this. How
do you enforce this? So, Mr
Chair senator the same way that
the secretary of state enforces
violations of the campaign
reporting act now, But there are
specific penalties in here For
the first time you do it. It's a
misdemeanor, second and
subsequent. It would be 1/4
degree felony. Um, and so those
are those would be specific only
to this
Subsection in the election code,
otherwise violations of the
Campaign reporting act or a
misdemeanor.
Um
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. I just like to
clarify the secretary of State's
office is not an enforcement
agencies, so the way that the
campaign reporting act functions
is through a complaint
structure. So the secretary of
state if and when they received,
we receive our complaint about
an advertisement for existing
disclaimer laws, for example, we
make the referral to the State
Ethics Commission.
There's also a provision in the
Sierra that allows for criminal
referral to the attorney
general's office. But as leader
Chase indicated earlier, the
state ethics Commission also has
the authority to pursue things
on their own.
Okay. Well, thank you. And
thanks for bringing this
forward. Thank you.
Would you pass?
Hmm. Senator Sarah Morris
objecting all of those in
support Senator representative
chasing Nice to see you. Over
here. Welcome. You haven't seen
much of you these days. Hmm. 30
Day session, so you have to
pass one second beautiful.
Hmm. Oh,
Thank you.
Thank you for your patience,
everyone. I'm talking to
The floor majority leader. We
need to be back on the floor at
1215. I was asking to see
whether we'll have enough time
to take up some additional
business. It looks like we can
get started on House Bill eight.
I'm not confident that we'll get
to a place of a vote yet on it,
But I'd like to start the
process of hearing the bill
begin some of the debate
discussion and take any public
comments between now and that
time.
Oh,
Maybe here in the files. This is
okay. This This is what I need.
And so I appreciate everyone's
patience. We
We don't have Emily today and we
won't have you tomorrow. I'm
sorry to say so. I hope all of
you got a chance to say goodbye
and thank her before she left.
This committee's really
impossible to run without her
sort of, But we're really
fortunate today to have you'll
have to introduce yourself to us
also.
Everyone. I'm Elaine Medina,
Committee secretary from Senate
finance, So we poached her from
Senator Munoz and, uh, we thank
her for being here and stepping
in in a pinch for us so we can
get some additional work done.
So thank you very much for being
here today, and I appreciate
everyone's patience as we
Make the transition from Emily's
indispensable role. So House
Bill eight, will we have only
one registered proponent Rob
Baca. So sponsors you'll have we
have rules on this committee
that are somewhat unique, so I
usually allow a certain amount
of time for proponents and
opponents. There are no
opponents to register to the
bill. So will recognize you for
up to 10 minutes. How we want to
make the presentation. Alright.
And then and then we'll we'll
join.
The registered proponent Rob
Barker will recognize
So you have up to 10 minutes.
Thanks.
Thank you, chairman and and
members. Um, for those who don't
know, I'm representative
Kathleen Cates and, um I'll be
introducing my expert witness
moment before you is House Bill
eight. It's a critical piece of
Legislature amending the
Governmental Contact Act to
ensure that it is enforceable.
That it is sets rigorous ethical
standards and well
Help hold public officials
accountable for violating those
rules.
Recently, the New Mexico Supreme
Court issued an opinion that
bars criminal enforcement of
large sections of the act and
ruling that the provisions are
unconstitutionally vague.
The result is that most of the
government conduct act is
functionally non existent until
we can remedy the concerns of
the court.
Essentially, there are three
elements in the house. Bill 81
is it brings key principles into
the Federal Hatch Act into New
Mexico law by adding a new
definition of political activity
and providing explicit guidance
on that acts by public officials
are prohibited.
And two it clarifies prohibited
prohibited actions on abuse of
office. Quid pro quo corruption,
financial benefits derived from
official acts and misuse of
public property.
And last is subsequently
increases The civil penalties of
the violation from the act of a
flat $250 per violation up to
$5000 per violation. This
increase. There has not been an
increase in these penalties
since 1995 and as I pointed out
on the house side we have some
legislators have been born after
that.
Um, I would like to introduce to
my expert witness, Mark Baker,
and he'll make a statement.
Uh, Chairman Cervantes, members
of the committee
Um as representative Kate said,
there's three central parts to
this bill. Um, one that I would
like to like to elaborate on is
the bill adopts provisions
parallel to the Federal Hatch
Act.
Um, for New Mexico. Those have
been upheld as constitutional
for decades. Um, those are
restrictions on the manner in
which you can conduct political
activity as a public employee.
So, for example, um, when I
worked at the U. S attorney's
office had been politically
active before that, and when I
had been in private practice
before that, I could send a
donation.
Off to Senator Bingaman from my
office computer. Once I went
into government I had to really
monitor and make sure that there
was none of that going on when I
was conducting public business
on public property and my public
office that's not accessible as
a as an open forum and that's
been tested under First
Amendment principles for for
decades because it's been
federal law for so long, has
also been touched on by our
Supreme Court.
So those are tested rules for
good government. Um
That have been adopted
elsewhere. The other major thing
is, as representative case noted
the chairs decision from the New
Mexico Supreme Court pointed out
some vagueness issues that
affected the criminal
enforceability of the statutes
as the law is currently written,
and the new section 3.2 is
adopted to to do that, and then
finally
The increased penalty from 252
$5000. I don't I don't know that
there's magic to 5000. But I've
gotten speeding tickets worse
than 250. I don't think I should
brag about that. But recently in
Oregon there are there.
interstates have a 65 mile an
hour speed limit. So 250 isn't
much of a of a hit if somebody
has violated the law.
And so that's the framework that
we're operating in.
Is that correct?
Mr. Chair representative. You're
saying that this is going to
basically take these are mere
the Hatch Act, which I had some
familiarity with decades ago.
Um, but so far, remember
correctly, the legislative
branch of the federal government
was exempt is exempt from the
Hatch Act.
Is this going to bring us in our
staffs into this mirrored
hashtag Chairman and thank you,
Senator. Um, I'll defer to my
expert witness, but there are
sections within HB eight that is
only for state officials. But
But I would like my expert
witness to answer that you
Um, Chairman Cervantes, Senator
Moore's, um, if you look on page
Three lines 23 to 25. It's this
provision
Refers to a public employer,
public officer employee
elsewhere in the bill and other
sections that aren't related to
the political activity
provision. It specifically
refers to legislators. And so
the short answer to your
question is no. The Hatch Act
provision would not be
legislative
Moreover, legislative
enforcement of
Most of the provisions that do
apply to legislators would have
to be within this body. Um under
the speech and debate clause in
the parallel of the statement.
Where can you show me that
legislative our activities here
or inside this building or
outside this building.
Like in the feds, um, are not
covered under the hatch. Act
crime. I'm just gonna use the
representative McKenna is a
federal employee working for a
member of Congress, and she's
allowed to run in a
Partisan election and be
partisan up here. She's not
covered under the hatch Act. And
when I worked for Congressman
ship, I was not covered under
the hatch Act. So where can I
see this in here? That it would
not put us or our staffs.
Chair. Cervantes. Senator
Morris. If you look on, for
example, Page five, those
provisions specify.
Legislator or public officer or
employee.
And so legislators are not
covered.
By exclusion and the other
provisions they specify to whom
they apply.
And those are, um
So you've got some sections
where they only apply to the
Legislature where they say
legislator. It just says public
employee or officer. That is not
including
Under the overall structure of
the act. It's not including
legislators.
So is this thing equating us as
legislators as public employees?
Chairs around is Senator Morris.
No.
Okay. I'm looking forward to the
rest of the debate. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Thank you very much, Mr Chairman
And first of all, Mr Chairman,
Senator Morris.
I'll point out that on page
three lines 13 and 14.
If you look at the definition of
public officer or employee
Acosta employee excludes
legislators.
So if they so they used the term
public officer and employee by
itself that does not include
legislators. This chair Senator
the Federal Patent Act Act
specifically is only executive
branch. It's not for employees
of the legislative branch, so
this would bring in our
employees also, so this is much
more broad because they
specifically exempted act.
The legislative branch and all
their employees.
So this is more broad than the
chairman and Senator Morris.
Ah, when the government conduct
Act was written. It did not
consider the concept of
legislative employees. Um
Wow. They're here. Now. This
Senator, Mr Chair.
Sure, and so and so
consequently.
Ah!
Um
That is, that's actually
something
Mr Chairman, Senator Morris.
That's actually something that
If you look at
If you look at public officer
employees
The exclusion is to legislators
only it is not too
Uh, the legislative branch of
government.
Right, And that is that is
something that has as as we're
expanding.
Probably should be considered.
Was was not going to
The
Um
I will.
I will note with with with a
little bit of interest, Mr
Chairman.
Uh oh, that on at the bottom
pitch three.
When when you say a public
officer or employee of the state
agency?
You just specify within the
executive branch of state
government, which I did find a
little bit interesting.
Because a public officer or
employee
Is the defined term.
And then and then you go on to
specify within the executive
branch in at the on on lines, 24
and 25 of Page three, Mr
Chairman, Mr Baker? Yes. Thank
you, Chairman. And thank you,
Senator. Yes, And then it goes
on further as well with the
local government. Um, we are
referring to individuals who
require
Security.
In this section.
Mr Chairman, representatives.
I'm sorry. Say that again.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, Senator. Um, I'll
defer to my expert
Mr Chairman, Senator Ivey Soto,
You're correct, And I believe
the reason for that would be
that if you have a
Broader definition of public
officer and employee and the
definition section and then use
circumscribed, different lower
provisions. You can narrow those
but not have to change the
definition of public officer or
employee. Um
But the political restrictions
are specific as you've noted to
the executive branch of state
government or local government
agency, did you just show
conduct the rules of the
judicial conduct judicial
standards imposes even broader
restrictions on the judiciary,
and I think it would be up to
them to determine if it wanted
to establish the staff that
would be appropriate, but
Right now. It's drafted to cover
the executive now, Mr Martin and
Mr Baker. You just You just read
that in a different
You recited that in different
ways that I read it.
Which was Spanish because I read
it as
As a state agency within the
executive branch of state
government.
And separate from that I read or
a local government agency.
You read that together?
And and so, Mr Chairman, and Mr
Baker
Representative Mr Baker. I guess
I'm wondering
Whether it's clear from the
drafting of this
What the executive branch of
Modifies whether it modifies
exclusively.
State government or if it also
modifies local government
agency.
Cheers. Cervantes, Senator Ivey
Soto. I believed I meant it to
read that it modified executive
branch of state government
because I think in local
government, it's mushy is to
roll their some roles or
sometimes a mayor can be
considered acting in a
legislative capacity as well.
And so I That's been my
assumption and reading that
language, and that's how I
understood it.
So I believe it's clear but with
local government there's the
separation of powers issues or
get different in mushier.
Mr Chairman and Mr Speaker. I
understand, but But if you
Like I said, when you just now
Reddit.
When you recited it altogether.
It did sound like it modified
both as opposed to having
Employee of a local government
agency.
Or
Of a state agency within the
executive branch of state
government.
In which case it would be very
clear.
That the that the modification
is only within the state
government.
And not, and not a modification
that would apply both to state
and local
Um, because I think it could be
read both ways and and within
local government, arguably,
certainly, for example, within a
kind of commission, uh, the
board of County commissioners
would be the legislative branch
of the
Of the
Of the county.
Government.
And so then the question will be
whether or not this would apply
to them or not. And I think the
intent is that it would Mr
Chairman, Senator Ivey Soto. I
read it. I just read it as
state.
Um
The executive branch of state
government, one local government
agency to And then the question
would be if you try to define
the county commission to be a
local government. That's the two
pieces of it, and that's how I
read it.
Certainly I understand.
And I do understand how you read
it.
The positive questions how
courts going to read it later.
So, uh, I think that's the whole
reason why we got into the whole
terrorist situation in the first
place is because different
people read things in different
ways.
And at the end of the day, it's
a question of how
The Supreme Court. Read
something.
Regardless of what was intended.
And and I get to that in a
second.
Mr Chairman, If I may for just a
moment to I do have a question
on Page five with regard to the
news section 3.2 abuse of office
prohibiting quid pro quo
corruption penalty.
Uh, on Page five, Section three
of the bill, which is the new
section 3.2.
Which, as I understand is the
response that you have to go
terrorists.
In the bill. Is that Mr Chairman
and representative Mr Baker, is
that correct?
Yes, Mr Chairman. Yes, Senator.
And and so the first question I
have about that is is that
You indicate there that the
person shall not
Um
And I on the face of it. I
understand that the person shall
not use the power of
Online 15 through 19.
So I'm not used to power
resources of the legislators or
public officers or employees
office there clearly applies to
a legislator or
Perform a duty imposed by virtue
of the public office.
And and I guess my question,
though, on number two
Is whether a person has a
conflict of interest.
Uh and a person chooses to
recuse
Because the person recognizes
that the person has a financial
conflict of interest.
And that person, therefore
recuses, that person that is
omitting.
Their their duty to vote.
Because they are recusing.
As a result of that conflict of
interest.
The act of recusing may cause
the boat to go a certain way.
Uh, not withstanding the fact
that the person is removing
themselves.
From the equation because they
are acknowledging and being
transparent.
About the financial interest
that they have.
And I guess my question is have
they just committed a felony?
Mr Chairman.
Representative minister,
chairman Senator It's my
understanding that this piece
this bill before you is not ask
for a Legislature to refuse
themselves. Um, uh, that that
you did as an elected official,
That is not, um
That is not part of this
legislature. But I will defer to
my expert witness.
Chair Cervantes Senator Ivey
Soto. Ah!
The short answer to your
question is, I can't imagine
this would be refereed within
the Legislature itself, and I
can't imagine that you all would
find that someone omitted to
perform a duty if they did so to
comply with the conflict of
interest rules.
And so the idea that that that
would be
Something that you could be.
Punished for
Seems to me difficult to imagine
because you're complying with
your duty to not engage in a
conflict of interest. Therefore,
you're not voting.
Mr Chairman, and, uh, Mr Baker,
Representative Mr Baker.
Oh, we have a colleague.
Who was sent to prison.
Ah, over
Ah, some legislation where that
colleague stepped off the floor
did not formally re cute.
We're talking about,
Unfortunately, felony. We're not
talking about internal disk.
We're talking about prison time.
We're talking about a prosecutor
bringing a case.
So in that context, my question
again.
Is if we have a duty to vote.
And a person recuses.
Because they are transparent.
About their conflict of
interest.
Being transparent about that
conflict of interest.
Does that then mean that they
have omitted to do something?
That is part of their duty of
their office.
And being being that they have
omitted to do something that is
part of the duty of the office
as a result of the fact that
they are transparent of their
conflict of interest because
they have a financial conflict.
Have they committed a felony
under this?
And I don't see where you
Write this in a way.
That it says that a person who
is transparent about their
conflict of interest and recuses
Has cured the question of
whether or not they will be
found to have committed a
felony.
That is very problematic to me.
And you have yet to convince we
have this otherwise.
All you've said is you don't see
where we would internally
disciplined somebody, but this
is a felony where would be
prosecuted externally?
Cheers. Cervantes. Senator Sotto
if I might respond, please the
circumstances of that case, I
think are very different than
the straightforward Um,
hypothetically, you've given a
jury found beyond a reasonable
doubt that that was corrupt and
what you've just described would
not involve corruption. So the
short answer to your question is
no, I do not believe a
legislator who has a conflict of
interest.
And recuses on that basis could
be charged with a felony. Mr
Chairman, representative, Mr
Baker, would you please point me
to where it says
That someone would not be
charged with a felony for that.
Because what I'm reading here?
Is that it's as a legislator or
public officer employee.
With the purpose of benefiting
the person's own monetary
interest, or the financial
interest or benefit in the
monetary interest or other
financial interests of another
person within the Legislature of
public officer employee has
personal or business
relationship shall not omit to
perform a duty imposed by virtue
of the public office if I if my
duty is to vote, and I and I
recused myself
And the vote goes down by one
vote.
So that arguably my vote would
have made the difference.
On an issue.
How do I know that I'm not going
to be prosecuted?
On the theory that my vote made
the difference. My recusal.
Made the difference on the
outcome, Contests and review
Soto.
You don't have a duty to vote.
If you have a conflict of
interest, you have a duty not to
vote If you have a conflict of
interest, and so I don't I We
may have a disagreement about
this. I apologize, but I don't
see that as the omission of a
duty you would have under the
law. How could there be a duty
for legislators to vote when
they do have a conflict of
interest? That would be
paradoxical in my mind?
Mr Chairman, and and? And and Mr
Baker. Uh,
Uh, those are those are those
are matters of conscience that
that you and I may agree on.
But that a grand jury, maybe
maybe you in a different way.
Based upon the way that this is
written
And these are things that we
need to be very careful about in
terms of the way that they're
written.
I'm not saying that I disagree
with the direction you're going.
I'm just very concerned about
the way that it's written and
the implications that it has
behind it.
So, Mr Chairman, I know that we
need to go to the floor and I
see that people are getting up
and leaving.
Uh, I don't. But you know, these
are this is this is this is some
of the issues that I think we
need to take a look at it. I
will just simply say while we're
still in subcommittee before we
recess
That state versus Guterres
specifically had to do with the
language and 10 deaths. 16
deaths three
The one section of law I don't
see in this bill.
It's $10 16-3.
And and so when we come back,
I'm gonna be asking Why? I don't
see $10 16-3.
If one of the three purposes of
this bill is to resolve the
ambiguity that the Supreme Court
says exists in 10-16, that's
three
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Mr.
Sure sure. Chairman Cervantes
Senator Ivey Soto, the new
section 3.2 replaces Section
three by providing more specific
language that lays out in more
clearer terms rather than the
aspirational language that
plagued old Section three that
the court found unenforceable
because red like a preamble or
preparatory language, rather
than a clear duty.
The new 3.2 is intended to
provide clarity regarding the
things that would be or would
not be, um, unlawful so that
there is a clear actus races.
The courts caller.
Then the new Section three of
this bill, which would become
3.2 would be the rewrite to
address Gutierrez.
Um
In substantial part by adding
specificity where the PRI prior
Section three was vague.
Interrupt your center episode do
I think we're in a good spot
right now to take a recess?
We're gonna We're called down to
the Senate floor. We'll be back
here with this Wednesday. So
this is our regular meeting.
Time will look for a chance to
get back in here tonight. We'll
start back right where we're at.
We'll call for both of you Find
