Well, the first, uh, just so
everyone knows who's here, you
have an agenda, but the numbers
are in sequential numerical
order, not in the order with
which we'll call the bills,
that's determined by where
sponsors are at and any number
of other factors, so we're gonna
hear first of all Senate 78
Senator Padilla actually, I'm
sorry, sir Pope, I'm sorry, I,
uh, have not been clear on that
last one, but I know you're
first on the agenda, but we'll,
we're gonna hear some of these
other bills first, you'll
understand why I think, pretty
quickly, said P 7.
Senate Bill 78. My understanding
is a bill that has already been
through this committee once
before.
I.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, um
here on Senate Bill 78. I'm
Senator Michael Padilla. I do
have a Doctor Shannon Allen who
is president of the association
here in New Mexico.
And essentially what we're
seeking to do is grant certified
registered nurse and assists,
uh, the ability to practice
independently without the
requirement for supervision by
physicians, osteopathic
physicians, dentists, or
podiatrists, the bill does
define what an independent role
is, which is uh performing any
action related to anesthesia
care without supervision. The
key provisions are the licensure
requirements, the scope of
practice, independent practice,
prescriptive authority, and
expedited licensure. Uh, as you
mentioned, Mr. Mr. Chair, um, we
did.
Pass through this committee in
the 23, 60 day session. Uh, we
did uh form an alliance with the
AAs that year, helped them get
their bill through. We got all
the way out of the Senate, all
the way almost through the
house, and we did stall in the
uh the House Judiciary
Committee, not, not, not for
lack of support, we just ran out
of time there. Um, and I will
say that we did have 93 CRNAs
here today. I know that you want
to move quickly. So I think if
there is public comment, we'll
just ask 3 of them to stand up
if that's all right with you.
But we had 93 of them here
today.
And I did recognize them on the
Senate floor today, you might
have heard that part. Um, so I'm
gonna ask Doctor Allen to say
just a couple of words and then
we'll move in the direction
you'd like, Mr. Chair.
OK. Mr. Chairman and committee
members, my name is Chanel.
I'm the president of the New
Mexico Association of Nurse
Anesthetists. Uh, we're coming
to you today with a very
important bill and I just want
to thank you. I tried to meet
with many of you as I could
before to see if you have any
questions or anything, so I'll
stay very brief. Uh, Senate Bill
78 gives us clear, concise
language. I codifies our nurse
practice that to our current
practice. Uh, it makes sure that
we're able to continue providing
care for our vulnerable
underserved populations,
according to billing trends
right now, CRNAs do about 79%.
of all the anesthetics in the
state, in the rural area we do
almost 100% of them. Um, so I
just wanted to say thank you so
much and um
I really, really appreciative
that you have me here. Uh, thank
you, chair, and the last thing
I'll mention is I do have about
74 letters from various
entities including hospital
CEOs, eye surgeons, general
surgeons. I could go on and on
dentists, podiatrist, you name
it, uh, fully in support of what
we're attempting to accomplish
here. Thank you, Chair.
Unregistered in opposition and
support I just recognize those
signed in. We're not gonna go to
everyone tonight just because of
our agenda, but, uh, Lauren Del
Negro, Christa Brooks, Andrew
Costin, Kim Brandt.
Peter holds Tim Craven's William
Morton, Kyle Rogers, Jessica
Womack, Chris Bolzano, Zach
Davies, and Myra Riel. Thank you
all of you're here and you all
are here, you all here to wave a
hand at me any of you that I've
named. All right, thank you for
being here. I appreciate you
coming out. A lot of times we
would go up to you and hear from
all of you, but to that agenda
just doesn't permit the time and
there being no registered
opposition, may not be
necessary, so we'll see how it
goes. We'll go first to members
of the committee and see where
that takes it do it.
So, Mr. Chair and Senator, um,
So I have the same concerns as I
did when we had this bill in
front of us before and CRNAs
are, are an essential part of
our medical system.
Um
I'm looking, if you look on page
2, subsection B, that is their
scope of practice.
Their scope of practice is to
provide preoperative,
intraoperative, and
postoperative anesthesia care
related services.
That is an inherently
interdependent.
scope of practice.
They would, I don't know why, so
and so, which is why it made a
lot of sense that you'll see the
existing language is being
struck on page 2 is that they
were there as an interdependent,
uh, role as a, a member of the
healthcare team that is doing
the operations.
It does not make any sense to me
that CRNA like what, I don't
understand what independent
practice would be, because their
scope of practice is inherently
interdependent.
And so,
I, and so the reason and so they
have been doing this for many
years. They've been essentially
practicing independently because
back in the Johnson
administration, I think it was,
it was Medicare said, hey, if he
states, if your statutes already
allow for independent practice,
let us know, send us a letter
saying that, and we will start
reimbursing you, uh, to reflect
that.
And the Johnson administration
sent the letter saying,
They do, but that wasn't true.
The statute was the original
statue that you see in front of
you. Does that you don't provide
and, and this, um,
The thing that the, the Johnson
administration was was
responding to actually had this
funny line in it where it was
like, we're not gonna check you.
You guys tell, send us a letter
saying it's cool and we'll take
your word for it. And so our
state did that and sent a letter
that was not true and said, we
already provide in our statute
for independent practice, for,
for these folks. And so, that's
why they have been.
been operating as though they
were independent since then,
but, but they are not. It wasn't
true when it was sent back then.
Uh, it's not true now, um, and,
and the scope of what CRNAs do.
is inherently interdependent.
They are there when you are
doing operations.
I don't understand why there
would be a need like what they
would be doing.
Outside of that content.
Um, so I'll, I'll
As Mr. Chair Senator, thank you,
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Again, just to repeat what the
senator said, Mr. Chairman. Yes,
this group has been practicing
this way since 2001 time frame.
Uh, they are looking for
certainty in their field. A lot
of folks, because of the way we
practice here in New Mexico want
to come to New Mexico and do
this work, but they we're gonna
have a hard time getting them to
come here, um, unless we can
provide this certainty, um, most
of these services are provided
in rural parts of New Mexico,
and I think that's you can never
be any more important because we
need some help.
Uh, communities have never had a
healthcare professional. This
might be the only one that ever
decided to work there. I think
that's, you know, one very great
thing. When you talk about
what's happening in the
hospitals, they do have to
practice uh their work there in
a care team with the
requirements of that, that
facility, that hospital, and so
they're they're not getting
around that. And then the last
thing I'd say and I'm going to
ask Doctor Allen to say a couple
of things also and and probably
make it much better than say
much better than I did, is now
when they're, they are required
when they graduate by their
national board of certification
to have a doctorate degree.
So they're not just walking out
of uh uh their of school and and
becoming CRNAs as as a
bachelor's degree or whatever,
they have all of this taken care
of in a more professional manner
than they ever have, Doctor
Allen.
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much. Uh, so, if
you will look here at um page 2
line 10 and it says that we give
pre-op intra-op, post-op, and
then we give our anesthesia and
related services in accordance
to the guidelines of the ANA. I
do have those guidelines here
for you.
And I also have a letter from
our president Jan Stettner of
the AANA stating exactly what
the interpretation of that would
be, uh,
confining us to pre-op intra-op
post-op, that has not happened
since like the 1960s, because
that's what we did back then. We
worked in an operating room and
we worked with the surgeon. I
know by the 1980s we were doing
emergency airways in the
emergency room, putting in uh
lines because that's how I fell
in love with the profession and
I was a critical care nurse at
the time and one of the patients
would become critical and need
intubating, they would come in
and they would do that outside
of the operating room.
We continue to do that. If
you'll look at those guidelines,
you'll see that
Pre-op intraop post op is only
about 60% of what we do, and
that other 40% that is there
according to the ANA guidelines.
Most of that is done outside of
the operating room. We loved
working in collaboration, and we
love to work with other team
members, but sometimes like me
and Lee County, we don't have a
team.
An example might be I go out in
the middle of the night, I get
called to come do a labor
epidural. It's me, it's the
patient and her spouse doing
this labor epidural. I don't
even have a nurse most nights
cause they're in the next room
delivering a baby.
That would be an example of why
we need your protection.
So, Mr. Chair.
I gotta say I find that
disturbing because that means
that that you are already not
practicing within your scope of
practice. And the scope of
practice is what it says in law.
The scope of practices and, and
it, but that's how is that folks
are
are not
Functioning within their scope
of practice now and even with
this bill passed, still wouldn't
be, because we are not changing
that scope of practice here.
So I, I think it's problematic,
Mr. Chair. Um,
If I, so I was talking, I had
talked about this last time, uh,
ketamine clinics.
are, uh, increasingly um popular
and, and while ketamine can be a
a real valuable, uh, treatment.
I think for some folks, uh, and
also, I think can be
I think some of these clinics
are essentially offering
recreationally.
Um, and so CRNAs would have, if
they are independent, would have
the authority to do that. Um, I
think
I think that the scope of
practice in this is clear. If we
are not changing the scope of
practice, it makes no sense to
me.
To change, uh, change the
independence.
That's our we respond to the,
especially the ketamine comment
because that did come up two
years ago and I'm like Doctor
Allen to respond.
I heard your voice, Senator.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman,
Senators, and so I did look into
the ketamine clinics and I did
get with the executive director
of the board of nursing so I
could bring you some answers.
Uh, first of all, it's not for
recreational use. It's primarily
used for behavioral health
things such as depression or
maybe pain that is unrelieved by
other methods.
Uh, so I did have a conversation
with them, the New Mexico Board
of Nursing, since we've last
been here before you guys 2
years ago worked with the
medical board and the board of
pharmacy and the trimittee. They
wrote rules and regulations for
ketamine clinics. There's a link
to this found on the uh New
Mexico Board of Nursing, the New
Mexico State requires a
behavioral health specialist,
uh, to be involved in this with
him.
mean these clinics have given in
very small doses, uh, they run
it over about an hour. The
patient is awake, the patient's
talking to him the whole time.
You have anesthesia providers
like physician
anesthesiologists, and CRNAs, we
use ketamine daily in induction
doses, so, um, OK.
OK.
Any other questions?
There was
There were
no changes from two years ago.
No, no changes, we did do some
work on it, thanks thanks to
this committee and what left
this committee is what you're
seeing now. Yeah, I know it was
a Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute two years ago, so
it's identical to that. Yes,
sir. Thank you.
Um, I was alone vote against it
last uh time in the last
session, uh, Senator Duke, you
were excused. Uh, we're not
present. Senator Morris was
excused, but I was the only vote
against it, so I'll stay
consistent senator I'll still be
a no vote for a lot of the
reasons that have already been
expressed. Um, other questions?
Anyone else?
There's
and to pass.
for DuPass. We'll do a roll call
vote, please.
Yes.
And I do have.
Senator O'Malley.
Yes.
Be oot.
Senator Tor.
Yes. So work? Yes.
Yes,
No, you do pass.
Houston. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you. We'll hear next
Senate Bill 303. Senator Paul.
Has anyone heard from uh Senator
Pinto?
She is here, OK.
I'm gonna do 303.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
members, uh, before you guys
have SB 303 for consideration,
um, just a high level overview
of this bill updates our state's
gaming machine standards
currently in New Mexico law
requires the gaming machines
meet the regulatory standards by
Nevada and New Jersey, this bill
removes outdated requirements
and ensures gaming machines
comply with New Mexico law and
rules, uh, with me, I have, uh,
Pat Garrett, who
was the chairman of the Gam
control board as well as uh
Terry McGaha, who was the
executive director, and then I'm
sorry.
I'm gonna yield to Terry to just
give a couple more details on
the bill for you.
Good evening, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
I'm telling me, yeah, the acting
executive director of the New
Mexico Gaming Control Board.
Senate Bill 303 proposes that
New Mexico no longer default to
the gaming standards established
by Nevada and New Jersey.
Recognizing that our state's
gaming industry has matured over
the past 25 years and now
operates under well-developed
independent regulatory
framework.
When gaming was first
established in New Mexico, it
was logical to look to Nevada
and New Jersey, which were two
of the longest standing ga
jurisdictions for gas at the
time.
However, New Mexico's industry
has involved significantly since
then, with regulations and
operational structures uniquely
tailored to the state's needs.
New Mexico's gaming environment
differs in critical ways from
these other states, making it
essential that we adhere to our
own regulatory framework rather
than continue to follow
standards developed for
fundamentally different markets.
By moving away from Nevada and
New Jerseyans, New Mexico
affirms its ability to regulate
gaming based on well-established
principles and priorities.
This legislation reflects the
state's independence and
overseeing its gaming industry.
While ensuring
That regulations align with the
realities of our market.
Send the bill 303 strengthens
New Mexico's ability to govern
in the gaming industry and the
manner the best serves its
business regulatory agencies and
the public.
And with that I'd open up for
any questions you may have.
Thank you very much. Well done.
Uh, we are, we don't have anyone
signed up in support or
opposition, so we'll write to
members of the committee with
questions.
Anyone?
Themes. Thank you Mr. Chairman,
Senator Paul, gentlemen, gentle
lady, no, this is great, it's a
great statutory fix.
Uh, I noticed that this, this
law was written in 1997, soon
after the contacts were
ratified.
In Nevada and New Jersey were
the.
states that, that gamble, you
know, up until the mid-nineties,
so.
So uh
I stand in support appreciate
the leadership from the, from
the gaming motions, anyone?
Brantly with a motion for a due
pass, is there further
discussion, seeing none. Is
there any objection?
The Du passing it to pass on 30.
Don't get too comfortable,
Senator. I'm gonna bring up
Senator Pinto, you're still
here? 457.
Seel 457, Senatorinto.
Thank you Mr. Chairman Senator,
I don't have anyone signed up in
support or opposition because we
didn't have that. All right,
very good. Go ahead, sir.
Uh, Bill 457 outlines a total of
20 million to transfer from the
general fund services
expenditure for 2026 to provide
civil legal services to
low-income persons.
That's all we have to stand for
questions.
questions.
So dude
to pass.
motion for due passes are
further discussion.
We're all long time supporters
of legal services on this
committee. I think we're all
familiar with the good work and
I think given the
Context of our country right
now, they're gonna be called
upon more and more all the time,
so I support this. Anyone else,
is there any objection to do
pass motion.
this on all other sport you
have. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you. Back to you now. um, I'm
sorry, Senator Paul, give me a
second. You're gonna be with us
for a little bit, um, let's do,
uh, Senator Duke Senate 14.
Yeah
Yeah,
good, sir.
We've got, first of all, just so
I understand where we're gonna
go. I've got uh 5 individuals
who signed up.
As proponents, are they part of
your presentation?
Richard Mason, Erica Sanchez,
Jasmine Tain Fong, Tat Sanchez
of Evelina Barwell.
That part of your presentation.
OK, so I'm gonna keep all of
them within your time, OK? All
right, and then we've got a
number of other people in
opposition and who recognize
them when we come to that. So,
all right, so, go ahead.
I left my phone up there, so if
I'm doing badly on time, let me
know.
So, Mr. Chair, as you might
remember, last year, we brought
Senate Bill 15, which sought to
address the increasing trend of
private equity and and other
companies, um.
Uh
Doing mergers and acquisitions
and, and getting healthcare in
New Mexico and their ownership.
And control. And so, when we
brought that bill, we did it at
the last minute. We did not do
the kind of stakeholder
engagement that we needed to do,
so we ended up stripping it
down. It's a very bare bones and
putting, uh, a one year sunset
on it to give us this year to do
stakeholder engagement and make
sure that we were talking to
everyone who would be impacted
by this bill. So over the last
year, myself, representative
Sapanski and our our uh
superintendent of insurance, uh,
have
Had over 20 meetings, um, with
folks. We did a essentially a
statewide tour going to impact
the communities. Uh, we did
meetings in Albuquerque, Gallup,
Santa Fe, Almo Gordo, Las
Cruces, Las Vegas, and Taos. We
had meetings with um
With tons of meetings with the
hospitals and hospital
associations, meetings with
providers, insurers, patient
advocates. Uh, we did incredibly
extensive, uh, stakeholder
outreach, and it was really
valuable. We learned a lot, um,
especially going into those
communities that have been
impacted by these transactions.
Communities just like yours, Mr.
Chair. Um, in Las Cruces.
And uh and what we, what we
found is that what we're seeing
around the nation is true here
as well, that when these
companies, uh, acquire
healthcare here in New Mexico.
I, what tends to happen is that
prices go up.
Quality goes down, uh,
interference with providers, how
providers interact with their
patients increases, um,
providers, uh,
are, are often the expensive
ones get fired, uh, and cheap
ones get brought in to replace
them, um.
And it is, and it has a, a
negative impact on the
healthcare in that community.
And so we are now back with uh
Bill that after working on it
with all of these groups for the
last year, that would provide
appropriate oversight for
transactions where someone is
trying to acquire a hospital in
New Mexico.
Or a non-hospital entity only to
the extent that they are being
acquired by a hospital or an
insurance company.
So
providers, apart from that,
providers are not included in
this bill.
And sure, I will, I will quickly
walk through.
The, the bill if you would like,
um, or I might just save that
for, for when we're doing
questions and answers. I'll
note, Mr. Chair, I, I know that
there is a, a concern.
About the propriety of of having
the government be involved and,
and essentially private
transactions. Um, I'll also note
that that is something that we
do all the time. Uh, the reason
that this is with the
superintendent of insurance is
because she already does this in
the insurance context under the
Insurance Holding Act. Uh, if
you think about what happened
with US steel. Uh, they wanted
to sell to Japan and our
government said no, that is
going, there is
there's a compelling public
interest.
And making sure that that
doesn't happen. So we're gonna
stop it or step in and address
that. And so, there is a
compelling state interest in
making sure that New Mexicans
have have access to affordable,
high quality healthcare.
And so if someone wants to come
in and acquires one of these,
uh, acquire one of our
hospitals.
The review that would happen is
that first there would be,
usually the first there's gonna
be an informal meeting with the
superb intendent of insurance
where they find out, do we even
need to do anything with it.
Uh, if the answer is no, go
ahead, go on your way.
Uh, the answer is yes, then
there will be a preliminary
review.
Um, if after that preliminary
review, if and it is a
relatively simple transaction,
uh, then the, and, and there
doesn't appear to be any
indication that this transaction
would harm healthcare in New
Mexico, then go ahead, go on
your way.
If it's a really complicated
transaction or there's some,
some red flags potentially
there, then it would go to
comprehensive review.
And that, and
The approach on comprehensive
review would be the exact same
thing that happens now under the
insurance Holding Act, where the
superintendent of insurance
would engage experts to look at
the transaction.
Uh, and, and the parties pay for
those experts, just like they do
now under the Insurance Holding
Act, uh, and then based on that
review, if there are conditions
that can be placed to make
saying maybe things like you
can't cut all your essential
services. You can't fire all
your docs and bring in advanced
practice of folks. You can't,
um, ratchet up prices on
patients in New Mexico.
If there are reasonable
conditions that can be placed on
the transaction, and they agree
to that, then great, go ahead.
And there's continuing oversight
to make sure those conditions
are held to.
If they say no, we're not, we
don't want to do this unless we
can get rid of all the labor and
delivery services, unless we can
ratchet up prices on New
Mexicans 300%.
Then, in that very rare
instance, the superintendent
would have the authority to
block that transaction. In
states where this is done, we
see that that is rarely happens.
What happens most often is that
either it doesn't even go to
comprehensive review because
there's no need to, or if it
does, that there are reasonable
conditions put on them and then
they go ahead. Well, at least
one of these reviews has already
happened, uh, under the, the
bill currently in place, um, and
it went great and
The parties to it had been made
public statements, uh, about how
happy they were with the process
and, and the transaction has
proceeded.
Uh, but Mr. Chair, I have no
idea how much time I have left,
cause I forgot my phone up
there, um, but
All right, then let's go to our,
our public comments.
And
If you don't mind, Mr. Chair.
And I ask all of our speakers to
limit their comments to about 1
minute and a half.
You're recognized for a minute
and a half for the sponsor.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member and a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters in New
Mexico. The league has
prioritized support for SB 14,
and thanksen Dohe for bringing
it forward.
The League of Women Voters of
New Mexico supports the
healthcare system that provides
a comprehensive level of health
care for all New Mexican
residents in order to provide
that comprehensive level of
health care, we need to assure
that we have adequate providers
and facilities. They've been
examples in other states of
entities absorbing healthcare
provider networks and
facilities, milking them for
profits and then closing them
down.
In my native state of
Massachusetts, Stewart
Healthcare firm purchase
purchased 6 hospitals, milked
them for profits, and then
declared bankruptcy, leaving the
viabilities of those hospitals
in question to those hospitals
were forced to close. One was in
my community. I lived in, which
was a predominantly black and
Hispanic community. So SB 14
provides oversight for the
consolidation of healthcare
facilities to minimize that
threat to.
the health of New Mexico. So
please give SB 14 a due pass.
Thank you.
It's not so. Are any of the
people whose names I read in the
audience here, Jasmine
Taingon
at Sanchez, Evelina Barwell.
No, I
had to leave. OK.
All right.
Uh,
Mr. Chair, members.
Uh, my name is Erica Sanchez.
I'm a healthcare attorney with
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty, we stand in support of
Senate Bill 14, the research
tells us that consolidation of
hospitals and other healthcare
entities, increase healthcare
costs, decrease access to
healthcare by eliminating
services not considered
profitable, such as labor and
delivery and emergency rooms.
They especially have severe
impacts on rural communities
where patients.
are forced to travel long
distances for care.
And they undermine local
priorities and decision making
when out of state corporations
move management outside of New
Mexico. Since consolidation
happens through confidential
business deals. Our state
agencies and communities have
little knowledge of major
changes to the health care
system before they happen.
We appreciate the work of the
sponsors and the superintendent
and taking the time during the
interim to listen to a broad
range of stakeholders to develop
this well vetted bill that
really balances confidentiality
and transparency in healthcare
transactions. And it will
protect the availability,
accessibility, affordability and
quality of health care for New
Mexicans. We ask this committee
to vote in favor of Senate Bill
14. Thank you. Thank you.
Jasmine Taton from.
Mm
No Cat sciences.
Oh, all right. Uh, so, that's
all we have in support and
opposition.
Is there a, is there a
coordinated spokesperson in
opposition?
Is there?
Are you, are you the
coordinating spokesperson?
I understand, but you're, you're
the one coordinating the group,
is that right? OK, this is who I
have uh signed up. I'm gonna
rely on you to
Tell me which of these people
are part of your group or not.
So Julia Ruttenson, is that
right? Yes, Dean.
again
Miller
That scan was on but scratched
Alice and Riley.
Carry Robin Ruer, Linda Siegel,
Jason Espinoza, and Terry Cole
by Zoom. Are all of those part
of your group? OK, I'm gonna
leave it entirely to you. You
have 15 minutes, you'll
coordinate the speakers, all
right, so you're, you're ready
to go.
Right.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, I'm Julia Ritten,
senior director of government
affairs with the New Mexico
Hospital Association, uh, and
thanks for allowing us to speak
today. On behalf of our 47
community hospital members, I
stand in opposition to Senate
Bill 14. We and our members are
not opposed to reasonable and
meaningful oversight, and we
shared this with uh the
superintendent and the sponsor
during the summer meetings as
well as our meetings this
session. Um, and where we are in
agreement with the uh items in
the
is about 80%, um, and where we
are in disagreement,
unfortunately we're far apart.
Specifically, we have concerns
about insufficient
confidentiality protections on
pages 1114, 17, and 22.
Excessively long
post-transaction oversight in
section 9, subsection B.
The annual ownership reporting
requirement in section 12 that
includes all healthcare
providers and a broad scope that
will require some smaller
hospitals as community board
member changes to go through the
approval process because control
in the definition is set at 15%.
We haven't access to care crisis
in our state and anything that
could deter or delay investment
in sustaining and growing
healthcare services, we must
oppose, and we believe this bill
will do just that. Thank you.
I'll now pass this on to our
hospital members and healthcare
representatives, and 3 of those
individuals are on Zoom, and I
think they're noted on the list.
Uh, Linda Siegel.
Right, OK, thank you very much,
Mr. Ray.
Uh, Mr. Chairman of the
committee Larry Horan,
registered lobbyist for
Presbyterian Healthcare
services, I guess I better start
with the question because it'll
change my testimony. Cin Bill 14
came out as a committee
substitute out of Senate Health.
We are understanding there was
also a Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute. I don't
think we've heard anything on a
committee substitute for Senate
Judiciary, so I don't think it's
been moved and adopted, so that
may change my comments a little
bit, but generally, um, the
comments would be the same.
Uh, first of all, I would agree
there's been lots of discussion
on this piece of legislation,
but that that a lot of
discussion does not mean a lot
of agreement. There's still
significant issues for hospitals
and for Presbyterian in
particular, and I'll point to a
few things, um, just from a high
level, and then I'll leave it to
my other colleagues. First of
all,
It's vague. So what we're
supposed to provide when we're
entering into a transaction,
there's a list of 10 things in
the initial notice. But once you
submit the 10 things, that's a
laundry list. That's pretty
clear, but then, um, the
superintendent has the
authority, if you look at page
and I'm on the committee
substitute on page 14, um,
subsection C starting on line 4.
The office may request
additional relevant information
or documents at any time after
the notice is complete. That
leaves the door wide open for
them to ask anything. Why is
that?
Significant because there's
timelines laid out in the
legislation that are told every
time the superintendent asks for
a new piece of information. So
that can drag the process on
every time the superintendent
determines there's something
else that they need to consider
for a transaction.
And then you get into a, you get
into a preliminary review, which
can lead to a comprehensive
review. My question for you
would be, and if you look on
pages 15 to 19, that's where you
look at comprehensive review or
or preliminary review then
comprehensive review. There's
nothing that sets forth the
criteria, what means that a
transaction has met criteria to
either be approved under a
preliminary review, what kicks
it to a comprehensive review,
and in a comprehensive review,
what's a transaction that's
going to be approved or what's
it going to be?
How's it gonna be disapproved?
There's no set criteria in the
statute, so we have no
predictability as to, as far as
to know what we have to provide
to have a good transaction
that's going to be approved.
If we're, if we're working off
the committee sub, that would be
the end of my comments with the
exception of 8 years versus 10
years post oversight. Coming out
of the health committee, there's
a 10 year post transaction
oversight.
In the committee sub, there's an
8-year, um, post-transaction
oversight. If you think back 8
years from now, if we had a
transaction that occurred 8
years ago, we would be in
Susannah Martinez's last 60-day
session.
That's before Governor Lujan
Grisham, that's before COVID.
Think of that span of time and
how much has changed in those
eight years. Under the current
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute. That's how long the
superintendent could go back and
look at and have oversight of a
transaction that happened 8
years ago. We urge you to vote
no on this piece of legislation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
committee.
Hello, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee carry Robin
Bruunder with the New Mexico
Medical Society. We oppose the
judiciary substitute for Senate
Bill 14, a position that we have
had since 2024 on this issue
because independent providers
are not excluded from the bill.
I'll walk you through our
reasoning. First, on page 3,
subsection H, the definition of
a healthcare provider
organization includes all
persons engaged in the business
of delivering or managing
healthcare services. This means
this language means that all
healthcare entities, doctors,
SLP.
pharmacists, behavioral health
providers, I mean all healthcare
providers are included in the
bill. Second, on page 4,
subsection M, were concerned
that in the definition of
independent healthcare provider,
there's a standard that a
practice be entirely owned or
controlled by providers. We have
practices that are truly
independent, meaning they're
local, they're not affiliated
with a hospital or a health plan
and have no private equity, but
they would still not meet this
definition. For example, if a
practice manager who is not a
provider but has an MBA.
is a shareholder, that practice
would no longer be independent.
Our biggest concern is on page
6, subsection 3 on line 18. This
sentence structure is really
problematic because it's two
independent clauses joined by a
conjunction. We feel strongly
that this bill would apply to
all proposed acquisitions of one
or more healthcare provider
organizations, including all
independent practices because
that independent clause in the
sentence does not carry the
qualifier of being affiliated
with a health insurer. The read
of
This section when paired to the
expansive definition of a
healthcare provider organization
and acquisition means that all
organizations, not just those
affiliated with the health plan
are now subject to the bill.
This is reinforced because
independent providers are then
not excluded in subsection B.
Also as two independent clauses
in the sentence, every time a
health insurer or a practice
affiliated with a health plan,
hires a healthcare provider, the
insurer would have to ask for
approval from OSI to make the
hire.
Finally, on page 30 section 12,
considering the broad definition
of healthcare provider
organization, all of those
entities would be required to do
annual reporting of their
ownership structure, reporting
that is not exempted from IPRA.
In this substitute existing
providers and independent
providers are not excluded from
the reporting. Based on this
reading, our members are
concerned that SB 14 will have a
chilling effect on investment in
independent practice. Investment
that in today's medical business
environment is critical for
practices to survive as.
Our practices do not have scores
of attorneys to navigate this
process and to push the cost on
them for experts contracted by
OSI is unfair when we are not
the problem this bill is trying
to solve. We believe the
provisions of this bill are
harmful to independent practice
curtails collaboration between
practices, stifles potential
expansion and requires us to
expose sensitive information
about our ownership that could
be used against us. For those
reasons, we oppose the
substitute.
Yeah
Mr. Chair members of the
committee. My name is Kim Lagan
with Ocean's Healthcare. Ocean's
Healthcare is the only hospital
that has successfully,
successfully undergone the
rigorous review process
established under SB 415 passed
in 2024. This process ensures
transparency, accountability,
and confidentiality while
allowing proper regulatory
bodies to conduct a fair and
thorough evaluation of
acquisitions.
be 15 was designed to protect
sensitive business and patient
care information while still
providing oversight. Under this
framework, hospitals can engage
in necessary transactions while
exposing while without exposing
proprietary data or compromising
ongoing patient services. In
contrast,
SB 15 laks.
These essential protections
without clear confidentiality
provisions, hospitals may be
forced to disclose sensitive
operational details in a public
forum, potentially leading to
misuse of proprietary
information unnecessary delays
and destructions to patient
care.
Ocean Healthcare opposes SB 14
and urges policymakers uh to
maintain the framework that is
under SB 15, which has already
been successfully implemented
and tested. Thank you.
Chairman members of the
committee is Jason Espinoza,
representing the New Mexico
Association for Home and Hospice
Care, we do stand in opposition
to the committee substitute and
do agree with the Medical
Society and want to highlight
the legal ambiguities in the
bill that create inconsistent
interpretations, regulatory
uncertainty, and potential,
potential litigation. The core
issue has been mentioned lies in
the vague structure of the
provision on page 6, item 3,
which governs acquisitions of
healthcare provider
organizations, the language
fails to clarify whether it
applies only to hospitals and
insurance.
or to all acquisitions of
healthcare provider
organizations, including,
including small home health and
hospice providers. This
uncertainty invites lawsuits,
regulatory delays, confusion,
leaving providers onshore of
their obligations. Beyond
ambiguity, the bill imposes
unnecessary barriers on an
industry that's already heavily
regulated. Small home health and
hospital providers operate on
thin margins and rely on
strategic partnerships to
survive the spill at its costs,
slows decision making and
threatens.
provider viability.
Furthermore, the bill's
reporting requirements cast too
wide of a net. It captures far
more providers than likely
intended, including our small
home and hospice providers,
which creates yet another
administrative burden on an
industry already struggling with
compliance demand. If the goal
is improving healthcare access,
this bill does the opposite. We
are a committee to say no, uh,
and consider the unintended
consequences that this will
drive up costs till investment,
and restrict patient care in New
Mexico. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, that concludes our
in-person speakers and the
remainder are on Zoom. I did get
a text that Linda Siegel was
unable to join the Zoom, so
it'll be um Alison and Terry.
Right, Ms. Riley.
That was right.
Riley
If you're recognized for as long
as the presenter wants.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alison Riley, public
policy director for the Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, and
opposition of Senate Bill 14.
This bill places an
inappropriate and impractical
burden on the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance, and
they play a crucial role in
regulating insurance markets,
ensuring financial solvency and
protecting consumers, but they
are not equipped to evaluate the
complexities of healthcare
mergers and acquisitions.
Antitrust law, healthcare
economics, and service delivery
models.
Require specialized expertise
that falls outside OSI's core
responsibilities. Tasking OSI
with reviewing these
transactions, which stretch its
resources beyond its intended
function, leading to department
inefficiencies. This bill would
also have broader negative
consequences for New Mexico's
health care system. Mergers and
acquisitions are often necessary
for smaller providers to sustain
their workforce, manage costs,
and comply with regulations. If
healthcare companies fear
excessive
Government intervention, they
will take their investments
elsewhere, exacerbating our
existing challenges in
recruiting and retaining medical
professionals. For these
reasons, and the others
mentioned before me, we oppose
the bill. Thank you.
Terry Cole, we have you
registered to speak by Zoom.
we have Ja.
Good evening.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Terry Cole,
president and CEO of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
We are opposed to HB 14 because
we're concerned that the bill
will have exactly the opposite
effect as intended. Why do we
say that? Our hospitals,
especially our rural hospitals
are often cash starved because
of the high percentage of
patients not covered by private
insurance. The only solution to
their problems may be
acquisition.
By an entity that can bring cash
to the table. It's that or
potential bankruptcy.
Increasingly, it's very clear
how important healthcare is to
economic development. It's a
major quality of life and
economic component, and people
must be able to receive timely
care. SB 14 could potentially
block or delay acquisitions that
bring solutions, not problems.
Our hospitals must be
financially healthy in order to
compete for medical.
professionals. We understand
that SB 14 seeks to help, not
hurt. Unfortunately, we don't
see that as the result, and
respectfully ask you to vote no.
Thank you very much.
You.
Um
That's all I have registered in
opposition
had about 3 minutes left on my
time. Can I, I'll, I'll leave
you at that rebuttal. I'm trying
to figure out, yeah.
Mm
Like, who are you, ma'am? I'm
ready.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, but, but.
Yeah.
No, I'm sorry, just a second, so
never mind this was referring to
somebody else, so yeah, we've
already been through the
proponents. I don't know what
happened and I don't know that I
had you signed up as part of the
performance.
Yeah, um.
Let me, let me, uh, I'll
recognize you for one minute,
Mary. I get, I get, I mean,
where's my son in this thing we
have that.
Yeah, we don't have you signed
up here.
OK.
Thank you. Uh, so, yeah, we'll
recognize you for 3 more minutes
for rebuttal.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So first,
there is an emergency clause in
here. So if any hospital is
about to go bankrupt, if they
need this transaction in order
to survive.
They will, they will be
approved. They will not have to
go through this process. We are,
we're not trying to to push
anyone into bankruptcy.
Um, we have the claims that that
access to care will dry up if
this happens. We have not seen
that happen anywhere else. We
have the highest percentage in
the country of hospitals owned
by private equity already.
Almost all other states regulate
these kinds of transactions in
some way or another, uh, we have
not seen it destroy healthcare
in in any of those states. Um,
there is a, a comment that, uh,
perhaps this would stretch the
OSI too thin and then eat up
their.
budget, uh, and funding for this
has is already included in their
budget for this year. Um, and
Mr. Tay, we want investment in
New Mexico. We want people to,
to come here. We bought healthy
investment. When that investment
seeks to acquire our healthcare,
strip it down, leach as many
profit as much profit out of it
as possible, and then leave
after usually leaving the
hospital.
With the debt of the purchase,
is that the way that they do
these transactions is
That they use the hospital as
the collateral for the debt, and
then they leave in an average of
7 years, having strips down the
hospital, uh, gotten rid of a
bunch of services and providers,
sucked every dollar they can out
of it, and then they leave, but
the hospital is left with that
debt. It is a horrible deal for
New Mexico hospitals. Um, I also
find it to the extent that
I know there's uh
You know, Presbyterian, what,
what, what kick this off was
the, the Presbyterian merger
that almost happened, uh, a
couple of years ago. Um, my
understanding is, yeah, Pres
Presbyterian still wants to do
that.
The fact that they are saying we
do not want to live under
conditions where we would have
to make sure we didn't harm
healthcare in New Mexico. To do
this transaction should give us
all pause. We want, we want
A vital healthcare system in New
Mexico. We want
providers to be able to treat
patients the way they see fit.
And
We want to make sure that the
people who are taking
Massive amounts of our state
funds, uh, in the form of not
only the incentives we keep on
giving them, but also Medicaid,
Medicaid payments.
have the well-being of New
Mexicans as their priority.
It's 3 minutes. Uh, we have gone
through the registered comments
and support opposition, so I'll
go to members of the committee
question.
Oh, so we have some business to
take care of, don't we, sir?
Don't we have a an amendment.
I will, I will move a do not
pass on uh the Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee Affairs
Committee Substitute for
Sunnyville 14, and they do pass
for the purposes of discussion
on the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for the
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 14, and that's 692.1.
Yes. And then you've got an
amendment. I do. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. On page 6 of the
committee substitute.
At line 2.
Striking the language that comes
after the comma.
Don't, don't, I have a committee
proposed amendment that is 765.1
handed out oh that one I
remember you, you are absolutely
right.
Center, let's do that.
Let's do that first and then I'm
gonna make another an
additional.
verbal amendment.
So, Mr. Chair, mostly this, this
amendment is just cleaning up
small things. There was a, a
definition left in of a
healthcare staffing company that
should have been left out when
we took out, uh, other parts of
the bill as part of our
negotiations.
When, uh,
Most of the folks you just heard
speak against it. Um,
We are.
Uh, taking out a, a def uh a
subsection I on page 12, it is
just unnecessary language, um
and then otherwise, this is
really just cleaning stuff up.
There were parts in there where
it said, where it says above.
Uh
Like above in the statute. We
don't, we don't use that kind of
language. Um, so it's taking
that out. Um, and then,
Uh, earlier in the bill, we
have, we use the term
effectuated to talk about one of
these transactions going into
effect, and then later in the
bill, they used the word
effective. So this is just
making a consistent throughout
the bill that uh with the use of
effectuated.
And then there was some some
repeat.
Lake Wedge or on page 33
stricken.
So I would move the amendment.
On
any further discussion, is there
any objection to adopting the
amendment?
adopt him.
I do have more minutes. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Yes, so on page
6, line 20.
There's the language or
employment of a healthcare
provider.
I don't, I'm just doing this
verbally.
Um, so page 6 lines 20 and 21.
Striking the words.
Or employment of a healthcare
provider.
the objection to adopting that
amendment.
Be on that amendments adopted.
All right.
As uh moments and I was reading
the First Amendment, we added a
comma after providers, so we've
got a double comma now, you got
to delete through the comma,
correct? So yes, that would,
you're right. Thank you. That
would include striking the, the
comma they got added. Thank you.
Sure, the amendments and the
committee sub for discussion and
so we're on the bill for
discussion, committee members,
questions?
Anyone? Questions at all?
They're being.
But Mr. Chairman, I, I would
like to hear from the
superintendent of insurance
about about this bill.
Just
You know, how we got here, no.
I, I, I've heard why we need it.
I just would like to hear from.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senators, uh,
thank you for the question. Uh,
this, uh,
OSI got involved uh in the
Prudential merger because they
had two health insurance plans
that they owned, and because of
that under the uh holding
Company Act, uh, OSI was
required to uh
Investigate who was the ultimate
owners and what the
But the plans were for.
The viability of the health
insurance plans, but that
required us to go all the way up
the chain, and that's how we got
involved and I think after that,
um,
And it took a while to get the
information, but, uh, ultimately
we did and we, it, it was gonna
be a merger, as you know, with
Unity, uh, we were being told
that there'd be no change at
Presbyterian, but it became very
clear when we got to the
ultimate owner and the bylaws
that the control was really
going to be with the Iowa Unity
Group with Iowa, I think it was
Iowa Unity Group and not with
Presbyterian, uh, as a result of
that, I was asked uh by the
governor to look into um mergers
and acquisitions and and
approach Senator Duha.
To be one of the first sponsors,
and we worked on this last year,
uh, as you know, we had a more
comprehensive bill and we and we
uh compromised dramatically to
get SB 15 put in place. The idea
was that we were going to spend
at at the suggestion of the
legislature, which we took very
seriously. We were asked to go
out and do uh this outreach
program, which was
Fairly intensive, uh, and very
revealing. Uh, it did confirm,
uh, I would say for me it, it
enlightened the fact that the
public has to be involved when
you hear their reactions to the
uh the um the transactions that
had already gone in the past. We
heard how some of the
transactions went wrong. Many of
them fit the nationwide issues
about accessibility, uh, in many
situations that we heard the
OBGYN, uh, uh
access was immediately
restricted because of lack of
profitability, uh, Senator
Duheck referred to elimination
of the more expensive doctors
and bringing in less expensive.
We heard that, I think, I think
that was Las Vegas. Uh, it was
also very clear that some of
the, the transactions that had
gone on, the uh individual
healthcare providers were very
intimidated and felt that they
weren't being able to uh
practice medicine at the level
of quality that they felt they
should. We had uh and they did
not want
to be one of them did not want
to be identified, hence that
what we put there was no
enforcement in SB 15, SB 14 has
a lot of, uh, you know, has more
enforcement, civil, which was
requested, because in the
insurance law it's, it's
criminal. We went to civil, we
went to uh uh whistleblower
protection, uh, I, I guess I
would and uh again all this was
put in place. The emergency
provision was in the original
bill, uh, my, my staff's
capability of doing a full
review of this is, is, you're
absolutely correct. We can't do
a total review. We're very,
we're very uh uh experienced in
looking at financials and
ultimate control and and
corporate structure, we in the
bill proposes that we work with
the healthcare authority and
also where we need experts to
hire them. We went to the point
of working with the sponsors and
there was a lot of, I'm not the
sponsors of the hospitals and
and the people, uh, about, you
know,
How we did the bill insofar as
experts, yes, we get experts,
but we'd give them a notice and,
uh
And estimates of what it would
cost, uh, there was questions on
confidentiality. Yes, yes,
things are kept confidential and
they can ask during the period
if I asked for more information
that that information remained
confidential, um, the the
monitoring and oversight period
is really gonna be focused where
their conditions put in place on
the hospital based on what was
going on.
uh, ask a little more direct
question cause we could get this
for a very long time, so like
how did we get here forever?
Well, I, I was enjoying that
story of how this happened and
why and what we did last year
and why we need this, but you
know if I'm out of time, I'm out
of time.
And it's just a narrative, so
it, it could be really
unlimited, but we'll go ahead
clear floor go ahead two more
time some of the things we
remarked insofar as the material
I could ask for after the
submission. It was supposed to
be relevant material, um, so and
uh I guess the, uh
So I, I think those are probably
the major pieces that I
Oh, and the one other thing on
the annual reporting. Initially
we had asked for a lot of
information in the annual
reporting. It was very clear
after um when, when the
Presbyterian deal came that
there was no
No full picture about.
who is owning what in in New
Mexico and uh we put the first
round was, was, had much more
information we requested. We
made this a very light
reporting, but I think both
sponsors, both the Senator Duha
andresentative Sapansy thought
it was very important to have an
annual vision as to what was
going on in in New Mexico. Uh,
again, I think the hospital said
we, we, I think we got a 100%
there, but we've, we've really
responded to a lot of what they
wanted and, and I think they
will.
admit not
agree that we've really tried to
work with them to get them to
support this bill.
Thank you. Appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman didn't
mean to cut anybody off their
word.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Can
you go through, there was some
Again, Miss, Ms. Bruder's
comments about independence.
Providers being part of this
bill, I thought this was a
hospital.
Bill, can you, and, and I think
the focus was on page 6, and
then you just walk through the
specific language as to if, if
that's the case, and again,
Or, or, or why she's incorrect.
If it's not the case.
So, Mr. Chair, senator, so yes,
so, so look on page 6,
subsection A, which starts at
line 8. And, and this is who
this applies to. And so, the
first one is if it deals with uh
a change of control of the
hospital in New Mexico.
The second one is, um,
I acquisitions of of healthcare
provider organizations. So if a
hospital is acquiring like say
uh buying up all the, all the, a
bunch of ERs.
Um, that would be something we
would look at.
And the third one, I think
caused some confusion, uh, but I
think the, the language that was
struck there should hopefully
clear that up. So what it says
is that proposed acquisitions of
one or more healthcare provider
organizations.
Uh, in New Mexico, buy a health
insurer or a person that is
owned or affiliated with the
health insurer. This is getting
to Optum.
Optum goes around and buys up.
Uh, independent practices all
over the country.
And we want to make sure that
when that happens, that is not
at the expense of the care
provided to people who are using
those practices. This would not,
so the only extent to which this
would cover independent
providers as if that independent
provider is being acquired by a
hospital or an insurance
company.
It does not, and so same for the
the home care and hospice stuff,
um, who are, are really, who
have never been, uh, part of the
spell.
Um
I guess if they are
If they are, uh, being.
Acquired by a hospital or an
insurance company.
Then there would be some
potential that that there would
be a review, but other, but it
is only in those two
circumstances that anyone other
than hospitals is covered in.
And so Mr. Chair, I know one of
the things that lots of
hospitals are doing.
are contracting out certain
portions of their
Bulk of business, for example,
the emergency room, uh, and is
that, would that kind of a
transaction be part of this
bill, Mr. Chair, Senator, no, we
took that out at the hospital
association's request. And so,
Madam Chair and senator on page
6, that line 11.
It would actually have to
involve a change in control, and
that's the key there, so.
So that practice is gonna
continue then, which again, I
know.
Hospital here in Santa Fe has
done that in the ER room.
I'm, I, I'll just, there was a
comment by someone in
opposition, basically saying,
Private equity brings cash to
the table or there's bankruptcy,
which is the alternative.
I, I just, again, have been
involved in, in a number of
The malpractice cases that
results in some of these small
hospitals that have gone through
these, these
Acquisitions and patients are
being harmed.
There is some really bad things
that are happening, because
what's happen
You know, they're not, they,
they, they, they move into the
hospital and then they tell
practice group, well, guess
what? You get to instead of
having 8 doctors, you get to
have 4.
And so
Again, we talked in, in the tax
committee this morning on
another bill that Senator
Cervantes had about the
Important role that
Trial lawyers play, quite
frankly, in trying to get
change, and, and it's, again,
some of the things I've seen
with with those those exact
acquisitions, to some extent we
might be better off not to have
that happen, and then figure out
what are other alternative there
is to help that hospital. So I,
I really am concerned about
that, and I know that's what
you're trying to, to do with
this bill. Um, so I'm gonna
continue to
to listen, but I, again, I the,
the issue of the independent
providers, clearly that opens a
whole new
and I hope that that language
change in the amendment has
narrowed down.
Thank you.
For.
Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, and, and I appreciate
also that you clarified the
independent provider part and
I'll listen to the attorneys to
to verify that they think that
that has been.
Uh, addressed. I, I still, this
is my question, Mr. Chairman
would actually be to the
superintendent. You mentioned
that you were involved um
With the hospital, uh, uh
acquisition because there was
insurance companies involved.
Right? And I understand that and
on page
Uh, 6 of section 3 number 3, I
can understand that, but can you
explain to me how the Office of
the Superintendent of insurance
has oversight of 1 and 2. I
understand that you're, your
statutorily obligated to
regulate insurance companies,
but how does that expand to
hospitals, just, just walk me
through your role on that.
My, my only role in that would
be if this bill is adopted.
Well, that's not true. I, I am
involved right now because of SB
15, and as a matter of fact, you
heard oceans discussed that
there was a transaction that we
reviewed this year. It was two
private equity groups coming
together to have a a behavioral
behavioral health facility in uh
in New Mexico. They had many
others in the south and in other
states and uh there are two CEOs
came in, presented what they
were trying to do. We went
reviewed, uh, brought in experts
that have reviewed the financial
conditions, and we worked with
the healthcare authority to see
what, what facilities what they
were bringing in if they were
needed and if they thought they
were adequate and uh we also had
some questions about some of
their past practices that we
raised, and they showed us they
came forward and showed us that
they how they had rectified
them, and it was all done by
year end, which is what when
they were, that was their target
for closing. Mr. Chairman
and superintendent, but to
clarify at this point, this
would be an, an expansion of
your scope. At this point,
without this bill, you do not
have oversight of the cell of
hospitals, correct?
Uh,
Mr. Chair, uh, senators, I do
under SB 15, which sunsets.
Which sunsets, OK.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Deit, Superintendent
King, thank you so much and your
staff. They uh just appreciate
all of you. I mean, um, the
tremendous amount of work and a
tremendous responsibility that
that that OSI.
62.
to take on, um.
I mean, I'm trying to learn as
fast as I can what different
states are doing, uh.
try to get information from
Oregon as to how they manage all
these, all these applications.
Um, but I would imagine it takes
some type of agency, type of
staff.
Uh, you know, these decisions
should be made by, you know, 10
economists in a room, you know,
um, as opposed to.
Um
Political wins and stuff, but
But right off the bat, Mr.
Chairman, Senator doing.
I'm superintendent. I'm looking
at
What the charges, the
superintendent of insurance uh
was part of the PRC for years
and years, still is, but
independent.
Um, and then we, uh, and then we
made it a constitutional office,
so I'm looking at
The Constitution section of
Article 11 rather, Article 11,
Section 20 and it just says the
the office of the superintendent
of insurance.
Uh, shall regulate insurance
companies.
And others engaged in risk
assumption.
In such manner as provided by
law. So
Risk assumptions, so
theoretically the superintendent
insurance could regulate, you
know, sports betting once we get
sports betting, but um,
But in all seriousness,
How does
State government have the
authority to do this.
Under the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, senators, uh, we
did look at that issue. It was
raised with SB 15 and uh uh the
legal opinions that I received
was that
This, this, uh, authority could
be given to us by statute.
OK, no, thank you. And I
appreciate you taking it on and
just a tribute to your
leadership.
And your commitment to these
issues because
The, um, this is a highly
regulatory scheme, but health,
health care.
Government must play a role in
health care.
Um, you know, to me, government
should be providing stability
and predictability for for
market forces to flourish.
And the economy to grow, but
Healthcare
It contradicts market forces,
you know, I.
In a perfect market, you have a
choice.
You have a choice. You can
buy, buy from this company, buy
from that company or not buy it
all when it comes to healthcare,
you have no choice. You have no
choice to get that medication,
to get that procedure, uh, to
have a doctor, you know, deliver
a baby or whatnot, um, and then
there's on the flip side,
The providers
I have no choice, or at least
theoretically have no choice if
if an ambulance takes a shotgun
victim to the ER late at night
or
Or someone's having a baby that
the, the, the oath, the oaths of
medical providers is to provide
that service. And so,
It's just sad that um
That such like short term
economic interests are making
these decisions to cut.
To cut these vital services, um,
in the rural areas. So anyway,
my point is I'm, I just
appreciate all the work you're
doing. The um
I do have concerns about the
constitutionality because this
stuff is gonna end up in court,
but
Um, I know what the goal is. I
know what the goal is so that
services are not decreased.
But I don't see it in the bill.
I don't see like a threshold. I
don't see like
If, uh, if employee, if employ,
if the labor if the labor of the
hospital dipped below 5%, it
would go to a comprehensive
review. I, I don't see.
Those matrixes in the bill. So
what
What
Where in the bill, Mr. Chairman
Senator who does it.
Uh
Or, or, or let me back up.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Senator, is a
preliminary review always a
mandatory or there's
Where there's a possibility of
no preliminary review.
Oh,
Mr. Chair, senators, there's a
possibility of no preliminary
review, the idea, and again,
this is we're modeling and a lot
of what we, what's done in
insurance, uh, people who are
going into transactions often
knock on the regulated's door,
tell them what they're gonna do,
and if there's no problem, just
go ahead. We tried to make that
simple as a matter of fact, uh,
one of the hospitals did come to
me and had a preliminary review
under SB 15, and I said, no, you
don't have to come. Um, I'm not
a film.
a pre-review, uh, what we've
done with the preliminary review
is to try to make that as
comprehensive as possible and we
shorten the time frames, and the
idea with that is they just go
forward. It's not a a deep
approval process, the
comprehensive review we assume
will be in not will be in not a
major, you know, a small
majority of majority, small
number of the cases, uh, and
we're trying to make that as, as
tight as we can. Again, we
shorten the timelines there for
people's concerns.
Uh, what we're, when, when they
say the superintendent asked
questions again, this is pretty
much done in insurance
transactions all the time if you
have additional questions, you
wait, you ask the questions,
they have to be relevant, and
then, uh, and material and you
you get the information. If the
information isn't complete, you
go back and ask other questions.
Again, this is what happened in
the prior in the transaction we
had in SB 15. We had a back and
forth and, and the other pieces
one of some of the issues were
were without outside I felt the
scope of our authority, we turn
to people who had done
transactions like this, and also
to the healthcare authority, uh,
and they were involved in
discussing uh basically where
their conditions had been
rectified and they were
comfortable
and senator, I think you asked a
question that that didn't get
answered, uh, like what are the
criteria?
What what are the, yeah, and
So, so I, I, I'm looking on page
14.
And I have the, I have all my
marks on the original chemio but
looking at uh
I'm looking at a section.
Uh, Section 5, so section 5 is
the notice and then section 6 is
the preliminary view. What is
the threshold in the bill that
prompts the preliminary review.
So,
So Mr. Chair, so
So looking at that section 6,
that's gonna lay out what all
the, what they're looking at in
the preliminary.
So, what, what, why it would go
to preliminary review or not. So
if in that that initial informal
meeting, it became clear this is
not something that comes under
the act.
That this is not that that this
does not qualify that this is an
acquisition that maybe have a, a
non-hospital entity, but it's
not by uh uh an insurance
company. It's not by a hospital.
Then, then there would be no, no
review.
Um, if it does fall under the
act, then it would go to
preliminary review, and then in
that section B there, it starts
at line 9. That is, that is the
criteria that would be looked
at. Um, it continues on to page
16.
Then we have the same thing for
the comprehensive review, the
criteria that is looked at for
that.
And I think you asked, you know,
what?
We don't know what what.
How would we know if when we
went to a comprehensive review,
I don't know if you asked this
or or one of one of the speakers
said this.
Whether we were actually going
to, but there was going to be
approved or not. Look, on page
19.
Lines 8 through 16.
Disapproval
But there would be a
consideration of disapproval
because of a substantial
likelihood of a significant
reduction in the availability,
accessibility, affordability or
quality of care for patients of
healthcare services, or any, any
anti-competitive effects from
the proposed transaction or
acquisition that outweigh the
benefits of the transaction or
acquisition.
So that is the lens through it.
So after you've gone through all
the review, that is the lens
through which the OSI is looking
to say,
Should this, should this be
approved or, or not approved. If
it's going to significantly
reduce the availability,
accessibility, affordability and
quality of care for patients in
New Mexico, and that is, that is
a good reason to consider
disapproval, because that means
that New Mexicans would be
harmed by this transaction.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman Senator Deick. No,
you're about 3 questions ahead
of me, um, but thank you for
that. But I'm looking on at the
notice.
And it doesn't say it in the
bill.
What, what determination the
government has.
From notice to preliminary
review. It does not say in the
bill, based on these factors and
this analysis, we shall do a
preliminary review. Um, and then
in the preliminary review
statute on section 6.
It does not say point blank.
If this matrix.
was used and this analysis was
used and these factors were
determined, the government would
do a comprehensive review.
Now you do have some good
language with regards to yes or
no.
Um, at, when I say good
language, I mean better than
notice to preliminary
preliminary to comprehensive.
But I don't know what
significant reduction means in
statute, like is it 3%, 5%.
Is that, uh, is an emergency
room?
care, is it?
Uh
You know,
OBGYN care and then
anti-competitive effects. There
there's no matrix, there's no
mathematical formula and so my
point is, Mr. Chairman, is is it
it
It
It would allow potentially
arbitrary government from
occurring.
And you just can't have
arbitrary and capricious
government in these.
In these large transactions, it
just sends
A wrong message, um.
Not only
Investors in healthcare, but
just any investor, you know what
I mean? So anyway, it's a big,
it's a big
Complicated thing to write and I
uh.
Just appreciate all the work
that the folks are doing, Mr.
Chair, I just want to know all
of this is subject to appeal.
Any, any denial could be
appealed to the district court.
So there's there's no
The superintendent does not have
the final word. It cannot be
arbitrary and capricious, with,
with 00 consequence. Uh, I also
want to make clear cause I think
there's a misunderstanding. So
if you are covered by the by
this act, you would go to
preliminary review.
That's, that's what gets you to
preliminary review, being
covered by the act.
Uh, thank you,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, just a
couple of quick questions, um,
And I, I think I understand what
you're trying to do, and I, and
I really believe your heart is,
is, is moving in the right
direction, right? I believe you
actually believe what you're
going to do with help, medical
care in New Mexico. And so I,
I'm struggling with this. If, if
this bill is so beneficial to
New Mexicans, you know, why, why
do we have so many associations
and groups come up to, to go
against it. What, what, why
would they not want to support
this?
So, Mr. Chair, Senator, um, so
one, I think industry rarely
invites oversight.
I think we, we, I don't think we
ever have people coming in here
saying, please, please regulate
me, um, but, uh, but Mr. Chair
and Senator, I'll tell you, I'm
really frustrated cause I spent
the last year negotiating in
good faith with all of those
folks, and I don't think they
are making massive concessions.
Uh,
And I was the only one making
concessions. There were no
concessions on the other side. I
continually, uh, ended up
negotiating against myself,
taking out more and more and
making more and more changes,
uh, to satisfy their concerns
and then the line would move.
Then we would make another
change and the line would move.
And I don't think they were ever
negotiated in good faith. I
think they planned on coming
here and killing this the entire
time.
I think a year of my time was
essentially wasted. Um,
And that's really unfortunate,
uh, because we should be all be
working together.
On these bills and and and we
got really good information,
working with them too and
especially hearing from rural
hospitals. I mean, that was
that.
was critical information for us
to have in, in craftiness and,
and hearing directly from the
providers, um, so I'm really
disappointed that
That I don't feel like they
were.
They were participating in good
faith in those negotiations.
OK, thank you for that, Senator.
Uh, just one other quick, uh, I
have a couple more questions,
but so we have Senate Bill 15
from last year already in place.
So why did the sunset and why
don't you, why did you just come
back and, and
and remove the sunset. Was there
additional things that you added
as a result of that based on the
work that you've done over the
last year, Mr. Cha, yes, so
Senate Bill 15 was
A band-aid. Um, it was, it has
no enforcement.
It has no transparency. Um, it
was the absolute bare minimum to
have in place while we went
through this stakeholder
engagement process and, and that
was why that it also was
intended, always intended to be
temporary because I thought we
had all agreed to work together
to come back with a
comprehensive approach, this
session.
Thank you. Thank you for that.
Thank you.
So I'm gonna tell you, I
actually, um,
don't like government overreach,
obviously, and, and so one of
the concerns I have is I, I
believe when private businesses
want to do a transaction, and
they both have rolling parties.
They both go through their own
analysis. They go through their
own business assessments, uh,
and typically when a transaction
of a merger or an acquisition
like that occurs, it's because
there's a clear, uh,
Idea of reducing costs.
They want to, you know,
eliminate duplication, and they
typically want to streamline the
services. That's typically why
businesses do that, so they can
increase their profit. That's
the whole purpose behind it.
Understand healthcare.
It's another issue, but it is
still a business, and, and so I
have a problem with government
coming in and saying, well, we
don't think you can do that
because it, people look when
they come in with a a business
transaction, they're looking at
all the aspects of what that,
what that business contains, and
they actually understand
probably the other side that
they're about to acquire better
than that other business does,
so they look at each other very
carefully to see whether or not
there's a good match, and, and
so.
While I understand what you're
trying to do, I actually don't
believe in interfering with
private transactions unless
there's a direct and as you
said, and as the Senator Ma just
said.
Healthcare does impact everybody
in that community. And so,
But
But I, it, I, it just feels to
me like this is a little bit of
an overreach and from my
perspective, and so from that
perspective alone, I, I can't
support this, but thank you.
We had a couple of people that
had indicated they wanted to
speak and we're looking for
their registrations online. They
came in well after the committee
time started, so it was a little
too late. Um, all right, uh,
Senator Thornton, anyone else?
On the committee.
That leaves me, Senator, uh, I
want to appreciate you, the
superintendent for coming to Las
Cruces. I went to your meeting
there with great interest. She
had great turnout from the
medical community and was
pleased to see that and always
pleased to see government coming
down to the southern part of the
state, and I, and I know you
have worked very long and hard
on this, so I've met with you
maybe not nearly enough, I know,
but uh you, because you worked
hard on this, I could probably
never meet enough with you, uh,
and, and, uh,
I, uh, I want to renew the fact
that last session, I didn't
favor this idea, uh, this
concept of giving this what
would be to me awesome new
powers to the one individual,
the superintendent of insurance.
I realized there's an appeal
process from that, and you and I
may disagree, but the courts in
New Mexico, in my experience
generally defer to an agency in
its area of expertise, and here
we would be conferring that area
of expertise. So I think of
course with greatly defer to a
determination by the
superintendent, which means we'd
be conferring awesome powers to
the superintendent.
decide whether any hospital
could be sold or purchased and,
and um that causes me a great
deal of concern for a children.
In fact, I, I routinely sue
hospitals.
have a lot of cases involving
suits against hospitals and
subsidiaries, parent
corporations went all the way up
the chain to multi hundreds of
billions of dollars private
equity firms. That's what I do
in my practice and very
interesting. I'm smiling at
Worth probably has one of the
seminal cases in New Mexico,
Worth versus Sun with son
health, uh, where he is involved
with nursing homes and the same
kind of thing, so it's not just
hospitals that goes up the chain
into the nursing home structure
as well too, and they create
many of these shell corporations
and subsidiaries to avoid.
Frankly, us knowing how they're
working and where their profits
lie and so forth. I, I, I
deplore that, of course, but I
also realized that it's a
competitive marketplace and um
the hospital is very jealously
guard their finances, their tax
returns, which I'm in the
business of trying to go get,
um, and to try and show these
relationships and so forth. So
the, the concern I have with the
bill is the, the control, the
affiliations between them and
how all of those things might
work. Uh, I, I, I do believe
that if we were to give this
kind of authority to
one individual, a superintendent
of insurance, even though
there's appeals to the court, I,
I'm confident that it will chill
investments by um companies,
corporations, and others in the
state to health care and that,
that would be my big concern is
the chilling effect it would
have on growth and oversight
being. Amazing thing is when I
opposed this last session, I
voted for it, uh, because the
hospital association said they
were fine with it last session
and so we're hospital groups.
They were all fine with the
idea, I, I was incredulous, but
I, I'm not quite so arrogant.
I think that I would know better
than they did about their own
business and their own industry
when they're saying they support
this idea last year, even though
I thought it was not in their
interest to do so, they
supported it strongly. I get
incredulously, but still
deferred to their, uh, to their
own judgment for their, for
their business and industry, but
I think they've maybe realized
this is not, not the way they
want to go to the future, so I
appreciate Senator, you've
worked hard to get my attention
to try and get my support for
this. I still think it's very
troublesome to me that
Give this kind of authority to
purchasing and a sale of
hospitals to private practice
groups and any number of other
medical services to one person,
I think I saw Mary and I
appreciate Mary trying to be
here. I'm sorry we didn't
recognize you. Mary. Mary's been
trying for years to get what was
the health uh health Security
Act and try and get essentially
New Mexico to socialized form of
medicine. I think this would be
a huge step in that direction,
and I can understand why you'd
probably want to support this
because that's been your goal
for a very long time, but I
haven't been a fan of it for
quite some time, so, um, again,
I
I'm not really thinking that we
need to move toward a socialized
medicine in New Mexico alone.
We're gonna do it, we should do
it as a nation that we might see
differently, so anyway, that's a
long explanation would go page
by page, line by line, I won't
do so. All right? Uh, anyone
else on the committee with my
comments, questions?
All right, we're taking motions.
Stewart.
You didn't even look over here.
I you know I had my hand up.
I'm sorry, what was that?
Never mind,
you, you're so funny. You look
down and then you said Senator
Stewart, so I was trying to get
your attention. You must have
known that my hand was up I was
just glad it wasn't a finger,
but it was
no, no, it's the point that
fingers I'm talking about the
pointing finger, said
Mr. Chairman, I move a do not
pass on Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee.
substitute for House Bill 14.
And a do pass on Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 14.
With all the amendments we have
done today so it'll be a 0.2
version of our committee set.
With incorporation of those
amendments all right, very good.
That's the much before, but it
was a roll call like please.
Turn around me. No.
And do
Senator O'Malley. Yes.
Senator Pope. No.
Senator Stewart, yes.
Then Thor.
No, Senator word yes.
Senator.
Cervantes.
The DuPass motion fails. Uh, do
we want to have another motion
or I wanna roll it over.
Rolling over this time. All
right, very good. Thank you very
much. Thank you, same to me.
Center pole, you're back up on
302.
OK.
Sponsors of uh Senator Pope, I
know you're there in the back,
Senator Trujillo. I, it's never
my goal to have any of you all
sitting here to wait on your
bill to be heard. So Senator
Lopez, so if any of you all want
to be someplace else and want us
to call for you, you will not
lose any a momentum with me, all
right?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
members, uh, we've got Senate
Bill 302 in front of you. I've
got the, the same set of experts
here with me, uh, just a high
level recap on what Senate Bill
302 does. It strengthens
regulatory oversight within the
gaming industry by expanding
background requirements for
those seeking gaming licenses,
work permits, and unescorted
access to gaming control, uh,
board facilities, um, gaming in
New Mexico is obviously highly
regulated industry.
that requires strict safeguards
to prevent fraud, financial
misconduct, criminal activities,
and so this bill is seeking to
kind of modernize and enhance
the safeguards by ensuring that
all individuals involved,
whether they're licensee, uh, an
employee or contractor, uh,
undergo through a background
checks to include national
criminal history screenings and
financial disclosures and I'll
turn it over to Terry, the
executive director, if he has
any additional comments to add
to that.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, um, Senate Bill 302
basically has two components.
Uh, Senator Paul indicated one
deals with background checks for
contractors who have an
unescorted access to facilities
in the Gaming control board, and
the second component, um,
the means application and
renewal requirements for game,
gaming licenses for those
individuals who hold findings of
certification or certifications
for findings of suitability and
for work permits.
And Senate Bill 302 is largely a
formality that needs to be
codified in the law to bring the
Mexico in compliance with the
Federal Department of Justice
requirements, approximately 2
years ago, Federal Department of
Justice audited um an audit
identified the findings stating
that New Mexico Gaming Control
Board like a clear statutory
basis for assessing criminal.
History information for
contractors and bingo and raffle
applicants.
Although we had rules, uh, in
place.
Uh, for conducting backgrounds
on contractors and being on
raffle applicants.
These rules were found to be
insufficient.
To meet the federal DOJ
requirements for accessing
criminal information needed to
complete background checks.
The DOJ mandates that access to
criminal history information
must be explicitly rooted in
state law.
Regulatory agencies to use in
licensing matters.
Without this statutory authority
of the gaming control board's
ability to conduct thorough
background checks on gaming
related individuals and entities
including contractors and bingo
refle applicants could be
restricted.
Thus it would weaken our
oversight authority.
Contractors, vendors, and, and
being on radical applicants
often have direct or indirect
access to gaming operations and
our funds, uh, making background
checks essential to prevent
fraud or criminal activity
without proper vetting,
unqualified or high-risk
individuals could gain access to
gaming sensitive gaming
environments.
Or managed charitable gaming
regulation activities posing a
threat to, to fire and legal
operations. Senate Bill 302
simply codifies existing
practices in the law to correct
the DOJ a finding and to assure
continued access to necessary
criminal history data for all
relevant parties.
And this bill does not change
the way background checks are
conducted, but rather provides a
legal framework required for
compliance.
The second component.
And Senate Bill 302 that changes
the license requirements to a
3-year period for conducting
background checks on finding of
suitability and work permittees
involved in gaming operations.
It's justified for several
reasons.
Currently, the standard is
annual.
Which is not necessary and
overly burdensome for licensees
and to the agency.
A 3 year
um
Exactly.
So I'll conclude with that the
3-year license renewal is, is an
industry norm and then it it
complies with, with uh these
licensees from the standpoint
of, of that's a standard
throughout the industry and
they're often um
License in multiple
jurisdictions that up for any
questions you may have.
the
Um
We don't have anyone in support
or opposition to this bill, so
we'll go to members of the
committees that do it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I have
a question on the, on page 8,
where
Now you'd be doing background
checks under the bingo and
Raffle Act. Is that, does that
happen now? There are people
getting background checks so
they're doing raffles or bingo.
They are and they always have
been. It's just we've been doing
it, uh, in accordance with the
MAC rule as opposed to um law.
OK. Great. Thank you,
Mr. Senator, the only other
thing is, uh,
Your language on page 9, if the
FBI hasn't told you that this is
the right language, you're
likely to be back here again
next year. We see this over and
over again, where the FBI says
we got to put it in statute for
us to do the background checks
and then we put it in statute,
and they're like, nope, not like
that. And then you say, but how?
And they don't answer you, so
just a warning on that.
No, we've seen it. Yeah.
Anyone else members other
questions.
Motions.
Stewart
Wa, there you go, very good.
There Stewart got my attention,
uh, with a do pass motion. Any
other discussion?
Right. Is there any objection to
do pass?
center pole, you have a new
pass.
Yeah, my bad.
So, let's see who we got here.
Oh, we still got Trujillo, Pope,
and.
Senator Pope, you were, oh there
you are. Come on up, Senate Bill
10.
To here, we're gonna do a lot of
time on yours. You probably
anticipated that, so I'm gonna
save you for the bitter end.
That's.
He knows what she's up against.
OK.
All right, uh,
behind you.
Senator Pope, we have one
opponent signed up, Daniel
Williams. Nobody else signed up
in support.
considered, uh, you're
recognized to give us a
presentation on Senate Bill 10.
Thank you Mr. Chair, committee
members, I won't be too long. I
think we know what this girl is.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 10,
the Anti-hazing Act.
As we all know, hazing is a
dangerous and often deadly
practice that fosters a culture
of abuse, coercion, and physical
psychological harm.
Incidents of hazing have led to
severe injuries, mental trauma,
and extreme cases fatalities.
By making um by banning this
practice mandating education.
And holding institutions
accountable, the Anti-hazing Act
prioritizes student safety and
well-being.
And ensures that no student is
subjected to harmful initiation
practices under the guise of
tradition.
Schools must be environments
where students feel secure and
supported rather than presented
into degrading or
life-threatening activities.
This legislation represents a
critical step towards fostering
a campus culture respect,
inclusion, and accountability.
Just want to reiterate to folks,
um, this committee substitute is
a little different than the one
that was introduced. It no
longer contains K through 12 and
is only for higher education.
And so I just want to let folks
know that highlights of the
bill.
Um, hazing is defined, um, and
it's also matching a lot of the
federal legislation that was
just passed before the end of
the year.
Um, those who are involved, if
you're involved in hazing, it is
a misdemeanor offense.
Those who fail to report it's a
misdemeanor offense as well.
Um, there are no new felonies in
this bill with the caveat that
those who permit a felony in
these acts will be charged uh
from the current laws.
Um, there's also other penalties
for individuals found guilty of
hazing, they could lose state
funded scholarships, grants, or
awards.
Organizations that permit hazing
are strictly liable they are
going to be liable for the
damages and may lose
institutional recognition as
well.
also, as I mentioned, there's
also a misdemeanor or failure to
report, and that's really to
hold a lot of the coaches and
administrators accountable.
There's also mandatory reporting
and transparency, schools must
publicly report verified hazing
violations by student
organizations, athletic teams,
and fraternities and sororities.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I'll
yield the rest of my time. Um, I
just want to end and say that,
um, for me, and I, I think um a
lot of community members, it's
important that we just say that
hazing is wrong and really
Uh, let everyone know that this
is illegal. We are 1 in 6 states
without anti-hazing legislation
in the country.
And I think a lot will be said
just passing something like
this, still holding folks
accountable, to just let folks
know that this is not
acceptable.
Um, and to really change the
culture. And with that, Mr.
Chair, I yield back to you.
Very often over here. I have to
be bringing more bills to the
judiciary from time to time, so
if you come on Monday.
All right, we'll start looking
for more. Uh, we do have one
opponent signed up in advance,
Daniel Williams, are you here,
Mr. Williams?
Because you're the only
opponent, sir. I'll recognize
you for up to 3 minutes.
I hope I won't take nearly that
much time, Mr. Chair, my name's
Daniel Williams, I'm a policy
advocate at the American Civil
Liberties Union of New Mexico
and I want to thank the sponsor
we've had several good
conversations about this bill,
and we certainly share the
sentiment that hazing is wrong
and that a strong statement
needs to be sent. The provisions
of this bill that have to do
with education, with prevention,
with reporting or nothing that
we have a problem with our, our
concern is the creation of two
new misdemeanors.
In particular, the, the
definition of hazing that
undergirds those misdemeanors is
quite broad and could encompass
quite a bit of behavior.
When hazing leads to real harm,
as we have seen in especially
high profile cases in New Mexico
and in cases that don't make the
news, that action is already
illegal and does result in
criminal.
Proceedings
And so we don't believe that a
new crime is necessary. Again,
we
Like all of us, like I'm sure
everyone in this room can agree
that hazing is wrong, and we
believe that there are that the
education prevention and
reporting provisions of this
bill make a strong statement
that do not require a new crime.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. All right,
that's all we have registered in
sport and opposition. We'll go
to members of the committee this
time.
members questions.
You know,
to.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
not sure.
question is directed to, I'm not
sure, Senator Pope, but
But the previous speaker said we
already have laws on the books
about this.
Do we know any about that? Do we
have examples of that of that,
that's why I didn't think that
you would answer the question
because
Senator, I guess I'll try to
answer some of the legal experts
can jump in and correct me or or
provide more.
I think in situations where
hazing.
Goes to the level of assault.
Uh, sexual assault, things like
that. There are current laws on
the books.
But in cases where he may not
get to that level, and there's
still harm, especially
psychological harm, um, I, I
would say that.
There's not a lot, a lot of laws
in the books, but folks can
correct me if I'm wrong.
All right. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Just a question and um I'm
tired, so it's hard to think
through the wording, but page
two, line 5.
the reasonable cause definition
means a person who witnesses
hazing.
Or receives a credible written
or oral report alleging hazing
or potential or planned hazing
activity, just a little
concerned about
You know, the determination of
Incredible in there, and I'm not
sure how to tighten that up at
this point, but it does seem
like that's
It's just a little loose, that
language, you just don't want to
get someone.
I mean, I get the witnesses,
clearly.
But it's the receives a credible
written or oral report alleging
hazing or potential.
I mean, I guess what would
happen is you'd be charged and
that would be something that
You'd have to deal with in court
to try.
Explain that, but I just, I'm
concerned about the second part
of that, but I'm not quite sure
how to.
If you just strike that part of
it and just
Reasonable Cosby's a person
witnesses hazing.
I see where you're trying to go
with it, but I don't know if
you've got any suggestions or
ideas on that.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Wirth, I,
I think I understand your
concern. I think initially we
put that in there.
Or kind of the failure report
and kind of taking it up to
leadership and nothing being
done, but I, but I could see
your concern on how that
language could.
You know, possibly get someone
caught up.
In the situation, so.
Um
I would understand the will of
the committee, and I, you know,
I, I wouldn't push back on that.
I definitely the reasonable
cause is a person who witnesses
it.
Hazing is
I think the most important. Let
me just propose an amendment
that unless anyone wants to
discuss that before I do the
amendment. I, I just, I think if
we online 6 put a period after
hazing.
And just delete the rest of line
six and delete line 7.
Some basic reasonable cause
meets the person to witnesses
hazing.
As he said Senator,
um,
I, I guess the only question I
would, would have with that is.
If we do that and the fact that
we're kind of
I guess the failure report, say
it's a situation that it goes to
a coach, and we're talking about
the credible written oral
report.
Or we kind of
Aing
Even that part of the bill out,
that that would be my concern.
No, that's a, that's a good,
that's a good point. I see
Senator do it. Maybe you've got
a suggestion on how to wordsmith
that language.
Mr. Cha, I don't know that I
have a suggestion. I just
I don't know how a person can be
reasonable.
Uh, we, we generally don't
reasonable, it's, it's it's kind
of mixing two concepts.
So I've, I've seen this before,
uh, Senator Pope, um, Mr. Chair,
so I, I just want to make sure I
understand. The only difference
between the federal law and your
law is you've added the
misdemeanor charges on top of
Is, is that the only primary
differences you've added this
misdemeanor charges to
particular cases, Mr. Chair and
Senator, uh, that is correct.
Uh, we tried to match the
definition, um, there's the the
federal law really just has the
definition of hazing and the
reporting, and so this just has
um a little more specific.
Um, on the reporting, but really
uh the misdemeanors, correct.
Because the federal law doesn't
have any penalties.
Thank you for that. Um,
That's all, Mr. Chair.
Send a message.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Pope, thank you so much, Theo.
Getting back to that, uh,
The definition on the top of
page 2 reasonable cause word is
not used in the in the act.
Mr. Chair center, let me
Yeah.
So if you go to Mr. Chair,
Senator.
If you go to page 8.
They mentioned it on line 13
starting there, a person who
witnesses hazing or has
reasonable cause to believe
hazing has occurred. Oh, I see.
Thank, thank you, Ms. Chair.
No, I was just asking what the
definition was.
But, but anyway,
we'll get to that in a sec. So
on page 3,
So I understand the, the
criminal.
Aspects of the bill, cause
what's cause the key to this
criminal statute is on page 2
lines 12 and 13.
And that's the magic words,
regardless of that student's
willingness to participate.
That's why it's
tough to
To make someone of battery or
salt or whatever, cause the
A kid that up
being hazed has, even though
they're coerced into it or
They feel obligated to
participate there, there's some
element of volunteerism there,
um.
But on page 3, we have further
penalties. It says, um,
any uh subgraph Mr chairman on
line 5, any student
organization.
Um, that permits hazing is
strictly liable.
And that individual directors of
the corporation may be held
individually liable for damages.
The um
Well, I'm assuming that Mr.
Chairman, Senator, that's in a
civil case that's suing, suing
the
The fraternity and the national
affiliation.
Mr. Chairman Senator, Maestas,
um, that's my belief, that's,
that's how we broke the line.
And then uh
Below that subparagraph E, a
person who
participates in the hazing of
another shall forfeit any
entitlement, so
So that's a policy choice
whether that person should lose
their scholarship, assuming, you
know, everyone's gonna be on the
lotto or the or the
opportunities scholarship.
State funded grants.
Awards. So there's, it seems
like there's a different
definition for
If the state proves this, you're
guilty of hazing and you, and
you're guilty of a misdemeanor.
So the crime is intentionally
knowing or
Or committing and then over here
it's a person who participates.
Who participates in the hazing.
And then it's, I guess it's not
a contradiction, but somewhat,
Mr. Chairman, it says that the
participants shall forfeit.
Uh, for a period determined by
the institution.
So does the, so is it like taken
away?
Like they literally have to go
to the bursar's office and say,
hey, I no longer want the
scholarship.
So do they like actively
forfeited or does the school
yank it away and then
I should know this, but does the
school actually give the
scholarship, or is it, or is it
higher ed, so
There may be some issues there
in addition to just the policy
choice of should the kid lose
his scholarship.
Cause I think it's an awesome.
disincentive. It's an awesome.
Dick, so to speak, so that folks
don't participate in hazing and
then below that I'm subparagraph
F. It's like any organization.
Uh, knowingly permits hazing.
I shall forfeit its official
recognition.
granted by the institution, so
like let's say.
A buddy of mine was in the Phi
Delta.
Fraternity, so the Phi Delta is
doing some crazy hazing stuff.
So the, the university would
then kick Phi Delta off off
campus, they would no longer be
affiliated with that school, Mr.
Jenners, uh, I mean, Mr. Chair,
Senator, that's correct. They
would, they would be de
chartered for what they're doing
and so um
I know this
How we set this up is, you know,
Not really adding the felonies,
but really kind of putting the
accountability on the other end
and in some cases, I know that
seems kind of harsh as far as
the grants and the scholarships.
Um, but that's kind of the
direction.
You know, I was trying to go.
In this room.
And then also on on G uh
No, I think it sends a strong
message, and then on the failure
to report is failure to report
to law enforcement.
So you flip the page on top of
page 4, failure to report the
incident to a law enforcement
agency, but like if the coach
tells the athletic director.
If the athletic director tells
the president.
Theoretically they could still
be violating this.
This act, so they have to
Um
They have to call the law
enforcement agency to report the
crime.
So I just wanted to point that
out.
You want to make sure that it's
uh that
That it's, that it's uh dealt
with in the criminal courts and
as in addition to the, to the
institution itself.
Correct, Mr. Cha, Senator, um,
don't want situations where you
have an assistant coach and
tells the coach and it just kind
of stops there and he's like,
well, I told, you know.
No
Uh, Senator, I appreciate you
very much bringing this, as you
know, um,
As a resid of Las Cruces was in
the midst of
Some very deplorable allegations
of conduct relating to the NMSU.
Athletics program and um
I think there's probably some
Uh, initiative for this type of
legislation, we see those kind
of headlines and hear those
reports.
Um, the, uh, it may not surprise
you.
doesn't surprise too many people
in this committee. I was not uh,
you know, fraternity.
It was not Greek material,
uh, and, and did aspire to be
Greek material, so uh it wasn't
my thing. So I, I don't know
much about the whole.
Fraternity process, but I, I did
play sports, I imagine you
probably did too, Senator, and,
and I know also you're your
military service and background,
right, Mr. Chair, and I'm in a
fraternity as well, uh,
historically black fraternity
Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity, so
you, you probably have some damn
good experience relevant to some
of my questions. The the concern
I have is that we have to strike
that balance, I think, and, and
again, particularly with your
your military service because if
I, if I look at the way on page
2 that you define what hazing
is.
It would seem to capture a lot
of things that I was subjected
to as an athlete.
So if I dropped a pass in a
football game, I had to run
laps, uh, or I had to do
push-ups and um you know, my,
uh, teammates might cheer me on
while I did the push-ups or the
sit-ups or or whatever it may be
and um that was designed in part
to maybe instill discipline,
maybe to motivate me to do a
better job in the game. I'm not
entirely sure, but I think that
would be captured here by by the
definition of hazing would be an
intentional knowing a reckless
act against the student.
com m it ted with the intention,
uh, for initiation or
maintenance of membership on
things like an athletic team,
and that would seem to be
exactly what I'm talking about,
and it says, and he says goes on
to say it and has caused are
likely to contribute to certain
things, and it includes mental
harm or uh degradation, right?
And certainly I can tell you
when I'm being told to do
push-ups and sit-ups and run
laps. It's um causing me mental
harm and, and it, and it is
degrading, uh, and I think
that's
part of, of what was intended by
trying to instill discipline on
a coaching situation. I've got
to believe Senator in your
military service, that was
probably part of Finn Doing, uh,
certain sprit de corps and, and
uh some of the objectives of
military service and, and on
campuses sometimes we have ROTC
programs and other things too.
I'm concerned about, concerned
about that.
Um, I, I would say Mr. Chair,
and I don't mean to interrupt
you, that's all right. If we
look on.
Page 2, line 19, and so I don't
know that language kind of
covering, you know, as long as
it's not unreasonable risk and
um maybe that's enough language
to kind of cover.
Um, but I, I think there's a
difference between you're doing
military training and pushing
yourself to the limit.
Um, going through
Special forces training going
through basic training, going
through two a days in football
camp, um.
I think it's different than
A student that wants to be part
of a fraternity or club and
Kind of, you know, being forced
to drink alcohol to a level
that's, you know, so, but I
think it's hard to
I guess verbally or, I mean,
write that down on paper what
that line is, so, but you are
highlighting a.
An important point on the hit
center, you're right. I mean, I,
I, I could nothing but condemn
drinking games and drinking to
to the point of passing out and
so forth was fortunate I was
never subject to anything like
that, but
But the, the, the difficulty is
you're right, defining and
writing down what is that line,
and so you're, you're looking at
that language and it says the
activity would have to be
something that causes or likely
to contribute to substantial
risk above the reasonable risk
encountered, that's, that's
complicated and, and frankly,
it's very poorly defined, not
because you didn't make a good
effort. I just don't know that
it can be defined unfortunately,
it kind of falls into the uh
Supreme Court's efforts to try
and define what its pornography
and the greatest legal minds in
the country have essentially
said, yeah, we'll know.
we see it, right? Um, and so
here that line I think is
challenging for you and that
that's, that's uh I think
difficult, especially because
we're saying whoever does this
is guilty of a misdemeanor, and
that, that means up to a year in
prison, very significant fine.
I think you're also mixing
criminal concepts with civil
concepts is probably not a good
idea in my opinion. So if you
look on subparagraph D, page 3,
you're saying that a student
organization or an association
or living group, is strictly
liable for damages.
Uh, resulted from hazing that's
a civil principle, right, strict
liability means essentially
you've got no defense, right?
You, you, you do this you're
liable. Uh, that's the, that's
the easy way of thinking, I
think of strict liability. I, I
think that probably doesn't
belong in, in this concept.
You also go on to that same
paragraph to say the individual
directors of the group here it's
a corporation, but it's
corporation is whether it's a
profit or nonprofit, so any, any
uh corporation, um, because if
it's a corporation, the
directors are individually
liable, and um I don't know how
that works because again, I had
been in a sorority fraternity
group, but I imagine that some
of those are as corporations, I
would guess, and, and if they
are corporations then by your
bill, the directors of the
corporation are individually.
liable for damages, but they
would any, but would have to be
insane who want to be a director
of a, of a corporation where
they're gonna be individual,
individually like my home all my
personal assets are, are subject
to, uh, uh, uh damages in a
lawsuit.
Um
he says that anybody who
participates in hazing shall
forfeit a number of things,
including scholarships. We
worked so hard in the state to
assure student scholarships and
uh college scholarships and um
I, I
I realize there's gotta be a
consequence and we need to
really uh impose sanctions
against this type of conduct at
the same time, it seems that
we're really trying to keep kids
in college and give kids
scholarship money, and I'd hate
to see anybody who makes a bad
judgment.
Even some minor incident of
hazing to lose their their
college scholarship and
everything we've done to get him
4 years of college here as the
state, and it's, you said it
again, it's a line, right? Uh,
how, how bad does the conduct
have to be?
Here, the forfeiture of those
scholarships would be determined
by the public or private
postsecondary educational
institution does say how they're
gonna make that decision. Is
that the board of regions, is
that the president who makes the
decision whether the students is
gonna forfeit their scholarship.
But I think that's a, that's
something that's not well
defined. It also in ups said the
organization or association or
student group uh may forfeit any
official recognition or
approval, I assume that would
mean things like if you're a
sporting team, you're, you're
gonna forfeit your conference,
uh, status, NCA status, whatever
that may be, because again,
you're forfeiting any official
recognition or approval, that
would also probably include
fraternities, I guess, uh
national uh organization, yes,
Mr. Chairman Lee, your
fraternity.
and that they're chartering on
campus.
she says the failure to report
hazing to a number of people,
faculty administrators, but also
coaches, um, is then become a uh
Misdemeanor crime.
Uh, you'd have to be insane to
be a coach in the state of New
Mexico for a college team, that
that may be an overstatement,
but I, I really find it hard to
believe many coaches would want
to be subjected to criminal
prosecution for a misdemeanor if
they fail to report a hazing. We
want to report the hazing. I
agree with you. But um that's a,
that's a pretty high bar.
Even I, I studied the AG's
report on the NMSU, uh,
athletics department, and I did
not the the athletic director
that was terminated, uh, but I
didn't see anything in the
report where there was a report
to him of hazing that he failed
to respond to when he, when he,
when Hazing what he did learn
hazing, I think there's a lot of
action taken very quickly, but
there's no failure to report
hazing by the athletic director.
There was a report of hazing by
the coach, and I think the coach
was immediately suspended in his
contract terminated, but he, he
lost hundreds of thousands of
dollars.
For his failure to report to
Hazen, but we didn't put him in
jail for a year. Um, and I, I
think it would be tough for, for
coaches who want to come work
in, in a New Mexico college
program if they're, if they're
gonna be subject to that, I
guess, uh, really the, I'll just
end with a uh couple of
questions for you. Do you know
of any, uh, other state, you
said there's other states that
have anti-hazing legislation,
other states impose this breadth
of criminal penalties on
everything from fraternity
stories and and athletics
programs there are Mr. Chair,
um, there are a
few states, I don't have them
offhand. I kind of modeled some
of this legislation off of
Washington state, and from the
group that was pushing the
federal legislature.
But it's not a consistent across
the board. Most are just
Um, hazing is illegal, um, with
no penalty. Well, I think that's
useless too, uh, to, to say it's
illegal and will not do anything
about it. So I appreciate you're
trying to do something about it.
I, I, I do think that we've, I'd
be curious to know cause I, I
haven't yet heard it today, and
I, for some reason I vague
member that we've done something
like this before, imposing
obligations on higher education
to adopt programs and policies I
see Miss Coop in the back, I
think we've tried to at times
impose on institutions.
Requirements by law that they're
being uh orientation programs
for new students and things of
that kind, and I see some of
that in here that's the top
really the, the education and
then the reporting, uh, similar
to what they would do with
sexual assault and things on
campus. Yeah, and I think that's
excellent and I'd be fully
supportive of that and even
appropriating money to do those
things and even perhaps having
some kind of a sanction for
failure to do that, but, but
putting people in jail for a
year, students, coaches,
administrators, uh fraternity.
Um, I mean, what do you guys
hear about what's, what's it,
what's it for turning out for an
adult, you have like, don't you
have adult sponsors or what do
you call them the
Just like the alumni, but mine's
a little different. We're still
kind of active the whole time,
but, but I know there's like
alumni that come in and kind of
sponsor or mentor them at the
house.
Yeah, yeah, volunteers
volunteers, yeah, so, uh, it
would be pretty spooky, I think
if you were involved in trying
to help out these programs and I
don't, I don't think you want to
see these programs go away
entirely. I don't think that's
the goal here to say so. Those
are just my thoughts, Senator
O'Malley with more. I think he
was the chair and glad that you
mentioned that.
The uh requirement for policies
and I was gonna ask that
question too, if we had already,
there was legislation at all
about requirement that these
institutions organizations have
a policy and then mentioned, you
know, the institution that would
either be responsible for uh or
have sanctions or whatever if if
there's a violation of the
policy rather than, uh, you
know, the student or, you know,
um, uh, harming the stu I mean,
yeah, that's what I, that's what
I was gonna get to. And I
And so that's what's gonna be my
question, if there, if you were
aware of anything like that,
that, that
That we win
that already had
Mr. Chair and Senator, I know
NMSU has really stepped up with
what's happened. UNM has
policies as well, um, I just
don't believe it's across the
board at all of our higher
institutions, and then um once
again, we took out the K through
12, we're gonna look at that in
LESC because
You know, we really wanna see
what's
going on there and not really
impact our educators and and and
young students, right? Um, with
any of these types of penalties
and see what we can do, um, but
You know, it's definitely an
issue.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I used to
think of hazing as, you know,
the
Uh, way to gain some kind of
membership or, you know, getting
to a club or that sort of thing,
and then I, when I think about
um I think bullying, right,
would fit into some of the
younger younger folks are
involved in that,
but I'd say, Mr. Chair, Senator,
I, you know, and, and Senator
Thornton was asking this
question. I don't have the exact
definition. I think the big
difference on the bullying and
the hazing, the bullying is
really kind of exclusionary,
right? How you
Maybe assault someone or bully
them, right, to say you're not
part of our group, they
humiliate you, whereas this is
more of
Making you do things that could
harm you to be part of the
group, and so, um, it's not what
they do in the house on their
first go, so I know folks are
always scared about that on
Hazenville, but that's not what
this is.
Forced to do the 100 party or
whatever, that's a form of
hazing, I guess. OK.
They
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Right, understood.
Oh well, Mr. Chairman, I've,
I've, I've read the FIR and the
analysis I had, I did not
remember that.
Federal government passed the
stock campus Hazinger.
December 23, 2024.
It's requiring all of our
colleges and universities to
collect tasing statistics
have policies again documenting
violations by July 1, 2025, uh
require annual security report
starting in 2026, and then you
see what uh you and him at least
has developed as a result of
that types of hazing, subtle
hazing, small paragraph.
That harassment, hazing, violent
hazing, um,
So, I mean, these pathfinder UNM
student Handbook.
against tasing, tasting to find,
I think they've
I think the federal government
is saying that, you know, you
either do this work or you don't
get your federal aid, so it
seems to me they, they finally
already stepped up.
Uh, to do this. So this is
pretty extensive, but what they
have in their student handbook,
at least, at least at UNM is
certainly uh stepping up to the
plate. I'm sure NMSU is also.
So, uh, I put it on the bottom
of page 2 and top of page 3.
Yes
I may have gotten something
different than you did, and I'm
looking at that same and I
appreciate you pointing out to
me. It says this was signed into
law December 23rd, 2024, so this
is only 2 months and a half in
place, correct. And of course,
and it's, and it's to be uh
I think I, I don't know what
part of government would still
exist to force any of this any
longer but,
but there's that, yeah, so we
can rely on the federal
government, but maybe not so
much
anymore than
this group doesn't seem like the
kind of folks that are going to
be too concerned about hazing,
uh.
seems to be
seems to be their MO.
Yeah, that's right, but, uh, I
mean, I don't mean to make light
of the significance of this, but
we, it does look like that
there's been some very recent
efforts at the national level.
Before the new administration
came in, like December 23rd,
they must have not been doing
anything right there at the end
of the year.
So, so much so, Mr. Chair, that
literally I was drafting this
bill and someone sent me an
email that they just signed it
like, you know, right around
Christmas and so nobody really
and it didn't get a lot of
publicity.
Senator Stewart, you saw before.
Thank you. Thank you for
pointing that out. It's
important. Others committee,
pleasure of the committee.
No motions?
There, I'm gonna give it a one
last chance for emotions, and if
there's none, we're gonna roll
this over to uh another date
centerator uh
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee members. I'll continue
to work on this and thank you
for the feedback. Thank you very
much. Thank you. You know action
from the committee tonight.
Thank you. We'll hold this in
the committee. Thank you,
Senator.
centered Trujillo, 105.
And then our last goal will be
center to 375, and we'll call it
a night.
OK.
one of these cans.
What do we get?
OK, it's been a while.
Hi. Welcome. Do you have uh
folks lined up or you, how do
you want to do your
presentation?
Just
All right. Take it away. You
got, you got uh 10 minutes
Chairman and members of the
committee. I'm tired too. I
heard Senator Wirt say that. I'm
gonna claim that also. You
should have before you a
substitute for the social work
compact.
So what I wanna do though is I
first want to go through the
original compact so that you can
see the changes that I've made
to it in the substitute. So the
first part that, and you won't
have the original, so you're
just gonna have to take my word
that it's here. I've got.
abs and everything.
I took the first, the 2nd
section out, which is a purpose
session section, and I know that
this committee has historically
removed purpose sections, um, so
let me just explain for those of
you who are kind of new to
compacts. I've been not in this
committee this year, but I've
been in this committee before,
Compact is a profession is an
agreement to acknowledge
licenses for a profession in
every state that
in the compact.
Um, the social work compact is
still fairly new, um, but it
would allow an individual whose
licensed in what they call one
home state.
To practice in any other state.
It's not the same as all
compacts, but that's what this
compact allows for.
And so if we were to enter into
the compact, then individuals
who are licensed in other
compact states would also be
able to practice in New Mexico.
Likewise, those who are licensed
in New Mexico as a home state,
would be able to license in
other states. I want to point
out that it's not a requirement
for you to get a compact
license, we still would have the
ability to give just a single
state license, which is the
current social work license that
we give, but we would be able to
authorize an offer to
individuals who wanted to get a
compact license, the ability to
enter into the.
Compact license. That's another
step.
So, let's just start with the
things that have been removed.
The
Purpose statement has been
removed.
The, um,
Added that.
On when a subpoena can be
issued, we've added language
that says, but only to the
extent that both states agree to
and our participants in the
joint
investigation pursuant to the
social work compact Li
Interstate compact.
We've also removed.
Um,
Qualified immunity.
So if you're not familiar with
qualified immunity, I did find
some information um on the ACLU
website as well as the Cato
Institute website. And if, if
anyone would like to learn about
qualified immunity, I'm happy to
give a brief kind of statement
about it, but I'll wait for
questions to do that. That has
been removed.
And then we also changed
language to make the venue in
any state or federal court in
New Mexico.
So those are the big things that
have been removed. Some of the
work that we've done in the
course of drafting these bills
is with to to make a
determination as to if we were
to remove some of the statements
in the compact. We've always
been told that we won't be
accepted into the compact, but I
have some research that shows
that there are at least 2 states
that have uh amended their
Compacts to eliminate the uh
Qualified immunity and to make
the jurisdiction in their state.
Those states are
patients.
Montana and Alabama.
And um I, I do not, they have
not amended their social work
compacts to have that removed,
but they have remanded amended
the psychology, the audiology
and speech, and the physical
therapy compact, and they have
remained in good standing in
their respective compacts.
So, I wanna give an opportunity
for my co-sponsor, who I have um
the pleasure of carrying this
with. She was very helpful in
getting these files open and I
just want to give her an
opportunity to speak and then
we'll kind of page by page
through some of the highlights.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
uh, Senator Trujillo is the
queen of compacts, and I'm
really just trying hard to be a
lady in waiting, um, for her,
but the reason I support these
compacts so much. Is it really
we need in this state to
increase access to social work
services, um, and that that is
the purpose. Um, it also allows
um
It it also, um, I have Kirtland
Air Force Base in my district in
Kirtland Air Force Base is very
supportive of this. I think they
might have sent a letter, um,
they, because of military
spouses.
And so that's something if we
have these kinds of compacts, we
get points when they look to
look to bases that they look uh
to close, um, having compacts
actually gives you more points
and to avoid closure. And so
that, um, that's actually what
got drew me into it, the, the
people from Cortland Air Force
Base, um, called me, and luckily
we had such an excellent queen
of compacts that this is
something we could do.
Um, and then the other thing it
does, it allows for the use of
telehealth.
Um, to facilitate, um, to
facilitate access to social
work. So I think it's really um
It's really important to, to
pass these, and I really admire
my co-sponsor, Senator Trujillo,
because she really worked hard
to get a uh to get to put a code
uh compact together that I think
will satisfy the interests of
New Mexico and um and do what we
wanted to do, expand access.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I'm
just gonna move on to uh page 9
of the substitute.
compact, and I know we haven't
adopted that for discussion
purposes. Is that OK to do?
So, Mr. Chairman, I move a do
not pass the Senate below 5, 105
for purposes of discussion at Du
pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So on
page 9, line 16 through 18. I
just want to point out that the
law that is enforced is the law
for where the client is located.
Right, at the time of the care.
So if you're licensed in Texas
and Texas is in the compact, and
you're providing social work
services for someone in New
Mexico, you, that's where that
where you have to be licensed.
So you either have to be
licensed as an individual state
or you have to be part of the
compact. So that's what makes a
big difference. On page 10 at
the top, there's a grandfather
clause. There are some states
that never, uh, just recently,
um
required a national examination
to qualify for state licensure
in their state, so anybody who
has that, um, got their license
before their state required um
to be licensed to have that
national exam it's grandfathered
in Texas or not Texas,
California is a prime example of
that. California had their own
statewide test and it was really
comprehensive, and they have
recently adopted into.
the national exam.
Turning to page.
12, um, when you have a
multi-state license that renewal
process for your home state is
what will drive that. However,
it's important to remember that
if New Mexico is not your home
state because your home state is
who has the primarily primary
authority to discipline a
licensee and then it applies to
every other state. If you're a
remote state, that means that
New Mexico would not be your
home.
State, New Mexico can still take
action against your license, so
none of that none of that
ability to discipline and to
prohibit someone to practice
social work in New Mexico, that
would be stripped as part of uh
being part of this compact.
Um, I do want to point out that
um on page 14, nothing in the
social work license interstate
compact, nor any rule of the
commission shall be construed to
limit, restrict, or in any way
reduce the ability of a member
state to enact and enforce laws.
Regulations or other rules
related to the practice of
social work in that state where
those laws, regulations, or
other rules are not inconsistent
with the provisions of the
social work Interstate license
Compact.
What I want to say about that,
I'm just gonna give you an
example. I'm trying to be as
open and upfront with you all as
I can.
I think that the national exam
is not the best way to determine
that you're a you're a good
social worker, and I would like
to see New Mexico move in the
direction of eliminating the
National Social Work exam. If
that were the case, individuals
would not be able to get who got
licensed without that national
exam would not be able to get
into the compact unless they
took the national exam. They
could, if we eliminated it here,
they could still get.
single license, but they would
have to take that one step more
to get licensed in New Mexico.
Um, again, on page 15, nothing
in the social work licensure
Interstate compact shall affect
the requirements established by
a member state for the issuance
of a single lic single state
license that goes back to what I
just said. You still got that
opportunity, that's not being
removed.
Um
the
On page 18, um, I pointed out
that I added in that um
subpoenas can be issued and will
be acknowledged, but on line 17,
you see only to the extent that
both states agree to and are
participating in a joint
investigation pursuant to the
compact. That's language that we
added in to make sure that we're
not having to give up
information that another state
requests and we're not
interested in giving it to them.
It's flip to
Page 22.
So when we hear that the
commission won't let us into a
compact if we change any part of
it. What I want to point out is
that there's language in the
compact, in this very compact,
starting on page 22.
We get these letters from a
compact attorneys saying we're
not gonna let you in if you make
this change. I just want to
point out that those attorneys
are not the ones with the
authority. On page 22 at the
bottom, it starts the
commission, and the commission
is made up of members, a
delegate, so if we were to join
the compact, we would send a
member and so the member states
are the commission, not the, not
the attorney who provides legal
guidance.
Yes, to the commission, but it's
the commission members who have
the power to, and then please go
to page 25, lines 3 through 6
determine whether a state's
adopted language is materially
different from the model compact
language such that the state
would not qualify for
participation in the compact.
So I've tried to keep that
little sentence in the forefront
of my mind as I've made
amendments to the compact.
Oh, I'm sorry, on page 25, it's
lines 3 through 6.
And I think that's really
important that we recognize that
the compact members are the ones
who make it and we want to not
go to we don't want to change
every word or changing very
limited things that are
appropriate for the state laws
that we have here in New Mexico.
And I think
On page 31, there's two things
that I want to point out.
On line 10, it used to say with
respect to qualified immunity,
defense, and indemnification.
Now it only says with respect to
defense and indemnification, and
the reason is because we don't
have qualified immunity in New
Mexico. We eliminated that, I
believe, in 2019. I'm pretty
sure it was 2019. Maybe someone
in this room knows better, but
the two paragraphs that are left
is that it gives the commission.
The right to defend any member,
not the state. New Mexico
doesn't have to defend. It gives
the commission, and this is
language. I, when I, I googled
it and tried to figure out this
is language that's very typical
of a nonprofit, and the
commission is a nonprofit.
They're, they're, they're an
extension of government because
we all buy into it, but they're
not a government entity, and
it's very common for nonprofits
to have language that they will
defend the
members, um, in civil action
seeking to impose liability
arising out of any actual or
alleged act, hair, or omission
that occurred within the scope
of their employment or duties
etc.
However, on line 22 provided
further that the actual or
alleged act.
Error or a mission did not
result from that person's
intentional or willful or wanton
conduct. So they'll defend, but
not if it's not part of their
responsibility, and then we go
on to the paragraph 2 that the
commission shall indemnify and
hold harmless again, provided
that the actual or alleged act
did not result from the
intentional or willful or wanton
misconduct of that person. So
again,
And those two paragraphs are
very common for nonprofits and
doesn't require the state to
enter or do any affirmative
action.
Um, and then on paragraph 5,
line 19 on page 32. Nothing in
this compact shall be construed
to be a waiver of sovereign
immunity by the member state or
by the commission.
So it we're not waiving any of
our authority here.
And um I think I'm going to end
with that, because the rest of
it is just
Details that I think are cool,
but I'm not sure that you're
going to care about. Um, I do
have, especially at this late
hour, um, Mr. Chairman, I do
have some individuals in the
audience that I believe would
like to speak, um, but before I
give you their names. Um, I do
want to point out that I do have
a letter, um, from the
Department of Defense in support
of this, in support of this
compact, um, and then we do have
um information.
Uh, from Think New Mexico is,
who is also in support of
Compas, um, and with that, um, I
would like to have Megan Dela
Rosa.
And Megan Cornett, um, to, uh,
have an opportunity to speak on
behalf of.
By all means, as part of the
presentation, please come
forward. Say your names.
members of the committee. My
name is Megan Dela Rosa on
behalf of the Kurtland
Partnership, as directed by
Congress, the Military services
are required to incorporate
states progress towards ensuring
licensure reciprocity into their
mission basing scorecards,
enacting license or compacts
such as social worker compact
ensures that the military
continues to consider New Mexico
as a place that can support
military families.
Economic security and
consequently able to retain
current and attract new mission.
Mr. Chairman, Senators, on
behalf of the chairman or I'm
sorry, I'm Megan Cornett from
the Office of Military base
planning and support on behalf
of the chairman and the 11
members of the military base
planning commission, I voiced
their support for Senate Bill
105 as brief today, which
eliminates barriers to military
spouse employment and improves
access to social work services
across the state.
Joining the 42 other current and
pending members of this compact
will preserve, if not increased
New Mexico's military value to
the Department of Defense and
what is going to be a tough time
moving forward. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
will also point out that we have
Melissa Salazar in the room, and
she is the division director for
the boards and commissions, and
she's here as an expert witness,
but if you'd like to speak on
behalf of the compact.
No, OK. Um, so, so, uh, in, in
closing, Mr. Chairman, what I
wanna just make sure that we
understand is not only does
entering into the compact give
us better points for missions
and base locations, keeping our
bases here because we want to
have a high rating. Right now
we're red in our friendliness
for families, for spouses. We
want to have a higher rating
because we want this to be a
friendly. We
done a lot of things as a state
to make New Mexico a friendly
place for military and for their
spouses. Um, this is one of
those things that helps us to
get to green and, and the reason
being is that when you move and
your spouse comes with you or
your family member, they want to
be able to get employed
immediately, and this would give
them that opportunity to be
employed immediately, and with
that, Mr. Chairman will stand.
for questions.
Thank you very much for the
presentation. There's no one
who's signed up in opposition,
um,
But I think you've addressed a
lot of this committee's
concerns, but will not go to
members of the committee.
Senator to do it, yelled.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
senators, and, and this is by
far the best compact that we
have seen in here. Um, many of
the problems that, that we have
with compacts have been
addressed and, and I really
appreciate you doing that.
There are a couple more though.
Um, so,
On page 5.
Line 11 to 13, the definition of
a rule.
A rule is a rule that is adopted
that has the force of law.
And in New Mexico,
our Constitution. Only the
legislature.
Can make laws.
So this is, I think, arguably an
unconstitutional abrogation of
of our legislative authority to
to have that force of law
language in there, and I'll,
I'll offer an amendment in just
a minute that would take that
out, um, but I just wanna, I'll
just kind of run through them
first, see if they're friendly.
Um.
On page 34.
Uh, at the top.
And this is talking about, about
uh records from the
The data system.
And it's, it is giving.
Hearsay exceptions.
To these documents. I don't
think we can do that. I don't
think in statute is page 34.
Um
Line 4.
Shall be entitled to any
associated hearsay exception in
any irrelevant judicial
quasi-judicial or administrative
proceedings in a member state. I
think, I think that is probably
a violation of powers that we
are saying by statute, Judges,
you have to find this as a
hearsay exception.
Um
The, uh
You got most of the venue stuff,
but there's still some left on
page 42 subsections J and L and
on page 43, subsection 10. All
this would require um require uh
us to go to to the District of
Columbia.
Uh, to bring soup to, to
participate in, in these suits.
And so, I think the intention is
was to take all the venue stuff
out, but
No, OK, but I think that was,
those would need to be taken out
as well.
Um
So, and, and this thing about
the rules being laws, this is a
big deal because if you look on
page 47, and, and actually not
even this it's throughout, I
mean.
We, if we are letting a
commission.
We are letting a commission make
laws in our state.
Under this language.
That is not going through our
legislative process, uh, that
does not have the, the
The balance of power, the, the,
it gets applied to, to laws that
are otherwise made here, um.
So
My suggestion is going to be to
take out all of the force of law
stuff about rules.
Take out the, the stuff that
violates separation of powers,
requiring hearsay exceptions.
And take out um
The stuff about venue and and
and and the DC District court.
Uh, but I'm wondering if that
is, would be friendly before I
But everyone through the torture
of reciting those amendments.
It's
I'm gonna
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
it's not completely friendly.
Um, and so I, if, if we'd like
to walk through it, we can do
that, but some are and some
aren't.
Um, in particularly, I'll just
go back to the jurisdictional
issues. We left in the
jurisdictional issues that are
relevant to the commission
taking action.
Where it's us taking action,
then absolutely, then we want
jurisdiction to have that, but
when the commission is saying
that they're going to take
action, um, on, uh, you know,
against a member state, then I
think leaving the jurisdiction
with them is absolutely
appropriate, but I, it, I will
let my partner.
Co-sponsor.
Um, and, um, we do agree with
this force of law thing. um, I
think what would be an easy fix
is to say that has the force of
regulation.
Because that's what it is, a
regulation.
Um, and so I think that that,
you know, it's a, it's a
compromise that I think will
still allow us to be members
because
Of course they're not law in our
constitution uh talks about
that, but they are regulations,
and the commission would be
making regulations that the
members would have to comply
with. So I think if we just
substitute law for regulation, I
think it's a totally friendly
thing, and then the hearsay um
issues. I think we could still
be accepted by the compact, and
of course, this is, we're just
guessing, but I think we could
if we take out the hearsay
because there are other ways of
getting it those documents into
court here.
New Mexico. So I think we could
convince the commission that,
well, we're taking this specific
language out, but you still have
the ability to use other ways of
getting these kinds of documents
in.
So I think those two are, are
friendly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, so on
the jurisdictional 11 of them is
where the commission is doing it
on page 42 Ellis, but both Jay
on 42 and M on 43. That's where
the member state is doing it.
That's where member state is
appealing in action by the
commission, uh, and Jay and um M
a member state may initiate
illegal action against the
commission.
So this would be, this would be
requiring us to go there for us
to do things as a member state.
So
slow down a little bit. I'm
trying to flip to the pages and
so by the time that I get to the
page, you've already talked
about it, so I'm a little bit
behind schedule here um thank
you no problem, no problem, so I
got page 5 and we talked about
that, um, being changed to
regulation. Well and and Mr.
Chair, if I may, I don't think
we have to check. I think we
just take course um take.
Just delete.
Just delete everything
everything after Compact.
Uh, up until the, the semicolon.
We don't have to say what it has
the force of.
If it is a, it already says it's
a regulation. We don't have to
qualify that.
OK.
Yes. So, OK, so I'll, I'll
I'll do them in order, so I'll
make that motion. So, page 5,
line 13.
Striking everything from the
comma through the word law.
And putting it
So.
But leaving the semicolon.
Wait, I
take that, yeah, take out the
comma, leaving the semicolon.
As we said, that's, that's a
friendly memory.
OK,
that's what we do.
Oh, thank you.
We can carry on.
Yeah,
maybe just for clarity.
Any objection to that amendment.
No objection.
OK.
The next one would be on page
34.
So, on starting on
Page 3.
I'm sorry, I'm sorry, line 3,
page 34, line 3.
Um
I think putting a period at the
end of line 3 after commission.
And then striking lines 45, and
6.
And they are authenticated
business records of the
commission.
But we're not saying, and the
court absolutely has to.
Uh, make this ruling about
hearsay
I, I agree with that because
it's a business record, so
that's the exception you would
use, so that has no, no effect
on the commission. I mean, on
the compact, and I think we
could convince the commission.
But the strike is the hearsay,
that's friendly
so we have uh the uh
They won't pay page 34, page 34,
at the end of line 3, inserting
a period.
And then striking lines 45, and
6.
Yes.
And
11 last time. So, page 34.
On line 3 inserting a period at
the end of line 30 after
commission, and that striking
lines 45,
and 6.
OK, then on page 35 because we
took force of law out of the
definition, it's used again
here.
And I think, I think we could
probably, I'm sorry, uh,
subsection B on page 3, page 35.
From lines 8 to 15.
Uh, my inclination is just to
strike the altogether, but if
the sponsors
I think, uh
I think a different approach is
needed. Um,
Certainly open to that.
Right
18 and then up to the semicolon,
is that what you said?
We, we, so, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator, we could do that. I
was, I was thinking of just
dragging the whole section if
you think that's too much, then,
then sure, we could, we could
strike actually up to the work
up until where, so.
So, page 35.
Um,
Uh
I don't, I don't think we need
provided that if we don't have
the language before it.
So it would be page 35 on line
8.
Strike everything after B.
On line 9.
Strike everything up until the
word we.
And make that a capital W.
For where.
Friendly
All righty, great. Everyone on
the same page, 35, 989.
unclear on what the suggestion
is. Anyone knows
that much.
That changes the doctor. Thank
you.
OK, then online 42, I'm sorry,
page 42.
Uh, and it is, I'm looking at
subsection J.
And this is where, where a
defaulting member state is
appealing an action of the, the
commission. Right now, they
would have to go to the district
court in the District of
Columbia for that. Um, or the
federal district court where the
commission has its principal
offices.
And so
I'm gonna do the same thing, I
think, Senator Trujillo that you
did for the other venue
provisions.
Which would be so on line 5, so
it's page 42, line 5.
Strike the words United States.
Miss Madam Chair, or Mr.
Chairman, Senator, I would
prefer, since we get to make the
decision here that it be an or.
Instead of eliminating,
so it would be the, the, the or
for the district of Columbia or
the Federal District court where
the commission has its principal
offices, or, and then we go into
the language that I have
elsewhere.
Mr. Chair center, I think that
is a very good suggestion.
And I'm just looking for your, I
think I know what your language
was, but
But I, uh,
I'm trying to find it to make
sure we get it right.
Uh.
I think we could just say or uh
district or federal court of, of
that, of the member state.
Of New Mexico. OK, so page 42,
line 7, before the period.
Insert.
Or uh or
The
district.
Or or the state or federal court
of New Mexico.
OK.
Mr. Chair
Already, we got that one.
Last one, I swear. All right,
page 43 M.
We will do the same thing.
Um
On line 7, page 43, line 7 after
offices.
Insert
Or state or federal court of New
Mexico.
Online
Mr. Chairman, Senator, that's
friend. OK.
Right. Thank you and, and
Thank you guys so much because
it is always so frustrating when
we have people bring compacts
that we really want to adopt,
uh, and
be able so often seen a rigidity
about addressing these issues.
So I really, really appreciate
your, your approach to this
compact, and I'm excited to pass
a compact in New Mexico for the
first time since the nursing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator for your
input, and I will just add to
that that when I got a letter
from another compact that I've
already gotten through another
committee, and it was kind of
threatening in my opinion, uh,
but it basically said we're not
going to let you in because you
made it.
that had these amendments made,
I just, you know what I did with
the letter, I, I, I have a
recycling bin and I'm done, like
that was the end of it. So I
appreciate that. We're trying
really hard to make this work
for New Mexico.
you
when I move it do not pass on
the 105 I do pass on the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 105,2 version
with all of the amendments we
have made incorporated into it.
that motion to
another couple of.
on page 42 and 43.
Oh, thank you, thank you, thank
you. Before I take that motion,
uh, let me propose another
change on page 42 and 43, page
42, line 7 through 9.
At the uh bottom half of
subsection J, it reads the
prevailing party shall be
awarded all costs of the
litigation, including reasonable
attorneys' fees.
It says that again um
Line 24 and 25 of 42.
And again on page 43 lines 11
and 12.
So the question is that
Policy question do we want to uh
We normally don't have that.
In statute awarding all costs of
litigation, including reasonable
attorneys' fees to the
prevailing party if I could just
correct you, Mr. P, and it would
start with um number uh line 7
and go through line 9 on 42 and
line 23 through 25 up through
the word fees and period and
then on 43, it would start on
line 10, after the period of
damages and period and go
through the end of that
paragraph to line 12.
I already had a highlighted. We,
we, um, I just thought somebody
was gonna miss it. All right,
cool. No, I just was attracting
people's eyes to the page, but
let's be more precise. Thank you
for that, Senator.
So,
I'm gonna make
Uh, on page 42.
Lines 7 through 9.
After the word offices period
strike the prevailing line 7.
And strike lines 8 and 9.
And then uh uh at the bottom of
page 42.
Strike lines 23.
24.
And 25 through the word fees.
And then, uh, on page 43.
On line 10, after uh damages
period strike the remainder of
the line 10.
And strike lines 11 and 12.
And I'll do that in one motion.
And
Right, and that's a friendly.
Let us into the compact with
The attorneys provisionally. Is
there any objection to that
motion signal objection that
change has been adopted.
And now we're gonna go back on
Senator Schwartz's motion, which
Which incorporated the change
just now.
Uh, and a point to substitute
any other comments by the
committee.
The objection to that motion.
Note all those on the committee
voting in favor.
Right, great, you have a
uh, that is a first for this
committee and so thank you for
all your work and thank you,
Senator Deit for, for your work
on this as well. Second, I want
to give mass props, but
well, the nurse compact got
through and nobody paid
attention to it. But Mr.
Chairman, um, and Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee.
Thank you, thank you, thank you.
Um, I, I just have to say you,
I've learned a lot in going
through this process, and I just
I I won't hold you, but I wanna,
I wanna tell you this story. I
did have a
meeting with another group of
folks, um, who said, oh, you
can't make any changes, the
compacts coming over from the
house and you can't make any
changes to it, and I explained
to them why we had to make
changes, that they have to match
New Mexico law, and, and so they
decided they didn't want to make
changes and so uh before we
close the conversation, I said,
I said, this is what could be
helpful.
You go to the Department of
Defense, and you go to the NCSL
and you tell them that they're
writing really bad compact
language, and that's who you
need to go lobby, not us,
because we're going to stand by
what's good and right for New
Mexico. So thank you everybody.
Thank you and thank you Melissa
Sala up for your work and
appreciate you being here.
Yeah.
We got 3 words for you, Senator
Trujil.
I would love to be a part of
that and I, I, I think I've told
you before that Senator Payne
was like the first person to
really be a pain, um, but he
taught me a lot, so thank you.
um
everybody an apology for.
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Honorable members, this is
Senate Bill 375. I'm joined by
Department of Corrections
Secretary.
To set up the the foy Lucero and
we're very grateful for her and
her staff for being with us on
this Saturday night.
Uh, as you know, Mr. Chairman,
uh, probation and parole is
under the jurisdiction of our
prison system, Department of
Corrections, they do a heck of a
job. There's a division of
parole, division of probation.
There's been massive, massive
movement nationally on these
efforts, uh, to reform probation
and parole to lower recidivism.
For me, it's a scarce resources
argument. If a probation officer
has 100, I call them clients,
but 100 probationers.
There's at least 20 or 30 that
simply are not
Going to recidivate, but there's
10 or 20 or 30 that have a high
statistical probability of
recidivating, and we must funnel
scarce resources toward those
high risk.
probationers. This bill does
just that and does some of the
things we've been trying to
attempt to do, uh, to no avail
in the past decade, so number
one,
There's a national movement to
get rid of fees, so this bill
gets rid of parole costs.
Uh, the department has cut down
on, on the, on the necessity for
parole costs, uh, as of late,
but we want to eliminate them
all together.
Um, and the department is, is,
is already prepared to take that
hit in House Bill 2, it's
approximately $300,000.
The maximum someone could be
placed on probation in the state
of Mexico is 5 years, so, so we
want to have uh a good for
nonviolent offenders have good
time opportunity for those
probationers.
Because statistics show that if
you go 2.5 years without a
violation,
but to take the statistical
probability of you violating the
last 2.5 years is so minimal,
it's just a waste of everybody's
time. So this would have uh a
good time, so to speak.
Um, one half or more, uh, while
you're on probation. It would
also have.
Good time while you're on
parole.
Uh, so there's a big carrot for
that, and if you were to violate
parole and you would get, you
would go back to prison for that
year or two, you would not get
the 4 or 8 or 30 days monthly of
good time that you normally
would. It's in addition to the
the the stick, it's an
administrative nightmare. And
then also there's a, there's
another administrative twist to
this bill.
Which I think is
Fantastic idea.
Uh, and I'm gonna have the
secretary explain it, but
essentially,
Those persons, uh, if, if you're
a violent offender, you're
eligible for 15% good time
credit, nonviolent offenders are
eligible for 50% good time
credit calculating that is a
task.
So the department wants to
calculate it in the future, so
instead of you gaining good
time, which, which moves your
kickout date forward in time,
you would lose.
Good time that way the inmate
knows if that inmate behaves and
does the programming, he knows
when he's going to get out.
There's a brighter light at the
end of the tunnel for the
inmate. Easy to administer, and
I think it'll keep correctional
officers safer. So with that,
I'll turn over to the secretary.
Thank you for.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, members of the committee, I
can't tell you what an
incredible thing it is for me to
be sitting up here with Senator
Maestas. We have been working
for so long and this is, I, I
mean, we've come to this place
where we have found this really
exciting way to do a lot of
different things. Um, yeah, I
won't, you know, say what he
already said and I believe he
covered everything really well,
but our goal ultimately is to
help justice involve people
succeed, reduce recidivism and
to encourage positive behavior.
and we believe that this bill
does just that, uh, he asked me
to explain just a little bit
more about the good time
calculations, although I do
think he did a phenomenal job of
of clarifying what that meant,
uh, but ultimately if we award
the good time upfront in
addition to providing this
positive incentive where the
individual has to keep their
good time instead of every month
earning it and never quite
knowing what their release date
is. This gives the uh
incarcerated people and really.
anybody who has any interest in
the person's case, uh, real
clear understanding of what that
projected release date looks
like from the very start, so
there won't be any ambiguity for
victims for the courts, any of
the people that are involved in
the cases and not for the
incarcerated person's family
either. Everybody would know
upfront what that date looks
like. We are not making any
changes to the way that a person
can earn good time or can lose
good time. We just changed the
way it's worded, so.
Instead of saying earn, uh, we
say lose and and so we, we made
some changes like that
logistically throughout the
bill, but people would still be
eligible to earn lump sum
awards, which is an extra
reduction of uh time on their
sentence by doing certain
programs or educational programs
and things of that nature, they
would also still be able to lose
good time if they choose to uh
not perform their uh programming
assignments and uh and they
could.
possibly lose good time as well
for engaging in violent
incidents or behavior when
they're incarcerated, uh, with
that, Mr. Chair, I will happily
send questions.
Great. Thank you very much. We
do have one person signed up and
support Rickie Lee Chavez on
Zoom.
Go ahead for up for up to 2
minutes.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Rickie Lee Chavez, on behalf of
the Law Office of the Public
Defender. We appreciate the work
of the sponsor. We know that he
has worked really hard on this,
um, initiative for several years
and as, as has the Office of the
Public Defender. The only thing
that we have um would appreciate
the sponsor's consideration of
is um
The is the incentive for inmates
for a good time. So we do oppose
that one provision, um, because
it does remove opportunities for
earning good time in prison,
which we believe is an important
incentive. Otherwise we
appreciate his work and we urge
this committee to support. Thank
you.
Thank you. We didn't have anyone
sign up in opposition members of
the committee.
Going once, going twice to work.
No, it is an extraordinary day.
I appreciate, Madam Secretary,
you.
Being here and San Maestas all
the work.
It's kind of
go on into this. I mean, it is
something that
Makes a lot of sense. I've
supported the efforts, but I
understand, you know, we've come
so close.
But it feels like you're here. I
don't really have specific
comments other than.
Yeah, it's a
Big deal, we need to move this
thing now. I'm thinking the next
step, how do we make it happen
and get, get it up to uh.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else?
I just have, uh, so on page 8.
The language you're adding in
there, that subsection 3 or C
starting at line 3.
just as a defendant shall
automatically be released from
probation if na na, uh.
So that that's taking discretion
away from the judges.
Correct?
Oh
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Doig. um, I don't believe so
that the judge uh sentences of a
suspended sentence or a
partially suspended sentence and
the probation department manages
that probation or whether it be
intensive supervision, uh, or,
or the various uh
Levels of supervision, uh, this
would uh allow them to utilize
scarce resources to.
Uh, to place people off of
probation, Judges when they
sentence would know that this is
the law and what
And would send somebody
appropriately, but um.
But I don't believe it would.
where their discretion
necessarily.
Well, Mr. Chair Senator, I mean,
I think now.
I think, I think saying you're
automatically released if.
Inherently takes away their
discretion. I mean, yes, but
this would now be the law that
they would operate under, but I
think now they have discretion.
And they, they wouldn't under
this. Um, I have a question
about what minimum level risk
commands.
On line 5.
Cause I don't see that that's
defined anywhere.
Madam,
uh, Senator. So, uh, what
minimum risk means is the way a
person is assessed on their
compass evaluation when they're
under supervision. So typically
it would be a person that had a
lower level felony offense and
also a person who was doing very
well while they were on
probation supervision, so
they've uh been going to their
counseling appointments. They
have been working or going to
school and uh so they don't have
as high a need to be
supervised people that are on
minimum supervision typically
only report a couple of times a
month, and so, uh, that is what
a minimum responses. If I may, I
just wanted to share a little
information and I didn't bring
up in the introduction, but, uh,
Douglas Carver from the
Sentencing Commission had called
me beforehand, and he just
wanted to make sure that I
shared with the committee that
they did conduct a vote on this
bill and of course everyone
knows the sentencing commission
is made up of a a body of
entity.
from the district's attorneys
Association to the
administrative Office of the
courts, uh, public defenders
office, my department and so
forth. There's several entities
that are part of that and there
was a unanimous vote for support
of this bill, and so I just
wanted to share that with you,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah, I think, I think it would
be better if you had definitions
in here about things like
minimum level risk, um.
Also, I'll just know.
And this is not a criticism of,
of this bill, um, but to the
extent that both this and SB 54
pass, there will be a conflict.
Um
With provisions with, with that
bill, so that might just be
something we want.
Anyone else, other members of
the credit or
Very important.
Just a quick question and maybe
it's something that everyone
else here understands, but with
regards to, again, page 8,
Line 6, you talk about a
minimum, a validated scoring
instrument.
Uh, to, to evaluate whether or
not this person should be
released or not. Could you
describe what that instrument
is, how it's used, who uses it,
and has it been validated
before?
Mr. Chair and uh Senator
Thornton, yes, absolutely. So
the uh the assessment that it's
discussing for our purposes is
a, is a product that we use
called the Compass assessment.
And so what it does is it goes
through several factors that uh
judge a person's criminogenic
risk and what their support
systems look like, so it covers
lots of objective criteria, but
it also goes very much in depth
into the person's history, uh,
while they have been on
supervision.
And as far back as they're able
to assess that person and so,
uh, we stay validated because
we've had it studied to make
sure that it is relevant to
populations in New Mexico.
Thank you with that. So is that
similar to when uh prosecuting
attorneys used like the Arnold
tool to decide is, I mean, this
is on a separate end, but
there's an Ar too that I know is
being that's used to decide
whether or not, uh, someone
should be on, uh, you understand
what that is, but is this kind
of a similar type of tool. Thank
you, Mr. Mr. Chairman and
Senator Thornton, uh, they're
both, uh, scoring instruments,
uh, I guess suppose they're both
validated by somebody.
Uh, but this one is 10 times
more credible than the Arnold to
is.
Thank you, that, that was my
biggest concern, and, and how
credible is this tool as well.
Madam chair.
Senator Cervantes.
appreciate you being here today.
You said something that I think
merits us just spending a few
minutes more, which is your
appreciation for endorsement by
the Sentencing commission on
this legislation and I'll just
tell you this session, this
committee has renewed the
sentencing commission's role, in
other words, I, I really think
the Sentencing Commission was
largely dormant from my
perspective for the last uh year
or more, several years, and
early in this session, we had a
presentation on the sentencing
commission, and as you pointed
out, it has an incredibly
diverse
Representation, membership,
prosecutors, public defenders,
uh, judges, the whole gamut of
people who should be advising us
on a true sentencing structure,
so I want to appreciate the fact
that you, uh, recognize them and
that they're endorsing this
legislation. Now, it's
important, I hope that you
recognize that sometimes
sentencing commission may not
endorse certain things that this
administration is promoting, and
I hope that at least they'll
understand that when the, when
they're promoting certain
legislation that they may be at
least take into consideration
the
of the Sentencing Commission
where sometimes it may not be
inconsistent with the same
thoughts of, of the
administration and I also hope
that you'll maybe communicate
within the administration.
The importance that you're
giving here tonight, which we've
heard for many years, the
importance of good time to
modify behavior, to reduce
recidivism and to accomplish a
lot of important goals. Uh, you,
you, you may not be aware,
secretary, but the uh so-called,
um uh felony possession
legislation that was promoted at
the special session and
continues to be promoted,
eliminates good time, uh,
conduct, uh, for those crimes
and would eliminate that
important tool that I think this
committee tonight is going to
endorse the importance of and
you've said here tonight is an
important tool for you. We
Know that, and we get that, and
so, I'll tell you that that's
one of the principal obstacles
to that piece of legislation is
the fact that it would eliminate
what we know works, um, and so I
hope you'll communicate that
with all respect to the others
in the administration, your good
experience here tonight. We want
to be consistent.
All right. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK. What's the will of the
committee?
I do pass. All right. Is there
any objection to that motion?
They show Senators Thornton and
Paula,
voting now and everyone else
voting yes, you have to pass
this up.
But we will not meet tomorrow.
There's no necessity, given the
floor to enjoy your Sunday.
Please plan to meet next
weekend, Saturday and Sunday.
Thank you very much. Good night,
everyone.
