Thank you Mr chair and members
This is a bill that's been
around for a while it passed in
the Senate two thousand and
fifteen twenty eight to
thirteen.
Aston twenty seventeen in the
Senate twenty thirty two nine
and then passed again in twenty
nineteen both chambers Senate
thirty to ten in the house forty
six to sixteen and was pocket
vetoed by the current governor
the reason for that veto from my
perspective and what I was told
was because we were dividing up
the appointments of the
Interstate Stream Commission and
that's what this bill is about
Interstate Stream Commission
currently has nine members under
the statute of currently it's
the state engineer and eight
representatives of irrigation or
Conservancy districts no
diversity of appointments in the
current law this bill is
attempting and we took out the
appointments by the legislative
branch realizing that that was
the issue of in the last bill
that went up so this bill only
deals with the appointments
and so the governor will have
all the appointments in addition
to the state engineer but it
does change the make up of those
appointments so the state
engineer will still stay in
place all four of the
appointments will be
representatives of irrigation or
Conservancy districts one
Representative of the New Mexico
state care community ditch Juan
Representative a New Mexico
drinking water utility R. one
member of New Mexico water
resources research institute or
a civil engineering
environmental engineering
faculty member of U. M. or MSU
and one hydrologist with
expertise in New Mexico
groundwater resources or a
professional engineer with the
New Mexico consulting
engineering.
In water resources or water
utility engineering so five of
the eight remain in agriculture
and then we do add some
diversity and why do we do that
well we do it because in two
thousand three we task the
Interstate Stream Commission
with formulating our state water
plan so their job is not only to
enforce compacts it's also to
put in place water policy and so
basically that's what the bill
does there is a technical
amendment that was delivered to
the committee which was an
oversight and drafting and so I
I however you'd like to proceed
Mr chair in terms of.
There we are there is there any
yes can we adopt the amendment
and then go to public comment
that would be great
so I do I have a motion for the
amendment.
So.
Yes some of is there any
opposition to the amendment.
I see none are you having
amended bill.
So let's let's go to our go to
public comment
We go to opposition first and
again we're mindful of our ten
minutes ten minutes that we've
so firmly established so so keep
that in mind it ask Senator do
you have anybody well zoom
Meister do we have any opponents
ready to speak.
We do not have anybody who
registered for public comment on
this bill okay would that be
Senator Wirth you've got four
more minutes so did you have
anything else to say yield my
time for the committee okay
great is there to the committee
we go
Members of the committee.
Hands.
Yes Senator Stewart.
Mr chairman I move the do pass
on Senate bill two twelve as
amended.
Thank you is there a second I
second.
Okay Senator Lopez segments okay
is there any opposition to
Senate bill two twelve.
Mr chairman and madam chair
tensions are going to speak on
all I'm sorry I I I'm sorry
Senator Ivey Soto sorry and
strategies.
The system.
I am that is yes from this
really happened and so on.
These are I was interested in
and are raising a couple of
issues and I see Senator per
order so take your time thank
you and our Senator R. Senator
there are and and I would ask.
Mr issue would be so kind as to
allow me to share my screen.
and thank you.
So I there are two minutes I
would like to raise our the
first one in this armpit is to
run one of the bills.
The ministry right the what I
and insert in lieu thereof the
work for.
For the S. explaining and and
Senator Wirth and what plans as
I didn't get a chance to
chat with you about
either of these beforehand I
want to so.
There is no members on there are
are very of the commission
there's the state engineer who
is part of our government.
And there are.
Members from.
That that.
Is capable of appointing our
state engineer the same part of
the governor.
Your operational eight numbers.
The same political party I'm
assuming they would be in the
same part of the governor
what what are mounting never
have sex for the same political
party.
And we're as important numbers
four four one.
One of the state engineer the
five percent.
So so for that reason I think I
think actually.
Right but apartments are bright
I have a R. O.
for the same Representative
Fe County recognize that state
engineer is also providing our
and then I will be able to
Senator Wirth for his is our
thoughts on this.
Work thank you Mr chair so again
this is the fourth time around
on this bill and I believe we've
we've actually spent time on the
section center he so it's all
two years ago and I guess we go
back and look at here's my only
concern I don't think that the
governor should I mean you're
assuming that the state engineer
is going to be the same
political parties the governor
and so I'm a little concerned by
that that you don't want to the
governor should be able to point
the best it state engineer
regardless of party and so
that's the challenge if that
were to happen that was a
different party than you're
creating a scenario where we
start to count count heads um I
I you know I I get what you're I
guess what you're arguing with
that would be my counter
argument you're just basically
ensuring that and that you if
you're the Democratic of
governor Ivey Soto you're gonna
appoint a a partisan state
engineer and and if you didn't
you could actually end up in
just in a situation where you
could have Interstate Stream
Commission that was going to go
the other direction and I do
think some favoritism towards
the governor
is appropriate and obviously
this works the other direction
when the governors of the other
party so again I leave it up to
the committee this is one of
those items I can see the
arguments both both directions
Mr if if if I could just on the
query of of of of some of the
work because I I do I do hear
what you're saying.
It is that what if we were to
instead and I'm just gonna miss
on the fly for second here is
with the provision that not more
than five members of the
commission in the engineer state
engineer shopping for this
incredible part.
So Mister Mr chair Senator I
said I think that's a much
better that gets what you're
trying to do and and avoids the
issue of having a having to have
a partisan state engineer you
just making sure that that
you've got.
I from the same party which
again gives the the current
governor control so yeah I I
think that's a better better
solution to get we're going.
Okay so we have an amendment
then I did you want to move the
amendment.
Yes I I will Mr chairman and I'm
I'm I'm taking what I have not
the spring are just
so that people don't get of the
views of apple went the
amendment would be is on page
two Ryan one of the bill
afterward members.
Inserts.
The mission in the state
engineer.
Okay.
That I believe based on Senator
Woods comments that that would
at this point the all.
It's really more punishment okay
before we go to a vote center
pearl you have your hand up to
you are you on the bill are on
the amendment.
On the bill okay so yes so with
that amendment is there any
opposition to that amendment.
Seeing none are you have that
amendment added to this bill and
sorry you have a second
amendment.
A second amendment.
Our products
So that when let me re share
here real quick.
So that one would be
So.
So.
One year makes sense only if you
looked at number two so out of
page three rounds four through
nine.
On subsection C..
I'm sorry page right my dad page
three one four two nine so the
first the first sentence there
the point one should be
qualified by no less than ten
years experience with New Mexico
water resources actually what
properly grams as the first of
the all the requirements.
I think I the other
commissioners.
Our.
And then.
Right and and so I would need
that that starts out.
Most of those requirements and
then you have the other
requirements of the
commissioners some of them
subsection C. has all the
details on what the political
party issue is that we've gone
using Google places are places
stature primarily where we're we
need party balance on some
things are and any I just.
I we're gonna end up in some
places in New Mexico for example
for registration with with and
also will
Our with our Alexion works
etcetera.
It just gets to do what Senator
Wirth was was intending but
there's there's a couple of
other important we're friends is
here certainly member of that
excuse me a member of that
commission.
Okay part of a party in the two
years next preceding the members
apartment in such a manner that
the members Pilar party
registration with member
ineligible to serve.
On the commission.
R. right because you are
somebody.
Well somebody ground change for
example brand being libertarian
to being Republican.
Are there are should not that
disqualify the person.
From service our.
And then and then.
The next sentence our continues
with that with that more once.
Which is which is that the.
A member of the commission shall
not continue to serve
I was read the residential
language
Commission if the member changes
farming registration after that
appointment one such a runner.
Okay remember in our table are
to serve on the commission
and and and and and we can we
can act in the in in such a
manner as to change
right now it's a party balance
we are part of right so.
You have somebody who changes
or funding let's say Republican
tune Representative Roger not
disqualified a principal
continue to serve as you don't
have one political party.
Our own.
That that has to meeting
members.
So this would be the
let me just just just from
listening this last run as to
In such a manner as to as to
I just wonder what our goal RT
to have more than five members.
Right and so right so right now
we are working with the fact
that that Representative
reported that more than five
members.
Just a practical parts
of this is that once we don't
really care as long as you're
not changing in a way that were
that that will not work on our
political parties have too many
numbers are and so on and again
I would be able to
Senator Wirth operators of
response on this work thank you
Mr chair so just to be clear.
Do we want to so the only thing
makes me pauses and we've left
that we do you just fixed it
down below but it's the language
in such a manner.
That would make the members
prior registration I kind of
like to know more than I members
because if you've got three
Democrats three Republicans
three libertarians and
libertarian changes to become a
Republican that's perfectly
fine.
R. I would just get so if you
clarifying tracked adamant on
purpose I'm okay with this and I
do think it's important we get
this consistent throughout the
statutes but I think that that
would make it abundantly clear
what we're trying to allow to
have happened so there's only
four Democrats on the commission
or for Republicans and someone
changes to become the fifth
that's okay are your.
And and and I just want to make
sure I understood your your
deaths you're you're basically
so someone could change their
party affiliation provided we
don't exceed five.
Or and I'm also I and I also I
just want to point out I would
be getting ready to clarify that
this applies to the appointed
members of the commission the
state engine thank.
So Mister chair based on based
on those those tweaks and a
desire to have the statute
consistent I'm fine with that
amendment.
All right so can I get a motion
to approve this amendment.
Hi I move
is there anybody opposed to this
amendment.
No one this is your final
amendment as I understand it on
this bill.
Is that correct Senator Ivey
Soto at least so far.
We vote on this amendment should
yes no we just did what I just
asked for anybody it upon us
okay so I Senator Pirtle back on
the bill as amended.
You're up.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Wirth.
I was just wanting to ask if we
left the geographic diversity
portion that we put in rules
however many years ago that was.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle we did
and that's a really important
piece that's not in the current
law I think the current law says
that
me just read it to you section
seventy two fourteen dash one of
the members appointed by the
governor shall be Representative
major irrigation districts are
sections and no to membership be
appointed from the same
irrigation district or section
but they could all be from one
part of the state so yes it's
got that diversity.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
I.
Shade that the consideration
My other question is why do we
want the governor to appoint all
of all of the members I know and
in the past few years we've you
know added one or two from eight
council was there any
consideration Mr chair Senator
with having let's council have a
little say in in the make up of
the Interstate Stream
Commission.
Mr chair Senator Pirtle.
I agree with you the original
bill the last three years I had
it broken out so the governor
would have the state engineer
and for appointments in the
legislative legislature would
have for appointments I couldn't
get the prior governor degree
that's
and again we didn't get the bill
up there with the prior
governors on fairness you did
really get the chance but I
couldn't get the Republican
house even here the bill when it
was when it was over there those
couple years and then when it
went up this year that was
flagged is the big issue and
again it is a.
Separation of powers issue and I
and I think.
You know I and I had we had an
interesting discussion and
conservation with the head of
the Interstate Stream Commission
who said Hey these members I've
got a really good I like the
ones we have are we changing
this and we did put an amendment
on in conservation to allow them
to finish serving their terms
and so he my suggestion is and I
think what I hope we can do is
get this bill signed now and
then come back yet again right
at the end of a governor's term
and have the discussion about
why the balance is important a
water policy is too important to
have this thing swinging back
and forth and we see that and so
I I really I agree a hundred
percent I also think this is
this is step one
and I'm gonna have to work to
see if I get this one signed if
I can get it out there and then
I think we come back with step
two.
Mr chair and Senate Majority
Leader I appreciate that and and
we all know being part of the
legislature that
usually the appointments that we
make are more consistent the
doesn't swing back and forth so
there is a little bit of
consistency whenever a new
governor comes in and you have
that knowledge of past service
so I I really wish we can get on
this time but I do appreciate
the geographic diversity I think
that's a huge part of this
this bill.
You know the water issues in.
In the pagus basin lower pay
guests are not the same as up
around San Juan and so it's
important have all of that in
but thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator per all all
right so I'm not seeing any
other hands up so what's the
will of the committee.
You already have a motion Mr
chairman thank you for the
reminder okay as amended.
So
so is there any opposition to.
Senate Bill to twelve as
amended.
okay Senator Pirtle.
Senator Pirtle and Senator
Moores voting no everyone else
is a yes so you have a to pass
on your bill senator Wirth thank
you Mr chairman members Preciado
okay next up we have Senate bill
ninety four Senator Moores and
senator Neil but I Sir Senator
Moores can handle this
Senator Moores you're aware of
our time our time tradition so I
will be very very quick Mr chair
if you will stop talking started
Senate bill ninety four is a
great bill I first bill with
center of deal myself and
working on what was the national
organizations there's been a
push with and I have to expert
witnesses I think we're marching
on its those who massacred also
let Mario the athletic director
with Mexico state in be nice to
and we will keep it under ten
minutes
what Senate bill ninety four so
there's been an effort around
the nation to allow our student
athletes to actually be able to
earn an income off of their
names images and likeness
basically do an endorsement
projects and as we know that
multi billion dollar industry
that is college athletics and
special some athletes as being
from our for minority
communities really is a great
opportunity for them Sir on a
little bit of money and we're
really finding with this
legislation has been passed by
California and five other states
are ready to really help so
student athletes do male student
athletes I line issues one of
the most going stores are was a
all about player from Stanford
who went to the Olympics one of
metal and then when she she was
not allowed to actually go back
to school or any resources and
money check it will correct
remainder of perks eligibility
and not be able to actually
profit from what she had done
point sport and Out lost the
ability to actually.
Are looking future we do have
some members Oliver Margie
actually explaining what the New
Mexico are not messed my
apologies national all athletes
Association and what these
members actually do is make the
support with the other six think
about another seven states six
of already passes legislation
seven states are actually
looking at right now L. close
with before we go the amendments
that this is actually a.
Additive issue and the issue
what bill to bring Democrats
together and the Lobos and the
actors in one way bills will we
got the athletic director of MSU
speaking in favor for this
football coach in basketball
coach R. U. N. M. are also in
favor of this and what the still
this is competitive issues now
are Colorado and California have
passed this legislation which
makes us at a very competitive
disadvantage specially the
mountain west conference for UNM
I are predators of redoing
California Colorado I believe
all of Mario talk at the end of
his conference competitors or
California so who's us to make
sure that we're competitive in
recruitment moving for much of
you will you explain the
amendments on before we moved
our Mr chair was like the movie
amendments.
Our movie amendments to Senate
bill ninety four and Mr Timothy
could explain those for us.
Sure and and thank you for
having me German serve on to
send Senator Moores again rural
Oklahoma with us because players
Association been hoping a number
of states
with language and our
improvements and in just a few
of the the notable notable ones
here and as you can see there up
there I'm really the first
couple are just pretty minor and
and a number.
three as well this is
definitions
we we look at part three it's
really an attempt to make sure
that there are no ways to kind
of game the system so number
three we're making sure the
language is very difficult if of
if a because it did want to
avoid the law makes more
difficult this language.
three AA refers to reserves
receiving food shelter medical
expenses insurance from a third
party one of the things that was
on to see much of an oversight
with all the legislation had
discussions with that some
initial laws which now are being
amended in somebody's other
states is the weather over sizes
that if a player receives a
sandwich if we were all in for a
player that was hard but that
players average
it would still even with this
law be against in state rules
that would it could still put
the players eligibility in
jeopardy unless we use that
player's name image likeness you
know commercially and I think
that's more an oversight and is
it for certain issues especially
human rights as the main food
and shelter even insurance those
are things that if a player gets
any of those things with third
party that should not be a
violation of any organization
and and that actually New Mexico
out these needs that need the
state tax to make that clear.
R. B. also includes athletic
reputation which is another
thing again if if someone's
receiving food it's not
necessarily for use of their
name image likeness if it's
because of an athlete is because
of their athletics reputation so
you see language throughout the
amendment on that as well.
So the on the the top of page
two number two prohibit
discourage as to not be from
wearing footwear the student the
situation efficient trading
activities that actually is in
line with the NBA NBA players
get to use shoes of their choice
so long as they are safe and
follow certain parameters which
are
kind of defined there and and
the stepped in the provision
there it gives players some
players might have a chance to
maybe lost their own clothing
line item and receive money so
that we the one exception where
during in person activities
players would have an option as
well.
Number three ensure is that if
players on their own time
the school cannot interfere with
what they do on their own time
in regards to have these names
like this rather tributary shin.
Number four prohibits
inducements you know for and and
senator Morris talked about
recruiting this you can get very
competitive with really by and
large all the schools are saying
that none of these in our name
image likeness opportunities can
be used as inducements by a
school to lower high school
recruiter transfer.
Into enrollment.
Under for be really gets to
making sure that there's a
prohibition of retaliating
against players if the states
are gonna grant if the state is
going to make sure that the
athletes have these freedoms.
This is language that would
protect the players from
retaliation.
Going down to I see.
this also gets to when players
can and cannot exercise and I
deals so the the important part
here is really third and fourth
line I guess the.
Second third from the bottom
when it talks about in person
official manager activities so
some of the language we've seen
out there isn't so good it says
it would say that if if there's
a game going on a player cannot
exercise and I do name image
likeness to but what about if
that player has a rate of social
media post that is supposed to
go live during a game now the
intended California because
sponsors doing California that
language started to kind of get
into California bill when
they're trying to figure out
what happens if a player is at a
ninety school and under armor
pays the money to go where under
armour New Jersey was that of
kind of being more narrow they
they kind of initially broadly
said well the school kind of
control everything but
inadvertently it would prevent
prevent those opportunities also
players who started small
business for instance if that
small business has any staff or
is able to generate money
concurrently while a player has
happens to be in practice are
traveling to a game or any game
you know the industry the can
take measures to make a very
complicated for players to be
able to exercise those rights
this is not a farfetched theory
we were also advocating in
Congress as well with the power
five conferences proposed
actually policies that would
prohibit athletes from name
image likeness deals if there
are schools also had to deal
with say for instance Nike but
not to this it would just
prohibit players from deals with
Nike it would prohibit their
proposal would prohibit deals
with not all of Nike's
competitors okay rendering
entire industries off limits to
players this industry has never
one of these reasons for players
as a whole so.
Absolutely want to make sure
that any reasonable narrow
restrictions has to do with
whether or not a player is
advertising and promoting things
in person during mandatory
activities not if businesses is
going you know currently going
on to be conducted or paid
social media posts or other
opportunities while player is
actually in a game.
And finally on the last page
page three
really this this paragraph here
is is all about preventing a
conflict of interest making sure
that players are free to secure
representation as unaffiliated
with the school and and also to
make sure that any entity that
represents or has represented a
school in the last few years is
unable to Representative a
player right now players are
prohibited from having any
representation this budget
design like that purposefully so
which is a big reason why
players as that are at such a
disadvantage and many of the in
the entities out there.
Rest is likely to licensing
company they represent licensing
interests of colleges and they
sell the cottages intellectual
property rights and locals and
everything else for that company
for instance to turn around to
begin representing players at
the same time there's a major
conflict of interest because a
college really is a cash cow so
any deal that the player may get
well being concurrently
Representative with by
Colleges is is gonna be more
likely to be a raw deal than a
good one so those are I think if
there any questions about the
amendments
Thank you.
Senator of this pretty extensive
amendments did you want to have
a motion for discussion purposes
or do you want to go straight to
and there nay on the on the
internet I can't see of the
screen Mr chair solve all your
lead on that only visual I see
issue and the amendments so
there's anyone wants up
questions if not we'll go
straight to a motion.
I don't see anybody
This year.
Okay so much grow
I'm is there a motion to adopt
the amendment I will all move
that motion Mr okay and I'm
within my right to second that.
So is there anyone opposed to
the adoption of the some of this
ammendment.
I'm not seeing anyone.
So okay so now let's go back to
public comment and well are you
done did I have if I let that
Mario yes sorry for talking over
you of Mario just now quickly
say something that will be a
comment once good thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee appreciate the
opportunity to speak today more
emotion director of
intercollegiate athletics at New
Mexico State University and as
we've said before you know we
are in support of this bill and
appreciate Senator Moores taking
up this a specific FY exponents
thank you thank you madam hello
and thanks for visiting with us
today so let's go to public
comment opposition first zoom
Meister do we have any opponents
of this legislation.
Mr chair we don't have any
public comment for this bill
okay then to the committee we go
and we have Senator Pirtle up
first.
Do.
Okay I I was second that do pass
motion
is there anyone that wants to
speak on this bill.
I guess not just thousand US
senator Morris with your
presentation so I wait there we
go to like move on move on no no
no I thought I was waiting
Senator Ivey Soto you are up.
Mr Chairman just want to let the
committee know that I don't have
any amendments on this problem
setting myself for the next.
What
else
years separating your energy
okay do you have so much energy
Senator okay okay dokey so so we
have a motion for a do pass on
this bill ninety four as amended
is there any opposition to this
fine bell I may say that.
Sponsor I know where you're
you're yes this phone here Lee
just like in the old days you
would block and I would run
behind.
Just think how much money we
could have made.
No.
We wouldn't even be in this role
okay so so is there any
opposition to Senate bill ninety
four as amended.
I'm not seeing any okay so
Senator will you and I have a
due process as amended members
of the committee thank you Mr
chairman thank you all right all
right thank you thank you for
the motion thank you Mario.
Right okay so now we're going to
Senate bill seventy one Senator
Do�a and this year up.
Thank you Mr chair and
I know miss miss cook I I
believe we have like some
experts and folks to to be.
Wall.
You're you're you're ten minutes
ten minutes okay.
So Mister chair will there be
let and I'll go ahead and began
great so SB seventy one creates
the patients that protect that
collection protection act the
ultimate goal of this is to both
protect low income patients in
New Mexico while also decreasing
uncompensated care for medical
providers.
And I worked extensively with
every group that has reached out
to me on this bills starting
back in December when I reached
out to the medical society
continuing over the last two
months during which I've
repeatedly ask anyone who's
expressed concerns to me to let
me know what specific changes
they they would like and that's
how we got to the committee sub
that's before the committee here
today and which addresses the
vast majority of the concerns
that have been raised my experts
are going to address the
specifics of the bill and I have
no doubt that we're gonna have a
an extensive conversation that
will.
All the details but I do want to
flag for the committee that six
members of this committee have
actually voted for two of the
main provisions of this bill
already I every member of this
committee that was in the Senate
in two thousand fourteen voted
in favor of SB two sixty eight
that year I was chairs of this
Senator Ivy Soto Senator Lopez
Senator Moores Senator o'neill
and Matt chair o'neill and
Senator Pirtle and just as SB
seventy one does now SB two
sixty eight in two thousand
fourteen created a ban on sent
me low income patients to
collections are suing them for
medical that.
Required medical providers to
screen patients for financial
assistance and and actually had
broad bipartisan support it
passed the Senate with thirty
eight votes unfortunately then
governor Martinez line item veto
those provisions from that bill
which is why you're seeing them
now again here today in SB
seventy one so I'll go ahead of
for for more details on the bill
I'm gonna pass it over to my
experts we have odd Nicolas
court of and sovereign Hager
from at the center for long
poverty and we also have I don't
see that he's on yet but Nick to
Madison and he's gonna talk a
little bit more about some of
the specific debt collection are
parts of this bill.
They know about the time right
so this from what we're saving
about two minutes for for
rebuttal if needed okay.
So go ahead sovereign or neck
I'm not sure who of you is
going.
Thank you Mr chair Senator my
name is Nicolas court of a
healthcare attorney The New
Mexico Center center along
poverty on your behalf of the
New Mexico together for health
care campaign on.
Every New Mexicans should be
able to access the healthcare
they need without being afraid
of crippling medical debt I want
to start this conversation by
talking about a claim we at the
center line poverty worked with
names Linda Linda was diagnosed
with breast cancer Linda thought
she had insurance and so she
started to receive treatment for
that breast cancer six months
into her treatment sure she
found out she was uninsured.
And so she was facing over three
hundred thousand dollars medical
debt.
Because she couldn't pay.
Rather the hospital function
that she couldn't pay based on
your treatment Senator to
collections.
In collections they were pushing
for her to pay one thousand
dollars a month.
Only after working with
advocates did she find out that
she actually qualified for
Medicaid the entire time.
Fortunately for the hospital and
sue them to get thousands of New
Mexico patients are sued over
unpaid medical bills if they
have their wages garnished liens
placed on their homes their
credit ruined.
Effective is the subject of
national attention in twenty
nineteen with the.
For profit hospital in southern
New Mexico.
Instead taking step back
nationwide we can see that over
sixty two percent of
bankruptcies.
Fifty nine percent of all
negative items incredible arts
are due to medical debt.
So SB seventy one it does a lot
but I really want to focus on
three signature.
Late we're really pressed for
time you know did you did you
get that with the three minutes
that you have basically to to do
this did you understand that I
did yes okay I mean because
there's another advocate there
wants to talk can you kind of
wrap it up.
I will Mr chair.
And so really it does three
significant things are limits
charges or overcharging on
uninsured patients because they
are charged hyper inflated
rates.
And second it requires hospitals
to screen for insurance because
a lot of these patients qualify
for public programs but the
following are through the cracks
so hospitals have to check do
you qualify for something.
Third it requires rather eight
prohibits collection actions and
lawsuits against low income
patients.
What all these you are operates
to really reduce the number of
low income patients were sent to
collections but also reduce
uncompensated care costs and so
with that I'd like to turn into
great Nicolas Medicine.
Okay.
Mr chair committee members my
name is Nick Madison I'm a
consumer protection attorney
from New Mexico I will keep my
comments very short I'm here as
an expert to speak on section
sixteen through twenty of the
bill in addition to creating a
patients that collection act
these sections make some changes
to other portions of New Mexico
law that currently have negative
effects on people who have been
subject to medical debt
collection that includes a
potentially never ending statute
of limitations for judgments on
medical debt and also a
collection agency regulatory act
that may not require licensing
and bonding all of the debt
collectors that are out there
collecting a medical debt I will
reserve all the rest of my
comments for any questions that
the committee may have right and
then sovereign to do you want to
add anything.
No Mr chair I'm just here is
that right right okay so okay
thank you thank you so let's go
to public comment opposition do
we have opposition for this bill
zoom Meister.
We're gonna start letting them
in first we have Ashley Wagner
from the New Mexico chamber of
commerce right and okay.
We're allowing ten minutes for
opposition so actually keep that
in mind thank you.
We have Jason Weaks coming on
first there's not in the waiting
room okay Jason come on in.
Protesters there.
You're on mute Jason I apologize
thank you all.
Mr chair members of the
committee Jason Weaks on behalf
of optimal group I'm a
registered lobbyist for them so
I just jumped in and no warning
so
Autumn is a New Mexico's largest
independent medical group we
have approximately a hundred and
fifty providers with more than
half of those being primary and
pediatric care our clinics are
located throughout occurred in
Rio Rancho and we see more than
a hundred and a hundred thousand
unique patients every year we
participate with commercial
insurance Medicare and three
Medicaid insurers we appreciate
the Sanchez collaborative
approach on this bill we we've
had a couple meetings on it we
also generally approach I
generally support not exposing
patients to difficult financial
circumstances and aggressive
debt collection even so we
continue have some concerns with
administratively burdensome
processes including or what we
see is administratively
burdensome processes within the
bill including a provision that
would affect our gastro internal
need surgical center and our
group as a whole Ron really feel
like the practice like ours it
doesn't really accept we we
really don't see very many
uninsured patients while
provisions of this bill in our
previous bility to us just
doesn't make a lot of sense to
us from an operational
standpoint we don't think it
gets a lot in terms of helping
people get on insurance and what
we certainly appreciate some of
the debt collection measures
within the bill at present we're
just not in a position where we
can support it we are speaking
and and I guess soft opposition
to the bill today hopefully we
can continue to work on it so
that we can resolve some of our
outstanding issues but for today
we we stand in opposition thank
you thanks Jason right now it's
actually with us yet zoom
Meister.
Mr chair she is not okay do we
have another person in
opposition that.
Yes we do next we have Scott
Scanlon Hughes with the San Juan
regional Medical Center great
okay.
You're on mute Mr Scanlon.
Members.
This.
you.
R. Scott Scanlon we're not
hearing you.
Speak to us.
Can't hear you.
Mr chair at.
Audio and on his microphone
isn't working maybe you want to
give him a second to sort out
his audio issues I'm all back is
there another person in
opposition yes Mr Stewart Horan
is yes.
Mr Harmon.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chairman members committee
Leri Karan registered lobbyists
for press trained health care
services and present health plan
thank you only want to talk
about two sections of the bill
because the sponsor has accepted
me revisions and we appreciate
the work that she has to have
done with Presbyterian on the
bill and a lot of the things
that are required under this
bill as a not for profit were
required already do under
federal law but I would just
point you just to section nine
which has to do with pricing for
uninsured patients the way the
bill in the committee sub is
drafted it if you have an
uninsured patient there's a
default payment based on
Medicare rates one suggestion we
had in the sponsor might have
some conversations about this a
couple of days ago if you'll
remember it came to this
committee the surprise billing
legislation where we dealt with
how how patients couldn't be be
bill for for costs above
insurance rates and we set a we
set a standard that's that's
overseen by the superintendent
of insurance that we can
actually have those payments
that based on a percentage of
Medicare rates so we do ask for
consideration of maybe using
that as an index rather than
Medicare rates and sometimes we
actually if we use just right
Medicare rates and we have to
buy a piece of equipment that
will end up being at a loss of
the the the equipment will be
more than Medicare pays and so
can you can create some issues
for us and the second piece of
section eleven which is
community property in and how we
can collect that that has to do
with whether or not a spouse on
primarily would be responsible
for their spouses medical debt I
understand is going to be some
more conversation on that maybe
during the the committee so I
won't go into too much depth so
we'd we do appreciate the work
that's been done in the and the
sponsors intend this bill so
thank you Mr chairman thanks
Larry and our cat can we try
Mister Scanlan again or it has a
is this microphone working Scott
yeah.
Thank you Paula Jones for the
technical glitch my name is
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for the San Juan
regional Medical Center and we
to respectfully stand in
opposition to this legislation
we're still trying.
About eighty five percent of
this legislation hospitals
already do we already do so
we're still trying to figure out
the need for this legislation
respectfully
We don't is there seems to be an
impression I think by the
proponents that that hospitals
are actively seeking to take
people to collections and the
fact of the matter is is
collections are an expensive
proposition it's something that
we don't want to do we screen
patients right now and so again
I I think this bill is going to
up to to be examined very
carefully by this committee I
don't want to repeat and I know
that time is short so we
respectfully oppose this
legislation thank you Mr
chairman thank you Scott and
then cat we have time for one
more opponent if there is one
for two minutes.
We have missed Care robin
Brander from the New Mexico
Medical Society and that's two
minutes thank you we'll go to
the committee thank you.
Hello Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm my name is Kerry
robin Brunner and I'm the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico Medical Society our
opposition is very similar to
that of my colleague Mister
weeks we totally agree.
The station to make sure that we
are not having our patients be
crashed by medical that we know
that that serves no one's
purpose including the positions
in the state of New Mexico are
concerns that we shared with the
center long poverty and the
sponsors of the legislation
really have to deal with the
technicality around the
amendment or the definition of a
health care facility we want to
make sure that our doctors have
a very clear bright line as to
when they are complying with the
legislation when they need to do
screening when they need to
ensure that they're not selling
medical that indigent patients
and our concern is without a
tied to licenses under the
department of health and with
that without that clear
articulation of the health care
facility we then end up in a
situation where doctors have
good intention to comply but but
miss miss the ball we're also a
little concerned about who would
be liable depending on when the
information was sent to a third
party practitioners and where
that responsibility may lie it
doesn't actually work out and.
And for those reasons we we.
Working on the legislation.
Thank you so much thank you very
and now I'm to the committee we
go
hi Mr Mr chair there I believe
there are people signed up to
speak in support of the spell
that's why we had our ten
minutes but if you know right I
understood that the ten minutes
were for my presentation
advocacy that's why that's why
you you relinquish your time
here but yeah I understand so
like five minutes for your part
for your supporters but again
it's ten minutes you know we
where we've been through this on
this committee ten minutes to do
your quick presentation and you
go to your supporters anyway so
so that's my understanding so
and I'm running the committee so
so have a couple of your people
Mimi did you want to speak.
Mr chairman I just wanted to
tell you that Senator survive
yes after of comments about the
last meeting had said that he
will allow fifteen minutes five
minutes for the the sponsor and
her experts so then there would
be ten propone can opponents and
ten opposition.
Senator but yeah I Senator I do
went well over your five minutes
so so anyway what will allow
five minutes for your supporters
and then go to the committee.
I miss Catt risk would you I
believe you have the the list
that we had sent of the folks to
prioritize to speak yes
Mr chair the first person on
your list that we have is Anna
Rondon's.
I've got three of protest then
so yeah just go ahead thank you.
Just a thank you Mr chair
meeting members my name is
enrolled in I am one of the
leaders of forward together in
nineteen ninety six I was a
single mother
Of two toddlers and my when I
was driving to pick my children
up I had
really bad chest pains and so I
went to rural hospital in Gallup
and you said that I had to be
medicated and finding out what's
wrong with me but.
After I got to the hospital they
said they have to send me to
Albuquerque through an ambulance
and that.
And and and he'll at Rehoboth.
There was a minimum wage and I
was signing documents idea was
something that was liable for
outside of costs so I couldn't.
And and so we followed me on my
credit I got bad bad credit and
it's like an oppressive chain
reaction because I couldn't get
a vehicle I live on the
reservation dirt roads we will
have to travel at least thirty
sixty miles but my story is not
unique it's medium.
Of our community members Mexico
dissing issues of.
And they also want to go to the
hospital.
But to actually see what.
We're.
S. P. seventy one thank you so
much.
Thank you our next up.
Senator had on the next person
up is Genevieve Romero.
Thank you.
Thank you chairman committee my
name is generated right on I'm a
celeb was for to get action this
bill is vitally important to
ensuring the health of our
communities in families which is
important now more than ever two
years ago as a sophomore in
college I got strep throat
hunters the emergency room the
hospital never sent the fifteen
hundred dollar bills to my VA
insurance and the next thing I
knew I was getting calls from a
collection agency as a working
college student I do not have
that fifteen hundred dollars to
spend and now two years later as
a senior in college I am still
trying to sort it out and it is
now my credit report even though
I have insurance I lost count of
the times I decided not to seek
health care I needed because of
the fair share of incurring more
medical debt and as a question
was trying to improve economic
circumstances the harsh reality
is that my health care needs and
now impacted my credit my
economics teacher health
insurance not is not always
affordable are possible in New
Mexican families do not deserve
to be punished with medical debt
because they cannot afford
healthcare private insurance so
I urge you to please vote yes on
Senate bill seventy one thank
you for your time.
We are next up and Mr chair of
the other folks who are going to
speak are all medical providers
it sounds like they're not in
the waiting room I don't know if
I think about time from their
clinic earlier in the day and
and aren't available so we're
gonna go to the committee now
thank you Senator so I have
Senator Pirtle up first on the
bill.
Thank you Mr chair this isn't in
regards the bill I was just
speaking about the time issue I
was not made aware of any
changes in what we were the last
meeting.
Executive director aware of that
so thank.
Thank you senator and next we
have Senator Ivey Soto
Senator need for this one Mr
chair will point of order please
yes adjusted you have your back
okay I am sure just so that the
committee and and etcetera
Pirtle brings the point and
Senator Stewart brought earlier
to be abundantly fair I I have a
given the committee the
procedures that I've adopted I I
do recognize that I think one of
the earlier presentations on of
on Monday the sponsor of
indicated they were not clear
about how that process was going
to work a so in in consultation
with the leadership and I will
discuss it would center Pirtle
the thinking is that what we'll
do is for the advocacy
proponents will actually allow
fifteen minutes with ten minutes
remaining for the opposition the
reason for that given their
advocacy some additional time is
the sponsor the bill does need
some time to simply for was that
the bill to discuss the bills
explained the bill and that's
that may not really be advocacy
it is but it's really not fairly
advocacy I think so so
modification I discuss with
Senator was to increase the
fifteen minutes the proponents
with ten minutes for organized
opposition but I have not yet
had a chance to discuss that was
that R. Pirtle so my apologies
to him but we will adopt that in
the future of the less the
committee.
Is that it's not working for us
but I I don't want to be
confusion about where we're at
today thank you thank you thank
you chairman
so I Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you Mr chairman R. and a
dessert maestro would allow me
to share my screen.
I do have are I really
appreciate the work that.
R. Senator huh do reviews done
in terms of the committee are
some.
And our having gone through
let's
I do have I do have some some
amendments to suggest prices are
of a technical nature and and
these have been are discussed
actually with the needs are
great for a sponsor and actually
are we.
Mr chairman there is one more I
need that to actually just from
that sort of language on if if
if you were going to somebody
else parser as long as are voted
on the bill and the complex
right now I'll I'll I'll I'll
have that for you we'll do that
senator and so Senator Baca
you're out.
I thank you Mr thank you Mr
chair I was a you know I was
just wanting to see if maybe we
could get an email of that
committee set up so this really
isn't for question that's why I
raised earlier I I I don't see
any email of that committee so
it's really difficult to all
longer with the extent of some
of these are changes.
Just on the on the screen when
we put it up momentarily.
That last Monday.
We re sent the Senator Baca.
I can for that to him now greed
is there anyone else who needs
it.
Senator Pirtle needs at.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
sponsor for sending that to
appreciate that.
Next up I am Senator Stewart I
do believe if she still wants is
this a.
Senator Stewart was at your hand
from previous committee Mr
Chairman I'm sorry I did not
take it down okay so.
Okay back to Senator Ivey Soto
yes and and I would recommend
that that number is fine there
are many of the committees of.
On the to go through the
eighties and then
are they there's this is on a
little bit.
Are retailed so
you Mr chairman but I would
suggest our is as we go through
the suggested amendments.
But we
M. F. if someone wants to part
of one of more than we should be
able to just adopt the rest of
them and then we can discuss
wanted to them individually if
that is necessary so one of your
hand and share my screen.
Where.
And our so.
So on page three.
For though
So what's the right or wrong.
Working.
It's.
Answered means profiling
entities.
With revenues of at least five
million dollars annually.
R. and then and then it would be
them up the staff with a public
hospital etcetera I'm running
seventeen.
After all practiced by.
In search.
For.
So the practice are more common.
I
would just.
And start operating under the
license
I would say a hospital.
Some of the current state of the
all of their.
And then add a soda be
freestanding emergency facility.
Dropped on to the next line.
After the work facility.
More spry affiliated with a
hospital on operating under the
auspices of.
you can also learn strike
restaurant twenty eight
freestanding immersive facility.
Or other.
That's right the next line are
this is actually subsume right
making the change part of our
strike I'll patient frantic
office already affiliated with a
hospital or.
And then on line twenty two
operating under the license a
hospital to work with will will
remove some some places where we
end of template Kading.
what we were saying.
On the line.
Right money for.
The residential treatment center
and then we have the language
says that serves persons up to
one one eight years of age.
And so are aligned I would we
would strike that serves persons
up to twenty dash and on on on
the next line line five strike
one years of age.
So they would just say our
residents fitness center.
Also do the same thing with a
community Medical Center.
So it's right that serves only
persons up to twenty one years
of age.
And and Mr chair Senator if I
might if I may I believe the
intention there's one more that
we would need to add an online
seven where there's another
reference to a day treatment
center that serves persons up to
twenty one years of age I think
the intention was to was to take
out all of that language that
limited this affordability I
only to folks that served up to
twenty one years of age so it
you might want to add in line
seven strike it I.
After the word center striking
that serves persons after twenty
one years of age.
And that.
Nine seven as opposed line sex.
Down on.
We reversed as to.
Okay all.
them on page I dropped on the
page I.
Online twenty two.
Sprite.
Representative two.
We strike yes right that's right
the work to insert in there are
I.
And the parentheses struck the
number to answer in lieu
thereof.
Number five.
We are consistent as to the
dollar amounts that we're
talking about between our
facilities and providers.
On page six.
One twenty one.
Where to find our.
And start with the patients.
And the common drafters were
patient so if a third party
healthcare healthcare provider
will bill the patient
Senator from nation gathered.
When we get to the phone lines
we just kept keeps breaking.
Actually program doing at.
And that is on page twelve.
We get to section all of them.
So we strike them.
Actively all of.
Section eleven so that would
also than bees are striking
already down to page thirteen
line twenty three.
And then we would also the.
Are we number.
Sections accordingly.
Then on page sixteen.
We strike our.
Section sixteen from the bill.
We strive runs twenty four
twenty five.
The next page seventeen.
We strike them R. the entire
page.
On page eighteen.
Blinds one nine.
Once again then remember.
Succeeding sections accordingly.
And and for those of you
finally collapsed and and
wondering how this will work in
the and the because of the
committee substitutes if
whatever amendments are approved
we would potentially ultimately
them the approving many
substitute point three albums
are being cooperated in the
committee substitute before it
gets report about.
But on Mr Chairman that is
the six time just doing all
these at one time instead of
going up one by one but if if I
people have on questions about
particular woman's over like to
pull out one or two to have a
further conversation about them
would be happy to do that are
otherwise this is my a committee
substitute for the committee
substitute so Senator before it
got to the committee can you
just for my benefit at least
explain what these amendments do
and a macro like big picture
kind of way.
Certainly it and you actually
what it does is it streamlines
the federal
and you can sit with them that
are within that
what what the sponsor in the
advocates were describing in
terms of a rather trying to get
to with the bill it
with that definitional part
questions what it does is that
it it takes out
some of the definitions that
would have been are duplicative.
Thing that it does with in terms
of the of the threshold of the
only from two million dollars to
five million dollars is that
that's a threshold where we are
of those who have revenue under
that threshold are not covered
by this marks.
So what that does is it actually
so roll up my understanding on
and I think Clinton Turner does
a lot of work in this area
is on the call and may be able
to to assess our with some of
the some people have questions
on the sides practices are but a
a single medical practitioner
is is is is over or under on if
you're just by yourself a little
under a million dollars a year
typically are Representative
when we get it from its size
medical practice inside medical
practice right now typically is
is of around five and a half to
six million dollars and between
now and about fifteen million
dollars operator so what this
does is there's and then there's
there's actually significant gap
between between the are the
single practitioner and mid size
practice so what this does is it
actually raises that.
Practically change on.
Also the option the mid size our
practice our practices what are
recovering dollar figures it
allows in arms and increase for
inflation.
the for our before we start
running up against us over time
and wanted to come back to start
making amendments again because
of that.
So Senator during their
experience this as a friendly
amendment a committee sept here
committee so yes Mr chair of the
center and I went through the is
and and I am I am fine with
these amendments what one more
thing to add though.
It that we realize we're going
because of these amendments now
in the definition of facility we
end up having community mental
health center in there twice so
on page four line I.
Of what we're striking should be
a community
basically strike everything
after the semi call and online
I.
A page for.
Okay Sir Senator Stuart I.
We hear from you on this.
Share Mr chairman thank you I'm
so my questions are directed to
Senator Ivey Soto
and you starting at the bottom
of your amendment can you
explain of first a number
seventeen page seventeen why you
are striking that entire section
my first question.
Thank you madam chair I can read
but actually I would prefer to
yield to the sponsor of the
general because you probably do
part of in our and about a
context of what I would do.
doing.
Our technicians are let me let
me just.
this one requires those part of
this is we are what we're doing
is what with what such sixty was
doing was seeking to amend the
committee property acts.
Ballard.
The family law
Article our chapter forty one
that's best for the soonest time
chapter twenty is is family law
and so and so what what happens
is is that if you if you do know
that the the language that you
see.
Going on page eighteen.
Our.
It is right now at the end of of
seventeen I want to see response
then Charlie consensus in
liability for such medical that
we're seeing that legislative
assistance central be on
separate standalone document.
What we discussed at the fact of
that would be a standard form
that would be created for every
single admission of patients
that would that would been set
right I am very.
On my spouse are consenting and
that and then and for me we are
going to the smiles and ran I
get in the last response signs
off.
Just don't seem to be disrupted
people's health care and it also
It also is is our it needs some
of our problems in terms of the
whole concept
of community property well but
but without all online
I know the Senator doing.
Mr chair Senator Stewart was
Senator Ivy Soto said as as as
correct we have some concerns
that there would be unintended
caught consequences of including
this language and there that
would either prevent folks from
from being able to get their
loved ones admitted
appropriately or would put them.
What we see before is that their
situations where at some
facilities in appropriately go
after family members who are
signing their family their.
Their their mom their data their
spouse into a facility and and
are then inappropriately pursued
for those that's later are there
was a concern that by including
this language and some and the
other language that is struck in
Senator Ivey Soto is amendments
were striking the entire
sections on that would actually
give give these facilities are
roadmap to to have these folks
dead to rights
and so if that would be an
unintended consequence of of
this language instead that's why
why I'm I'm OK with taking it
out.
It's still it's still real issue
that that we're gonna need to
figure out how to deal with I at
a future point I I think that
will end up being at a separate
bill in the future.
Thank you senator Senator you
still have the floor.
Thank you Mr chairman so the
next one is number the.
Thirteen and fourteen so you're
taking out completely the
section eleven liability for
medical debt so what is the
purpose of that remove all.
Thank you sort of service it's
part of the central bank except
this one ends up becoming on and
reimbursement Sidious because
actually goes beyond on
America's to other persons so
let's say I am dropping somebody
off our I'm I'm let's say I'm
taking a parent to to the
hospital and dropping them off
at the hospital for their them
to be admitted this this
actually creates an incentive
for our medical
practices.
Rural to happen until a
consensus Bollinger early in
closed because the president's
medical care on Charlie comes
consent to assume liability for
the medical debts or nursing
home that another person
eighteen years of all.
And so and and and and and so
that's what generals of the
previous one is is one where
where you know certainly the
intense is a is a proper intent
I do agree with senator doing
that this is something that
especially within a family
structure we probably should
come back in and we visit at
some point but it it it has some
real unintended consequences and
what we don't want to do is we
don't want to create the
standard forms and standard
practices where we're medical
facilities and up getting
somebody else when they're
dropping somebody off or or or
there was a long one or
significant other or that are
that they're not married to
domestic partners etcetera and
have them program voluntarily
and Senator my ability for the
medical that.
So Mister chairman Senator do
heck is would you like to add
anything to that.
Mr chair Senator Stewart no I I
I agree with with what Senator
Ivy Soto said.
All right thank you so Mister
chairman of the I think this is
my last one the number eleven.
H. I.
The.
You might have said this
although you just ran through
all of these so quickly it was
hard to really listen can you
tell us the purpose of a number
eleven page five certain arms
are Mr chairman and senator
Stewart
supports five matches which is
which is in this last if you
have your number eleven in
action matches number one.
It's our in in both cases of
number one and number eleven and
and the amendments we're talking
about the size of a practice.
And and I'm not rates whatever
the threshold member is that
that we have in the bill they
would not be subject to the
requirements I'm doing this for
the a screening.
And and know what it is when we
started to this bill
and so and so the thing is is
that our experience in as
possible as much as we talk to
the medical society and spoken
to other practitioners on their
there's a concern as to the
impact of this would have on
small practice
what's the point of the
deskside.
The small practices tend to have
a better understanding of what
they're dealing with.
Madam staff one of the
impact as to as to the all the
requirements are within this
bill particularly in terms of
having to do this we have to do
a variety of other things and
and the small practices on
routes.
Okay act and and and and
etcetera if you could probably
speak to this as well as as co
sponsor of the bill miss more
practices on what the problem on
that that is forcing people into
thanks.
And so and so this would do then
is Senator generally and had
listed.
Our.
Senator added have this path and
opportunities
initially right in this in this
committee signed.
Are based upon information that
she had about about what the
typical size of a small
practices.
We'll take a look at what's the
size of the product some slides
from this data has to be armed
around around six to fifteen
million dollars.
Then in the bill.
One part of the dollar amount in
the statute more make sure that
there's some space for this
practice to grow with inflation.
And so this provides that given
the amount of space that exists
between the small practices in
the mid size practices
essentially.
I know it's it's it's it's
actually interesting to the
finances of a medical practices
you could practice for small
practice.
Your bars the small practice one
wind up having to to pass out.
Seven million dollars in order
to be able to make it
financially work and service
accommodates that and and I
think it's consistent with where
the whether you numbers on the
best practices I will some of
the Clinton Turner one of one of
the X. program this is often the
Sanchez is here as well he's
done some economics work on this
and I think that comports with
those numbers as well.
Thank you Mr chairman the is
that center do head wanting to.
Wherein you Mr chair Senator I
just want to clarify one small
thing that Senator Ivy Soto said
because at one point he said
folks under that five hundred
dollars five million dollar
floor would not be included in
this bill together the portion
of this bill that deals with the
the ban on debt collections that
would apply to to anyone dealing
with medical debt that that that
would so that would apply to any
practice regardless of that four
percent I just wanna make sure
that that that's clear and and
and thank you for that Sir I did
that's that's actually positive
excess federal member there was
one section is still planned
everybody knows.
As explained thank you.
Mr chairman that ends my
questions.
So Senator Baca do you have
comments on the amendment on the
bill.
Senator Baca.
Yes yes I do thank you.
On the amendment I'm just just
looking at the bill and I
appreciate it thank you Mr chair
thank you senator for bringing
forward the amendment it does
alleviate some as I can tell you
that that of the community
property a provision in there
the separate property was really
just completely misplaced I
would think but the song I
that's going away Mr chair the
other issue though is that
the real problem I have here is
I think we're losing.
side of what are two million in
a five million dollar business
are I mean these are it sounds
like a big number it's so you
know if someone's making two
million or five million dollars
and the put in their pocket
that's one thing but we need to
revisit these numbers I mean
five million dollar business is
not a big business you're
looking at a business that
probably
Mr chair and Senator hasn't
maybe thirty employees forty
employees I mean that's a small
business and so what we're doing
here even at five million
dollars is your is your
impacting very small medical
providers that rely on the on
this money to pay employees and
and and that sort of thing and
so you know for every one of
those businesses that is
basically walks into this new
structure of your impacting
their revenue and and and there
gross revenue I mean the margins
are stand in these businesses
and as it is the owner isn't
taking all those kinds of
numbers are taking on some small
percentage of that and so the
net effect of of this type of of
And maybe this is something more
for the bill but.
Mr Chairman billion dollars
honestly we need to be looking
at numbers like twenty five and
thirty million in the medical
industry to to protect the
smaller providers that's really
all I have to say of I'm gonna
support the amendment just
because it expands it a little
bit but you know
this is very constrictive in my
opinion.
I have Mister that Mister
chairman.
Your tier starter for bringing
the amendment of bill okay
center I've missed out on the
amendment yes if I could make a
suggestion and that is
I'm happy to members of.
Our amendments to through ten.
And our world through nineteen.
R. as one motion and then we can
we can return to and then have a
and then in a separate motion
making here with amendments one
and a lot of.
Okay what's.
All right.
So can I get a so we're we're
talking about two different
motions on two different
amendments right.
So are you on this panel under
this time it's if and
our internet or any discussion
on the on the other are
questions that are there are.
I'm one of those are to route
nine.
And our revenue through nineteen
okay as one amendment.
Okay so
yes I Senator Stewart thank you
Mr chairman Senator Ivey Soto
don't you mean through and.
Number two through ten.
And I appreciate your diligence.
Okay so
so we have the members two
through ten
and
That's a separate separate
department nineteen and nineteen
if you Mr chair Senator Ivy Soto
on paid that on number eight
there I shouldn't say strike the
entire line issues they struck
everything after the semi colon
not have actually will respond
universal one years of age your.
Okay.
All right.
Okay so we have a is there a
second on the motion to move the
this are complicated amendment.
By seconded.
Okay Senator Stewart yeah we're
good okay so.
So we've adopted these these two
now go ahead we have we haven't
voted on it yet for.
Well I said is there any
opposition to the adoption.
Seeing none.
You have an amended.
Subcommittee Feb yeah whatever
okay.
Mr chairman we would return to
amendments numbers all one and
the I'm gonna when I read about
that we had quite a discussion
about the members are and that
and I will it and and and you
know I'll I'll just say that I I
I'm here with senator Marco on
the state on the size of a
practice
and I and I really struggled in
terms of where to put it and I
think the I'm kind of relying
upon some of the numbers
provided by
by Mister Turner and so this
gentleman if I could on a year
to Mr Turner to find his yeah
his this committee about
about five million dollars
annually in terms of revenue and
then that way also Senator Baca
can ask you some questions yes
yes we are Clinton Turner can
you join us here in this
discussion yes Mr chairman if
you can hear me yes I can hear
you and and just for Mr chairman
and for the committee I work the
Legislative Council Service so
that disclaimer I'm not here in
support or opposition yes for
technical support yes.
so that the information that I
was able to get was primarily on
revenue per physician and this
was from the medical group
management association survey
and it has revenues from about
seven hundred thousand all the
way up to two million per
physician with those higher
being human vascular surgeons
are now surgeons so a family
practitioner would average about
eight hundred thousand and
Revenue.
And about two hundred thousand
for salary so the median
practice size for family
physicians was I and that also
very by specialties at
orthopedic surgery practice had
media around eleven.
Have you had any questions on
that data but the those were
hi try to assist some of that.
Senator Baca did you have a
response to any of this.
I do you know we're we're
looking at
Gross revenue at this point you
know cross Revenue I mean this
doesn't take into account the
number of employees you have the
amount of the amount they get
paid of what we're talking about
averages for for a certain
person who does this type of
surgery that type of surgery you
can have I mean you can have all
of gosh ophthalmologist your or
a a pediatrician that does a
million and a half a year but
has ten employees Mr chair and
so I I appreciate the research.
If that doesn't bear out in the
real market that's not what
these practices look like Mr
chair these practices very great
they're very greatly and scope
and number positions of the
doctor they pay people and so
just putting in their Mr chair I
think it's a poor metric even
initially to go buy a gross
revenue because margins could be
very small Mr chair and senator
so I mean you can do a five
million a year and you can have
a a net revenue at the end of
I don't know a state five
percent to be making two hundred
fifty thousand dollars a year or
you can be doing fifty million a
year and compound that of
further down and be taking maybe
you have a large operation but
you're not there very much sure
you're at less involved and be
taking up.
Our home smaller amount the
value isn't so much and in what
the end of or the owner is
putting the money in his pocket
the value is where that money is
distributed to employees and so
this has all of just on the fact
that I think is in some cases
exponential some businesses
where the margins are very small
were impacting the medical
economy by a large amount by Y.
eight putting in this gross
revenue this new price structure
now I'm making under this new
price structure or was fifty
million I'm making thirty
million now I have to let go X.
amount of employees to continue
to make a sum gross revenue with
yen which is my target it costs
jobs and the the probe real
problem about this is that not
only does it cost jobs it costs
jobs in a critical industry we
are running many health bills
this year Mr chair that are
impacting this particular
industry and now you know and
again this might be for the bill
later on we're working both
sides of it now we're working
the side here's how much you can
right and then we're even trying
to say how you can collect and
and we're trying to regulate the
price of the insurance at some
point this equation if you're
working both sides of that equal
sign it has to give and so and I
give means medical providers
moving out of state because it's
no longer profitable to be in
New Mexico that's all I'm scared
about Mr chair and so number
five million that I was talking
about that.
Senator thank you Senator Hickey
co sponsor of this bill would
like to weigh in on this on this
discussion so Senator Hickey.
Thank.
My apologies to everyone I'm
just about to introduce in
another committee and I've been
going crazy back and forth so I
do want to validate the five
million in a small relatively
small practice
it the family practitioner as
Mister Turner pointed out that
that's a correct amount but
where I think have Senator Baca
is mixing apples apples and
oranges is that that one point
two million or seven hundred
thousand includes the employee
he's in that family practice
that is the total revenue and
and as Mr Turner said correctly
the family practitioner take
home about two hundred thousand
I also want to validate
Senator Ivey Soto was
observation is that when you do
go Egolf you might have two or
three family practitioners and
pediatricians sometimes you do
have to have more make of a
larger jump but I think I
million works as a cut off level
and I would endorse it and I'm
gonna have to drop out.
You senator and senator Morris
you want to speak on this issue.
Yes
Numbers presented are.
I'm sorry your.
We obviously recruit doctors and
healthcare professionals in
world New Mexico and the numbers
presented by that shark are
absolutely not even close we
actually are participate in
recruiting organizations that
you national surveys to identify
Ross salaries for doctors and
healthcare professionals and
other provide a very good
details of matrix on what
different health care
professionals earn and how much
revenue err health care
professionals so I just pulled
up a report to a by Merritt
Hawkins national recruiting for
that actually tracks in talks
about average average salaries
for recruiting physicians in
this one chart of looking at and
what the average revenue average
revenue could be for economic
position I'm gonna read off a
couple of your cardiologists
surgeons three points just under
three point seven million
dollars and reputations are just
for one surgeon and that's not
their style.
We're talking about the average
salary recruited party our party
back chairman is four hundred
five I am not trying to get into
rural New Mexico restaurants
where you're.
Hello Sir I am a family practice
for you brought your two point
one million dollars an average
salary of two four two one four
one thousand family practice two
million to talk about just over
two family practice positions
are gonna come up close you're
you're all general surgeon two
point seven million with our
three hundred fifty thousand
again this is for recruiting
purposes internal medicine two
point six million of revenue O.
G. B. Y. yeah which we do not
have New Mexico we have towns in
New Mexico road B. G. Y. X. so
it's supposed on a doctor's what
state are we're talking about
two million dollars per would be
G. Y. M. in revenue with this
our three hundred twenty four
thousand again for recruiting
Surgeon three point two million
so goes on and on and on these
so you're talking about soul
physicians highly trained
physicians in very rural markets
in the soliciting talk about
premium we're trying to recruit
someone to Las Vegas of the land
or Roswell's more even less
screws and that quite frankly is
sometimes up there pretty going
to get people out.
because some of our challenges
so the five million is sounds
like a lot of money it's not
side close it's a very low our
revenue as you can see from some
of these numbers are talk about
to physicians well pump over the
those numbers so you what
Senator Baca was talking about
earlier talk about practice for
five doctors opposition you're
really talking about a our
revenue stream of twenty twenty
two million dollars and that's
not largest on what they're
making that's a revenue stream
pay all their bills are medical
medical malpractice insurance
and everything else that that
more staff there every every
bill that the LFC rants so
that's not profit sounds like a
lot of money but their margins
are exposed and again so those
numbers that were presented
earlier are woefully.
Thank you senator real world
perspective of people someone
who access to try to recruit
highly trained physicians to
rural parts New Mexico thank you
senator Senator doing this is
your bills thank you I yes so I
think we've in this whole
discussion we've really lost
sight of what this floor this
five million dollars for the
were to our two million five
million what what role that
actually plays in this bill
this has nothing to do with
those compensation this has
nothing to do with recruiting
doctors to New Mexico the
purpose of that floor was to
make sure that small standalone
practices are relieved of some
of the administrative
obligations that are in this
bill around screening patients
for Medicaid eligible and and
other coverage eligibility so
that's that's all this is going
to this isn't anything about
changing people's compensation
this isn't anything this would
nothing about changing those
numbers would change the
collection bam that would apply
to anyone.
Wanting to to send medical debt
to collections all this does is
make sure that that very small
practices for providing some
health care services in these
larger health facilities they
would not have to do the
screening themselves the
facilities would do that
screening and then send the
results to them for them to see
before they built the patients
independently but what the
entire discussion has it is not
taking into consideration what
this bill and what this
provision is actually doing here
Google.
And so and using the numbers
based on on New Mexico that
Mister Turner found just so you
know our assuming assuming like
in a family practice with that
one one doc would have an
average of I think he's at a
hundred thousand in revenue
annually so that would mean is
that a family practice that had
six stops and this is in New
Mexico this isn't this isn't
that the regional or the
national number of numbers as
senator Morris presenting but
this is this is specific to hear
also that would be a practice
that had had a spur six actual
docks in it
then it would not for family
practice one would not then have
to do the screening themselves
they would instead get that
screening for services provided
in another facility from that
facility but that is the role
that this place here this isn't
about compensation this isn't
about this would not relieve any
one of the the collections band
changing this number
these these numbers need to be
read in context with the rest of
the bill hi and and I I don't
think they are right now.
Thank you thank you senator
Senator Ivy Soto this is still
your amendment so can we get
back to your comments on this.
Mr Chairman
I would our amendments one and
eleven as it appears on the
screen.
Okay and I think it's
appropriate to take a vote on
this so
So.
Yes yes.
It's R. five times right I would
like to actually amended those
amendments to to twenty million.
Mr Chairman does it does have
impact on recruitment Mr chair
because we have to recruit
doctors to New Mexico highly
trained professionals to New
Mexico S. does affect
recruitment it is a national
issue is we have to solve New
Mexico to people we have to so
people go to Las Vegas and Ross
Wells also it is a national
issue and those are at a
national grid networks so but
when you message gets out there
two doctors to positions
providers to get to this cap it
does send a short message to
recruit so.
That's twenty yeah we can take
up your amendment after we vote
on this amendment so.
Metal Mr bush yeah we should run
I I I think it's appropriate to
vote on the amendment to the
amendment for us yes.
Then then we'll go to senator
Morris.
Right.
What.
Senator direct but I believe Mr
as I believe Senator Ivy Soto
saying vote on senator Morris is
amendment for okay or has heard
from it okay so let's but let's
about on Senator court.
I'm sorry Mr chair before we
take that low
I think that one of my experts
nationally addressed address
this issue.
One point four Senator Moores
and and so I would be able to us
over here yes Steinborn thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee in terms of we're
access to health care and in
rural areas is something which
work on extensively Senator
online poverty and what we know
about the situation is that when
folks cream for.
Reduce confidence care and
that's borne out in some of our
rural hospitals for example nor
Lea hospital that's invested in
order.
Screening folks instead of suing
folks are sending people to
collections and that we know
that in rural areas folks are
being sued at really high rates
we've heard about that and the
national media and we know that
uninsured folks are largely low
income eighty five percent of
folks are uninsured or an income
level that qualifies for some
type of public program and so
putting in a requirement for
providers of a certain size to
actually make income off of
patients right to screen has to
budget one is to make sure that
we have more insured folks
across the state including rural
areas and that those providers
are getting compensated for that
care and second that people have
access to health care which is
incredibly important even more
so we know during this so I just
offer that based on the research
we've done.
And in the community.
Where where she practiced
medicine
burden go through that excuse me
Mr chair your work what's our
expert professional works where
she practiced medicine in
Senator your this is an expert
that that has been brought in by
the sponsor we ought to get into
resumes you know so as I'm gonna
ignore that question okay.
And we're gonna go to your
amendment so can you state your
amendment and we're going to my
name is that Mr chair take up to
twenty million.
Okay all right so just in case
if it's not already clear that
is not a friendly amendment yes
I'm very clear I think we're all
clear on that so the the clerk
to call the roll on senator
Morris amendment to change it to
twenty million.
So.
Family.
Audio issues I'm going to call
can you hear her from here.
This is on her computer Senator
Baca.
Yes.
Yes.
He said yes yes twice.
Sorry I can't hear you Senator.
No.
You
go.
Up.
My question is is there a
possibility yes flies to that
taken up to forty nine.
As.
No.
Senator Morris yes.
Yes yes.
No.
What is Senators Montesa me on
here he's Senator okay.
All right.
Mr chairman of this time and I
would need to import those
places to strike two million and
insert in there are five
million.
So that's the that's the motion
Emily can you call the roll.
What was that.
Technical issues in here when
you call the roll again.
Sure what we.
I Mr chair for every technical
issues we're not supposed to
continue the committee hearings
court rules.
Thank you for having a delicious
fact public viewing and we
don't.
I think we're just wrapping it
up Senator I mean we're you know
rock and roll call.
How should we can we get a both.
Right what we just did a vote on
yours and we can get about now
Analeigh can you call the roll
yes Sir Senator.
I knew you.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes ma'am but that thank you for
Senator Lopez yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
So the amendment carries over
back on the amended bill.
Mr chairman at the wrestling
because
yes.
It's a sure shocked the
committee to hear my opposition
strong opposition this bill for
those of you guys for lawyers
this is the equivalent of
setting
public what is help public aid
lawyers fees for medicine and
then saying that the lawyers
can't billers collect those
people are from those people
this is it showing showing bill
two years ago we passed a
surprise billing a law with a
lot of compromise Water
conversation or applaud the
sponsor for doing that that was
a bill that actually works
people talk got it figured out
there's just two years ago
and the words we you know it's
very very frustrating for these
bills and other bills this
session or coming through for
last ten months we've been
putting up big banners across
our parking lots and on the
Billboard saying thank you
heroes for serving us and during
this pandemic for me personally
I I I actually put on the scrubs
and and went out there and
collected COVID test for nine
ten months out all year we
stepped into the breach start
time a pandemic we're supposed
to be heroes and yet this
session we're seeing nothing but
it's tax on the medical
profession in this does send a
chilling message when we do
bills like this we work on that
surprise billing and we're about
two years for the federal
government did it themselves how
we work together but all of
these bills are chilling for
medical malpractice to this bill
you are saying New Mexico's
close to medicine these are the
people we just said we're our
heroes so I really want to
committee to think about that
who are heroes and we're gonna
punish moving forward we're
gonna say New Mexico is closed
for business to who are you
going to get your diagnosis from
what doctors nurse practitioners
are you gonna go see in rural
New Mexico these kind of bills
are chewing we all hate the fact
I personally have had a hospital
who had missed out.
There are all the billing
process send my bills to
collections of inviting them
right now they have some serious
issues that we need to address
for years going in and providers
into this people who were our
heroes were providing our
specific coverage here during
the pandemic and you're saying
you're closed we're gonna bring
you and we're going to punish
you for a drive out of state I
really hope this committee in
the Senate really thinks about
these and other bills going
forward and the messages sense
and all of its all you Mr chair
it is hard to recruit physicians
additional tax lab technicians
the place like Roswell Los
crucis Las Vegas it is hard very
hard and this bill and he's
built a backyard coming after us
are making it harder please
think about what you're doing to
New Mexico medical system when
you do things like this thank
you Mr chair Senator thank you
Senator Baca.
Before we go about.
Senator Baca thank you Mr chair
I I appreciate with this is
trying to do you know I know
where your heart is looking out
for the little guy Mr chair you
know I don't want to you don't
have to you know get into
collections or go broke over
medical condition we I I
completely understand that I've
I've had a family of my own that
has been in those positions well
all I'm just gonna pull you just
a couple sections to illustrate
why working on both sides of
that equal sign both sides of
the equation if you will what
we're doing to hospitals here in
a I would point out of well
we're on the topic that
There were really.
Aside from Representative Hickey
I don't see any proponents for
this thing I mean we have people
lining up saying how bad this is
for the medical industry ensure
there for big providers to
represent people like
Presbyterian but let's face it
those are automatic most of our
doctors those are the doctors
that serve us and even will go
out on a limb to put place
hospitals and medical care in
remote places where they don't
make a lot of money already so
I'm gonna go to page seven
Mister chair if you will
offs should for and our Senator
all Ivy Soto you'll to you if
you up if you see something that
you struck here of that that I
didn't catch in the amendment
but I'm looking at page seven a
section for a line the line of
work sixteen through well the
remainder of the section really
and this has to deal with
indigent patients okay and so
the indigent patients who were
if you're determined to be
indigent which I I mean that's
defined somewhere but I don't
know what that says other than
saying I don't have money at the
time all collection actions the
charges for health care services
and medical care are pursued
shall be terminated upon the
determination that a patient is
in pigeon so this is much more
so maybe my my metaphor will be
poor here because medical care
is very important but this is
akin to going in getting you
know.
Your car serviced or whatnot of
and then walking out and if I
can show you I don't have the
money to pay of the service is
free of or going into a
restaurant having a meal and if
I can show you I can't afford to
pay will in the middle was free
of what about that mechanic what
about that restaurant that cook
that waitress what about the
medical provider in this the
service is been rendered and now
they cannot pursue any payment
for that for the individual
party and then I'll move on to
another section of try to be
brief are you been pretty
patient Mr chairman I appreciate
that on page eleven of section
nine providing for for pricing
parity and it says here Mr chair
and committee health care
facilities and for our health
care providers show charge for
emergency are medically
necessary care provided to
uninsured patients on about no
greater than as apple Google the
applicables payment rate for
such care pursuant to the
federal Medicare program we all
know Mr chair committee that
these are the lowest prices out
there so heroes two instances or
telling the medical provider of
for this certain group of people
you don't have to pay at all and
we can even pursue a collection
because of the bill we can't do
anything with that and I would
guess that that could be legally
defensible if they try and
collect that that is anti
collection so you could really
just go after them for violating
this law and then on the second
part we're saying if you find
this care and it's medically
necessary and not not even if
they're indigent we're just
saying you're on line Levin on
insured.
They're gonna have to pay but
with Medicare provides for them
and so what we're saying is that
you can go in and you can have
that that gourmet hamburger all
rather than the McDonald's
cheeseburger and they're gonna
have to charge you for the
McDonald's cheeseburger and they
have the gourmet hamburger and
all and that gourmet hamburgers
the people that work there Mr
chair it's a people to get paid
their it's the people that have
to get paid more when they're
recruited because they're out
really in the middle of a small
town and and you gotta Pam to be
there and so we're working on
this angle of it and on the
other side of this equation
we're trying to get insurance
for everybody at low cost it is
really just impossible to
balance these two sides I wish
Mr chair that are committee in
this legislature would pick a
side are we gonna try to make
insurance
four yield for people so that we
can get everybody insured and
then and in turn the medical
providers rate Mr chair what
they should be paid or are we
going to get the insurance for
everybody and then tell the
medical provider but you can
only charge X. amount of dollars
for your service I think we need
to focus more on one side we've
been on the insurance side or
maybe we should continue working
there working both sides of this
equation we are going to push
medical providers all and all
you know I rather have real
strong oppositions bill because
of that and especially in light
of the pandemic that we just
came we know how necessary
medical providers are in the
state why we should have on so
was reasons I I certainly will
support this bill I I think the
numbers are wrong on it I think
that there is really just a
gross conceptual error of what a
large in this.
Small business are and so anyway
of those are those are the
reasons for my position I want
to thank you senator though for
bringing it forward especially
in the in your in the inaugural
year this is a complex building
take it on here so I I want to
applaud your courage there but
this bill of particulars I feel
just very bad for a specially
rural New Mexico thank you thank
you senator and you know we're
up against our for our limit for
those for everyone we're not
gonna do Senate bill sixteen.
But I wide no I'm gonna go to
you Senator I wouldn't leave you
hanging every two months so
before we go to a motion about I
want to go to the senator from
Roswell for his comments.
Thank you senator I I appreciate
that I'm I'm gonna be as brief
as possible and and I don't want
to continue to make the same
points have been made but being
from one of the rural districts
that is always a fifty thousand
dollar helicopter ride from a
major hospital I think you know
I do need to speak out on this
the majority of specialists that
we have for rural New Mexico are
all just a hop and a skip across
the border.
And I think what the unintended
consequence of this legislation
will be is that are real
specialist are extremely skilled
doctors we have wanted Ross will
it's just amazing that for some
reason he wanted to come back to
New Mexico is a dermatologist
he's a rock star actually played
basketball against them
that meant that I might have
elbowed him a few times but he's
still a great doctor he'll he'll
give me and whenever I need to
get in
but you know the concern there
is he's he's trying to raise a
family he has a great practice
when we start doing things like
this Texas isn't that far you
know there's nothing preventing
him from packing his bags and
moving.
Just across the state line and
so I think those are the
unintended consequences of
things like this I wish we would
take a little bit more time and
look at those issues when when
we try to limit what what these
people can charge because I go
to him because he's the best and
I'm gonna pay that because
otherwise if I don't go to him I
have to drive all the way to
love it just it just to see a
dermatologist and so that's
that's that that's the position
we end up putting people in is
that they have to drive three
hours six hours round trip just
to just to see a doctor and so I
think those are the things that
I hope everybody will consider
would when making this decision
you know in Albuquerque you guys
have specialised positions I can
do anything open heart surgery
all the way down to you know
setting a bone but in the rural
areas we don't and when we get a
doctor that is great we want to
do everything we can to keep
them and and not see them leave
and and so I think as a body
we've done some great things to
help recruit doctors whether
it's through a bill that I had a
few years ago on how we
credential positions or or how
we do that I think that was a
great step this this sends a bad
message so hopefully the body or
this committee will consider
those those concerns rural New
Mexico but Mr chair that's all I
have thank you thank you senator
and so back to the original bill
can I get a motion.
Hello Senator Stewart.
Thank read more chair Mister
chairman I move that.
Dude are you gonna be able to go
back to the I'll make the motion
and perhaps you could let your
sponsor wrap up and we do not
have.
On Senate bill seventy one and
they do pass on Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill seventy one the point three
version with the amendments
rolled in.
Thank you senator and I second
that and before we go to the
vote brief motion to table.
Okay all right so we have a
motion to table
from Senator Moores all
discussion ceases at that point
so Emily can you take the role
on senator Morris motion to
table yeses to table and knows
to not table family okay.
No.
Receipt.
Normal.
Now.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
No.
Thank you so now we're back on
the bill at Senator Stewart just
made a motion I seconded it
before we go to about a center
doing briefly before we go to
the doctor.
Thank you Mr chairman well
there's just a couple of things
I want to say and and one of
them is that we have multiple
medical providers would wanted
to provide cut public comment in
support of this bill today and
we're not able to do so I would
encourage members to check that
Judiciary mailbox to see those
written comments and see the
folks who were saying that they
did want to speak
but this is a bill that over all
helps medical providers it
increases compensated care by
making sure that those folks who
are currently not not insured
and also.
It would be getting blood from a
stone to go after them in
collections you are not actually
getting money from these folks
you are just destroying their
credit and and making sure and
and making it so that they don't
get necessary medical treatment
because they're so afraid of the
debt that comes with that
so there's not a bunch of money
that's already being gotten
that's not going to be get we
had because of the US this does
not affect provider compensation
this does not affect it would
increase receivables for
providers by by making sure that
more folks are covered but
Canadian thank you very much I
appreciate this discussion thank
you now let's go to the vote on
this motion Emily can you call
the roll.
Do.
Yes.
The
issue is.
Yes.
So.
The.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Yes so you have a due passi
Senator do a very this is bill
and thank you for the discussion
and thanks this committee for
keeping a sense of humor and I I
hear everybody's point to be a
lot of where so that does it for
this edition of the Senate
Judiciary and so we'll see
everybody again on Friday thank
you Mr thank you thanks
everyone.
