R. is already in statute what it
would take a right is the
affidavit that is required for a
seventy five year old to go and
get notarized to submit to be
excused from jury duty.
C. indicates that it has records
of the ages of the correct ages
of everybody who's called to
jury duty and so if you were
seventy five or older it's
already in statute that you can
request to be excused you're not
required to be excused but
simply takes away the
requirement for the notarized
affidavit and I would stand for
questions.
Thank you representative of.
Emily or what can you or let me
start with used us are spikes do
you have anyone who you're
designating as an expert request
recognized as a proponent.
Then to page.
Act court services division with
administrative office of the
courts he is here if there are
any service questions but he's
on the Civil.
Okay very good and Emily do we
have anybody who registered in
advance in opposition.
How dare how dare they.
there being no opposition.
Yes sponsor completing the
presidential go to the members
of the committee members the
committee.
Mr.
Yes center Ivey Soto yes
Representative all we've heard
this impasse here as we normally
approve this I will know if
there's one thing development
which is that.
He said the federal twelve
passes this year we will have
remote online notarization and
it actually makes it easier for
somebody.
Was thirty five years of age to
be able to do the conversation
without ever leaving their homes
notwithstanding that this still
developing and if nobody else
wants to speak I will make a
difference.
Sir I was so for the past is
there a second.
Also Mr chairman thank you
Senator Lopez motion and a
second to spiral no other
discussion I missed anyone.
Great signal other discussion
will take a roll call when we.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Senator o'neill yes.
From here.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes yes.
Senator forex Representative
McQueen have a to.
House bill one eighty five.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you like to nonprofit many house
members we have gathered hi
whatever you heard about Senate
judiciary I hope you just
noticed is not true.
This the second bill will here
is
house bill forty one if.
Representative.
Garcia is offline is he.
Chair I am on your present.
Representative we earth this
bill in our conservation.
Maybe there is a Senate version
of this is my right no there's
no Senate version all there is.
We have seen this but piece of
legislation before in twenty
nineteen and twenty seventeen
all right let's do it house bill
forty one.
Representative Garcia.
Sure can I bring my my experts
over.
At this point or do you want me
to do that after I do the
presentation I would like to
have you bring for you got you
representative of the other
representatives what we've been
doing on Senate judiciary is
Representative Garcia you have
fifteen minutes to present the
bill an advocate for it in any
way you want that means going to
experts you wish going to
proponents if you wish people on
the line if you want to
recognize registered you want to
be your current you have up to
fifteen minutes in total present
your bills if there are no it's
your bill will have a total of
ten minutes to propose your
bills and up if they're
organized they pay our guys one
speaker or for work which time
it will it to all of those who
asked to be heard in opposition
doesn't make sense.
Yes it does Mr chair all just
going to the presentation and
then recognize my my experts for
read presentations as well all
right very good representative I
see the time at six thirty five
yep that.
You thank you Mr chair Mr chair
a house bill forty one includes
a new language in chapter forty
nine which is our land grants
statutes.
Adding the final criteria of a
partition Spanish land grant.
And Mr chair house bill forty
one also adds qualifying
criteria in what constitutes a
partition Land Grant.
Mr chair these two elements lead
to the object of a house bill
forty one which is establishing
partition land grants as
bonafide units of government
slash political subdivisions of
the state.
In doing this Mr chair these
partition land grants join their
twenty six centuries old sister
land grants and that undertaking
Mr chair this legislation only
applies to six partition land
grants those bean and gone then
which is something more a lower
guiding us which is west the
Montezuma castle your Herman
speak that's the less which is
between story Laken us thank us
Senator was the dean which is
south of Las Vegas so get on the
road which is south of Las Vegas
and oil on the arena which is
north of the house Mr chair I'd
like to now you all to to
experts are
Mr Joseph on the other from one
of our outstanding leaders of
our one of our partition
requests in after him I'd like
to you know to run Ortega who's
also one of our outstanding
leaders of a partition Grant and
Mr by the R..
madam secretary is coming in on
phone.
He's at five oh five fourteen.
Around eighteen thirty five the
settlers were farmers ranchers
woodcutters skilled labors the
surrounding area included small
farms the common lands farms
were adjacent to the gayness
river common lands were west of
the village in the mountains and
the forest partition grant is
the common land west of the
village the forested area around
the city this was used as common
lands for the community of
mostly he this it was organized
with the governing structure
some of the uses of the common
lands include grazing timber
wood hunting try farming some
irrigation will forward to
nineteen fifty one the Las Vegas
Land Grant want to sell the
common lands west of masakela
is.
A group of individuals from
looks like he just went to the
district judge and got a deep
for the common lands this dude
was for three thousand acres and
became the partition grant of
Los Angeles the Las Vegas land
grant also gave a deep for the
common lands to the community of
Los Angeles this occurred around
nineteen fifty one similar deeds
were given to lower gayness on
it on the oil and others the
partition grant of nineteen
fifty one is being governed by
an elected board of trustees the
petition grant has been self
governed and is defending itself
in court we have been a
standalone entity regular
meetings are held in compliance
with open meetings act there is
a set of by laws in regular
elections are hard are held.
The original instigation for the
unit of government occurred
because of the challenges the
city this experience in
receiving watershed restoration
and fire prevention funding from
the state the state forestry had
approved funds to reduce the
risk of fire to the watershed
about Las Vegas but the
uncertain status of the city
this delayed moving the funds
into action additionally a
motion he this successfully
defended itself record against
another state landowner who
blocked access on the road to
the standing near you the state
he has prevailed in district the
pellet court at great sacrifice
to its members we receive no
support or help from Las Vegas
Land Grant in summary we support
house bill forty one to become a
unit of government this would
enable us to apply for for
standing up mostly he this is a
tributary to the gayness river
which is the drinking water city
of Las Vegas and the second
water for farming.
House bill forty one is passed
both houses and committees but
pocket vetoed by two governors
this is been D. V. as an
organized entity with the self
governing structure since
eighteen thirty five we strongly
support house bill forty one and
welcome becoming a unit of
government thank you.
Thank you Joseph and Mister
chair I have another expert the
run on thank but I don't think
he's in the queue.
Thank god he's also coming in on
phone.
Hair Representative I do not
have monarch tega his name
address phone number and the
leading okay.
we do have a right to that as a
technical expert for questions
only and we can bring them on
board whenever that arises so Mr
chair with that with that we
stand for questions.
Very good thank you
Representative alright we'll go
to members of the committee but
questions I don't see in which
somebody recognize or identify
themselves.
Questions.
Mr Chairman yes Senator Lopez.
I don't have any questions this
but I would like to move into.
Senator Lopez asked motion.
You're listening yes.
Ceremonial Sir any other
discussion or questions numbers
the committee.
They're being non Emily would
you please call the roll.
Senator Baca yes.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez.
Yes.
Our.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart yes.
Sen.
Yes.
Senator Morris.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Representative Garcia you have
and you passed house bill forty
one.
Thank you members of the
committee thank you Mr chair
bustling when I'm not in the US.
Well next year Senate bill three
sixteen center at one.
Yes Mister chair I am my
apologies about that.
All right Sir and what you'll
have up to fifteen minutes to
advocate for your pet.
Time is six forty point as
always you can reserve any.
Right.
Okay thank you Mr chairman I
know that I know I.
Show that you have a three
experts and others.
Your opponents.
So that should give you some
direction.
Senator Hamblen fifteen minutes.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee for hearing this bill
we're going to be as quick as
possible I'm really grateful to
have this opportunity to bring
this bill to you this is the
general orientation data
collection bill and the reason
why this is important is that
data on services needs an
interventions about LGBTQ people
are fair and difficult to
find to the extent that we can
track the number of LGBTQ people
who access various services and
monitor their successful use of
those services with this bill we
will be able to identify those
barriers to accessing particular
programs and services that
affect this population this will
support request to analyze and
respond to such barriers and
allow us was dressed in existing
inequities the best decisions
are made with data to inform
them and we know that LGBTQ
people lives in every community
are part of every family and
work in every sector in New
Mexico what we don't necessarily
know is if we have access all
the services that we need and
just for those of you that don't
know I am an out lesbian and if
I knew this information if I saw
this information present on
forms when I was filling out
that data when I was growing up
my driver's license and filling
out health insurance forms that
would have made a big difference
for me so what this bill does is
it asks state agencies and
departments to collect data on
sexual orientation and gender
identity where they're
collecting other demographic
data just like age sex race
etcetera it guides state
agencies to ask the questions
using best practices already
monitored by the department of
health unless the program is
federally funded and the federal
agency provides them with
questions and answers to use I
do have a couple of experts here
also as a.
Shares are on just mentioned
that there are people here who
are in support so if we can go
to those folks who are in
support and then if there are
any questions we can go ahead
and go to my experts Mr Andrew
Gantz and Robert Strom.
Senator Hamblen what we what we
have been doing is asking folks
who wish to support a particular
piece of legislation to register
themselves passport for you to
recognize them the difficulty of
course not knowing how long to
it allow it one particular
person to speak do you do you
all who is on the call now wish
to speak in support yes Mister
chair I know Marshall Martinez
would be more than happy to
speak at this moment he's the
only one that I see outside of
my experts that is here today.
So Mr Martinez if you don't mind
speaking.
Thank you so much thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee Jim Marshall Martinez
executive director of equality
New Mexico statewide LGBTQ civil
rights organization we are
twenty seven year old civil
rights and advocacy organization
in New Mexico we strongly
support this legislation because
our work towards equity and
justice for our communities
starts with just knowing the
realities of the struggle of our
community we have amazing
partnerships with most state
agencies across New Mexico this
legislation will give us all.
Senator Wirth better approach
programs and provide access for
New Mexicans in every community
I also just want to say
especially thank you to Senator
Hamblen and of the state
agencies Department of Health
Human Services Department and to
Roberts chairman this call who
have been working on data
collection and health equity for
many many years already thank
you so much.
Thank you Mr Martinez thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you for your presentation
center that concludes the public
testimony if we would like to go
now Mr chair to our experts if
they would like to make a short
statement or if you'd like to go
ahead and go to the committee
I'm fine with whatever direction
you'd like to take resemblance
entirely up to you you still
have plenty of time on your
domestic recognize your experts
at all out of this much time if
you wish all right thank you
very much Mr chair so Mister
hands if you don't mind making a
statement that would be
fantastic.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee and Senator
Appalachian my name is into the
inside of HB just to the
tightest section manager with
Mexico Department of Health and
we find that this bill could be
very helpful to us in in a
couple ways one is that if there
are federal grants and and
requirements for data collection
we would follow those but there
are a lot of areas where there
is this expertise so deferring
to the department to identify
best practices in questions to
collect the data we need is very
helpful the department of health
as a lot of work around health
disparities and ensuring health
equity you can't do that work
without knowing what disparities
are and what you're trying to
achieve so data is helpful to us
thank you again.
Thank you Mr dance Mister chair
thank you very much Mr strong if
you don't mind making a couple
of comments that be great.
Sure I'm happy to
The only thing I really want to
add that you and and Mr gas
haven't already said is that one
of the other things that this
does it standardizes asking
questions as part of a process
that takes the onus off of
individuals of different
programs in different
organizations across the state
from making their own decision
about when it might be
appropriate or necessary to ask
about someone's sexual
orientation or gender and it
makes it easier to explain to
everyone in the community why
we're asking these questions it
becomes just a standard normal
thing rather than a stigmatized
set of questions and it also
allows everyone to this ask
these questions without it
becoming
responsibility for folks that
aren't really trained in this
area so it will definitely
increase our ability to
understand issues that are
affecting this community and to
address the effective thank you
senator.
Committee and chair.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chair Mr chair one already
for any questions from the
committee all right very good
center I'm sorry as I noted we
had nobody to register in
advance to speak in opposition
to the bill all up there I just
a moment because I know we've
got a number of house members
are standing by for their bills
with a forty yard and I'll be
getting us that's how we're
doing things in passionate
issues operate that fifteen
minutes to control your own
destiny and fate your allow
speakers that allow the question
which I will not cut them off
artificially during that fifteen
minutes that's up to you sponsor
all right okay so next we'll go
to members of the committee.
Mexico to members of the
committee.
Sharks.
Mr Chairman yes yes Senator Ivey
Soto.
Thank you very much so I'm I'm.
Thank you thank you for bringing
this sentiment I am curious I
see on page one we are one
twenty three through our page
two line eleven a recitation of
rate of cabinet departments are
those all of the current part of
the state of Mexico or did you
leave any out.
Mr chair Senator Ivy Soto I will
have either Andrew or Mr
Martinez actually might also
have some input on that too.
Clarify whether or not those are
the parity of the departments to
be included in this bill.
Mr gaps are these all the
government departments.
And executive branch or did
anything.
My apologies Mr chair Senator
Ivy Soto it is all the
departments my apologies.
Okay rob and I K. here thank you
don't want this to every time we
created the department.
It's probably isn't too often
that we have to go back and
modify this.
Right so if I could make a
suggestion.
On page one line twenty one
start the work following and
insert into the rough trap nets.
Eight one one twenty two.
Big Jim striking from the colon.
Through page two.
Line well.
What part.
Sounds good to me Mr chair
Senator Ivey Soto.
Clean it up it makes sense then
that way if we had more cabinet
parchments Oakley act
requirements it just adds
inflows of that.
Well so that part of the moment.
That's a friendly amendment Mr
Mister chairman Senator Ivey
Soto thank you very much and I
Mr chairman Senator Stewart had
raised for hand decision.
I first of all make sure that
the.
Garcia has the amendment sure
sure let me know if she does not
the proposed amendment on that
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman so if
we're going to do this and I
wonder if on the page one line
eleven why we say certain
executive departments if it's
all of them then
I don't believe that we should
say certain.
And I think that kind of goes
with Senator Ivy Soto this
ammendment it makes me feel like
there are other departments
I think we have more executive
departments than this Mr
chairman but I I support his
amendment but I do think it
should add taking out certain
also.
Mr chairman and
searched would I would I would
agree with that.
It's not certain about one.
Mr Chairman Madam pro ten yes I
believe that as a friendly
amendment that makes complete
sense and it's cleaning it up.
And the others on the committee
on the proposed amendment with
sorry Sir I understand you to be
accepting Senator Stewart's
modification.
I am I thought was very cogent
and I appreciate her always
check and the title.
Not always.
Anyone else on the committee on
the proposed amendment.
Right hearing none others.
Is there any objection to the
adoption.
Mr Chairman no one is showing
objection all right.
Very good all members present.
That will be shown informative
the amendment is adopted.
Back to the committee on the
bill as a matter.
Mr chairman I would nobody
passes meant.
The motion and second is there
anyone else on the committee
with questions right.
Mister chairman Senator Stewart
is waving a hand front.
Yes.
Thank you Sir Senator.
I'm I'm just curious about why
we picked October thirty first
twenty twenty one as an
effective date.
Mr chairman pro tem that gives
those departments Incan in
coordination with them that
gives them enough time to go
ahead and make those changes on
those forms as the forms get
need to be re done and the
process is need to be re done
it's a logical time for them to
be able to go ahead and add
those those different criteria
for the department of health
guidelines.
Okay all right thank you thank
you madam.
When I was ready with questions.
Our workers for roll call.
Senate bill three sixteen Emily
please.
Yes.
Yes ma'am.
Yes.
No.
Senator Pirtle
Senator Stewart yes.
No.
Yes yes.
When you have a to pass three
sixteen as amended in Senate
Judiciary.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee for your time that was
the fastest that this is ever
happened to me and thank you for
the wonderful experience.
Right when you bring the bill
Senator.
Do we stood out speaking of
which do we have center to see
paid out.
Mr Chairman.
Are you Sir
another reason for you okay
well.
Our.
Next year Senate bill one
nineteen Senator Ortiz.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
certainly hope my administration
is shows up
Bring for you for another try.
The psychologist interstate
compacts in jurisdictional come
very.
This is the case with the
nursing compact with some of the
other compacts you may have
seen.
Is an average.
Making it possible for
psychologists licensed in New
Mexico.
To practice in nearby states.
With the minimum of difficulty
as long as they're licensure
meets the standards New Mexico
in the accepted into the other
states.
And similarly so I ordered my
extradition and similarly
psychologists who practice in
other states.
Would be able to very readily
practice in New Mexico as long
as they're state licensure meets
our standards and that's for the
contractor sure is is that all
of the state there licensure
standards meet the standards of
all the other states.
And it's a way of making it
easier for New Mexicans to
access the services of
psychologist as you know we we
have a shortage particularly in
rural communities.
And with this bill.
We sign this contract.
Students will be able to have
psychologists from.
Sample.
They were in southern New Mexico
they might have somebody from
well yes so or possibly longer
hello.
Be able to work with them as a
psychologist with minimum of
difficulty and I would like my
expert witness from the New
Mexico psychological association
and former head of the board of
psychological licensing Dr David
Matthews to say a few words
about this contract.
Mr chair
Who is tearing at this point
members Senator someone just
because.
I'm not sure yes Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is the Dr Dan Matthews
I am a licensed in the state of
New Mexico which means that I
have to practice under the code
of conduct of the licensing
board of state of the state of
New Mexico I need to know New
Mexico's laws I need to know our
reporting requirements I'm not
license in any other state and
that's going to be important as
we go through just a brief
background for thirty one years
I was director of the department
of psychology clinic which is
the primary training clinic for
you and Ms American
psychologically Association
approved program in psychology
so three doctoral students I
served on the board of
psychologist examiners I was the
I was vice president vice chair
of the chair.
I have been on the the
legislative committee for the
New Mexico psychological
associate issue for many years
and I teach ethics for
continuing education and also to
our graduate students so that
some of the background is that
brought me to to what we're
doing today I am currently
supervising students at the
women's resource center it yeah
at the UNM and also a few
students by all students from
UNM and of course right now all
of our work is on line
so I develop some knowledge and
expertise regarding telehealth
and all of these capacities as
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino said
this bill starts the process of
regulating and unregulated
practice that affects the health
and well being of New Mexicans
currently in the state practices
psychology group.
Through telehealth is not legal
unless the psychologists is
licensed in both New Mexico and
the distance State and I know
many people who go ahead and get
a license in New Mexico and some
other state so they can find
telehealth.
This is not a practice that New
Mexico by by itself can regulate
since it has to do with
Interstate Commerce.
and respecting the sovereignty
of other states as they must
respect ours and this bill make
sure that New Mexico's
sovereignty regarding licensure
is maintained.
I would like to say early and
often that this bill is
fundamentally different from the
other compacts having to do with
licensed professionals that
you've seen you see nursing
compact physical therapy
physicians I think speech and
language maybe come your way SB
one nineteen is fundamentally
different it is not a license in
reciprocity bill is narrowly
focused on allowing and
regulating therapy through the
medium of telehealth it would be
great if you could put those
other compacts are out of your
mind for a few minutes and look
at this narrowly focused bill
that just regulates one aspect
of psychotherapy
practice my sense is I don't
need to spend much time telling
you the value of telehealth in
New Mexico allowing the practice
has been of great benefit to New
Mexicans and in almost all of
our practice right now is on
line.
interstate practice will provide
additional benefits to New
Mexicans and it was Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino said if you've got
people who live near in the
southern part of the state near
el Paso they would have access
to those Arizona all of the
state's surrounding are part of
the compact at this time so
you'd have access to licensed
psychologist from those other
states immediately.
But Interstate practices not
regulated that means that
conscientious tractors
practitioners are not willing to
practice cross state lines and
I'm concerned that the there are
people who are licensed in other
states who are willing to
provide telehealth into New
Mexico but who are not abiding
by the standards of practice
that we would like to see once
again this legislature cannot do
it without the legislature's and
cooperation of the other states
I would like to make this real
to you as real as yesterday
I in one of my supervision
sessions one of my students the
sad I'm seeing a UNM student who
is gone to Colorado perhaps for
spring break I'm not sure
exactly what can I continue to
see that person by zoom or phone
or other secure method and while
they're in in Colorado and hi.
Again a careful answer which is
she would be practicing high
would be practicing
professionals practicing under
my license in the state of New
Mexico because that's from
licensed and then in the state
of Colorado and one of my
colleagues asked me you know
what are you really practice in
the state of Colorado well it
turns out that if the client
were to say that they want to
kill her husband or something
like that and we thought that
was a credible State credible
threat.
Colorado has different reporting
laws the New Mexico does
regarding a duty toward our duty
to protect another person so I
think it's very clear you can't
say I'm practicing in New Mexico
or practice in Colorado in that
state I am clearly practice in
both states and that means the
Colorado and New Mexico would
need to come up with an
agreement in order for us to.
Provide the care that this
person needs there's no reason
to immediately refer this person
to another another practitioner
for this limited purpose let me
tell you the other part of the
problem which is you may or may
not be able to see this but this
is something I got in the mail
the other day lessened a little
over a week ago and it says the
world needs therapy you can help
it is soliciting me to provide
telehealth for an organization
are marked out their name
because I don't think I should
go against the corporation but.
I look this is this organization
up and they have sixteen
thousand sixteen thousand
counselors they claim that all
of their counselors are licensed
but it turns out their license
in different states they are not
licensed to practice in both of
their state and the state of New
Mexico it's important to
recognize that right now I can
do telehealth within the state
of New Mexico but I can't do
telehealth in another state
without something like this
compact for going ahead and
getting licensed in different
states.
We are here today in part
because the public is not
protected from the unqualified
or unprofessional conduct on the
part of psychotherapist
practicing across state lines
online the practice affects the
public safety and welfare as we
you do with all licensing laws
and yet it's unregulated
I I went also to this are
actually if you someday you may
want to go to Google online
therapy and you're gonna find
here are the five best online
therapies in the state in in the
country there are eleven online
services they're providing
online psychotherapy right now
presumably some of them are
providing care into New Mexico
the people who are on those
online services are not required
to practice under our scope of
practice they are not required
to know what the loss of New
Mexico are
It is it is critical I think
that we regulate this on
regulated profession and that we
not have a bunch of people who a
business says that they are
qualified to practice in New
Mexico but we haven't taken a
look at the.
As I said the the this
legislature cannot regulate
interstate commerce by itself
this is the kind of thing where
you need to contact act.
Once again I don't know whether
you can see my little drawings
about okay yes Hey thank you Mr
Roberts this is a map of the
compact states in purple and
you'll see that New Mexico is in
black which means we are we are
currently doing what the all of
the states in black or ones that
are considering joining the
compact
Is the and and so right now it
is fifteen states I believe
there are fifteen states that
are considering you aren't in
the compact we would have access
to all of those the surrounding
states at colleges in the
surrounded States to meet the
standards and the standards for
this compact are the same in
terms of education and passing
the licensing law the licensing
exam as in New Mexico so I'm
satisfied and I'm pretty as much
respect we're on this that that
of the meet our standards.
I have with me to if there are
experts other experts who are
here today we have the the CEO
of outside packed here I believe
that
and we have a lawyer for.
Do we do we have I can see we've
got here you.
Well for is the is it is a a
lawyer representing the the side
packed Commission
Janet or wig is is here also and
she is the CEO of of so I packed
can be element is the chairman
of the board psychologist
examiners doctors are Henry is a
license psychologist who works
with
military families and this is a
really and for for military
people Christian sharia is is
our legislative chair at this
point I think that's enough to
let you know that there is an
issue and once again I just like
to say please put the notion of
rig reciprocal licensure off
your your plate that's not what
this bill does it regulate
something that cannot be
regulated except by the federal
government or by a contact of
this sort
that's enough for me for now and
we can have information from our
experts if you like.
Senator Ortiz panel you have
about three minutes left in the
fifteen minutes you can
recognize others so we can go to
the committee.
It might be good to hear from
you I can't contact Mr Chairman
sorry.
Senator so this is our this.
Senator Ortiz.
When Mr chairman what we have
right now generally speaking we
have the right side.
She has two more minutes.
Good evening I am generally I am
the executive director for side
packed and and of course I am
here in support of Senate bill
one one nine I'm I would like to
express my appreciation for your
consideration of this bill and
as you know the goal sidetracked
is to increase and improve
access to mental health services
by facilitating the cop in the
practice of telehealth by
license for colleges across
state lines it represents a
significant step in the
profession of psychology to
cover further what Dr Mathew
said I would like to kind of
share a story on Arizona was the
first state to enact the compact
and one of the reasons they
looked at it was that they had
some issues coming in with a
psych to psychologists that were
practicing into the state and
they had a complaint filed and
they went to do a disciplinary
action on those two psychologist
and found out that they did not
have the authority to do that so
they contacted our state for
those two psychologists which
then tell them they didn't have
the authority to do it because
the patient was not in that
state and that is what I I was
created to keep from happening
that particular scenario so I
thank you very much for
considering this very important
mental health issue.
Mister chairman Senator Russians
thank you very much and as I
leave I started with Center
anticipate all know registered
opposition on the bills and with
that we'll go to next the
committee members.
Many members with questions for
senator Ortiz hours experts but.
Restauranteur Center doing has.
Thank you Senator do it.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator to the Pino I I I I am a
big fan of the the intent of
this compact and I know that
these are services that we we
really need here in New Mexico
But the public does have some
the same language in it that
that we've seen in other
compacts that that is
problematic not not about
reciprocal
licensure or anything like that
but I do have an amendment
I believe it was originally sent
to everyone on the tenth
amendment sent out again today
at two fifteen thank you.
So what this ammendment does.
Is in the venue provision that
is in.
This bill on page twenty five
right now this would require
someone bringing suits to go to
the location of where the
commission is located and and
file suit there this this moment
would allow a New Mexicans to
file suit here in New Mexico
for for any proceeding other
than to to enforcement of the
compact among other states.
The second part of the amendment
strikes subsection G..
And what that is the.
The same language that we saw in
the P. T. compact regarding
qualified immunity defense and
indemnification and that's
that's for the same reasons that
this committee I went through
with that P. T. compact and and
that the cost effective impose
on the state
The third one I think that's
something that let's Council
services that's just the cleanup
that they included there it
putting a closing quotation mark
after period and then the last
one would strike the the
severability section
It's not necessary but but if if
what's going to be a
severability is section in there
we would want it to specifically
acknowledge the anything that is
contrary to
At the member state but also New
Mexico statutes and I believe Mr
chair Mike Doyle is actually in
the waiting room I don't think
he was speaking in in opposition
to this bill overall but I know
that he he did want to speak hi
to that the concerns that are
are dressed in this amendments.
All right Sir you're lying and
for your.
Senator.
Yes if if we had allowed him to
to to come in and and just
briefly addressed those concerns
I would appreciate that.
On the street.
Yes.
Many members.
It is time to speak I I spoke at
a previous.
Hearing on this bill about these
very issues brought up by this
ammendment well just like
Senator Duhigg you understand
and value was trying to do what
it does so at the risk of New
Mexicans not giving him a venue
for this committee.
And
Committee.
Noted that any changes would be
problematic but we think that
without these changes the bill
is problematic for New Mexico
there needs to be a venue and
any District Court in New Mexico
for then use proper in any
judicial proceedings by or
against the commission shall be
brought in New Mexico court or
the court of competent
jurisdiction the same on page
thirty five lines twenty two
through twenty five in page
thirty six one two tenders
qualified immunity we don't
believe that there should be
qualified immunity we think that
takes away the rights in New
Mexicans and that is the one
immunity for anything.
For the there should be
liability for ordinary care
excuse me just want to be clear
we want to make sure that the
bill and the amendments as Dr
find for that.
Finally the separability as
Senator Duhigg stated we believe
that the amendment she proposes
off address concerns about
severability and issues that are
consistent with New Mexico law
but would still allow to stand
so I think the the bill with
these amendments would be fine
for New Mexico I know in the
past there's been problems.
The Sanchez experts mentioned
there may be problems but we
think that these amendments are
very good thanks a lot of
problems with this bill.
For.
Mr chair I I'd have nothing
further on this most
professions.
Thank you Sir.
I I heard your expert Senator
refer repeatedly to we.
Help me understand that please.
Mr chairman you heard my
experience for into which.
I'm sorry center need not that I
was director question to us
etcetera do or login.
Senator Duhigg are your expert
made reference to we.
Is your expert.
Mr chair yes Mr Doyle is
associate with the smaller
sensation.
Right because you do it.
Thank.
I understand the confusion my
question all right I'm not a
senator do its amendment please
anyone else on the committee.
Sir
Senator Paypen has handout as
well.
Mr Chairman do we get to at
least respond to see that as a
friendly amendment now we do
that and some committees I'm not
sure we issue the policy is we
do we do it always on the chair
is being.
Senator so let me ask you your
Robert reaction to the proposed
amendments please.
You can you can either take up
together or.
up individually.
I believe I would defer to my
experts and I think.
Either Mister doctor Matthews Mr
Wilder would be the ones to
respond to all three of those
amendments.
Mr chairman I would like to
defer to uh double for who is
the who Representative is the
council for the commission he
has been able to find a very
clear answer to this question.
Yes thank you doctor Matthew
thank you Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
and Mr chairman my name's Duggal
program council decide packed
Commission and I'm not here to
comment on the merits of the
amendments but really the
technical aspect of amending
interstate compact that's an
agreement as you all know
between the state and if the
state passes legislation that
alters that agreement as a
legislative body you're free to
do that but the commission's
responsibility to the integrity
of the compact the agreement
between the other states is to
essentially review any non
conforming amendments with the
model legislation and determine
if those amendments would
materially alter that agreement
between the states and you know
in in cases of venue and
immunity and and severability
that you know it's my opinion as
counsel to the commission that
that would materially alter the
agreement between the states so
again not not so much of a
substantive comment on the
amendments that the commission
would have a responsibility to
the integrity of that agreement
that the other states have
already all entered into to
determine if those amendments
would be disqualifying for
membership and I can give you my
opinion is council it's all
ultimately up to the commission
but the my opinion would be that
those amendments of this nature
would be disqualifying for state
because that would be a
substantive alteration of the
compact so
again not merits based but just
the nature of the compact and I
the last thing I would add is
that again the state passes an
amended version of the compact
it didn't pass the compact
that's really the the bottom
line it passed its own version
of the compact.
Which would you know would then
pose an issue with that state
being able to participate in the
compact because it did not adopt
it essentially so that's that's
really the the primary issue not
again so much on the merits of
the amendments.
On that point.
Jack does center Ivey Soto yes.
Actually on that point center
instead of the work we will be
amending this compact and that
if at some point we've amended
it to the point that you believe
it is unacceptable the
commission you to let us know
that we can stop to overcome
this and one of the things thank
you very much.
Mr chairman I would say if you
amend the compact and is not
acceptable.
Then you have a situation in
which you have no authority over
psychologists from another state
practicing in the state living
in another state and that's what
you wanted to Senator amendments
to the contact will amount to.
Will he leave New Mexicans far
more unprotected then you
Representative making them
subject to legal action by local
attorneys.
Thank you senator in Senator
Ivey Soto
I had this Senator Baca on the
amendment.
Thank you Mr chair of.
I was just wondering if maybe
the sponsor of this ammendment
Mr chair might my dad to her
amendment we can for the
purposes of of a time economy
strike all of article one as
well if not all caryatid another
motion.
Senator Baca explained your
proposed modification to Senator
do exist amendment and then
we'll see whether she is going
to consider them together.
basically a my amendment would
strike of all of article one
which essentially is purpose
statement up to article two and
then re number accordingly.
Do it Mr chair Senator about
that yes I think that would be
that's consistent with what we
have done in this committee on
other bills I'd be happy to add
that to this ammendment.
Thank you Mr chair that's all I
have.
A good Sir Baca thank you others
on the committee discussion on
the proposed amendment.
Mister chairman Senator thank
you.
I just want to make a comment
that.
This committee.
And house judiciary which I've
spent twenty years on.
Has regularly Hey can both of
these aspects out of compacts.
We should be allowed.
To.
Have our own venue and we put
that in all the other compacts
we have worked on and we've
worked on a lot of compacts we
have taken out the qualified
immunity.
So of the gentleman who spoke
you can't do that isn't there
not only that Mr Chairman we
have amended uniform loss doing
the same thing those uniform
laws sometimes yes had to go
back to the uniform law
commission I did one of them
many years ago for
I forget.
I had to go back to uniform law
commission so I want us to join
those compact I think it's
important but I believe the
gentleman who spoke earlier is
incorrect you can then these
compacts if you do it carefully
and with a scalpel not an axe
which is what I believe these
amendments have done and there
has been no consequences we're
part of the compact we've just
made it a little bit of our own
of the one of the one exception
to what I'm saying was when we
joined the national popular vote
that compact was written very
poorly we didn't change it
but that's the only one I
remember that we have not
changed so I I believe these
amendments are in order and are
consistent with what we've done
thank you.
Thank you others on the
committee on the proposed
amendment Mr Chairman.
Senator Ivey Soto yeah I I would
like to address real quick the
amendment with regard to and
that's our age thirty five go to
page thirty six regarding
qualified immunity.
And and let me just simply
suggest a center doing that
perhaps we don't need this right
all of subsection G. but instead
right the words on page thirty
five line twenty two qualified
immunity and strike paragraph
one the rest of subsection G.
eight is is whether or not the
commission will defend any
member officer executive
director employer
representative or whether not
the commission shall indemnify I
don't think there's any problem
with that the issue is the
qualified immunity.
Mr chair Senator Ivy Soto the
reason that I had struck the
difficulty sections was based on
the conversation that we had
regarding the need to talk about
will concerns about the costs of
those defense of that
magnification being ordered by
state.
That was a concern that that
chair savant has had raised when
we're having that discussion
because at it now and I had only
sought to struck the qualified
immunity questions
I I I would be fine with limited
to the commute to the qualified
immunity portion but I thought
that in the interests of of
addressing the chairs concerns
force previously requested
strike the entire section
yeah and Mister chairman Senator
doing as as I recall one of the
attenuating issues with the he
to compact was that there also
that at the time and so there
was there was a of a pending
liability potentially there and
the and so and so
Well if I can just think more
real quick Mr Wilford is if you
just after the question I'm
asking which is does the does
this I packed there are it is a
site what what are the financial
status of the site back.
Right now.
I'll defer that to Missouri.
Ms or what what is the financial
status of the of the staff.
We are dissolved we do not have
a line of credit we do have a
memorandum of understanding with
the association of state and
provincial psychology boards
which provides for our staffing
our overhead our facilities are
computer programs and we do pay
down forty percent of the
application fees but nothing to
do with the state of assessment
these so we are not do not have
a line of credit credit and are
not and that.
What are not.
So yeah let me if if I could
suggest and and etcetera Baca
was to get on this I'll be happy
to yield for a to him for just a
moment but otherwise I would.
suggests that are Sir do if I
need to do so on a motor would
make a motion that we amend your
amendment is here yeah requests
are possibly from a pharmacy
thank you I I just before you
make your motion I'd like to
call your attention to page
thirty four section three and
and they're the they're talks
about the commission levying the
assessment on each compacts
state and so I would tend to
agree with Senator Duhigg that
that indemnification directly
effects of that would be that
would be cool collected on each
compacts state and therefore
increase the cost of that
assessment so I just wanted to
put that in there before you of
major your motion so that you're
aware of that thank you.
I appreciate that very much
Senator Baca it is
Well let me give it a shot and
see how it goes.
so let me do this in the form of
a motion and see what the what
the sense of the committee is
and that would be to amend the
amendment etcetera okay yeah
yeah we're still on the
proposed amendment my or our all
right.
Sorry.
The striking of subsection G.
would be instead of striking on
page thirty five one twenty two
of the work qualified immunity
and striking paragraph one.
So that we would leave defense
and indemnification and
paragraphs two and three would
become paragraphs one and two
would be remember to want to.
R. and so that would be my
motion to to amend Center doing
amendment.
Well.
Which I would as I understand it
you would either take that we
unfriendly or process.
Is there Senator I would I would
say cautious I I I I I hear I
think the the exactly what
Senator Baca pointed out that
that's still a concern
regardless of whether that the
compact is in debt or not.
And and Mister chairman Senator
has remained.
All right let's try and keep
things straight though Senator
Ivey Soto you have proposed an
amendment to Senator do exam
Senator Duhigg is not accepted
that as an amendment to hers so
we'll still take hers in
isolation unless or until she
accepts the modification of
permanent or or we come back and
then perhaps take a vote on
years after the adoption orders
is is still the amendment before
the committee Senator Stewart on
center doing some of the.
Mr Chairman since Senator Duhigg
referenced you I would like to
hear your opinion and why of why
she referenced what you said
which I have not remembered.
R. Senator you know that as the
chair I usually try to leave my
comments for the and but since
you've asked me to Rick recalled
of for you my issue or and and
Senator Ortiz you know I I
personally made a knowledge your
comments and your desire to have
something in place since I have
some kind of combat.
Senator Stewart where where
everything we own is compacts or
uniform laws we seem to run into
this same issue which is we have
the organizations that promote
these uniforms laws in compacts
telling us that we really can't
change them or else they're
really not uniform they're not
really compacts and I understand
that argument at the same time
of course our obligation is to
pass laws for the benefit of the
state of New Mexico and its
citizens often times these
compacts have I think what one
of the speakers moment ago
described as a state assessment
or state assessment fees and
let's keep something in mind
these organizations are private
organizations they're not
branches of government they're
not state or local governments
at all their private
organizations maybe nonprofits
but they're still a private
organization they have budgets
they have salaries fees and
costs and they support
themselves and a number of ways
including by imposing
assessments on states with the
state assessment fees and I've
always your question Senator to
always been cautious when we're
asked to adopt a compact that
allows the organization of the
the compact organization to
assess the states with fees
because those fees are assessed
are going to come from us we
have to budget for them and then
we would have effectively NO
control over those fees in some
cases your call we have compacts
where we largely can get out of
them once we're in the and so
that's why I've been very
cautious about getting in the
compacts we ask very good
questions about what it takes to
get out of a compact we find
it's not in the interest of the
state and of course when we have
compacts that allow the
organization to impose fees on a
state now we should do so very
cautiously if at all and I
usually to to to your question
directly Senator I usually of a
move to strike out any the forty
that the organization would have
to impose fees on us that we
would have to pay as part of our
budgeting process I hope that.
Answer your questions.
Yes it does thank you.
Thank you Senator Stewart all
right others on Senator Duhigg
amendment etcetera Ivey Soto you
had a proposed amendment Senator
do exist
amendment she has not embraced
that of yet that's not to say
she will not but will stay
focused on her amendment at the
time and then we can come back
and perhaps amended further
others on Center dudes amendment
bring the matter before the
committee right now.
Anyone else on the committee no
one else.
All right what I would just like
to join the venue issue Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino again commanding
your in the interest here but if
if someone is a therapist in New
Mexico and they're part of this
compact if if we do not change
the venue law they are agreeing
by this come back to be sued and
is that the state of Virginia
that I get that right.
Mr chairman and I I think I
believe in elves all certainly
stand to be corrected by Mr
Goldberg well for.
That section is talking about
suits against the compact not
suits against individuals are of
this.
You're you're using you're
confusing the venue for students
against the compact would have
to be you this also says that
has to be done over the compact
is office.
There's twenty eight states the
compact and runner under twenty
different states.
Yes yes individual therapists
those can be done according to
New Mexico law that's my reading
of it Mr will bring may may want
to correct me but that's the way
I read.
And and senator I I appreciate
the clarification and that that
gives me a little bit of a
better fought on many but not
enough to to not embrace the
amendment because even if the
issue here is simply a selection
of menu an agreement that that
if there's a suit between of the
state of New Mexico which would
being a member of the compact as
I understand it the compact if I
am am I not correct the the
party who is a party to the
compact for New Mexico.
Mr will.
Your answer.
The the state psychology
licensing board would be the
recognized authority.
Okay and so that that reforms
what I would be concerned about
which is the state psychology
board would effectively being
and agreeing but if it had a
dispute with the with the
compact authority that the state
board would agree to being a
litigating all matters in the
home venue what is a home venue
again.
State of Georgia.
State of Georgia
so the state of New Mexico
licensing board would agree to
be sued in Georgia and we agree
to a certain.
Because you're correct that
please.
I'm sorry what I'm sorry
Senator.
Senator so I just said.
If the state of New Mexico
licensing board was to be soon
it would have to be in Georgia
that's not what this means.
This is that this is only on the
narrow issue of litigation
involving the commission we as
in been any to date and I'm not
really sure what the set of
facts would be that would you
know be necessary for that type
of litigation it's that it's
extremely rare and remote
possibility and if the state is
dissatisfied with its
relationship in the commission.
Mr chairman I your comment
earlier was that you can't get
out of these there is a
withdrawal clause in this
compact that the legislature
merely has to enact legislation
to affect the withdraw so the
it's not a permanent
I revocable election to join the
compact.
Thank you and senator I
understand your explanation well
to and the the fact remains
always that for me anyway I
think that it that I I really
have a hard time imagining
agreeing that a that a board of
New Mexico would agree that it
that it has a dispute orbit
wishes to assert its rights or
if it was gonna be sued for
something on to come back that
are and under all of those
circumstances it would be
agreeing that that would take
place in Georgia and can
candidly I think that puts New
Mexico at a at a strong Mr chair
and anyway that's my.
Read we have a concern with the
venue part of the bill.
Mr Chairman just I just want to
repeat that it doesn't mean that
it means is that if if anybody
sue is the commission.
That suit has to be settled in
the headquarters of the
commission what is the state of
New Mexico once is being.
It's our it is here in New
Mexico that so would be Senator
not in Georgia because we joined
the compact doesn't mean that
the commission is for all of
these suits against the New
Mexico psychological board for
the New Mexico psychology word
is suing somebody else they
would have to go to Georgia it
doesn't mean that all they just
only means very narrow these
little legal action which might
entail the suit against the
commission itself.
Millions are bored all the
compact is no the boards of the
twenty states for so many
fifteen or twenty state symbol
long to develop my by the same
rules but it doesn't mean that
we give out any of our
sovereignty.
All right very good all right
those are my thoughts anyone
else on the committee that we
miss we go to a roll call vote
on the amendment.
Senator doing.
Mr chair this is Senator Duhigg
I just realize what we're having
that discussion there's actually
another spot in the bill that
that would make New Mexico go to
Georgia it's on page forty four
lines one through six
which says the defaulted at so
in the event that the state
default that defaulting state
may appeal the action the
commission by petitioning the
United States District Court in
the state of Georgia or R. or
the federal District Court where
comic has stripped off.
So I would just want to add to
this amendment to strike that
language as well page forty four
lines one respects.
Representative doing it is your
amendment the you're entitled to
amend your amendment
Is there any is there any
discussion or questions for
Center doing on that proposed
amendment tournament.
And sorry I'm Mr Mr chair.
There's more.
Forty four lines nineteen to
twenty five.
On continuing on to page forty
five the again would would allow
the commission to incident
initiated legal action in the
state of Georgia against our the
state of New Mexico.
That would be adding are
striking that language as well.
Senator doing you're gonna have
to go back to these a bit more
again just to remind us of the
page and line number so that I
can be sure that that our staff
hasn't.
Correct if the amendment should
be adopted our it would you
would you please review again
the the page align number yes
page forty four striking lines
one through six.
When.
Three twenty are.
The
great lines one through three.
These are modifications that
will take as part of your
original motion for the
amendment other members of the
committee on these additional
changes to the proposed
amendment.
No questions.
All right I believe we're ready
to take a roll call vote on
senator doings amendment with
some modifications here on page
forty four.
Would you call the roll on this
ammendment please.
Question this is also include
Senator Baca was amendment.
Yes I I agree that that was the
right building I paid for page
one
article all of article one very
on page one at nine twenty.
Great at line nineteen.
Thank you.
Yes.
Yes.
Hello yes.
Yes yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Start.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes the amendment is adopted.
Members of the committee on the
this legislation as amended now.
Mr Chairman yes Senator Ivey
Soto thank you Mr chairman I do
have some questions for Mr
Wilford if I may.
Yes Representative your regular
thank you waiting for Mr Roper
to activates APEROL.
I'm sorry I'm here Senator thank
you.
Watch so are Mr Chairman how
long and senator this will bring
along has sidetracked in effect.
I was Mr or we get I I'm
recently council to so I packed
but it she could answer that I
think it's within the last year
that it was stood up.
Sorry.
Well I'm not.
she's frozen internet connection
problems.
She is in the same position she
was three minutes ago.
I was just.
I thought that was just dear in
the headlights.
Know your questioning is issued
Senator but it's not that you.
This is a possibility.
Yeah I did answer question I I
think the the commission was set
up in two thousand nineteen
early two thousand twenty.
Okay okay this so.
What our dryer attention to page
forty five
this of the section thirteen.
B..
All three of the compact.
And.
And in particular I'm looking at
lines twenty one through twenty
three which I will be perfectly
honest I've looked a lot of
these complex I find these were
to be quite shocking we'll go
into these words elsewhere
because they appear to other
places.
It's a rural than previously
adopted by the commission.
With regard to joining the
compact subsequent initial drive
of rules.
Any role that has been
previously adopted by the
commission shall have the full
force and effect of law.
On the day of the compact
becomes walk in that state.
So Mister chairman Senator Ortiz
if you know what part of the
state we have a process of
credit loss in New Mexico that
involves either passing a bill
to create a law.
Or
or if it's an administrative
rule by doing it through notice
and comment.
We have a specific provision in
our constitution that's
specifically for budget
amendment by reference.
And so and so what what what I
understand disturbing is that if
we vote yes today with this
language present.
The rules that you have a.
R. as a contact to the time that
you that you so if you've been
struck.
Presumably would become law the
law of the state of New Mexico
it might Mr chairman and senator
been out missile program I read
that correctly.
Any that they would be
regulatory law just as any other
agency law would be our would
have that same force and effect.
Certainly although again Mr what
part of no agency in New Mexico
thank we ate law without doing
notice and comment.
But you want but but but what
this provides is that without me
noticing COVID.
You would have your regulatory
rules I'm presuming a separated
from your regulatory rules would
have the force of law in the
state of New Mexico.
So I'm.
Once at your
Right now.
I haven't had a chance to go
through the various different
ones but I do see that you have
a rule on rulemaking that's a
good rule to hell as follows a
rule on definitions so I'm
assuming however you define
things now would become lost in
the state of New Mexico all
rural on compact privilege to
attend to practice toxicology
I'm not sure why you would need
a rural since you have the
compact.
All rural on compact temporary
authorization to practice again
I don't know why you need the
rule because we have the
compact.
A rural on the conditions about
technology practice into a
receiving state again it's on
the compact.
What adverse action again it's
in the compact thus it seems
like what's in the compact is
only part of what we're looking
at yes to all the issues that
are in the compact because
you're adopting rules that
expand what's in the compact so
that what we're seeing in the
forty six pages that are before
us was senator doings amendment
probably forty two what we're
seeing in the pages that are
before us is in fact not what
we're adopted under what you
have Mr chairman senator if you
know I missed what what is that
is that an accurate assessment.
Of of a description of the
situation.
What
returning your question slightly
Senator by the bill and if I
don't get injured that were
there are there any rules that
would apply to the state of New
Mexico.
Recommendation is adopted.
That aren't included in this
pandemic and Mr Chairman targets
panel I just read the rules that
they've already adopted that
according to this it appears
would apply to the state of New
Mexico.
I just I just read off the title
of those.
What's my point they've already
adopted rules and so Mr chairman
senator minimized what part.
So I'm assuming that because
you've adopted rules.
On on the issue of our.
You adopted rules on.
Our privilege to practice cell
psychology I am looking in the
our.
I'm looking in the compact.
And as I look in the compact I
see.
R. I. C.
article.
We are I believe it is of the
compact which is compact
privilege to put practice tells
mycology what you adopted a
rule.
On the contact list to practice
still psychology so Mister
chairman senator penal missed
what part what is in that rule
that is not in the compact.
It is that directed to me you
you're you're asking for all and
I'm not sure which of us is an
insult to you Mr will thank
thank you I I don't know of any
statute or any statutory scheme
that's implemented without
guiding regulations Mr Ivey Soto
Senator so I I I mean it is
commonplace that statutory
authority is then implemented
through regulatory bodies the
commission is an instrumentality
of the states that adopted just
like any other state regulatory
agency so if you have statutory
guidance on an issue you're
going to need implementing
regulations that get into more
levels of detail in statute has
but I'm I would like to also
clarify that none of the
commission regulations have
anything to do with setting
clinical practice standards the
compact completely differs to
the receiving state in which the
services are being provided to
legislative scope of practice
that states clinical standards
that state standards of practice
oversight of the licensed
clinicians these are
administrative rules that guide
the commission and the member
states in terms of the
administrative responsibilities
related to the interstate.
Grant of authority and you know
the verification of credentials
the reporting to the database so
that other states can be aware
if there is a disciplinary
action in one state you you
can't have a clinician who can
sort of evade that by just going
into another state which is been
a shortcoming of of state sort
of acting on their own and not
being part of these contacts so
that would be implementing
regulations deal with those
kinds of things that really
offer additional protections and
that take those concepts in
statute and implement it like
any regulatory scheme folk
missed I I appreciate you
explaining the structure of
things might do you did not
however answer my question.
What my question was what is in
the rule that is not in the
contract because you're asking
us to adopt as law.
I'm usually my dad.
What is the role.
In addition to what is in the
contact.
And so we're being asked how
crucially without something that
at the moment without notice and
comment in New Mexico without
going through a an
administrative process.
Without it going through the the
the procedures for law in New
Mexico.
and so and so that is that is
part of the concern.
Our office will work that I have
I did see Mr chairman I did see
that Mr our that doctor
Matthews.
Wanted to make a comment and and
I'm certainly be happy to
I'll defer to him up for just a
moment and I have to use.
You.
Mr chair of members to commit to
that Senator Ivey Soto the thing
that seems really important here
is that the rules were talking
about here are things that the
state of New Mexico has no
authority over which is the
Interstate
Practices of psychotherapy if
they do they don't I'm I'm not a
lawyer so I don't know these
things but I know that these
these laws don't have anything
to do with with something that
you as of legislative body or
our regulatory scheme is allowed
to regulate does that matter.
Yes it does matter and and let
me give you one example of what
a simple as for example I'm
looking at article three of the
compact article three of the
compact right talk about it
licensure and and and and and
and happy in the compact it says
a psychologist may hold with one
or more compact state licenses
at a time if the psychologist is
licensed in more than one
compact state the home state is
the compact state with a
psychologist is physically
present when the services are
delivered as authorized by the
authority to practice in our
jurisdictional tells
acknowledges under the terms of
contract contract now that is
fairly clear language right
there.
That if you are licensed using
the example that that that you
had before of of some in
Colorado well with with fairly
at the psychologist were to be
moving back and forth between
let's have a psychologist at by
a Colorado and the psychologist
happens to be licensed in New
Mexico and Colorado.
That when the psychologist is in
New Mexico their home state is
New Mexico.
When the psychologist is
physically present in Colorado
their home state is Colorado.
I see you nodding that seems to
make up for my sense.
Interestingly.
In rural four point nine
however.
R. a licensed psychologist who
is active duty military or is
the spouse of an individual who
is active duty military may
designate one of the following
because a home state as long as
receiving state and nonstate are
members of the compact it could
be the home of record the
permanent change of station for
the state of current residents
if it is different from the PCS
state for the home of record the
active duty military personnel
or fast of an individual is
active duty military may change
the member state designated as
the individuals on state I
notifying the commission.
So what we have here is a rural.
That the commission's adopted by
actually overrides the language
in the compact.
So the contact is one thing the
rule says something completely
different for a subset of people
who are who are practicing no
I'm not saying that that's a bad
rule to have I'm just saying
that's not the work that we're
putting in the in the in the
statute so sentiments echo of
the documents please.
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto the
the what you're discussing here
is a naming rural the the
Senator talks about home states
and distance the aids and so for
certain purposes you might need
to be able to say that a
person's home state was axed but
the critical thing is that the
psychologist is responsible for
practicing under the scope of
practice and the laws of all of
the distant states of the state
in which the the client resides
so there may be cases in which
it's important to say that a
person's in a in this home
stated that home state but the
thing this regular what this
regulation what this a law does
is require that I know like I
know because my client my
student is is is a practicing
Colorado the Colorado has a
different reporting requirement
for duty to warn The New Mexico
does I would have to know that
underside impact for every state
in which I am practicing and
that's the critical thing it's a
name in rural and and it's it.
It's it's substantive meaning
it's not particularly.
But I think but you look at the
law differently than I do so I'm
just a poor poor country
psychologist and and and and
talked about this certainly I
understand that and I understand
you guys really want to get this
done and and I and I fully
support.
The goals of the site that I do
not at some point Dr Matthews
offline we can talk about the
fact that ever since I've been
in politics I do feel like
people are out to get me and and
I don't know if that's real or
not we can get into that later
but
but here's the thing is that is
that in the article four
paragraph see subcompact sedan
has been over ridden by rural
Oklahoma state Maine maintains
forty over the license of any
psychologist practicing into a
receiving state.
So what so what that means as by
rule some people are it's there
will be a priority over their
license is based on whether
present some people they may be
physically present in the state
of that state doesn't have under
the practice does not have
authority over there their their
license of the psychologists.
And that's problematic the way
that that's written and it's
even more problematic the way
that the rules then modifies it
and that is complicated by the
fact that under under the
compact it indicates that it has
the the force of law in fact
what it has it goes beyond
simply the force of law.
Because what I see in the in the
definition section section I
guess not sections are to
actively but I've and one second
but what's known as a definition
to a rule which is definitions
W..
Says that the definition has the
force and the fact that for a
long.
The worst part of several
statutory law in what we're
doing right now where it goes to
our legislative process.
Administrative rules which is
what Mr Wolfsburg reported
before is what agency does what
they do notice and comment and
then they adopt doctor rule this
is the rulemaking process
happening in Georgia.
That under the terms of the
compact would have the force of
a statute.
That one has to be adopted in
the state of New Mexico through
the legislative process meaning
that checked out the house the
Senate and the governor of
reading on what that is and yet
according to this they say that
it is better the statutory law
this is compounded further when
you look at the at the
at the duties of the commission
where again on page thirty one
of the compact you have and this
is in
Article two
the psychology of address social
compact commission.
Thank you the one right is that
the commercials on the following
powers probably not no one in
the commission's elected to
office of the state of New
Mexico.
The ability to promulgate
uniform rules to facilitate and
coordinate implementation
mistresses compact the rules now
have the force and effect of law
and shall be binding in all
compact states right but we've
already sent the rules and
definitions.
Have the same force and effect
of statutory law.
This is the problem with the
structure of this compact and
and and and let me just share
eighty eight a frustration that
I have.
The person that I have is we
have psychologists in New
Mexico.
Who desperately want to be able
to serve their clients.
What we want to make sure that
patients in New Mexico.
Are being treated with prove
licensed psychologist and the
proper standard of care.
The problem with this compact it
is if they would just simply say
this is all we're doing.
And we will make administrative
roles that have no effect in the
states but guide us in terms of
our administration only.
Wonderful.
Representative reasons that I've
never understood.
Every single one of these
compacts.
Says.
If we have a problem with you
we're going to see you in
another state you got to come to
find yourself in that a state if
you have a problem with us you
gotta go to that of the state.
Every single one of those
compacts has these all right and
then this this one goes further
on the state we're gonna make
rules and Georgia.
And that rule have the effect of
a statute in the state of New
Mexico.
And that is what I I problematic
Mr chairman.
I'm I'm happy to yield for a for
a couple minutes depend upon
what what amendments are
suggested or other action.
Is proposed to be taken by the
members I'm happy to come back
and and make a motion to strike
these various actions regarding
the definition of a rule at in
terms of it being having the
effect of statutory law because
that is unconstitutional Mr
chair right now I don't think
the church here anymore so.
Very well that that is no
actually he can hear me still
that is we constitutional in the
state of New Mexico are the the
end of the described the the two
other provisions that says that
I have to have the force and
effect of law in be binding and
all compact states if all they
were doing in the administrative
backend that language would not
be necessary and thus that
should not create a problem and
if for some reason these
compacts include that language
which asks us to give us our
sovereign authority given up our
sovereign authority as a state
and that is the problem with how
this is drafted and it pains me
it pains me terribly.
Because I I believe the first
half of this compact or what's
left of the first happens
contact I agree with I'm
passionate about wanting it to
be adopted.
It's the second half.
Well unfortunately runs afoul of
the constitution of the state of
New Mexico in a manner that is
irreconcilable.
What law making in the state
irreconcilable at all so Mr it
remove the table.
Mr chairman I believe Senator
Pirtle has a stand up.
Table.
Senator is chairman some others
on I I am thank you okay all
right we've been around a little
bit I have Senator Pirtle who
was next to be recognized
Senator Moores you jumped in
before you were recognized all
my apologies Mr chair alright
alright I let me recognize
center portal should be has
anything and I'll come back you
center more center portal Mr
chairman of the table.
There's not available tabling
motion before the committee
Emily.
Would you call the roll on the
table in motion please.
The agency that.
Yes.
Although not explain my vote.
Yes.
Wirth yes.
Pro.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Yes.
Mr just checked by my vote I
would have preferred that we had
finished our amendments and
Senator the compact and let them
decide to reject us for except
us under certain conditions but
I certainly do understand given
the structure where it is where
the committee is that on the
last thank you for thank you
senator.
Senator Ortiz the pandemic we
table Senate bill one nineteen
thank you for of complicated
bill Sir I know it's tough and I
know your intentions are very
good.
We've already finished with the
bill is it possible to get back
to Matthews just thirty seconds
as we finalize.
Chair Dr members would like that
instead argues if you would like
to.
Just.
No I don't have anything to say
I I I I I'm really disturbed by
the unregulated nature of this
bill in the the concerns that I
would think you brought up are
very rare
so I think you're protected
against something that doesn't
need protection but that's me
that's a.
Thank you so you know and I
would just say Mr Chairman
unfortunately we've we've left
New Mexico which had a message
for regulating.
Psychologists from other states
who practice here Representative
telephonically we have no we
have no protection against them.
And maybe there were problems
contact.
We don't have anything to
substitute for our and so a
psychologist from the state in
the country in practice in New
Mexico telephonically now not be
regulated by the New Mexico
border psychological examiners.
And and and we have no authority
to challenges are.
Do any damage we have no
authority to rectify that
damage.
Sixteen thousand counselors as
well.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator Ortiz Pino how
the next matter before the
committee tonight will be House
Bill number five.
that earlier we had the.
Senator Representative Lundstrom
and representative Garcia.
A state representative Garcia I
don't know we're still joined by
Senator look our reserves and
Representative Lundstrom.
Mr Chairman.
Okay great I'm not sure which
one of you wishes to begin I
hope by now you notice two
things one is the Senate
Judiciary Committee is warmed up
and number two that
I it allow the sponsors of
fifteen minutes to effectively
present the bill as they wear so
you'll recognize we wish
representatives and for whatever
time you wish so that people
don't feel like there were
constrained to just one minute
bursts of time and and I leave
it to you to interrupt your
speakers of the going on longer
than you want them to I know
that both of you have identified
as expert witnesses Ellen Chavez
Yarborough and Evan Williams all
know it also we have no
registered opponents to the bill
who've asked to speak in
opposition and in advance so
that being the case I'm not
likely to recognize or go to
anyone in opposition so
Representative one show go to
you first to speak at a
seniority.
All right thank you thank you Mr
chairman and that as you and I
have exactly the same amount of
seniority and may have about a
month on you if I remember
correctly I thank you thank you
Senator house bill five comments
electric generating facility
economic district act our last
year with the help of this
committee we were able to
establish a
Authority.
As a result of the closure of
the Escalante power plant last
year last year with the closure
of that power plant we lost a
significant number of jobs and
there is a significant economic
impact of both McKinley and
Cibola counties.
last year under that law we
established a redevelopment
authority and the primary
purposes for industrial
redevelopment and with this bill
simply does Mr Mr chairman and
committee is it expands the
number of people participating
on the authority currently
McKinley County is allowed five
members appointed members are
Cibola County is allowed for
appointed members and what we
would like to do Mr chairman is
add an additional member or
symbolic county and three
members for the governor as well
as two ex officio those
regarding the plant itself the
exhibition all members are
primarily because there is
expert advice needed in the
decommissioning of the plant
they would not have a vote are
we also felt like adding some
folks because of the governor's
reach more interested in her
interest in alternative energy
and are interested in helping
impoverished counties we feel
like she would be able to add
some good appointments to this
to this authority they're not
necessarily state staff people I
mean she would have the
authority to appoint a national
experts if necessary with that
Mr chairman I ask my Michael
Sanchez say a few words.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the committee thanks for here in
this bill today it's been a
pleasure just need well is going
on with you guys anyway back to
our deal Mr chairman now it of
the utmost importance that we
passes because the legislation
basically due to the loss of
jobs in our communities of
requests I would talk about a
thirteen million dollar direct
hit from payroll.
And other
Forces that they're working this
power plant and right now Mr
chairman and committee members
we do have by a bill which is
the home paper manufacturing
company on site and we're trying
to do here is attract more
businesses to this economic loss
so we have a crew in New Mexico
as you all know all Mr chairman
we also lost two of them
refinery in Gallup just recently
in our coal mine is on the verge
of going away to and what we're
trying to get done here Mr
chairman and committee members
is a.
Keep job open for people to New
Mexico in the western part of
the state we are devastated by
the COVID this year also and all
the matter just compounded on us
and all of one time and we're
just trying to survive right now
and madam chair pretty well
covered at all Mr chairman and I
appreciate that we appreciate
you guys Sturman Committee
members to put them would drive
this because it is very very
important community is very
important is to the New Mexico
thank you Mr chairman.
Representative.
You have some additional time
Representative did you want to
recognize anyone identified for
you previously those that signed
up yes Mr chairman I laying
Chavis Mr rolls on if she if she
could please Mr chairman go
ahead say a few words.
Go ahead my name.
Mr Chairman representative
Lundstrom Eileen Mr Eileen
Chavez Yarborough I'm the
executive director of Cibola
communities economic development
foundation representing requests
wanted Cibola County I've been
an economic developer for nine
years and has serve on the state
the states economic development
association and have served as
president for the past three
years so I I would
She ate you all amending this
bill as as as it's
Representative I over the past
four years I have worked very
closely with the executive
director Lundstrom at greater
Gallup we had been planning for
this closure coming down the
line.
And when legislation and acted
the ETA energy transition.
We had to act very quickly and
so the work that we have done in
the prior four years she was
very very good for us and
positioned us well to it depends
it and find a way to help
replace those jobs then it was
compounded by the Marathon Oil
closing in Gallup and so
McKinley and Cibola County have
been hit very hard
just both by how losing you know
up to three hundred direct jobs
that are high paying high wage
skilled good quality of life
jobs
for the just for the Escalante
closure I can say that ninety
percent of those employees came
from Cibola county so that was a
big hit for us so three hundred
and then you just you can add a
one to one and a half multiplier
you know we're looking at five
hundred jobs that have
devastated our our communities
and not just in jobs but also an
economic tax base both of our
counties are have a lot of
public lands that we don't have
the opportunity to generate and
economic tax base from so every
company that we can keep is very
keen to our economic success I
in our communities and in our
counties and so this at
amendment would give McKinley
and Cibola equal footing as we
share the assets in the work
force for this for this
departure that was there and the
company and it would also give
us the opportunity to work with
the governor and see how we can
work together to help replace
those those jobs those high rate
you know good skill quality jobs
we
And like Patty said you know you
at work with her to provide the
expertise that we need to help
us make this happen I will say
that a greater Gallup and her
staff have been very
instrumental in helping lay the
foundational work that was
needed to get where we are today
and so I think this amendment
would help bolster our efforts
and help get this authority on
its way that replacing and re
creating those jobs there at the
accrued industrial park with the
authority thank you.
And Mr Mr chairman we also have
in the waiting room Marc
Fletcher is the lobbyist for the
city of Gallup.
Mr Fleischer.
More committed.
Mark we can't hear you.
There you go hello yep let me
turn off of.
The other hearing hold on one
second.
I March Fleischer Richard
lobbyists for you McKinley paper
company which is located in the
Escalante
area which is this.
We will be over I don't repeat
the same things others have said
but the in the bureau companies
benefited from Leda funding
it'll be doing other things into
the state would like to have the
governor be aware of what's
going on in that area and
hopefully supported it would
like to yes Representative
Gallup which is in McKinley
county and we stand in support
of this bill appreciate the time
thank you.
Mr chairman I don't think Evan
Williams is available this
evening so we're ready for
questions very good and
Representative as I said we did
not have anyone registered to
speak in opposition so we'll go
to questions from members the
committee.
And I see a number hands I'm
assuming their from this matter
not be presenting better so
we'll go to Senator Baca Senator
Pirtle.
Part of.
Thank you Mr chair
Thank you madam chair House
Appropriations keep can you tell
me
now so some reading this how
they're if I get this right Mr
chair and the.
Mr chair house program each year
Mr chair House Appropriations
there is how many how many
positions are there now on the
board.
Currently Senator the positions
are I for McKinley County for
four Cibola County and one ex
officio for the governor's
office that's what the current
legislation allows for
thank you Mr chair so I'm
looking at that and it seems it
seems to me that that they are
pretty well equally affected so
I understand the the addition Mr
chair of the board member for
Cibola County but the way this
bill reads our army right on the
first page online twenty four it
says account for the districts
of create the ability to govern
the district and so Mr chair
against my concern there is that
that the intention of this
section as inactive
Mr chair was to give the the
district account that works the
district
the authority I just I by the
plain language of their and so
I'm curious requests or how this
how these board members Mr chair
were were requests to be added
wasn't Cibola are requests that
are or were where did that come
from Mr chair out thank you Mr
Mr chairman thank you senator
basically
The complete formation has not
been done and the reason I say
that is that McKinley County
actually started the formation
of this district.
In December and January of it
was supposed to be started
before December thirty first
twenty twenty are there is a
number of delays what I
understood is due to COVID
issues that the county had to
deal with and was not able to
get to get involved with this.
What I'm saying though is that
this is not a.
A local issue as much as it is a
national issue.
We're talking about energy
development and we're talking
about redevelopment of a
industrial site that's much
broader than any two counties
good envision
my areas heavy industrial we are
basically blue collar job type
people out my neck of the woods
and
We were greatly affected by
outside events things that were
out of our control which means
we would like to increase our.
Influence outside of our control
and what I may Mr chairman and
senator is that we have.
Very
act governor very interested and
and alternative energy.
Are very interested in in
bringing the economy up in our
part of the state.
Understands the need for job
job training which we badly need
out there.
but this is something that is
initiated by me and by the
legislators from that area it's
not necessarily initiated by
McKinley County civil accounting
certainly Mr chairman and
senator would like to have the
additional member but this is
something that I since this was
my bill additionally I felt that
we just needed to have more fire
power so to speak with this
authority a little a little
higher than than what you're
going to get a county level.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
thank you madam chair I I and I
agree you know that that are
a some strategy is certainly
needed in and I I like I said I
I see the necessity for
sin Cibola here to have the
additional voice but we're
increasing from what it looks
like on the the board of county
by the you know of a factor of a
of a third really and it just
seems that that gives us a bit
of a heavy hand
so I I think Mr chair madam
chair that that you know I it's
it's a good idea I think there
should be a input as a matter of
fact we we have this discussion
I believe today I think it was
another committee or even on the
floor about four input should be
given and and I think that input
should be certainly given there
but I I think I'm a little
hesitant
Mr chairman and madam chair that
that we should.
What that sort of authority in
there that's quite I think a
heavy hand compared with this
board used to so I appreciate
the the dish in the Cibola and
and so I but but the that other
the other dishes seems heavy
handed so with that I I would
propose an amendment that I I
would hope you consider that
would still allow for that
that I I guess input and
influence and voice but maybe
with not as have yet of what
happened and so what I would
propose is that on on page a
page of.
Let's see here.
Page.
To our wine three and it looks
like there was already an
amendment in there and one of
the committees.
To add on that very line of
voting I I would I would move
that we add the word non dash in
front of the we're voting on so
that this would give really of
that voice there but they
wouldn't necessarily be voting
member so now C. will would have
voting members McKinley would
have already members you have
the exhibition go and then you
have three appointed persons
from the state level that could
definitely give voice but they
they would not actually be able
to to exercise that authority
over the two county so I I would
move that amendment I hope you
find it friendly.
Just make it make a comment
my intention is is to make sure
that we have the voice of the of
the governor's office and
the just for her reach and
expertise.
I don't I didn't think it was
bad to have actual voting
equipment members sense counties
are instrumentality of the state
anyway and the point wasn't to
have state employees.
Appointed by the governor.
But I just don't want to lose
Mr chairman that help I see it
is help from the executive I
think going to the executive and
saying gosh we need someone
appointed that has specific
background in state bonding or
financial management those kind
of things or being able to help
us with opening doors with BNSF
rail road or something like that
I just wanted to make sure that
we don't lose them.
The help so to speak Mr
chairman.
Senator Baca use of course.
Thank you thank you Mr chair I I
I.
I would I would move that
amendment that ice that I stated
previously.
and I appreciate madam chairs a
response in I I'd like I said I
just think it's a bit heavy
handed we're adding you know
full a full thirty three percent
to in addition to this board and
then giving
you know pointed again by one
person you know to have
influence over these both both
these counties I think I'd be
much more apt if it was an
additional member
and and again Cibola a has a
member of the thank you would
like to have a I think that's
great but the the other three if
there was another one I think
you know I think that might be
acceptable or possibly two but
now three and so I think that
they should have a voice in you
know the the executive in this
state is the executive and the
when when they speak they do
have a voice and so
as I said I would I would move
that amendment on page three
line to to insert prior to
voting non dash.
Mr Mr chairman if I may.
Yes Representative have.
I would it Senator and Mr
chairman I don't mind if a
couple of them were made non
voting is law because they would
still provide the input but I
would like to at least retain
one as a voting member.
And the symbol of percent of
course as a voting member.
That local county one voting
from the from the governor's
office and then to nonvoting
would be fine it's just I feel
like we we do need to allow the
executive to have at least at
least one voting position.
Thank you Mr chair and
Sounds like we're our trading a
little bit and you know but I I
think if if if it was two
nonvoting members I I think I'd
be able to support your bill
with one voting member and the
voting member from symbol of.
I have no problem with that.
Senator Baca used the floor you
have proposed an amendment that
would be inconsistent with the
amendment to you in
Representative Lundstrom I've
just been last discussing we
that amendment Mr chair.
We want to withdraw your
original ma'am I do have a
different amount I'm working on
it right now but I would a
insert before voting
One.
Actually I did Sir two nine dash
voting.
And one voting.
We need to voting so would be
to.
Nonvoting and one.
And and then.
Yes and Mr chairman I would
actually be to voting at the the
civil and one from the governor
and then two additional non
voting from the governor is that
correct Senator Baca.
Mr chair and the and madam chair
I ate I think we're on on that
section is section uses of
artificial include three members
appointed by the governor okay
we were only addressing the
remembers at that point
appointed by the governor so
there would be to nonvoting and
one okay I'm I'm okay with that.
Also Senator Baca again so that
Emily is following closely ours
are stab your proposed amendment
now it would be on what page one
line number please be on page
three line to be for the work
voting to non voting and one.
And then.
All right.
One of the time Center Bach on
that proposed amendment I see
Senator Lopez on that amendment
that right Senator Lopez.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm and
this if I may it goes to a
question for.
Chair woman Lundstrom with
regards to the governor's
appointments.
I'm madam chair just a question
and I'm an invading this and try
to see any amendments there's no
stipulation or direction for who
these gubernatorial appointees
are and I know.
Is did I miss a someplace in
here Mister all.
Mister chairman Senator no
there's no stipulation so and
because we're now in this world
and so I mean she could actually
have people that are pointed at
a national level to participate
with that board.
Okay and the reason why I ask
that Mr Mr chairman madam chair
too is is
Would it be I I mean and the
governor's you know a governor's
appointee persons from different
parts of our state did you want
to have somebody specifically
from from the community or the
communities that could also be
appointed by the governor to you
know to be a member of this
board.
Yes Mister Mister chairman
Senator it could well be I mean
the governor of my understanding
is as the governor actually asks
folks to apply for positions
prior to the appointments I
saying that even with this ex
officio position she's asked
that you go to our website and
those that are interested apply
to serve and then she goes from
that group of resumes it could
very well be somebody local that
may have the expertise in the
original bill we give criteria
for those appointees they should
have a background in finance or
engineering or energy economic
development they should have
some kind of background related
to redevelopment and they cannot
be an elected official no
elected officials are allowed to
serve on this authority.
Okay so with that information Mr
chairman madam chairs at the
same qualifications that would
be for these gubernatorial
appointees also yes.
yes it would be and the reason
why also just that Mr chairman
madam chairs because maybe
in as we're talking from what
Senator Baca is proposing for
then the voting on voting
is that if the governor is maybe
he could be required to appoint
someone from the communities or
one of the communities that are
part of this board that could be
a gubernatorial appointment you
could be two of them it could be
an and one who would be in XFS
yo Senator Baca I'm thinking
that could be maybe from outside
of the community I'm just trying
to think of maybe another option
so that and I know I'm Mr
chairman madam chair that you
know many of our communities to
have experts are unsung heroes
or heroines that maybe would be
willing to pre participating and
that the governor would be
willing to to appoint also I
just wanted to throw that out Mr
chair madam chair just for I
thought and thank you.
Mr chairman it's interesting
that you say that when I saw the
list to they came forth from
Cibola County of the for three
of them were local engineers so
they were all very qualified
people and then one of them was
an energy expert just happened
to be living in that in that
small community in that small
County and that they had all
apply to that county commission
and I think there's quite a few
that did apply and they were
selected because they met met
the criteria they're from the
community but there's nothing
that would prevent the
government from doing that
because people actually apply on
her website for these
appointments.
Mr chairman madam chair would
you consider maybe a friendly
amendment to add a stipulation
which would kind of I think feet
fat a Hershey's they feed into
what Senator Baca maybe
proposing also it's kind of like
layering but okay so so Mister
chairman what should be
suggesting Senator is that for
at least two of the position she
would be required to break of
select locally I I I wanted to
make sure I understood what
you're saying
one of the three or.
Madam chair Mr chairman madam
chair I would say maybe at least
two that would be local from
within your the board that the
district the region
and then maybe somebody else
that could be maybe the ex
officio member and some Senator
Baca I'm also kind of you know
moving within your amendment
also as you're talking about
these voting members.
I think also Mr chairman and
senator there's nothing that
precludes if she did choose to
put a staff person on there say
like the executive director for
economic development the cabinet
secretary somebody like that.
Who does not live in either of
those counties I I hate to have
that person I mean if that was
your choice we actually haven't
talked to her about people yet
or anything like that were we
talked were briefly about the ex
officio and that's what you
recommended that they apply.
But I wouldn't want to if there
were someone extra special out
of Albuquerque or Santa Fe I
wouldn't want to lose that
opportunity.
Okay I'm I just want to throw
that out in our discussion Mr
chairman madam chair thank you
thank thank you also to think
center Baca still has a floor on
his amendment that appointment.
Senator Ivey Soto are you on
survive because amendment I
have.
Right.
Yeah right now I'm I'm I'm
Representative figure out how
many members we have on this
authority.
And having the authority is
going to be.
Because.
As I'm reading this stance.
I mean so we start off with.
A district that consists of
eight members.
But then I'm trying to figure
out the governing body of the
county cell point I.
We got those I then we've got.
The governor.
Twenty three.
But.
Are there no other counties
other than Cibola that are
members of the authority at this
point because other.
Yeah.
Mister chairman Senator it says
based on location the two
counties that qualify to
participate or McKinley and
Cibola.
Lance and the facility itself is
inside of McKinley County so
late in the original legislation
were allowed I appointees and
see below was allowed for
what we'd like to do is to even
that out make sure it's five and
five so you'd have ten people
appointed.
By local elected officials
I believe most of those people I
don't know a couple of them but
most of them actually live in
one of those two counties.
And are very familiar with the
area that we're asking of
primarily for expertise purposes
an expansion of of the governor
being allowed to have three
appointees.
I don't I don't feel that it
would be a bad thing if they're
not voting a couple of them but
I would like to make sure that
we have at least one that is.
I feel that it that makes sense
certainly and so as a Mr
Chairman and and and
Representative Lundstrom.
Up.
So right now the governor has to
non voting members on the
commission now she has one
okay.
Okay yes yes currently Mister
chairman Senator shows one
nonvoting member which is
I think it's for the magnitude
and the importance of this
project in the focus we'd like
to have from the executive
that's that's not very much so
we're hoping to expand that
influence and then we've offered
in this also to.
Ex officio appointments for
Escalante only because we need
that expertise during
decommissioning they would not
be voting they have not asked
for that that's something that
I think but together in the
development of this legislation
I think it's important that they
have regular participation
because you're working on
redevelopment at the same time
you're decommissioning of power
plant and I just feel that
having them in regular
communication with this group
would be very important.
So
Mr chairman and and
The loss of.
Right so I'm I'm I'm looking at
for on on page three for more
subsection F. Nagy.
Beyond twelve elected official
shot services or to members not
employed or contemplates and the
action of an authority member.
By giving the governor of voting
member is that not the governor
influencing.
What is that number governor
influencing.
what happens of the commission.
Well Mister chairman Senator I I
don't know I would say so I I I
waited more to something like
the appointment of the board of
regents of the governor does but
those appointments for she does
a point that but all the day to
day operations and the
guidance general guidance and
policy guidance I don't think
that there's a tremendous amount
of influence at that point.
That and and I am forgive me
please I'm I am I am new in my
position as chairman the rules
committee and if I can part is.
Okay.
If I could.
Up.
The first is that our office as
to whether or not.
The voting member should be
somebody who would be let's
start with the advice and
consent of the Senate.
That's a good point I would not
know that senator I apologize it
wouldn't know that.
But it would be a good thing I
mean I think it gives of the
profile it needs to have and
some good betting I know the
Senate does some excellent
bedding with people.
And I I think that this may have
stepped away for just a moment
let me just ask other adult
hello.
Yeah the the question I was I
was I was I was deferring your
experience as the chair of rules
committee
as to whether the
The voting member should be
someone who sources
are on the price and consent of
the Senate.
I'm Mister chairman Senator it
could be I mean we've done that
for many other boards and
commissions
It is a governor's appointee we
can go through and evaluate as
as you are doing now as the new
chair so I think it it has value
it could be very much at least
for the one or however many we
let it
giving to the governor.
Yeah and I and I don't think
that's that's that's what is
important for the non voting
members
but the.
So Senator Baca I I just break
my question to you is with that
work for you to have the the
voting member my understanding
of of your enrollment is that
the governor's.
The governor is not a appointees
would be one voting and two
additional non voting members is
that correct.
Yes that's correct Mr chair and
senator and you know if we
needed to make that one voting
to incorporate Senator Lopez is
suggestion from an affected area
there either McKinley or Cibola
but an appointee of the governor
I think that would be just fine
to that language could certainly
work in there and I I would be a
I thought I thought that was a
really great idea.
Yeah and that's I think.
I mean I I think I think
certainly that that would work
in and and and and and
particularly saying
Of the revival Center law office
of Representative Lundstrom in
terms of that
So.
Our.
Not sure how we would want to
structure that right now if
you'd want to work on the slider
or Mr chair I would here
Mr chair and chair of rules if I
would your price for admission
for yielding the floor here
would be to construct that
amendment.
So I'd be happy if you worked on
that and I I think we have a
good idea here that improves
this bill and and would help it
along.
Thank you.
Our certainly our Mr chairman
if you would give me just a
moment I will craft that for
Easter Mr chair with all
withdraw my amendment for now
and maybe you could let some
other members of the committee
speak to the bill and then maybe
we could come back to this.
All right I see Senator Stewart
ask if you recognize although
all the master she may be on the
amendment and that's difficult
to know because we don't know
what the amendment gonna look
like just yet so Senator Stewart
all right connection I'm taking
my hand down I'm thoroughly
confused now with what we're
doing on the amendment ten
she's starting to feel like.
You know she just passed the
bill but I'm sure I'm in the
minority so I'll just go back on
mute.
All right of center Baca was
working on amendment he's
withdrawn it I think to allow
center Ivey Soto to.
Follow up with Senator Baca is
amended and take into account
the comments of Senator Lopez
and Representative Lundstrom
given the fact that we're less
than a week from the conclusion
of our session I'm disinclined
from rolling over bills so
members can go work on them in
part because let me just take a
few minutes to give everyone an
idea that what the coming days
look like I'm gonna be a lot of
work for this committee.
So we we meeting Saturday Sunday
Monday Wednesday and Friday.
Please realize that a number of
the bills are being sent to our
committee to try and resolve
when resolved issues at this
point so at this point in time
I'm anticipating we're going to
see.
Of the recreational marijuana
recreational cannabis bill or
bills coming to this committee
which will involve quite a bit a
hearing in work and I'm also
anticipating at this point in
time a medical malpractice of
bill that I know it's been
worked on some compromise their.
You know I anticipate this
committee is going to be hearing
up.
Of the and the life of physician
assisted end of life legislation
so there are a number of bills
and and all of that is just my
way of saying that I don't think
that we want to be rolling over
bills to work on them and
amendments I don't think that's
what the representatives were
with us tonight are going to
want to see because they're
going to get caught.
So let's stay a little bit later
Well but later so we get some of
these work out Starbuck is
alright with you.
Stay with you as long as you can
hang in there Mr chair all right
good.
You're worried about me.
Still my officers Senator Baca.
I am.
well up Mr chairman
let me see if I.
After.
the conversation correctly.
R. with what is up on the screen
so striking House commerce and
Economic Development Committee
amendment number five is to
simply striking the word up
voting.
So that it would say that's
already shown include three
members appointed by the
governor who shall serve at the
pleasure of governor for two
year terms and then following
the period we would answer.
One of the members appointed
from appointed.
By the governor shall be a
resident of Cibola or McKinley
counties who have a voting
member and who shall serve with
the advice and consent of the
Senate the other two members
appointed by the governor shall
be non voting members of the
authority.
Are in and and then that that
also gives the governor
flexibility in terms of of where
those people reside or or
whatnot.
Senator market is that.
That are out however the price
of admission there or or doing
something thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator for drafting
that
up I think that would cover the
price of admission you'll have
to ask Senator Lopez she'll
punch your ticket there and if
it satisfies her concern as
well.
Senator Ivey Soto
Representative Lundstrom earlier
I believe indicated that that
she would be willing to make
these changes but let me go back
to her now that she sees it.
Well Representative Lundstrom
Representative Garcia is this
what you would consider to be an
acceptable amendment.
Mr chairman I think it's
acceptable I feel that as long
as with the two members of their
non voting and the governor then
can choose possibly somebody
from outside of the area I'm
fine.
All right very good.
Now.
The.
Discussion I believe we had.
With the Representative
Lundstrom and other questions
was making effectively the same
change with regard to the
appointments and voting and
nonvoting members with regard to
the appointments made by I
believe the county is that right
Representative Lundstrom.
Now we wanted to leave the
county appointments alone what
we're doing is the county
commission in McKinley county
six five people and they have to
be one of the qualifications
what we're doing is just adding
a voting member from C. boleh
counting and that's not in this
section if I recall correctly.
Right what I was hoping to do is
try and adopt all this with just
one amendment but we can take it
in pieces.
Representative you follow that
earlier.
Mr I'm credited not.
Representative Lundstrom would
you would you go through that
again forces very quickly so
that perhaps certain that this
is a pair of three to the
amendment yes basically what
we're doing is we're adding a
voting member from Cibola county
so that would make a total of
five from civil County.
Yes currently it's for so we
would like to have them to get
another voting member.
Mr Chairman is that.
What were the original County
that that created the authority
was that was that making.
Gather original County is
McAnally.
And Cibola has the right to join
which they have done.
unfortunately we should have had
equal number of appointments
from both counties and that slip
through the cracks last year.
Currently and and so Mister
chairman and Representative
Lundstrom does that not covered
on page three line ten.
What usual kind of that because
part of the districts shall
appoint a USB ports and now I
additional members to the for.
Yes that's correct it'll be
covered online ten okay very
good.
All right very good so I
Representative center said
earlier I I had thought that
that we were going to be
limiting the voting authority of
some of the new appointees other
the governor but I think we were
a cover that.
All right so members of the
committee on the proposed
amendment you have in front of
you now Mr chair.
Yes Sir Baca I wanted to defer
to Senator Lopez and see if this
was a term liking she was our
suggestion that the appointee be
for much a local area.
Mr chairman my if I appreciate
thank you I yes it's good that's
I'm I'm good with that one of
course if the chairwoman is too
but I appreciate yes it's a long
might my thinking.
Voting members of the one we're
talking about it I I believe Mr
chairman and I I'm okay with
that.
Right Senator Baca you had some
help from Senator Ivey Soto but
I think you still have the four.
I DO he's used his admission
ticket Mr chair so I appreciate
that and I would move that
amendment as stated by Senator
Ivey Soto.
I any further discussion on the
proposed amendment then.
Any objection to the doctor that
amendment.
I see none we show all members
present for the committee to
have approve the amendment and
the amendment is adopted.
It's pretty cool Center Purnell.
All right members the committee
following the option that
amendment other discussion.
Our current.
Senator Ivey Soto
I cannot tell from his
background Senator Pirtle snot
come once again in the capitol.
I'm sorry Mr chair that.
What about from the background
it looks like you're in the
capitol but I see a little one
with you.
I cannot disclose my location Mr
bear with me.
Thank you
this.
Our to do so tonight Senator
Pirtle all right members the
committee we have amendment I
see no other hands up requesting
discussion.
We'll go to a do pass motion
with them we call the roll.
Following adoption of the Senate
Judiciary Committee amendment
Emily please.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator Lopez yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator start.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom
representative Garcia of the
past motion with an amendment
from the Judiciary Committee
thank you very much thank you
committee and have a good
evening thank you for being with
us thank you Mr chairman thanks
for the committee this is well
needed are part of the country I
really appreciated thank you
very much right well next year
House Bill to a one
Representative Cadena.
Good evening Mister chair and
members of the committee I will
have with me tonight our New
Mexico corrections department
secretary a secretary at least
at the fairly settle.
Mr chair thank you I'm just
shuffling things around fourteen
at first but I'm pulling this
one up I am proud to be Kerry
house bill two oh one on behalf
of the New Mexico corrections
department and just want to name
and appreciate their leadership
as an agency and specifically
the secretary here with her
probation and parole director
who are ready to do their part
in building a smarter criminal
justice system in New Mexico
that we believe is going to be
important as we improve public
safety together simply H. B. two
oh one addresses are
appropriations statutes allowing
a minimum or medium risk person
on probation to be automatically
released from probation if they
have met all obligations of that
probation term and completed one
half or more of that probation
period with that Mr chair I
would like to turn it to our
corrections secretary miss the
file is that all out to offer a
brief statement.
In the.
Representative Cadena just of so
you're clear.
you what I can gather follow the
rules we've adopted here for the
Senate Judiciary Committee yes
presentation your presentation
again at eight fifty seven you
have fifteen minutes I'll leave
it to you to control those who
wish to recognize principally
because there are a number of
proponents to sign in to speak
on behalf of the bill we
opponents but the but please
control the time of your
speakers certainly given the our
after the statement from my
secretary I'll be needing those
organizations and support and
laxity just have one person
waiting in today but otherwise
just naming I'll I'll read out
loud those organizations after
we go to the secretary very good
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative Lara Cadena I am
Alisha Tafoya Lucero and the
cabinet secretary for the New
Mexico corrections department I
want to thank our sponsor for
her willingness to carry this
really simple commonsense
modification of two of the
probation and parole process and
essentially what we're trying to
do here is to allow people that
are on low and medium
supervision to be are taken off
of probation supervision after
they have met all of the
requirements of their probation
and parole I'm sorry not for all
of their appropriations this
would specifically exclude
people who have convictions for
sex crimes violent offenses and
anybody with a felony level D.
W. Y. and R. we just feel like
it's a very important way to
make a meaningful change very
common sense change to the way
that we do appropriations there
is no evidence that indicates
that longer terms of probation
equal greater success we believe
that this will help to minimize
or institutional populations and
will also serve as an incentive
for people to do well and to
stabilized early on in their
probation term thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you.
I wanted to share that I. H. B.
two oh one is also supported by
the law office of the public
defender's The New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association the ACLU of New
Mexico the drug policy alliance
and those features New Mexico we
also were able to move this
legislation through the house
floor on a vote of sixty four to
weigh in and I really appreciate
the leadership of my colleague
representative James Powdrell
Culbert who served for many
years in different roles as part
of our criminal legal system and
stood to speak in strong support
of this common sense measure to
improve public safety with that
Mr chair we're going to have one
person share with us tonight
their experiences in the system
and that would be for non that
there he'll.
For non though go ahead please.
Members of the committee my
name's that number three and I'm
part of fellow with gold futures
for many young women United.
And in support of each mutual
one I am based out of
Albuquerque but I'm from
Espanola New Mexico and I've
seen that many among my
community my loved ones in my
own style all the way from up
north down south the in the
whole generations of loved ones
for decades and cycles of
substance keep busy and hi
seriation this is the steps and
in the right direction no no
people released from
incarceration to move on with
their lives being on probation
can be a significant barrier to
employment mandatory probation
appointments can claim to
working now worries in only so
many employers will allow
flexibility to attend fix
probation appointments being on
probation can make a our age we
locate for him well you may in
rural and borderline areas we
transportation is less reliable
and more expensive getting
through appropriations
appointments can be a
significant challenge each which
you'll want to reduce recidivism
by allowing these individuals
wide will Welch fully move on
with their lives sooner rather
than later and thank you for it
and I weird you for your
support.
Thank you with that we stand for
questions thank you.
Members of the committee with
questions.
Sen.
Thank you thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward a quick question this is
only applied probationers and
not parole.
Not.
Senator o'neill this is
probation only okay well and
then often times of by remember
right Representative Mr chair
and members are lot of times the
probation is tacked on after
somebody does or parole
this is that is that the case.
Representative a lot of times Mr
chair Senator it depends
sometimes appropriations of the
term served before prison
sentence but secretary if you'd
like to lab right on that.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
o'neill this would apply to or
I'm sorry the question was if
somebody has probed probation
after they've completed their
parole that is often times the
case and this would apply to
that term of probation as well.
Thank you and of I would just
again thank Representative for
brand forward you know my
experience just anecdotally
which only goes so far as it
it's an addict but when it was
working closely with folks at
additional thousand men and
women on parole you know if the
PO wants to wants to yield like
they're doing a great job and
then you know we as a program
see that as well and it's just a
question of some kind of
requirement of bureaucratic
requirement that keeps them on
parole it or appropriations that
is yes this this is just common
sense and I really don't think
that public safety is at risk my
sense is one thing I noticed
during my time working in that
capacity was of somebody is off
to a good start and they got
some really positive momentum
going you know for for several
months or even a year or even
more you know it's pretty clear
there get there on the right
path so I would just really
respect the parole office the
probation officers and
corrections department's
expertise in this issue are in
on those matters so again I
strongly support this bill thank
you.
Thank you Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair
Can you look into this or do I
think it's a pretty good idea
you know often times what what
comes before us is
Well and and you can bring it up
or Representative Mr chair
representative of what what's
placed before us is is some of
fiscal responsibility type of
issue where we're saving money
and.
I put words in your mouth right
now Mr chair representative but
anyway this is actually a a bill
that might be able to do that
can I ask you a question Mr
chair representative.
what what is the difference
between a minimum or a medium
level risk.
There in late thank you Mister
chair and senator I do want to
offer that it's been part of my
experience and expertise that
returning to the legislature to
have previously worked inside
the New Mexico corrections
department under governor
Martinez's administration I
served as the bureau chief of
recidivism reduction and that's
when I first got to meet
secretary FY other settle one of
the things important first that
you commented on is that we will
see potential cost savings
because we will be using New
Mexico's resources and limited
dollars more effectively so that
we can point supervision at
those offenders that really need
that higher level that higher
level of of appropriations I
would share in the internet to
the secretary the corrections
department uses of validated
risk and needs assessment to
classify offenders moving
through their system whether it
be on probation or house within
the custody of New Mexico
corrections department in our
prison system so using those
tools someone is identified and
classified as either minimum
medium or higher risk level so
this legislation only applies to
those that have been assessed at
a minimum or medium risk for
ball secretary if there's
anything you wanted to add.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
Baca so just to add a bit to
that we we use a risk assessment
right now and essentially the
people that end up on low and
medium supervision are the
people that have lower level
offenses and people that are
beginning to to do well while.
While they're on supervision so
more.
I'm sorry.
Okay.
My vote is been corrected thank
you Mr chair so I I just want to
clarify and I I believe I I
stated this already but
essentially it's any person who
is not being supervised
specifically for sex offenses
because those people are scored
using it completely different
instrument we use national
standards to supervise them and
it's done in a very different
way it excludes violent
offenders and we always exclude
the felony level D. W. why
fenders because of the issues
that we have experienced in our
state and so essentially any
person who is convicted of an
offense that is not in one of
those three categories could
potentially be eligible for
lower medium supervision some of
the people might start off at
that low level some of them
might start off at a higher
level of supervision but show
promise and compliance early on
and they are assessed very
regularly so anytime somebody
has a change in their status
meaning like maybe they
completed a treatment program or
they became employed or they do
get the the rules and school
those types of things would
trigger a new evaluation and
would potentially drop them from
a higher level of supervision to
a medium or lower level of
supervision.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
thank you Representative an
expert so you you describe going
to school as soon that would do
something like that might might
initiate a medium level to a
minimum level can you tell me an
activity that might initiate the
the alternative which would be a
minimum to medium level of what
that be an act committed in
prison or on probation or what
have you madam secretary please.
Mr chair and senator Baca
certainly so if there was a
person who was not complying
with their basic standard rules
let's say that they miss a
series of appointments or they
we're in a treatment program and
then they stopped attending the
treatment program or maybe they
were fired from their employment
that type of thing would trigger
a reassessment and it may lead
to higher level of supervision
and it may not but if it does
it's only for a period of time
until we're able to get that
person back on that on the right
track and get them back into
their treatment program or find
another place to for them to be
employed or to to be going to
school at so it's not a
guaranteed that an infraction
would increase the supervision
level but it often does but only
for for a period of time until
we start to see progress again.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
madam secretary and and
Representative I I appreciate
that answer and you know and I
appreciate your expertise to
you know I have some experience
with this but I'm sure you've
seen much more than me just has
a representative here that I
think though that that is a
little bit of what concerns me
is that activity you know this
this tends to
just just what you spoke about
Mr chair is it tends to indicate
a trend and so it concerns me
that moving from anymore to a
medium level
might be adverse and how do we
know that so Mr chair someone
goes from a medium anymore to
medium level of risk and and
then there still in the.
I guess realm of of being
released for appropriations
under this bill and so that that
concerns me a little bit because
we have sometimes people out
there that commit crime and what
not and the and and there are at
that risk level maybe and so I I
would I would propose an
amendment to your bill and I
would hope that it would be
friendly and I probably could
supported with this then it.
Understanding it is a went
through a the previous chamber
virtually unopposed but here we
are tonight and the so anyway my
my proposal would be this that
on page two one twenty four or
I'm sorry line yeah I would be
lying twenty four we would
strike of the words or medium
what this would would be
allowing a minimum risk
to to be allowed on probation I
I think that a different gear or
gives a greater guarantee of
public safety still still
satisfies your desire and all of
our desires to minimize cost
to look for better outcomes for
for the person that's involved
and really just to keep
everybody safe
I think I think that that would
be a reasonable request and
something that would be
palatable to most people and the
certainly to me so with that I
would look for responsive and
pass and I would move the
amendment Mr chair so thank
Representative Benham on the
proposed amendment to strike it
rich or medium.
Mr chair Senator thank you at
this point I would not consider
that to be a friendly amendment
Mr chair Senator Baca
if you and I watch the same news
whether we're in northern New
Mexico or southern New Mexico or
in Albuquerque are big city the
criminal legal system we have
the criminal justice system we
have is not working we do not
have public safety and what I
have done with this bill along
side the leadership of the New
Mexico corrections department is
trust our public safety officers
that work within the system
every single day and have built
their careers here so again Mr
chair and senator it is our
corrections department that
holds the responsibility for the
rehabilitation of these
offenders within their custody
and it's through their
leadership looking at models
across the country that come
from bipartisan efforts to make
our public safety system more so
more focused and smarter so that
we can actually improve public
safety so with that again what
what we have is not working and
this is an attempt to actually
improve public safety and I'm
gonna stick with trusting the
leadership of our public safety
officers within the corrections
department to continue on this
run on the amendment
Representative.
As we get closer to ten o'clock
the answers get shorter I
appreciate your response and and
the passion for which you bring
your bill I I guess I I am
looking at the side of the
equation Representative Mr chair
representative that you're
presenting for corrections but
I'm also looking at the other
side of that equation which is.
The the police officers on the
street you know recently we've
seen in the news we've seen you
know.
Fortunately homicides are some
poor we've seen actually two two
homicides on the east side of
Coronado mall just recently in
my district we had no eleven
year old that was a fatally
gunned down and we did hear
Valencia County and also and and
and so the corrections
department I think you're right
they have expertise and and I
think that
The suggestion of releasing a
minimal level risk of persons is
is a good suggestion I think
medium risk though in the state
that we are in the in the
scenarios we have in this state
with crime where it is and then
he missed this of the crimes and
the risk level to the public I
think it's a fair compromise and
you know I hope you to work with
me going forward I'd love to
support your bill but I I would
I would with that move that we
on page two like twenty four
strike the words or medium thank
you Mr that amendment
Center o'neill on the amendment.
Thank you Senator Baca for
bringing that forward.
The thing is for me and I
completely understand your
reasoning.
To the secretary what percentage
of probationers are medium isn't
it the case at least again I'm
just come back from my
experience are the bulk of
probationers medium security
isn't minimum security
relatively rare and also if we
are going to talk about.
Seriously talk about balancing
public safety with the costs the
additional cost of having folks
on medium security that aren't
really a threat to the community
doesn't that factor and so
percentage wise just roughly
what kind of percentage or
medium versus minimum.
Mr chair Senator madam secretary
please.
Mr chair and Senator o'neill I
don't have a specific percentage
for you but I I can ballpark it
for you I I think that it's fair
to say that about
ten to fifteen percent of people
are on minimum supervision but
as you state yes the bulk of
people who are being supervised
on probation are at a medium
level and the people that need
that higher level of supervision
often times have those more
serious offenses and those
people would be supervised at
higher levels of supervision or
in some sort of a special
program but but yes Senator
o'neill and Mr chair the bulk
are on medium supervision.
Thank you thank you know listen
to the discussion thanks Mr
chair if I may.
Mr chair in in that case it
sounds as if the discrepancy
that we're describing here would
be in the classifications and
and in in what were what were
you you know I I I'm not in the
correction systems as most of
the committee members are not as
well or the body for that matter
and so when you tell me medium
it Mr chair makes me feel like I
am at medium risk of what what
exactly is that and so so the
ball are in medium maybe what
needs to be discussed here it
are those risk levels and how we
assess some within correction
department so that when the
secretary and Mr Chairman
representative and you come in
with a bill that uses these
descriptive words such as medium
and minimum we have a better
understanding of what those are
because I understand even from
the optics of it that coming in
here in state what we have the
both of them in medium and
that's who we want basically
relate east versus the minimum
which it which would be a
smaller percentage if you're
telling me Mr chair and
secretary Representative that
these are of no consequence of
their heartless and why in the
world are date classified as new
as minimum then you're asking us
to accept them into society as
it is and I I would think that
that classification system then
should be adjusted so that when
we're looking at these bills in
committee you then have support
and back up and and and the
words mean what they need Mr
chair.
Mr chair and senator well that's
not quite within the purview of
this legislative station I do
want to repeat with the
secretaries already offered and
we can turn back to her is
necessary medium risk will not
include the serious violent
offenders by the sex offenders
those are the folks that are
going to be in special
programming and higher levels of
supervision based on the
validated risk and needs
assessment the corrections
department already uses and will
continue using thank you Mr
chairman Senator.
Chairman.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Well you'll to Senator Ivey Soto
Mr chair fits on the amendment.
Will serve as a.
Thank you Mr chairman stand up.
Senator Baca I I understand
completely.
What you're talking about in
terms of of the cascading
levels.
R. and and how they are we are
civilians are.
Reachtel cascades loves a big
part of the problem is the is
the people that we were just
dealing with them in a couple
bills ago
Not not that it was from what
what part of the problem is is
is the psychologist right
because it because if you if you
ask a psychologist right any
psychologist who were to
evaluate and one of us.
Our man of us would be a zero
correct we may see ourselves as
zero correct but regardless of
what the issue is a psychologist
is is going to is going to
identify anyone of us on
something as late as a
As a low risk wrapped.
R. because if I may Mister chair
of the psychologist that we're
just doing here trying compact
sign would would not agree with
sent sent center walk in centres
Center Michael please let's go
through the chair the hours
getting late we're getting tired
I'm gonna bring the committee
doing in here shortly I assure
you but let's try and and
maintain order until then all
right.
So or so I I guess I guess part
of my thing is that that it's
and and
Mr Chairman representative David
and and madam secretary it is as
I recall from activities once
prosecutor and what I did from
the fence and and this payment
options most people end up on
probation for for five years is
that is that not the case.
Mr chair Senator thank you
Secretary might you give the
affirmative yes I believe so.
Certainly Mr chair and Senator
Ivey Soto
we see probation terms that
range from eighteen months three
years five years those are the
typical amounts.
And and and it just seems to be
that you know I mean most of the
people who are going to find our
yes certainly in it you have
you've got you've got technical
violations
but but but you also have been
substantive violations range up
to violations would be something
other than other than you know
you got a moment I don't five
instead of ten o'clock sort of
thing which would be a technical
knowledge someone who does a
substantive violation is more
apt to do that in the first year
or two appropriation
because by then people tend to
settle that and and you and and
people are going to do the more
substantive violations so if
they do it on a repeated basis
they they go back to prison.
and are and are called out of
the of the of the probation
folks certainly if somebody is
is committing sexual violations
and I have been not been sent
back to prison
my understanding is that those
are the people who would who
would within the probation
system because they are
unpredictable or unmanageable
they would be classified as a as
a high level rest because they
would require a greater level
supervision because of the
unpredictability of their
behavior is not the case.
Mr chair Senator yes that's the
case.
Yeah and so and so while well I
well I certainly do agree with
Senator Baca that the that the
title of a medium level rest.
Is one that gives people outside
of the system pause.
it's that it's that definition
someone who has a felony.
On a scoring level would
normally score and at least at a
medium level and it would be it
would be really the exception of
somebody who would score low
level because I was going
mechanism one of the issues as
have you committed a felony and
that and that elevates you by
definition of in terms of what
the scoring mechanism it's as as
that it depending upon the
mechanism of the of the
validated scoring instrument
that is you is that not correct
as well.
Mr chair Senator generally sell
yeah.
And one of the things that I
that I discovered when I
Representative a couple people
who are of of somewhat youthful
age is that if you're under the
age of twenty five it is
impossible many of these for
instruments to become an minimum
level risk and and often times
under the age of thirty and and
crimes tend to be committed by
younger people
people get older tend to be well
they just don't have as much
energy to I'm so that that will.
And
right and but the scoring
mechanisms that we have because
you don't have the longevity on
this world of of your of your
behavior.
Then the those people from being
in a in a minimum
of level risk validation on
these on these tools certainly
that was expressed that I had
when I when I was trying to get
clients
the value it when I.
And madam secretary I see you
shaking your head is that that
is is that basically express
that you have as well.
Yes okay so Ms and so.
But because of the titles aside
I think I think the practicality
is that is that is that these
are the people who who even if
they're considered comment on
minute minute meetings you think
level rest they're the ones who
are we're still gently following
the rules and and and not the
ones that are requiring the high
level of supervision.
Mr chair Senator that would be
accurate thank you.
The bars up Mr.
Sorry sorry so as I don't all
right Senator.
Mr Chairman I'm I'm not on the
amendment.
on the amendment I think I've
gone through the committee I
have I have a lot of the same
thought some questions have been
raised so try and avoid
repeating them but the the we
have to read the proposed
amendment in the context of the
preceding language which says
the defendant shall be
automatically released if the
following takes place so who
releases somebody one is
automatically released who does
the releasing.
Mister chair Mister chair that
would mean that they would be
released from the terms of that
probation not on supervised
probation but released
completely but madam secretary
to please explain the procedure
in which that would happen we'll
just we'll just everyone because
I've been trying to quit who who
released to somebody it is it
down to a court process is done
by a board is it done by an
individual who really
automatically releases the the
device that says independent.
And I'm not even sure of the
defendant is the right word is
that the right word dependent.
Released from probation.
The.
And it matches the statute as it
currently reads so that's why we
choose here but yes they would
not have to return back to court
nor to a parole board that means
that the corrections Department
would have documented that they
were halfway through their
probation term and that the
obligations and done on their
side the procedural of paperwork
to and that super and that term
of probation supervision yes
that would be done by the
corrections department.
Yes Mr chair all right then I
want to follow up on the same
questions that were made about
the ambiguity between what is
meaning momentum I had the same
questions and unfortunate there
maybe even more complicated for
me because it says classified by
a validate and validated scoring
instrument I don't know what
that is do we defined in the
bill someplace or anywhere in
our laws what is a validated
scoring instrument.
Mr chair what we discussed
previously in other committees
validated scoring instrument is
with the corrections department
uses to again first about the
validated it means that this is
been validated with New Mexico's
population so it's been tested
to make sure that these tools
using the data we have available
to us are actually going to be a
reliable predictor for where
these offenders are going to
fall within the system so that's
of the validated part means and
then just going instrument means
that that's what they're using
to classify offenders within the
system so today it's a it's a
tool called compass but the
corrections department
intentionally left it open in
the case that based on best
practices or or demonstrated
evidence that they may need to
switch to another scoring
instrument in the future but
this is the basis for how
offenders are classified within
the corrections department
system.
And when when is the
classification done what stage
in the process is that now it's
committee be classified anymore
anymore
Change your current time as I
understand it Mr chair certainly
this is done at intake when
someone is sentenced to the
corrections department and then
as the secretary has shared Mr
chair this happens at regular
intervals also if something has
changed within that offender's
life like the secretary shared
whether it's dropping out of the
treatment program are moving
into a treatment program but
otherwise their regularly
scheduled moments whether
someone's on probation or within
custody of the corrections
department that these
assessments are run what's the
level of of medium.
I think that would need that
high risk but I'm gonna check to
madam secretary she seems to be
nodding her head yes sure there
only three categories minimum
medium and high.
Madam secretary Mr chair.
Can an individual doesn't
individual move from a high risk
to medium risk.
Mr chair and like to turn the
madam secretary to explain that
process again.
Mr chair yes a person who had
previously been on higher high
risk of supervision could move
to medium risk supervision but
really only after they've
stabilized and have completed
various aspects of what the
judge ordered them to do as part
of their probation term the
other types of supervision are
specialized supervision the
types so we have intensive
supervision and we also have the
sex offender supervision and
then we have the community
corrections supervision which
really targets people that have
both high risk and high needs
all right and then earlier I
heard the presentation that what
we're doing here would exclude
certain violent crimes sex
crimes the FBI where do I find
out.
How do I know that.
Mr chair that is because within
the scoring instruments and
classification system within the
corrections department of those
offenders are not eligible to be
in the different classification
levels but madam secretary
please correct me if I got that
wrong.
Yeah no so so is the answer that
those crimes violent crimes sex
crimes stated background those
are not classified as either
minimum medium or high risk not
classified all.
They are classified but they're
not eligible for the minimum or
medium risk just of level.
What what level what how the
class so there's classified in
on their own in a way yet Mr
chair they need to be a
specialized supervision level or
a high risk level.
We're on the amendment.
the other discussion.
All right we'll take a roll call
vote on the proposed amendment.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
No.
Senator Ivey Soto.
No ma'am.
No.
So.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Moores.
Senator Stewart.
No.
You know.
Hours
test drive for yes.
This.
Yes that amendment fails on a
vote of five four I'd like to
explain my vote.
I guess what what price state
with the night is long I'll try
make it quick for you
you know I just want to
emphasize something you said
Representative in our criminal
justice system is not working
and I've been here twenty years
and frankly it's gotten worse in
those twenty years which is
really hard for any politician
to admit you know that that I've
been an abysmal failure when it
comes to securing our safety and
our criminal justice is I don't
know what what's going wrong but
I agree with you and I certainly
agree it's a an abysmal failure
we're we're the worst.
In comparison to any other state
there's no other way of saying
that and it's costing us causing
us our young people are leaving
we're educating I'm working hard
all the way we want to do pre K.
we want to do K. we want to do
K. through twelve I want to do
college and then a lot of more
are my children and their
friends and I can tell you we're
educating when they're leaving
and they're leaving because of
crime.
so I know what's going on I I I
like the amendment because.
The it's the science part of my
background which is you try
something new classify this with
anymore people you you try this
and see how it works
and and then that works then you
go up and you go into the medium
but whatever we're doing we've
been experimenting with a lot of
things as long as I've been here
and it seems all the experiments
have failed so I I thought we'd
try as of may be a more
scientific approach to things
that's a long explanation for my
vote but in any event that
amendment has failed back to the
bill members of the committee.
Anyone else.
Senator Lopez.
Yes Mr chairman.
This motion for a do pass in the
second I see no other.
Tomorrow.
No there's okay thank you.
Microphones are Center Bach on a
do pass motions.
No we did you want to recognize
your hands up there Baca yes on
the bill yes on the bill yes.
since that amendment Rome was
rejected you know I'd like to
propose something else since we
are
we are now introducing media
new minimum and medium level
risk Mr chair
and so I I would think that
school level of of time survey
to might be in order here and so
I I see there on page three on
the on the blue line three
they talk about obligation of
time and in their what they say
a defendant shall automatically
be we be released from probation
if the defendant and then we go
down one to and let's go to
three on page three has
completed one half or more of
the period of a appropriations
and so from I I would like to
see if maybe the sponsor and the
the secretary might they might
find a under management
appropriate
at at that level so now we're
allowing anymore Mr chair and a
media and and we have a declined
to go to just a minimum so so
maybe they might consider
something of a little bit more
in a compromise on number three
and instead of has completed one
half or more of the peer to
appropriations I would propose
an amendment on page three line
three where we replace and
strike a one half of with the.
Three fourths.
And so I would move that
amendment and I would hope the
Representative the
representative Mr chair would be
amenable to this ammendment of
war on page three line three
would go has completed three
fourths or more of the peer to
appropriations again it's a kind
of a a second bite at the apple
on a we could try this if you're
successful all will sign the
bill with you and we will bring
it back Mr chair at one half and
we will show people more success
at that point and so thank you
Mr chair for that sentiment
Representative today and your
response to the amendment
briefly Billings Mr chair at
this time that would not be a
friendly amendment.
Anyone else on the proposed
amendment.
Right I see none will do a roll
call vote on that amendment.
The motion is the to adopt.
From have time to three fourths
of the period appropriations
before automatically released.
On that motion Emily please.
Yes.
Now.
Sen Bill
Tallman.
Senator Lopez now.
Senator Morris.
Yes.
Yes.
Sure.
No.
Yes.
This.
No.
That that the amendment fails.
All right members the committee
on the bill Senator Stewart.
Mr chairman I move the to pass.
The motion is to do pass anyone
else there Bakri back on the
billion.
Back on the bill.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative so.
We now look at two aspects of
this
and so now I'm moving on to
maybe a third that might be
considered so off on online
twenty two defendants to
automatically build pre released
from probation if the defendant
is classified as a minimum or
medium level risk by and
validated scoring instrument has
met all the obligations of the
defendant's probation and I'm
wondering if Mr if Mr chair that
of the representative might be
amenable to the some review and
all yield to the bill sponsor
such as the ward and would would
that be amenable are there some
review even by awarding of their
previous presenter somewhere
they've been incarcerated at
that point a look back to maybe
consider whether they should be
completely released from
probation.
Your Senator this process does
include a review this would be a
process initiated by the
corrections department they
would be reviewing the offender
status they would be making sure
they met the obligations of
their appropriations patient and
and so far successfully
completed that term of the
obligations so it would not be
necessary and I would be in on
from the amendment.
The PPE that probation and
parole officers do review and do
so within the Iraqi of their
departments thank you.
Thank you for your responses
Representative thank you Mr
chair and I I want to thank for
the committee itself for the
indulgence here but I just want
to I wanted to highlight just
how important these things are
because a lot of what the
complaint to get within my
district are violent crimes
property crimes being committed
by people that the state should
still be either on probation or
have violated probation and now
should be remitted remitted to
prove is present however they
are instead it out and have
committed a crime of some sort
and so I I just really wanted to
we're highlight that and so all
withdraw any amendment I have
for that and we can continue
back to the bill and get on with
the vote Mr chair thank you.
All right before I forget I'd
like to recognize there were a
number proponents to
were available to speak on the
bill for non entry here will
futures Rikki Lee Chavez I spoke
defense lawyers Barron Jones
ACLU been about our offices
public defender down to cash in
on the radio another one with
both futures and Keith Romero
thank you for a your position
and and then notifying us in
advance or on the bill any
others on the committee.
Although last it may seem a may
seem really strange to some
people that I support the first
amendment didn't yet other maybe
I confused the committee in the
sponsor the the second amendment
to me is just us throwing darts
at the wall you know with fifty
percent seventy five percent
eighty percent you know we
should have a little more
scientific
way of trying to combat crime
and and I appreciate Senator
Baca trying to negotiate
something between where we were
at and not I'm I'm really just
perplexed with this bill not
just because I agree so much
with center gov Representative
Cadena that our criminal justice
system is just not working at
all but really the thing that
trouble with the most in our
presentation was a statement
earlier that there's no evidence
that appropriations as of any
effectiveness are that I think
from the secretary you know I've
appropriations is of no
effectiveness that tells me a
number of things one we should
get rid of probation I mean why
we wasting our time if it's
completely ineffective why do we
have it that's a question
if it's ineffective is it
something we should get rid of
or is it an effective because of
the way we do it or is it an
effective because the people
that are doing that.
I think all of any and all those
things could be true but it's
really disappointing that we're
tinkering with probation and
then and then believing that
it's really of no purpose anyway
which is why you probably saw
some some of eyes rolled when I
said that I support the first
amendment because even when we
talk about medium and minimum
levels it's very sounds very
arbitrary.
very very arbitrary undefined
nothing in the bill nothing that
I can find you take us validated
scoring instrument but it's
whatever corrections decides to
use for that validate validated
scoring instruments all this
just sounds up pretty have
cooked to me but but you know
for tonight I'm going to
recognize that certain people of
expertise and.
Oddly there's nobody in
opposition to this with
expertise and it would have been
interesting to hear from maybe
somebody outside of just our own
system because our system is
working and and so why do we
keep listening to our own system
of it's not working really I'd
like to hear from somebody
outside of our system I'd really
like to hear from somebody
outside of our state outside of
the the the machine
and and really somebody
objectively give us a maybe a of
a bird's eye view or maybe a
more critical perspective but we
don't have that tonight so I'm
gonna rely with what I have
which is only one side of the
equation of New.
That event of that's my thoughts
for the committee Wembley will
go to a roll call vote.
No explain my vote.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes ma'am but but sympathy for
what the chairman this.
Yes.
No.
So
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Senator.
Yes are you have a do pass
Representative Cadena.
Members of the committee it is
nine forty six I'd like to
propose that we roll over the
remaining bills for the night
and put them on our calendar for
tomorrow unless there is a
strong objections to wanted to
hear something in particular
tonight otherwise we'll add this
to a full agenda tomorrow
beginning at one thirty but I do
want to have you have you pace
yourself because we'll be
meeting both Saturday and Sunday
afternoons Mr chair
Senator Baca I wanted to explain
my vote.
Yes and about on the last bill
yes thank you so I you know I
wanted to just express my
appreciation Mr chair to the
representative for bringing this
for I know that sometimes we
come in for these committees and
it's partisan and or seems
partisan that we're not all on
the same team here but I I
wanted to express that there's
an open door here you know and
ideas that work but we have to
explore those ideas and I really
give credit to the chairman
tonight because he articulated
some of my concerns well with
regard to science and what works
and what doesn't and he
expressed that you know some of
these things just don't work and
it's going to take a little bit
of time to find the place that
works and so you know my my
thought is just starting from
the other and that's all Mr
chair and representative and
that we move from an area of
safety to maybe less safety as I
interpret it but all all leave
it at that and thank you
committee were very indulgent of
my activity tonight and I
appreciate that and the I
appreciate the bill thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Sir Baca.
Do not tomorrow thank
all right so members of the
committee our plan is to meet at
one thirty tomorrow one thirty
on Sunday I'm advised by our
leadership the president can
confirm this word to start on
the floor both days at five
o'clock that's still the plan.
Mr Chairman so far that could
change depending on the
committees and when you are
ready I would like to make a
comment.
Okay madam president.
You know what I'm dismayed about
is that we seem to not take the
experts that come before us at
their word.
We have the secretary of the
corrections and a representative
that worked in that department.
They're the ones responsible for
running the system and yet you
know we look at the bill that
passed sixty four to one and we
just don't seem to believe the
secretary or the representative
it's just amazing to me that we
think we know more than the
people working in the system.
So I'm just this may that we
don't listen to what they say
about why they brought a bill
like that to us and everything
they do well we have Senator
o'neill who's also been part of
that who are often weighs in on
the so it's just it's bothersome
to me that we just don't listen
to the people come before us and
that's all.
Thank you madam president all
right so are scheduled for
tomorrow I think we call it a
night
then planned to see you all at
one thirty tomorrow we'll see
how it goes I mentioned this
earlier my plan is and has been
for some time.
To hear.
house bill seventy five tomorrow
This bill relates to the medical
malpractice act.
I will report to the committee
that there are ongoing
negotiations but that we won't
hear from those negotiating tool
probably Monday never the less I
think it makes sense for us to
to hear the issue and the bill
also with regard to recreational
marijuana likewise my plan right
now is to begin hearing that
bill as early as Sunday realize
that we may not take final
action on it in the same meeting
but but given them the enormity
of that task and I think it's
going to be one of the biggest
tasks if not the biggest acts
that task even after the liquor
bill.
of this committee and we did
good work in this committee it
took a lot of time it took
several hearings we rolled over
a couple of times and and I
think that produced a good
product so I would ask you to
anticipate the same when it
comes to marijuana but but
realizing that we have a week of
hearings so I'm gonna start
hearing some of these bigger
issues with the expectation that
we may be hear from the experts
we hear from the input and
comments we get the committee
talking about the issues but
perhaps we don't get ourselves
get to a final vote so that's
kind of my plan for us and then
I also realize that there is a.
A limitation to our ability to
meet on Monday and all wesco
Center Bacchus there Baca were
able to meet Monday until what
time Sir.
We'll be able to meet up on
Monday till six PM thank you for
asking you are the chair
appreciate that we have a super
secret caucus meeting at six PM.
All right so we'll plan to meet
on Monday till six o'clock so
let's work hard Saturday Sunday
and realize that Monday may not
be a late night for you it'll be
hard work after that all right
everyone thank you for working
late tonight we'll see tomorrow.
Thank you Mr chairman.
