So that'll be rolled over.
Senate bill one twenty six
hundred due to Hemphill we need
to roll that went over please
told on Wednesday please for
today's purposes I've also got a
hard stop today of six thirty
just have one knows so we've got
about three hours to get some
work done did really good work
on Saturday I appreciate all of
a.
This
twenty six.
Yes I'm looking for we've got
here senator Neville.
And also we got here from
outside the committee anyone
else.
This is what this is here
soldier so
Senator so.
Okay.
We'll start with Mr do we have
Representative Herndon's.
Permitted to starters.
Senator.
Wait just a minute first Senator
Representative Herndon and.
However you Senator know at.
We're trying we don't have a.
We'll have Representative Hern.
Services.
Is right there.
Representative Herndon come on a
privacy.
Representative heard it said be
the first time I remember to
this committee this session may
you may benefit from this one
last time so we need to get our
business done I usually with
some pretty tight
Current restrictions on
presentations.
All right now we have
C. Martinez identifies your
expert I don't see in here.
And we have a number of people
that are identified as
proponents on the bill did they
or did they organize themselves
behind you and your coordinated
presentation.
yes Mr.
I'm sorry yes so so we will
Sanchez have a coordinated
presentations than that
everybody gets one minute kind
of thing yes we do have a
coordinated presentation
officials is yes okay so who so
it was left on the agenda I
apologize so I I I I think
that's what they like.
Look like you're in the.
From so confused the the time
allocation for advocacy do you
have that time organized yes so
what we what we would like to do
is to reserve of five minutes
for rebuttal at the end for a
ten minute presentation would
like to reserve five for
rebuttal we do have a ten
minutes each for as I think is
on this allowed for the of for
those who are speaking in terms
of the presentation if I have
that time no we I have a test
not done we ten minutes each
there's I'm sorry my ten in the
seats but each side is that
correct that's right yes so
that's what I meant Mr you're
you're gonna do your first part
of five minutes and reserve five
minutes for rebuttal this all
right that is correct okay and
and I've got a number of people
on the list I don't know which
of our recorded part of your
presentation so sure Fallon see
with you he will be on soon okay
at Lopez.
Lopez is is he is he can see
with your group yes yes okay
Maranda was Coleen yes commander
hard stop yes this is so your
yes mom Barbara judge Energy.
G.R.T.  opportunity he's on.
Janet Williams.
And part of New Mexico this is
not part of my part need to get
things done in a fair.
Meredith mac mac and.
I don't.
Okay so
Senator we'll start with the
financing issue tell me this up
in five minutes I do I leave it
entirely up to you to know when
to stop and start including the
people that are part of your ten
minute presentation okay so
leave that entirely up to you at
ten minutes will go to the
opposition all right all right
thank you.
So thank you and good afternoon
Mister chair and members of this
committee thank you for the
opportunity to present this
important public safety
legislation I start by just
telling you a quick story and
it's a story of Benny Hargrove a
thirteen year old boy who was
killed on the grounds of the
Washington middle school at
lunch time in front of all of
his colleagues with the guns
that have another to that
another child had that he never
should have had had access to
nor should that child have been
able to use that it is tragic
story.
And others like it of why we are
here today and it is that we
need house bill nine.
When children have access to
firearms that are negligently
stored.
They not only endanger
themselves they endanger those
who are nearby and they endanger
communities.
Mr Chairman I think we all agree
that children accessing on
secured firearms can lead to
tragic consequences.
Children are less likely to
consider are the future of the
consequences of their actions
are nor are they able to really
understand the future of their
decisions because they're still
growing additional mature.
And they're less able to control
themselves emotionally and they
they don't understand how
arousing situations can be
controlled and they often and
and and in in under usual
circumstances that are often not
very good.
This state has a compelling
interest in trying to make sure
that we further may have a fund.
A secured storage
Legislation in this state and
it's called.
One in which we are looking to
make sure that we are.
Keeping children away from
having access to firearms.
House bill nine is accused is a
secure storage legislation but
is also known as a child access
prevention law and these are the
things that we're looking at
masters.
Mr chair members of the
committee we know that we can
reduce the number of children
who are killed or injured in gun
incidences and help reduce gun
the suicides if we just have
child access prevention law and
place.
One study has found that states
with child access prevention
laws have the lowest rates of
injury and death among the
unintentional children's
shootings house bill nine does
not tell people exactly how to
store their guns it just
requires them to do so in a
reasonable and secure manner.
Mr chair I would now.
Of.
Open up the floor to the members
who are here to testify in
support of this legislation.
I do want to do know that we
appreciate being here and I do
have my cosponsored to make it
an additional statement within
the time frame that we have a
lab.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee fifteen states
have passed child access
prevention laws similar to New
Mexico's H. B. nine eight states
and the district of Columbia
mandated over secure their
firearms New Mexico has no law
related to child at faxes
prevention once H. B. line is
implemented New Mexico will have
an effective law and one of the
important things is it will be
important to preservation to
prevention because they will be
training about child access
prevention isn't going training
courses and people have an
incentive to stop thank you to
send it to store their firearms.
And thank you Mr chair we also
have one of the co sponsor who
is here it's a Senator Mimi
Stewart and we would like to
make sure that she has a moment
to see which is to make a
statement.
That.
The.
That's all the time Mrs of and
how much time do we have to
maybe have about forty five
seconds left for share file and
had Lopez Miranda was Kohli
Committee hurts document to
start unless you want to go into
the five a reserve.
I'm sorry I just wanted to let
you want to go into the I mean
you reserve some sold out onto
the I introduce the that we have
a rebuttal so that I do what it
Lopez to speak.
If anyone of those individuals
part of your team your call and
you stop me start.
Workers are.
Our.
For someone having.
Order tax.
Webcast.
Mr chair does that mean we get
to start all over.
Know what I mean you can be sure
I policy so you're not eating
any of your time.
I texted.
The state is it.
Going to the at the.
With ways off.
Actually.
Yeah we have a bunch of the
women.
We need to format from the
webcast.
The ninety.
Different that was that we do
have.
I.
For.
Thank you for
Representative heard and you're
right about just a little bit
under five minutes so do you
want to hold on the five minutes
for rebuttal you want to
recognize any other people that
you identified as part of your
presentation so tell it to you.
Mr chair I'd like to identify it
Lopez what part of the
presentation will take two
minutes and we will we will then
move to the surface reserve that
three minutes for rebuttal early
Jewish Representative court.
Thank you Mr chairman members my
name is that Lopez a former
superintendent regulation
licensing a long time and I
remember turning and registered
libertarians I'm not a
registered lobbyist
Representative no one I just
speak for myself I I'm gonna be
very brief I just wanted to make
two points there Committee
members should have in your
materials to hand out of one is
a US state survey of child
access prevention laws it's a
yellow green red sort of for
that reason I wanted to present
this to the committee of Mr
Chairman is in House Judiciary I
noticed that there were there
was some confusion about the
of cap duties of care and I
thought it would save some time
to just do a green yellow red
sort of the stoplight of format
Benny's bill house bill nine is
in the green it is a legal
standard care of uses so it's
much easier to administer that
the the law enforcement officer
knows that the the child
actually not only access but
also used the firearm
this this
Use of child abuse is negligence
standard is predominant in the
United States on page three and
you'll see that approximately
eleven states have a protocol
similar to H. B. line
so as far as cap statutes goes
HB nine as far as gun owners
like me are concerned is a much
easier bills to follow this is
the last point I wanted to make
is we I I heard with this
committee said about the Bruin
of opinion and it's affect on on
the law we have provided this
committee with a seventeen
eighty four Massachusetts
statute on safe storage I won't
go through the whole thing.
that's my time thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Representative thank you Mr
chair we're ready to the
audience for those of support.
Okay hello I'm sorry.
Optical from.
Hello go to the opponents thank
you so I recognize and and in
those also who registered to
speak in support.
we'll go to ten minutes of
opposition is organize organize
spokesperson for the opposition.
I I find this.
Committees have a list of the
number of individual shown in
opposition my the the if you all
will consult the rules for the
committee okay if they allow you
up to a ten minute opposition we
like to have one person speaking
going to detail in the absence
of that I have ten individuals
who I guess is the name that you
provided to us and so they're
being really no other way that
address ten individuals listed
each one will be recognized for
one minute so one of the most
most there's a different
structure agreed upon by the by
everyone in opposition.
There.
I believe one of the.
Unable to get into the State
Council I'm I'm happy to try and
speak on behalf of most
opposition reserve the rest of
the time since.
The right list.
But just everybody knows the
reason we do this when this
committee is I find very little
to almost no benefit having
people line up and speak for one
minute at a time so does not
allow for meaningful discussion
or or understanding of any given
issue and so I really try and.
Encourage opponents and.
Opponents for any piece of
legislation organize themselves
and have an organized fully
really ten minutes opportunity
to fully discuss the bill and
and really dig into it but in
the absence of that right now I
have of
Eugene farming trip hosted of
Michael and Nate pesky can show
a joke coverage Joe cumbersome
so my name Catherine well Leri
Sonntag in publicly
all recognize each of them for
one minute so unless you have a
different agreement.
I'm.
Mr chairman committee members
terra matcha state director for
an RA in New Mexico
generally our legal system does
not punish someone for the
criminal actions of another but
that is exactly what house bill
nine would do the bill applies
to any place for gun is kept or
stored without limitation and
applies to whoever keeps
restores the gun not just the
owner New Mexico law does not
prohibit minors from owning or
possessing rifles or shotguns so
liability could be imposed on a
parent or guardian in cases
where the miners the actual
owner of the firearm.
With no exception for consent
are authorized to use of
firearms by minors to offer
protection we kept criminal
liability this measure could
have a chilling effect on use
accessing firearms for four H.
hunting and other shooting
sports and competitions lastly
house bill nine only applies to
firearms and not other dangerous
items or deadly weapons such as
knives poisons or drugs
I wanted to get into some of the
technical issues I think with
the bill
On page two subsection eighty
two it's unclear if a minor
access is the firearm and simply
displays it whether the gun
owner parent will have committed
and found a fence under this act
is the phrase in a threatening
manner tied only to brandishes
or is it tied to both display
and brandishes if it's the
former then a minor simply
showing his or her own pair his
or her.
When our parents unloaded
firearm to a friend or sibling
could trigger a criminal charge
the bill doesn't specify loaded
firearms anywhere in the
language
On page three subsection C. it
appears that in order to be
granted an exception under the
bill one would have to keep a
firearm in a locked container
and securely stored that lot
container for keep the firemen a
lot container and keep it in a
location that a reasonable
person would believe to be
secure under this scenario you'd
have to hide your locked gun
safe behind a secret panel in
your closet I don't think this
is necessarily the intent of the
author
but perhaps some punctuation in
this subsection might help
clarify that
Page three there's an exception
provided when a minor gains
access to a firearm in the
course of self defense or
defense of another person this
does not cover defense of
physical property or livestock I
know this was a concern and
among rural New Mexicans about
this bill.
I wanted to point out at least
during one of the committee
presentations
The advocates brought up that
Texas has a law similar to this
in penal code section forty six
thirteen that law creates an
offense of making a firearm
accessible to a child that bill
or that law only applies to
loaded firearms and that law
actually establishes a defense
to prosecution for hunting and
sporting or other lawful
purposes for for lawful defense
of people or property
if this bill's going to advance
these exceptions should be
considered to be included in the
legislation with that all
reserve my time we stand opposed
to this legislation
respectfully.
Thank you
have next Eugene Farnham you're
recognized are you here for you
here you need for.
Okay online.
No Patrick Huston active he's
that is online Mr Houston you
recognize what one minute Sir.
Thank you Mr chair of the
committee really appreciate the
ability to speak today.
A few things on this law I may
just to table them also return
your force a few things I found
that saw kind of other me was in
in section one page three.
See to the change in close
proximity to media control.
That effort which is still vague
I think it's the least he'll of
this bill I wish the author with
the fine weather in the distance
such as within arm's reach or
time within five seconds what
immediate actually yes we we do
we do not want to leave that
open to court interpretation so
so those are my remarks
Department provided the rest of
my time again.
The two.
Maybe just.
Does it or monsoon he's on a
stretcher your recognized up to
one minute Mr speaker.
S. thank you Mr chair members
the committee Committee and the
House Attorney General Torres
pine this law be likely to
survive challenging court you
made reference to a balancing of
interests between the rights of
New Mexicans don't use firearms
and the nominative public safety
benefit as you should well know
interest balancing tests are not
lawful in case such as this
those reinforced last year in
the US Supreme Court.
The staging of firearms in the
home for self defense is been
protected explicitly since two
thousand eight with the Supreme
Court holding that quote a
prohibition against rendering
any lawful firearm in the home
operable for the purpose of
immediate self defense violates
the second amendment and for.
Opinions today those which the
court said something else hardly
controlling also increase the
committee to carefully consider
the topic thank you thank you
can show your recognize what to
one minute.
I've declined to comment thank
you.
So Culbertson present yeah so
you're recognized appointment.
Press.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Joe coach
know from arctic in New Mexico.
I realize this is a feel good
and that's why it is because of
are reasons for wanting to
protect your children.
Getting the.
Image using understand.
But this is going to be in the
no force low.
Okay this party to somebody's
house.
Look to see whether they got the
guns locked up.
You have to have a search.
Would be based on something
entirely different.
I believe I agree with the
speaker this is what will go
about the constitutional.
And I think the.
Force the crime it's already
been committed you have to the
would be the time to to go into
the house you could say well
that this gun was committed used
in the crime.
And so currently what what the.
But I believe it's a
constitutional law.
If people feel like they have in
the to keep a gun close at hand
for self defense and is one of
the previous speakers talk about
that that's been avail thank you
Mr Culberson okay there is some
there's some tech.
It's not.
You Mr chair some of the
recognized for one minute Sir.
After.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee Leri Sonntag a
better together New Mexico
grassroots advocate I am a
retired law enforcement officers
I had children at the time that
I was serving and I have a two
year old granddaughter now I
completely appreciate respect
and understand the obligations
for responsible gun owners to.
Secure their weapons properly
there is already laws on the
books that hold people
responsible including parents if
they put the child's life in
danger negligently.
That word was mentioned by the
Billsponsored and others it's a
key factor in the the proponents
of this bill but if you're
consistent all the defense
attorneys who oppose all the
other get tough on crime bills
and even legislators have said
we don't need more laws on the
books when we already have
something to address this that
is exactly the case in this bill
thank you thank you Mr Santa
Paula McLain.
President of yes thank.
Okay you're showing under care.
One individual who had indicated
on travel Zacks work has has
joined the online and offline.
Secretary for to be recognized
for one minute.
Zoom.
Yes.
Miss Mister chairman of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to address the state
my name is a sport and the
president of New Mexico shooting
sports association my
organization is respect for post
hospital money well we all want
gun owners to store their
firearms in a manner that's
that's within fifty nine as long
production due to the small
mobile nature firearms
particularly handguns proving
how firearms store prior to the
incident occurring it's
difficult at best.
The standard for governor toward
the crime is merely negligence
these factors are combined to
get economy I excelled you'll
see it'll permanent Assistant
reports none of the studies
cited by random or support for
child access prevention lost
control.
Public awareness campaigns or
the ability of free products for
parents with providing
effectiveness of the loss.
So we don't actually know
what to expect that or worse
that was nearly my product
another factor.
In section one eighty nine is
the work displays suffer from
some branch well there's an
element of displaying economic
to frame should come up with the
workers for in this context.
Creates a seven cents so
strictly interpreted and finally
showing off of fire or another
party would be created would be
a criminal offense thank you for
your time.
Thank you Mr fort okay that
concludes right at ten minutes
of opposition your reserves and
of the time we reserve
Representative you still have
two and a half minutes have
you'd like to include the
discussion.
Or recognize any of the other
individuals I've given you their
names.
Central to Representative.
Thank you Mr chair.
As we listen to all of the
information that was presented
there's nothing in this bill
that talks about going into
someone's home knocking down
doors of finding out how the
security a firearm what this
bill does say is that if a gun
or firearm is cap on securities
stored in in in an unsecured
manner where a child could have
access to it the in what has to
happen a child must access it
and then do something if they
sued someone I called great
bodily harm are they called the
death of someone in this bill
says that the the the person who
was responsible for the gun show
Ezzell suffer the penalty of a
maximum of four degree penalty
if there is nothing that happens
meaning that no person was
injured no great bodily harm
occurs in a misdemeanor will be
implemented because the person
who had the fire arm kept it
stored in a manner in which a
child could access it and they
do it so that's what's most
important about this this bill
is all about keeping people safe
and keeping children safe and
that's that that is the bottom
line so those are the things
that we wanted to bring out and
research shows that secure
storage practices play a vital
role in reducing the risk of gun
violence and that's what we want
to do in the state of New
Mexico.
Reserve any of the time for
anybody else.
Some of the group that you had
identified Representative as or
anyone else or regulations to
about a minute.
Of the I would like to recognize
with that Vanessa sorry if we
can get on the line.
But this is so is the
grandmother of spinning cargo
the little boy who was killed
she on zoom this is on the
phone.
Can you see her yes if you don't
remember I I number I.
We don't.
This is.
It is very important to keep her
numbers.
private because of the problems
that have been happening with
our family.
I I asked her if this is an
individual.
Yes are you on the line.
This is.
They will have John Allen serve
John Allen to speak.
Are you on the line.
We do that here.
All right well I have is on the
phone also you have a sense.
We can call.
You can call me these on the
K. K. K. there will have to go
up move on folks we can't we
can't operate like this so we
have our rich energy Janet
Williams with Santa Fe now the
affair and Meredith Machen legal
when waters for also supporting
your legislation represents a hi
we heard ten minutes in both
advocacy and opposition members
the committee.
Yes question
center doing started thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative for
bringing this bill.
Have a question and you know I I
remember talking about this in
the room and and I just can't
remember what the insurance.
On page four and I'm I'm again
ma'am if the contact center
after before I'm looking at the
subsection after the end of the
bill
And a subset and sub one hundred
have.
It's the definition of firearm
and it includes the frame of any
such weapons why why is that
language in there that languages
in their of Mr chair members of
the committee Senator Duhigg to
make sure that we're taking into
consideration goes down and goes
Spence did not have a a a mill
number with them and so we
wanted to make sure that they
were included in the difference
of fire on.
So Mister chair representative
but don't would son's otherwise
be a weapon that will or is
designed to or may readily be
converted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosion Mr
chair members of the committee
representative to do Hey if the
that if a firearm is displayed
it may not necessarily be a
projectile but it would be one
that would cause mayhem and and
discomfort among those people
who are saying that because they
would not melt so it was really
important to make sure that we
distinguish that in this matter.
And Mr chairman and
representative I I wanna be
clear that I am I'm supportive
of your bill and I'm going to
book your bill today but but
that does give me a a little bit
of her firm because.
What if I if I hold up a toy gun
that just looked that looks very
realistic I call that may have.
I would it would not be missed
and and yes even knowing I got
hurt because it's not something
that's been fire anything.
That would not be a misdemeanor
but the frame the frame
otherwise would be I.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative
Thompson a to do the Duhigg
there's no way a person will
know whether or not that frame
is actually a gun that is order
back into one of the things that
is good about this piece of
legislation is that if if the
charges are brought into any
aspect of this it will always go
to the court and the court can
look at the evidence so the what
to this I would a person really
has to do with a reasonable
person about that that done
designed the way it was was
really real or not and whether
it was or was not and the danger
that because of the mayhem that
is because that's still
something that can be produced
in the evidence will be
presented for the judge and the
jury.
Four thank you so Mr chair
Representative further questions
on the very last one of those
bills the definition of minor
that you specify an
unanticipated.
My life.
Mr Mr chair members of the
committee Representative to do
here my apologies for that
one of the things that happens
is there is a difference if we
look at the law and which is the
man to rate it and and
emancipated individuals are
treated up emancipated
individuals are given more of
our to do more in the line of an
adult and I'm emancipated minor
is treated as a minor and I
talked about in the beginning of
my presentation about the about
the decision making ability and
the all the other thought
processes that go in with
respect to a minor and so but
within the massive rate
individuals the judge in order
to to emancipate that person has
given thought to the how this
person acts follow thanks and
and read and react and so it was
really important to make a
distinction here because that
person would be that person Andy
manis updated person would be
treated differently than and I'm
emancipated person.
And Mr chair Representative
Anderson and the that they might
be treated differently.
But.
But then effectively.
This does not apply to any time
in advance of an emancipated.
I am sixteen years old.
Mr chair please has gone out for
I can get it I go kill someone
else with it just the fact that
I was I was emancipated means
that none of the supplies for
his liability.
And the the the focus on of the
miners and equipment I I
understand that when you're
looking at the minor's behavior
there might be a different
analysis done by a judge as far
as emancipation but I.
I don't love that this is taking
in those emancipated minors out
of this completely because I
think any judge looking at this
just like you were saying just
now with the the frame any
finder of fact and and finer of
of of law he's gonna be looking
at a situation like this is
going to be looking at them on a
case by case basis and and
taking in the facility of the
circumstances.
Why do we not trust judges to do
that when it comes to
emancipation.
Such that we need to add this
language in this bill.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator do hate one of
the things again that happens
with respect to any man educated
individuals are treated
differently they're treated more
aligned with an adult and so
that if you are looking at them
in the terms of an adult how
would an adobe treated if they
took a gun and then shot
somebody that's a whole
different set of laws that we
looking at it is Mr chair but
but what we're talking about in
this bill really isn't I know
that the miners actions are part
of the analysis here but we're
talking about the liability on
the person on the gun owner.
And and and so.
I I feel like the miners
emancipation.
Should not be terminated after
in the gun owners liability.
and at all we from where I'm not
going to offer any amendments or
right now and wait for the the
discussion but I.
I don't love having emancipated
in their Mr chair also note that
for the big questions I have for
myself was is there based on
that new case was is there
historical precedent.
Boy am I impressed with your
expert
That is.
I I I that seems like a missed
most of New difficult to track
down and and I'm really glad
that we have here because that
that makes me feel a lot better
about the likelihood of of this
building
Health Association way that Mr
chair I might and the full
enough of the call I have.
Before we move officer due to
the ability to move with the you
were talking about potentially.
H. for striking workers on
emancipated just that work yeah
I guess it would be get yours
working on two and a yeah for
the for okay.
This professor of it but you're
not making that motion at this
time you know I I want to
understand a little bit more
about why why we would and so on
payments that we need that
language in there but I'm I'm
open to being.
At the center Pirtle next.
Thank you Mr chairman to
Senator.
Representative heard I do have a
few questions
What's.
What are we talking about when
it says kept in a locked
container.
and was either securely stored
or kept in a location that a
reasonable person would believe
to be secure.
Thank you for the question Mr
chair members of the committee.
Some of the things that we
thought that we talked about and
thought about very carefully was
the fact that the state of New
Mexico this economically diverse
and what you may consider a
locked container in which you
may have is a lot of container
maybe very different from
someone else who may not have as
much money and resources issue
so that sometimes a lot
containing could could be it
could be grandma's house
Medicaid is that locked with the
key with grandma keeps the key
around her neck and is placed in
the NM matter where at child
cannot access it and noticed
that the next statement is and
all our and this is our where a
minor cannot access it so this
in and and in this an older so
we want to make sure and we did
make sure that they would two
areas in which people are
looking at.
Share it with the top of the
refrigerator suffice.
So Mr chair members of the
committee
Senator Pirtle it's going to
look at the at the totality of
the circumstances we're talking
about the only child that's in
the house is a baby then the
answer is yes we're talking
about a sixteen year old the
answer may be no so the facts of
the totality of the
circumstances Mr chair members
of the committee representative
Senator Pirtle are very
important.
Mr chair representative ever had
anybody try to kick your door
down the middle and I.
Mr chair members of the
committee
Senator Pirtle I don't know what
that has to do with this bill
has everything to do Mr chair
and representative I have had my
dear my door attention to be
kicked down in the.
I've had my children absolutely
free my son is actually still
traumatized to this day from
that.
And thank god I didn't have to
go Hey whoever's trying to kick
down my door let me find the key
to a locked box.
So that I can defend my family.
Because if that it happened Mr
chair who knows what what
happened.
But thankfully because I keep my
firearm not state in a locked
box but somewhere hidden from
the children where I can readily
excesses.
Was able to to protect my family
and that's really what we're
talking about here is I
understand the intent of the
legislation but
the way it's written with a
locked container and some of the
issues it becomes very
problematic for that having been
a victim of somebody trying to
kick down my door break into my
home and cost great bodily harm
to my family I can tell you that
if this is passed into law this
is another law that I am
personally going to
because it's important to my
family safety that I do so and I
think that's the biggest issue
here for me and for my
constituency is that I don't
think one that if somebody's
child does access a firearm in.
Commit suicide or something like
that that there's a DA in the
state that's charge the parents
I don't I don't think that's
going to happen I don't know the
DA personally that would even go
to that extent as somebody's
already lost a child in
something as horrific as that so
I mean I I've tons of issues
with this but my my major one is
just from a personal experience
that I've had I think this is a
the.
Very dangerous idea
a horrible idea and it's really
gonna put people have to make a
choice of.
Do you risk being a fourth
degree felony or do you risk
something really tragic having
to your family that somebody
kicking down your door come in
and do it got some god knows
what of it so I I think that's
my biggest issue here I know
this will be a law that I will
ignore if passed but I imagine I
will not be the only one thank
you Sir bye.
You.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
a representative of for the
question to answer so far right
I I guess my my example is
similar the Senator Pirtle you
just touched on I have a teenage
daughter and Mr chair that
daughter
she knows weapon.
And governor somebody breaks in
that house.
Important appear.
With harm intended towards her I
expect her to get that with Mr
chair.
I'm not gonna lie negligently
leave it out on the teller we're
sat in the state defend yourself
with your life like your life
depended on it because that
could happen and it happens many
times across this country Mr
chair representative happens
many times a it's not Kerry uses
much but I can assure you there
are several instances of that I
can't think offhand of of one
little girl who is actually a
ski each year and the end of the
and the armed person broke into
her house and thank god she was
able to access the shop and
issues is to ski to and she put
that criminal down just like it
needed to be a thank god she did
because she still round.
Now what would happen with this
bill Mr chair.
For negligent in letting her
keep her speech rifle in my
negligent because I tell my
daughter for a loaded pistol was
in the house so she can use it
on a perpetrator.
I would tell Senator Pirtle the
save me a place in line next to
in to pay my fees because I'm
gonna do the same thing and I
think New Mexicans across the
state will is just another
example of criminalizing law
abiding citizens although well
intentioned I don't believe for
one minute the need to do more
but I'm willing to take the risk
for the protection of my family
and I think there's other New
Mexicans who are willing to take
that risk to I think that's very
important when we consider these
bills want to do for the
children what's to for my child
let's do it for Senator portals
child.
And for that I would say I would
reject this bill for the
children thank you.
For this sort of.
District of.
So I just I want to.
Go through it make sure that I
understand the structure of the
bill.
And then go through a couple of
issues that were raised.
So.
The probably negligently making
a firearm accessible.
Requires to fix if I understand
correctly.
First the the process to keepers
for the firearm.
In a negligent manner in terms
of.
How minors ability to access to
firearms.
And second.
The matter has to access to
firearms but not just Texas farm
they have to display renders
farm in a threatening manner
cause injury to the matter or
another person is that Mr
gentleman centered is that
correct
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Ivey Soto that
is correct so then in the.
The situation.
Then in in center.
But also.
Where I'm presuming.
That.
He gives permission to his kids
to have the gun.
The around the gun.
As long as they're not.
Brandishing a firearm display or
brandishing Department
threatening matter as long as
they're not causing injury.
The cells another person.
It is our prime.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Senator Ivey Soto no
there is not.
And in the case of Senator.
In the case of senator Baucus
daughter.
Looking on page three in the
course of self defense or
defense of another person.
It while he's gone somebody
comes into the house and she
grabs the gun and she is that
person.
Is that a crime under this Mr
chair members of the committee
Senator Ivey Soto no it is not
because the bill explicitly
provides a an exception for
purposes in the course of self
defense or defense of another so
under Senator Bacchus example it
would not apply.
And and then Senator Pirtle
example of with the plan.
And then.
Now in the case of.
Senator Wirth on if you were to
access to firearms.
Well he still hasn't got
disparity with the speakers.
That's because the heck out of
everybody in the room not that
would be a problem correct.
you Senator to Senator I mean Mr
chair members of the committee
Senator Ivey Soto would you
repeat that question that's
going
up.
But I do.
I do want to go over and I can
understand that that you all
were very careful about the
language to use I do want to go
over a few things here.
Which which frankly
I both appreciate and at a
concert at the same time.
Right is that the first US
keeper store firearm in a manner
that negligently disregards all
minors ability.
To access the firearm that's a.
It's not just of the fact that
the that the fire was accessed
but but I have to be kept or
stored away that negligently
disregarded the minors ability
to access right I will just say
that I have I have some concerns
with.
With with that being.
And because we also require.
That's a minor then displays a
branch of the firearm for causes
injury to the minor another
person.
I just I think that's a I just
think that's a really.
Hi bar for law enforcement.
So Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Ivey Soto if I
have a gun and I left it on the
table and I went out in my
sixteen year old came and got
the gun that is negligence on my
part and if that sixteen year
old to that gun can cause great
bodily harm or injury to someone
I have I should be subject to
the terms and conditions of this
piece of like legislation if I
know that my child has some sort
of
process with anger and I leave a
gun laying on my bed on my
dresser where the child to get
and the child is having
difficulty at school I have been
listening to it and the way in
which I have kept that fire on
and made it available for the
child the end may have gone to
school as occurred in the case
would be the hard go and call
staff doctor Lee harm to
someone.
Mr Chairman representative
that's no that's awful I
appreciate that I do I will say
that the.
the construction.
On page two lines two through
five is a little.
I don't know you got rid of her
four times.
Right it's displays.
Or brandishes the firearm in a
threatening manner and.
What you don't defined brandish
in in this bill.
Radishes is the defined term in
the statutes of.
Under brandishing a discharge of
firearms.
And brandishing their means
displaying for making a firearm
known to another person.
The farm is present on the
person of the offending party
with intent.
Seven eight four injured
persons.
and and in that regard.
It does seem to me that this
bill could have benefited from.
This is saying displays a
brandishes and a threatening
manner just simply says.
To yes Representative a minor
access to firearms.
And brandishes a firearm for
causes injury to the minor.
And then use that definition
brandish.
I think what of what would
provide greater clarity on that
sentence.
I will.
Now I'm looking down at at
subsection C..
yes so we.
Water.
Well no not following.
You've just what about to ensure
a good change.
So.
We're going to point out.
The.
I've following the model of your
demonstrated by vice chair at
the beginning of this year.
About what we do is do it with a
somewhat since.
Yeah
which is supposed.
I was trying to.
Representative.
Okay I was I was gonna go
through and just see if there
was.
There was
Interested in in that if we got
to that point but.
That's what I can we can start
there and.
and then and then move on to a
couple of things because because
I do think the frame of of any
such weapon is also an issue I
do agree with that for use with
just a little photo I just
want to change
something.
Certainly so Madam Mr chairman I
would suggest.
But I'm page two line to.
And this.
As it appears in thirty one six
eighteen thirty one eighteen
sixty.
Valerie that would that the
reference.
May is displaying for making a
firearm known to another person
while the firearms present on
the person the offending party.
With the intent to intimidate or
injure person.
That's a that's a definition for
brandishing yes.
I have.
He repeated.
page two line to strike
displays.
Page two line three strike for.
And then strike in a threatening
manner.
Right the first or and then in a
threatening manner and the page
three.
Between line sixteen and
seventeen.
It's sort of definition of.
of brandish.
Means.
The display for make a firearm
no to another person.
While the firearm is present on
the person of the offending
party with intent to intimidate
or into a person.
This doesn't happen.
Sure.
Yes this doesn't have.
To
this to the cost of.
Is this.
The family.
Mr chair members of the
committee I
one of the things that's
important to note is intent is
not a part of the first part of
this of the part that was
provided so when you put in ten
in there you're changing the
whole concept if the person yes
access is the gun if the child
access is the gun and then
displays that are so that they
their intent is not what we're
after what we're looking at is
did they do that if they call
cost something to
with mayhem.
But I do want to defer to my to
our.
To our sponsor on the on the
committee Senator Mimi Stewart
and economic that she considers
that friendly around for.
Thank you.
So Mister chairman I understand
what the senators doing
I'm concerned about I'm just
gonna say the quiet part out
loud I'm concerned about this
having to go back to the house I
don't see anything wrong with
the way it is now.
Yes it might sound just a wee
bit better with this massage I
don't see anything wrong with
that now and.
So that means you guys are in
the.
I do.
Discussion of proposed
amendments
and Mr but I would just point
out that.
Representative Harkins answer
allies exactly the issue that
was raised.
Is whether or not.
In a threatening manner which is
intense.
Modifies only brandishes or
whether modifies displace.
Which I think is in fact unclear
the sentence.
And.
And and so it does resolve that
that lack of third intended.
Session.
We go to Mexico all weigh in
briefly on.
For the members of the.
C..
I also think it's important for
me to release express
dissatisfaction with the notion
of the over.
The.
The house can.
Act.
That for a fact that the
radiator the.
Where we are discussed the.
Assessing the medical
malpractice issues aware of we
were told not to touch the
builder that was perfect.
The that.
Inviolate and.
To to request a little.
Back.
Yeah.
US large.
Legislation in recent years of
the federal.
The first house bill.
The reason we're that would
still look in the.
Things that were that place
already or yeah.
Mr chair and maybe I may just
say that the intent to harm it's
in the state in the statute is
different from the intent here
which is get a threatening
manner so I don't think it's
duplicative.
Got it all right we'll do Raul
Campos amendment.
Senator Baca yes.
Senator either stop yes
Representative of Senator Moores
yes Senator on you yes.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stewart hello Senator Wirth no.
Senator Duhigg no Senator voters
yes the amendment adopted
service of the so for thank you
so I'm looking now at the budget
to.
Blinds twenty two through twenty
five.
So president violate subsection
a or B. of the section if a
minor pains firearm.
That was kept in a locked
container.
And the.
What was either securely stored.
Work up to the location.
That a reasonable person
believed to be secure.
One of tamed.
By a minor.
And I'm I guess I'm I'm
wondering.
If it's a lot container would
that not be securely stored
already.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Ivey Soto so
the requirement was lost in a
lot of container and securely
stored so remember that I talked
about the economic diversity
within the state of New Mexico
if it's in a locked container
and securely store if you're
using a if you use in the state
that's very different than if
you using grandma's cosmetic
case the to locking so that in
the under those circumstances it
is locked in it is put up in the
high place where for example a
child could not access that and
so those are some of the things
that we're looking at we were
looking at that that economic
diversity of what would happen
so the and has to be there and
then with respect to the are
they again that also creates a
different scenario so Senator
location that a reasonable
person would believe to be
secure when it was obtained then
that's also different it may not
be locked in a container because
of all right is there but it may
be kept in the place in a way in
which a child could not access
well and and so Mr chairman
that's a that's another place
where I think we have a
grammatical issue here.
Because the where you see.
The or as being destructive.
Of the entire sentence I see the
or as being destructive of that
which follows aunt.
So in other words what I how I
read that sentence.
Mr Chairman is.
Actually two things.
Was kept locked container and
securely stored.
Second option.
Was kept in a locked container
and kept in a location that
reasonable person would believe
to be secure.
Representative ten by minus.
Mr Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Ivey Soto I
don't see how you can read it
that way the item is connecting
the the description next to it
and the R. is creating an
entirely different scenario so
there's no way to read locked
container and kept in a location
the or is there is a
differential for the purposes of
the two items that is separated
by the a and and being in those
two jointed.
Mr Chairman Representative
apartment there's the work
either.
So it says and was either.
And so that means the
destructive is two different
things that modify.
What came before and.
Mr chair members of the
committee since is sort of I was
Soto I disagree with you because
we often use either or on on of
on and off in the case of within
the English language and it
doesn't mean that the one before
it is applicable it means that
it is separated by the or
differential so I presented to
you I I still believe in that of
course I omitted disadvantage
here because of before the
committee but I I do say that
the way in which this is written
was to create two separate
incidences locked container and
securely stored ten for
kept in a location that was
reasonable.
Mr chairman and and but it is is
a truck or expanding then that
it's kept a location that
reasonable person would believe
to be secure when obtained by
minor it is not required to be
is that correct that is correct
if it's kept in the loop in a
location that is not that a
reasonable person would believe
was secure that it doesn't have
to be in the lock contain it
that's exactly what the intent
was.
Okay I thought.
I will just.
I hear what you're saying and
and and I think you have a
medical issue that that keeps
you from getting there.
And so but but we can help you
get there.
That that would be
On page two slide twenty three
strike the word either.
Page two line twenty three after
the work stored.
Insert a semicolon and struck
the work for.
Then create a new paragraph to.
It's sort of the work that was
at the beginning.
So.
And then we number accordingly
so that it would be.
One that was kept in a locked
container and securely stored
and will securely stored.
To that was kept in a location
that a reasonable person would
believe to be secure what
obtained by minor.
Okay.
Sure that would be
I meant.
On the proposed senator.
Mr chair I think we accomplish
the same thing but just striking
either we distract you there
that solves the problem very
simply and then you don't have
yes separated out into two
separate subsection.
Part of what.
the list so that proposed member
got a consideration for use of
every sort of way the Senate do
it on the proposed amendment
still Center firms are only
ma'am yes Mr chair that I think
we're simplicity
online twenty two district and
insert for.
She exactly what Senator trying
to do we're changing.
For.
separately so the floor we you
yield is that are doing yes
Senator and and Mr chair I think
that actually checks are when I
heard from the representative is
that the intent is to have there
essentially to standards one is
locked and securely stored and
the other is in a location that
a reasonable person would leave
a secure I think in making the
change that you're suggesting we
then have three standards we
have lost container is one
securely stored as to caption
location the reason for someone
believed to be here is three I
think that might changes the the
intent of the of the bill.
Mr chair thing it actually makes
it more clear that you do have
three options a locked container
securely stored board a location
that a reasonable person would
believe to be secure we have
tamed by a minor I understand
the intent of of those
presenting the bill but I think
that really clarifies that their
intent is clear that you can
either lock it up you can secure
that for you put in a location a
reasonable person would be able
to access it I think it does the
three different levels
this.
The group's representative for
Senator all right Senator Ivey
Soto back to the yes so I've
been I've been.
Partially to this place Senator
do it let me suggest this
actually is page two line twenty
two after the work was.
Insert the word either.
Page two line twenty three
strike the word either.
That would make clear that was
either kept in a locked
container securely stored for
kept at a location that a
reasonable person.
I think that actually.
Is the least the least change
that's a brilliant so you have
the prior motions service so
you're modifying emotions I am
of the ship yes right so that's
the motion before the committee
right now that's right so do do
you want to weigh in on the.
Are you want to reduce the
amount of one more time Senator
thanks to a light twenty two
after the work was insert the
word either.
H. two line twenty three strike
the word either.
The first question Senator Baca
mmhm thank you
I I guess all of Mr chair and
Representative Alaska question
what why do you want
what what is the purpose I guess
of of combining.
Maybe this is for the amendment
sponsor puts.
What's the purpose of combining
locked container.
Secure the store.
You have a lot containers that
not securely store.
That.
I guess I'm trying to make
myself clear on the men here so
I would direct that I guess of
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the.
The device that a member of the
example that I talked about with
respect to the economic
diversity of our state one of
the things that does happen in
low income areas is that things
are often locked in the cosmetic
case we don't want to lock in
the cosmetic case and then live
on the floor so we wanted to be
put in a secure location so we
were looking at the the economic
diversity and how we were making
sure that we were covering up.
It from as many scenario.
Likely for and so that's the
other reason why the the lock
container and securely stored
was it important.
This what could happen
Chair members of the committee
Senator Baca if I locked that
If I like that firearm for
example in my custody case even
though keep in the key around my
neck and I just put it right
there on the floor what was
easily accessible by minors.
That would do this I'm not been
proven no I am not being
responsible as a gun owner
because I haven't put it away
and out of the accessibility
accessibility of mine so that's
why it was important to keep the
two kids I guess Mr chair and
the Representative I guess the
trouble with that is that's
highly dependent on the minor
with the.
Whether it's a three year old or
a and I'm gonna get back to the
amendment.
Whether I mean a lot container.
could keep out the two year old
even if it's a jewelry box
what container might not keep
out fourteen year old.
And so there's a differential
there so you know so I think I'm
probably gonna vote for for
Senator Ivey Soto is amendment
but I I wish the the committee
would consider Senator find some
and and that his suggestion in
that that putting orders in
would make each of these you
have locked container for
securely stored or kept in a
location that would reasonably
for some of the with only to be
secure so anyway I I guess I'll
leave it at that actually and I
did like your first the first
one better because I like the
categorical approach to it I
like seeing that and then having
this this doesn't apply when ABC
and I wish you would've
abandoned that will probably
still support this thank you
senator.
It's really other discussions on
the proposed amendment will do a
quick roll call on the amendment
three six three.
H. two line twenty two after the
work was insert the word either
page two line twenty three
strike the word either.
Roll call yes I think this is
from the amount.
Local police and.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes
Representative Senator Wirth yes
Senator O. New yes Senator
Pirtle yes Senator Stewart hello
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator services yes the
amendment is adopted thank you
Mr chairman on page three.
I'm.
I just want to be clear about
the intent here that the.
Line seven by legal entry to the
person's property.
That would not include a
person's vehicle is that
correct.
Mr chair members of the
committee
Senator I was so the that's not
true.
The person's property would be
included in the if it was legal
entry into the vehicle and a and
a firearm was taken then we
would not hold the individual
responsible for that illegal
entry and taking of that far on.
Act very good I thought I'd I'd
I hope that is how it is right
I think that's appropriate and
and and by the way let me just
say that I.
What things are appreciate about
about this bill is that you are
not trying to micromanage how
people store things what you
said several times as recognize
the diversity of the state not
just economic but otherwise and
and everybody's situation is
different and so you're not
you're not trying to say
everybody just distort exactly
the same way and I think I think
that's one of the real.
Benefits of this bill I do have
a question about subsection do.
That a person Senator farm
safety training course prior to
a violation of this section is a
mitigating factor.
And I guess that caused me to
pause because in a way Mr
Chairman representative if a
person is taking of our safety
course and not store their guns
correctly.
That almost should be used as as
as as an uncalled the Tory.
Issue not an exculpatory issue
of Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Ivey Soto it
was important to you the
knowledge that people might have
taken a safety course maybe.
Something went wrong I don't
know but I wanted to give the
knowledge meant to the fact that
they had had taken a safety
course and remember the
terminology they choose here is
a it shall be considered a
mitigating factor and how a
judge or jury considers that as
a mitigating factor it is
totally up to them
how that will be utilized but it
was time to make sure that we
gave different.
And acknowledge the fact that
the safety course that.
Okay are not I I do want to
return to the to the issue of
the frame of any such weapon on
page three line nineteen.
and so explain to me.
Please.
So that I have a better
understanding when you say the
frame of any such weapon what we
what is it that we're offering
to hear.
so Mister chair members of the
committee and Senator Ivey Soto
the ex to.
One of the things that you can
recall there is a television
commercial and this this child
who was walking in an apartment
complex displaying what appears
to be a fire on and so whether
or not that far is loaded on it
whether or not it is
is the one that is a that was
built as a ghost gun are a real
gun it was important to make
sure that those are still
considered because of someone
was building a ghost and the
only difference in the bill
spend this is the fact that the
number that may be attached to
it and so and whether that it
would be it would be recorded
are not recorded but what we but
what still happened is that the
person left that item land now
and it still calls great the
discourse mayhem and it scared a
lot of people let's look at the
HMO plan is a plan that for
example with the next door
neighbor didn't know that it was
it was a ghost gun and that it
was a little bit and they died
of a heart attack right there
then what what do you think
would happen would you think sit
at because it should not have
been kept out at all so we
defined firearm in this broad
manner Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Ivey Soto.
But would you say that Mr.
Representative would you say.
The frame of any such weapons.
That would not be something.
That is designed to or may
readily be converted to expel a
projectile by the action of
explosion or it is so of Mr.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Ivey Soto a
ghost gun will be converted into
a project projectiles and
something that will cost us
harm.
So I guess Mr Chairman
representative of all wondering
that why we need that raised.
If it is designed to be to be.
Be able to do that.
Why would be the phrase or the
frame.
Mr chair members of the
committee
Senator Ivey Soto it that causes
great consternation let's take
it out.
Right off at at at at all just
just just a quick because the
other thing is we say the prime
of such economic.
Is the go back to what the
economic that will or is
designed to replicate so I think
the problem is that a collapse
back on itself anyway so Mister
chairman I would I would move to
strike or the frame of any such
weapons.
For through the on the line
thank you for.
For the discussion proposed
amendment of Sanchez I think I
heard you say that's okay a yes
Mr chair members of the
committee.
On the amendment thank you Mr
chair not just it's just the
sponsor the minute why but we're
stopping.
Just with that is not going more
into the the definition because
the way I read it.
The the definition this would
include the potato guns and I'm
pretty sure the chair of this
committee probably might see a
day or two growing up in a rural
community in New Mexico I know
I've lost a potato or two across
the field of my own farm.
and as it's written not going
far enough back I mean it would
include.
Table toys that that we grew up
with.
Choose some might use tennis
balls in the more sophisticated
urban areas but we weren't
rich enough to afford
have fun with the data so I
don't know if that would be
considered to to try to work
this definition a little better
because the way it is written it
just seems a little too
inclusive and to
quite a few cap guns and.
Mr Chairman I guess my my
thought is that if you end up
create causing.
Representative partly harm or
death with the potato gun.
Then I think that's exactly what
this bill is intended to.
Correct.
Or even or even a parking.
Juncker.
I don't know if it can just as
Senator real has would would be
included but I think under the
the definitions earlier you just
have to threaten somebody.
Let's do it do they feel
threatened or did you actually
frames I mean I I think there's
some some huge issues with the
definition I know it's cool and
have been fund is a terms like
those gun and assault weapons
that nobody even knows what the
hell that is but it sure is fun
to say but I mean I I don't know
what it is and I'm an avid.
supporters I have no clue what
those terms mean and the
different definitions just
problematic I mean.
The the the whole thing in my
opinion I'm trying not to get
too far off on this the
Subject in front of us but the
whole definition just as as many
many problems that I don't think
this fixes thank you Mr chair.
Propose further discussion.
On the mammoth roll call please
and.
Senator.
Senator Ivey Soto yes
Representative Senator Moores.
Center on you yes Senator Pirtle
no.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Duhigg yes.
Senator services yes the
amendment adopted senator so the
more I just feel back to Senator
do if she wants to revisit I'm
at the.
Do Page four by three.
Chair Mister chair I I was not
going to make an amendment
because.
I thank senator Stuart's point
is quite a good one about some
currents but sunset members have
already been made I'm a fan of
that ship has sailed I'll go
ahead and move to strike and I'm
sorry I'm looking at amendments.
Contacts.
The patient yes hedge for life
for you strive
I am on amendments rate it and
certainly there of a.
Special proposed amendment we've
been for the subject before.
The terror members of the
committee said to do the X. rays
of the state government again
I'm not sure I understand that
our our page for line three.
Breaking and on emancipate.
And putting it says just over
eight so it right minor means a
person under eighteen years of
age.
looks at that.
Good feminine go was unfriendly
known letters for the reward you
down the reserve.
I'm teasing you other discussion
on the proposed amendment.
Thirty objection the documents
show Senator Moores.
Baca pirtle.
Stewart.
All of the members of support
it's going to be Ivey Soto
o'neill to exurb Optus worth
that amendments adopted.
Senator doing anything else
traffic for me Mr chair.
Other members of the committee.
I'm gonna go back and revisit
the page three subsection the
line a.
Representative well I appreciate
the fact that you want to give
some recognition to someone who
attends a firearm safety
training course
I think this entire sections
should be struck I think it's
merely aspirational it's
memorial type language so it you
said it yourself evidence the
person intended of course
shell be considered a mitigating
factor no you don't know what
that means and I don't know that
means the number of this
committee knows what it means
and nobody will notice including
a judge will know what it means
and so I don't really think it
it adds anything you are you
rightfully said a judge will
consider that language for what
it's worth and I don't think
it's going to work very much at
all I think that just the
really takes away from from what
you're trying to accomplish that
and I need to consider from the
moment to strike that in and get
to the business at hand thank
you Mr Mr chair consider the
friendly amendment to thank you
thank you other committee
discussion on the proposed
amendment to strike subsection
the.
There's more to it see a twinkle
in the eye but I can't so with
that as I can with that flicker
of the hand is a yes no in our
group Senator Pirtle thank you
Mr chairman hunter safety be
considered a farm safety
training course.
Mr chair of the committee
Senator Pirtle I'm not sure I
understand your question.
Hunter safety be considered a
firearm safety training course.
The answer is yes Los.
Well the good news is we strict
as long as we won't have to have
that debate and.
And I'm sorry to tell you that I
disagree with who learned
Representative there's no way to
know what that would mean for
wide farm safety training course
with me hunter safety training
course and the so good luck with
that we strike it comes a move
issues so.
Thank you for frolic in the
afternoon.
All right we're on the proposed
amendment strikes of section the
the Sanchez said that's from we.
Is there any objection to
adoption of that amendment.
By the all the committee members
present and voting in the
affirmative unanimously.
Well we're looking at amendments
let me
Look at with you the house floor
amendment number one.
CPAS we aircraft to.
The pill Business session or not
exclusive of other traffic will
criminal charges or civil claims
I I can't think of any good
reason why we would need to have
that language.
In this bill there's nothing in
the law that would make any
penalties in any section
exclusive.
Whether criminal charges cruel
charges or speak frequently
brought.
multiple charges and there's
nothing in here that was
suggested excludes civil claims
so I think that seems to be
superfluous language to me.
Senator Sedillo Lopez nodding
affirmatively but let's just get
the program together a set doing
even though we struck it Senator
it was I'm looking I'm looking
at the house floor amendment
number one.
So as you struggling thirteen
to fifteen in the answer to
certainly there of the penalties
in this section are not
exclusive of other applicables
Committee charges for civil
claims that thank you was all
pretty self evident right that's
axiomatic thank you Senator.
Members of the committee we
wanted to make sure that in
individuals move that yes it was
an option of bringing a civil
claim if someone.
That that was still Nelson if
you're saying that that could
happen anyway here we don't have
to have it there.
I don't know if that those I
think it really fits.
The your bill that would
preclude civil.
Right I think what we have to
use that figure out what happens
when we take the first part of
that Representative strike lines
thirteen through fifteen on page
three.
We go see how that works if we
were to change that.
Those what I'm proposing is
amendment that would strike.
House floor amendment number one
paragraph to.
To do K. perfect.
That.
Amended to stop to to opt out
of.
Mr but if you if you mess with a
house amendment do keep they
result language for just one
strike the subsection strict
subsection this page is
restricting subsection.
You we struck subsection the.
We have to strike the paragraph
to the house floor room for one.
We do.
Yeah we have to both staff yes
of the proposed amendment is
strike paragraph two of house
floor amendment number one.
And to strike subsection the.
On page three and we letter
according.
That's my motion discussion.
Debate.
Your introduction is option that
member.
Seeing none all members of the
committee present all voting for
that madam.
All right on the bill as amended
any further discussion center
store that would like.
Motion passed center Baca still
militiamen.
Have a motion to pass thank you
Mr chair just as he struck
section six during the
discussion
I.
Of the hunter safety course.
Proposing an amendment to.
To make it an exception under
paragraph State and that would
look like a number six adding
subparagraph six under under
potentially be a sub paragraph I
seem to stretch on up in the
subparagraph States and sixty
struck section do and adding and
the minor has attended the
hunter safety training for.
So the new paragraph a new
subsection six under section C.
person does not violate section
section a or B. of the section
for minor teens a firearm and
the minor has attended a hunter
safety training course.
To seize.
Right that's the amendment.
I would quite like that would.
This is a very.
Additional both amendment.
Of separate on that amendment
thank you Mr chair of earlier it
was just a shameless plug the
awesome piece of legislation of
sitting in the queue
with regard to safety training
and film sets but I will say you
know there's a lot of
misunderstanding water safety is
it's it's a fantastic firearm
safety program you think of this
and how it trains you to sneak
in the woods in New Mexico
animals but that's not what it
is a my living he was ten at the
times eleven now is probably
more competent than most average
reasonable people as was stated
earlier
as far as how to safely handle a
firearm so I think this is it is
a of.
Right amendment
Most children that go through it
learn how to make sure fires not
loaded hat that they're not toys
it is really something that I
wish more kids would participate
I think would be a lot better
off if they did so I I support
the amendment.
Thank you on the proposed
amendment further discussion do
that by roll call to family.
Senator yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores says Senator new
not.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stewart.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Duhigg now.
Senator no and amendment fails
numbers committee would you pass
motion as amended any further
discussion.
I just like that at the end of a
couple things first what was it
with the missile here who was
prepared to testify and is the
mother of think of the.
Graham of the so I want to
acknowledge her presence and
while willingness to prepare
today sorry we couldn't get her
on the line but thanks for
please for me personally and and
technology loss.
I'm gonna say something
Representative that I I would
say a lot the session I think I
think what you're doing is
commendable I think what you're
trying to do something I've
tried to do remember I passed a
red flag law.
I think Senator Pirtle in center
Baca have a good point this law
is going to be ignored.
I just about everybody
and the most gun owners are
going to ignore it.
Of it's going to be I think next
impossible to prosecute anybody
under this law because of the
ambiguities a person is not
gonna be deemed in violation of
anything under this law if they
keep a gun in a locked
container.
Or would securely stored or
here's the part where captain of
location the regional person
would believe to be secure.
you know the tragedy of a lot of
these cases of police officer
who puts a gun up on the shelf
high above where they think any
child's going to get to and try
to get students somebody's
killed or injured and that
that's not a prosecutable crime
under this bill because that
person that police officer
reasonably believed it was
secure that's all it takes to be
immune from this loss to re to
reason when we believe it secure
that's going to just about
everybody in.
I don't know very many gun
owners I guess some I guess so
the more complete careless but
most the cases that we see in
the circumstances are tragedies
where somebody thought they put
the gun someplace and child
would get to it and and that
means they're going to meet that
requirement that they reasonably
believed it was secure.
I think a couple of things when
I when I heard about your
intention this bill in the the
tragedy that that prompted it I
called the district attorney
Bernalillo county at the time
the former disk Attorney they
have they've prosecuted people
under existing law successfully
for a minor getting access to a
gun and and injure themselves
are edging others that the the
existing laws have been used to
prosecute this so we we do have
laws in place to accomplish this
and and I think it's important
to me Representative the point
that I've made quite a bit over
the last couple months which is
the Center per percent Baca made
the point I think it's a valid
one do we have to ask ourselves
are we really going to prosecute
a parent who suffer this kind of
tragedy
and and a lot of travel to get
into the government and.
Kill themselves or kill other
family members in an accident.
Because now I know the the
circumstance that prompted you
to bring this bill is a very
difficult for a child takes a
gun to school and and.
Creates a tragedy there but it's
it's hard for me to believe that
the prosecutors are going to
prosecute a parent to put
somebody in jail
of a father a mother who's
already lost in the the greatest
loss the parent experts and and
I think that putting them in
jail is a good solution and
things really really hard for me
to imagine other that's ever
gonna happen so I I just I think
my point of all this is that I
passed a red flag bill it's been
ignored by law enforcement
it's been ignored by the courts
we've had sheriff's openly say
they're not going to enforce it.
That's disappointed me having
worked on it and believing in it
but I have to accept the reality
is that.
Randy unable so it's not being
used you're trying hard and I
know you're trying to train to
do it but it's just it's not
being used as it should be and
and I'm just concerned this will
be another bill that we think
is.
The dress the tragic gun
violence
but I don't know that really
gets us there and and I I say
that again to reverse.
Senator Pirtle another set of on
going on in a going on in my
whole life
And I think it's incumbent on
those of us that are gun owners
responsible gun owners to lead.
Of the effort to to bring real
change.
In the end these tragedies.
Around our state in the country
so much for your bill.
I wish that I had a greater
confidence it's really going to
make the difference I know you
want to make Representative so
all right Senator Ivey Soto.
Got the start at.
I hear I hear what you're saying
and I hear the first part of the
weather not.
Love the.
Followed or not what about that
enforced or not.
Particularly at a lot of the red
the red flag bill which which
has been used and and and
specifically that the World
Health Castro's from law
enforcement I guess part of my
concern is that you know.
Thank.
Right of it is illegal.
How do we know that someone
robbed a bank.
They got robbed.
We deal with that after the
fact.
Like most laws.
This bill for things after the
fact the the hope is.
That having this law on the
books.
helps to cause people to think
about what they're doing before
the fact and and and and I
think.
For me that's the advantage.
Of the work that Representative
Fajardo in senators Sedillo
Lopez and store.
Have been working on and and and
Representative Ferrary as well
on this bill was here
that that you all but working
on.
Is that is that is that yes
people get prosecuted for this
after the fact.
Having this law on the books
hopefully will help to change
behaviour before the fact.
With people knowing that it
exists.
In much the same way that even
though there's money in the
bank.
And I might want to.
The fact that I know that
there's a law on the books help
to stop.
B. or other people from going in
and robbing the bank
so anyways thank you Mr.
Course.
Okay generated about twenty five
of them is on the do a
committees up on us.
That's why is
Well okay all right all right.
The reason.
The reason why house can't.
The help of the process is.
Full full full little together
so.
I I appreciate the complexity of
the fault of the house not be
able to handle this with three
weeks remaining
which puzzles the hell out of me
but okay so we know will reject
the idea will do this committee
several duties amendments you
guys in the house can go back
and figure out what we did good
luck
but if anything else Center
Moores line struggles.
I appreciate the the only thing
all that I'm sorry I just have
conduct and take me just one
more minute so we we did get
appreciate the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts laws acts and laws
and we will give us this in
seventeen eighty four Senator
Lopez was it was a okay R. thank
you for that I appreciate I
trust most of you all in the
room following our earlier
hearing before we look at the
current status of the United
States from court decisions on
the constitutionality of of
second.
Flaws in on our I'm convinced in
this part the reason why this
bills instead of on premise this
bill would stand of
constitutional scrutiny.
From that Supreme Court decision
maybe one of the few the other
gun bills that we sing that
might withstand that scrutiny I
think this is a constitutional
lawyer also would be forty point
all right roll call these and.
Senator Bob.
No.
Senator Ivey Soto yes Senator
Wirth no.
Senator new yes center for the.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Duhigg
yes.
survived yes.
You have a do pass
Representative center.
Senate bill one fourteen
Centerville.
India and other.
I.
The.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman this started
A year ago I had dinner with one
of the judges in the state who's
an old friend of mine district
judge.
We went to a restaurant and he
said if you.
I'm sure most of you were most
judges concealed carry permit
teas I don't know about most but
many are and the.
He said I better take my gun and
put it in the glove compartment
because I want to be able to
have a point three felony well I
didn't think much about it at
the time but I as I thought
about it the fourth degree
felony got to kind of bothered
me for what whatever was my
first thought was that.
We just change the liberals a
couple years back and it says
you can serve in restaurants now
they can get a permit to serve
spiritus liquors the first bills
and and I will give some credit
Senator Wirth the he beat me up
a little bit last committee but
to
I came up with an amendment and
you should have that Mr chair
amendment it's seven fifty six
point one do you have that.
Is.
Six point one.
Yes okay the reason that this.
Senator reported up the that
might be what I originally had
proposes that if you serve any
kind of news you could get into
the restaurant with conceal
carry and understood is
concerned and so I have come up
with an amendment to the
amendment says restaurant
license there are two kinds of
restaurant licenses under sixty
dash six eight dash four one is
in a ones of the pandemic fees
allows you to apply for permits
to serve spirits
then that was part of the change
we did a couple years ago which
is a little this does not allow
for conceal carry within the
state the outback's of the.
Those kind of restaurants
because they have a different to
have dispensers license of the
what is called it's a much more
involved and they serve a lot
more liquor those kind of.
So trying to put it more down to
what my concern was a lot of
people are wondering around that
have concealed carry permits and
they might wander into a
restaurant.
Unknowingly they've been going
there for years I might go in
there and thinking it's a beer
and wine and it is a very fine
but they have just applied for a
B. Lysons and all of a sudden
they're guilty of fourth degree
felony per the statute on the
last page of the bill so that's
what the the amendment does is
it changes it from wide open to
just restaurants with the
restaurant license it would not
allow concealed carry and
outback's Applebee's is going to
restaurants and some others the
bill right the end of not be
left because they have a whole
different class of license much
for progressive liquor license I
guess you might say.
So that would be my first
amendment to that I would like
to propose the committee to to
tone down the bill a little bit
based on some of the things that
I talked about in the last
committees and over so.
Representative do with that so.
Representative first amendment.
One
the motion.
Representative.
Of
course.
So if I send the amendment and
so I I guess I'm asking senator
bill what would be a simple we
could care your concealed carry
and you can't take the bull ring
you can't take an Applebee's.
With the figure into where.
I don't know if restaurants
right here that will this
typical on their their number of
my notes reassure their small
mom and pop place type places of
silver and why they can my point
is that you're you're asking us
to know which one we can that
was my point of the bill begin
with everybody doesn't know
they've got their history they
know where they can go and can't
go most of us all know that
you're not supposed to carry a
concealed carry in the
Applebee's because it does have
a full bar of but you don't
necessarily know if there's a
restaurant I like to go to over
here on the.
Alameda thank all Valentin is a
have a beer and wine and I don't
know if they sell margaritas or
not but they could give up the
license and sell margaritas but
they don't have a full of our
they have
it's it's a small place I just
want to expand their business
offer your offerings and so
forth so B. it's a restaurant
licenses different than what the
big restaurants have which is
the specials this would not
allowed to spend two years
Senator.
Like where your bills for.
so I'm going to pull your
amendment thank you.
Because of.
Representative.
The those are some of the most.
I thank you Mr chair and I do
appreciate that I did have
concerns about this phone still
occupies forty bill but I do
think this is what this is
closer to the end that you're
trying to do which was to deal
with the unintended consequence
what I said in the prior
committees I actually I like the
unintended consequence
you know which was we changed
electoral laws and as a result
of that it is possible fusion I
think in this concealed carry I
sat in this room this is one of
those.
I think this goes back to my
My tenure on this committee I
was the only one here when this
bill passed on a thank you
center when you also carry this
bill and most of us on that side
of the file at left.
I just again center I I respect
you and appreciate what you're
doing and I did consider
possibly.
Amending this bill to just do
away with guns and restaurants
but I'm not going to propose
that amendment because that's
not what you're trying to do
what you're trying to address
the constituent issue but I do
appreciate that you're.
Again trying to narrow down to
what you originally had walked
in which is different than
having in all the restaurants
were license.
I just have a question because
I'm looking at the statute that
your reference there and I'm
looking at the license which is
the purpose of service of beer
wine and spirits liquors that is
a the license so how's that
other than not having cider.
I don't really know how Mr chair
this and then you leave Mister
Mister chairman Senator I think
if you look under dispensers
license that's where the
Applebee's in the bill rings and
those kind of restaurants
operate they operate under a
totally different state section
of the statute.
All rights I'm not sure I
understand FY and enforcement
and and what have greater
sectors I I can't I'm looking
for the bills I don't want to
put that the amendment from if
you're going to have to response
I think I actually my wife and I
went to el nido which is a
restaurant in the city and the
owner came up and said I really
appreciate what you guys did in
creating this new license that
allows us to be able to instead
of spending three three hundred
five hundred thousand dollars
which is what their policy
before the new alternative but
the lesser type of license and I
think that's where this is going
but I'm not looking at the
statutes I just want to be clear
that because that's exactly the
statute that we allowed
restaurants to.
So New Mexico spirits initially
that's part of.
I I I will say this changing
this amendment would not change
it to just folks so in New
Mexico spirits because.
No Way Out there's other
provisions to do the New Mexico
in the other spirits and so.
Okay I.
How.
That that.
I had to get an education and
would allow myself to get all
this figured.
Well the amendment.
Gesture of.
Support.
For
more.
The the
Thank you.
All right we do have a seven.
Amendment and I threw it up to I
want to add up because of when
senator Wirth again he's the
culprit here.
Yes.
Passed the election bill the
other day farms of the election
his bill which I think is far
more.
Scarier than to have firearms
around that he had as a petty
misdemeanor so I have a second
amendment that changes the
fourth line or the fourth of the
last line of the statute on the
last page of my bill it changes
it from filling a petty
misdemeanor.
I.
You have a fire.
In one of the prohibited physico
the sections are a.
Which includes bars a.
There's always someone that page
Mr.
Senator Baca yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Yes.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator o'neill yes.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
Senator lotus the
sales.
Correct.
Not at all.
All right so what we have seen
as we have for you we have
Mister on the.
Bill
I only need to.
We're meant for each of the
programs.
Get yourself ready is the lease
terms for.
K. A..
residues.
Year and a half Steve.
Your reserves are organized.
There is no chance for one
seventy.
One fourteen click that's all.
General.
Receive so.
Aaron disorder.
The.
Okay.
Your Mr chairman thank you
I support the bill of which is
one.
still during normal.
The U. S. population.
Texas is got a very similar law
they have no problems with it.
conceal carry your training that
the do not drink alcohol
firearms sold there should not
be any problems at all and I
certainly don't have the bill
passed thank you.
as we see.
All the.
Mr chairman I don't wish to
speak on this bill but I have
the email that I sent for the S.
G. C. soon that serves the
people you mentioned were.
Ups which positions.
The.
As soon as our.
Thank you Mr chairman I support
the bills usually written in the
amount of money out of receive
your pleasure.
Opposition or a strategy on to
shatter the.
yes first arrive on.
Reserves the right to own and.
And.
Senator is committee thank you
I was bill concern that really
just gonna stand was low of the
getting more guns in places
where the where we also have
alcohol however with all the
changes that have been made in
this amendment of bill looks a
little bit different than I did
before but I still have those
general concerns I grew up in a
rural area I understand that
their place is perhaps even more
rural areas where
Where the separation of the.
R. an activities from restaurant
activities are are less common
cause which is smaller and fewer
establishments so I want you to
think carefully about this bill
and this is really what we want
to go thank you.
Yes I'm here.
Okay I female everybody wants
full.
Yes.
Care.
I'm very concerned because
alcohol is forty percent more
hoping that wine and beer.
And I have reserves from UC
which I'm glad you're with you
that given month an estimated.
Two eleven million harmful this
is the right photo finish
reading and product more common
mode fire all.
The general population for men
there are as many alcohol
related deaths are violence as
motor vehicle accidents.
North Carolina Dr this twenty
thirteen and since then they
have twelve did twenty three and
and the worst incident involved
a hundred six gun.
I have family and friends to
come here and visit all the time
if there are loaded firearms in
restaurants and bars we will
become patrons and I think that
we are creating wealth of
situation.
And we're making the payment
terms.
The employees in the state.
All.
At risk of the job
thank you thank you Mr Klein.
Appreciate very much all right
we've gone through those who
signed up to speak in support or
opposition members of the
committee on the bill as
amended.
Discussion.
Senator Ivey Soto I think
chairman you know I'm I'm.
Also listed.
And that is part of the funds
to.
Process development possession
misdemeanor and you're drinking.
Some of our that that is a
felony.
Something like that but the.
Exactly this is that hello is
not the kind of.
The governor is because it is
still here people are.
Many ways so more will certainly
when it comes to guns.
and and so that's that's a
concern the concern is.
Is the environment the what's
it has taken and and the fact
that other people.
The government after that all
the other people.
End up intoxicated and.
That what happens when someone
than those of reaches for the
guy and and so that's the.
I think that's a concern I.
I think I think maybe with a
little more work for time we
might be able to that's
something here in.
But but but but this is that's
for me that's part of it then
the other part of it is that
this doesn't have anything in
there.
Talk about this loans converse
with them this is not.
All.
From the middle of the state I
believe that's covered in some
other section Mister chairman
Senator.
That you're not supposed to
consume alcohol with the conceal
carry with your firearm with you
for and I don't have that I
can't put that statute for you
but I believe it is.
Yeah and and probably is but
it's I mean specifically the
with them within this context
records but my guess is we said
was that you said was a district
judge from some of the that
we're tracking but you know that
a magistrate they may not from
and and and then you know if
it's a.
when I can certainly understand
their perspective.
But I mean
thank you Mr Senator
Mr chair with respect to my dear
colleague motion to table.
For the committee's motion
table.
Representative well tabling
motion which take a roll call I
should.
Senator Paypen no.
Senator Ivey Soto just a.
There are more snow.
Senator only you yes Senator
Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Duhigg
yes Senator Memphis yes.
Senator your bill's table thank
you Mr.
Senator Padilla to thirteen.
Gonna be my next question.
Yes.
Question for.
Just wanted to.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee we
Come before the Senate bill two
thirteen essentially would allow
registered nurses or licensed
practical nurses under the
supervision of a physician to
administer up to twenty seven
days of
methadone and in the Senate
Public Affairs health and public
affairs committee we amended in
in the title and and and where
was printed in the legislation
Buprenorphine or buprenorphine
with naloxone to ensure that
everything that they needed to
be added there was was a.
Handled and.
That's just as well and also we
we were able to get this we work
this out in for the past year
year and a half and had this
done by rule and so now we're
here to.
Codified in law.
And I'm gonna ask my co host
here to say a few words so
Mister chair members of the
I just this one is there is you
know we all have areas that we
know for better for worse and I
know all about methadone and
during my time with the Dismas
House that talk a lot about but
but you know it is an effective
strategy to get off.
Another other substances and I I
remember this bill from a couple
years ago and I have to be at
that.
The list of supporters in this
case we.
This bill has a lot of
protections you know I'm not a
big fan of scope of practice for
this these people know what
they're doing with the
administrative of the of the
methadone and like allowing
making it more and more doable
for somebody who's really
struggling in their recovery you
know it's just something it's if
you if you reduce impediments
without
impairing public safety patient
safety factor it's a good thing
so I support this bill thank
you.
And thank you Mr chairman also
an expert with me Eric Ketcham
not to be confused with their
Martinez catch him in the NBA.
FACP F. A. S. A. M. H. A. C. H.
E. F. A. A. D. M. I think we
covered all the letters of the
alphabet there he he is an
expert in emergency medicine in
Santa Fe N. Espanola with the
Presbyterian health care system
he also has a specialty in
addiction medicine needed
service are expert in the first
committee he's also the director
of clinical with implementation
for the New Mexico bridge
program medical director New
Mexico treatment services in
Farmington in the past he was
the co founder past chairman of
the national A. C. E. P. pain
management and addiction
medicine section and the past
president of the New Mexico ACV
payment especially if you work
as well.
Thank you a.
Chairman.
This is the the civil bill all
this does is just and able
Nurses to be able to do try to
do some coaching at a time.
Keep go keep your.
This this just allows nurses to
do what they do all week long
which is prepare the does the
patient would take when they
come into the clinic and allow
them to also therefore put that
into a take home bottle and put
a label on it this is
The process like I said that is
not very complicated
that the nurses only work with
two medications and an OTP they
only work with methadone which
comes in liquid form we work
with given our fine which comes
in tablet form actually a film
strip we'll be able to confuse
the two the use a digital
process that shows what that
does is for the patient the
confirm the dose of the patient
and the piece of equipment that
then take trades are prepares
that those pores it to an exact
milligram so this some.
Reason is important is because
it improves access to treatment
that's this is about the
particularly improves access to
treatment in rural parts of New
Mexico so
as I said before you know this
was already set up in rural
we're looking to make this
happen in statute this would
align New Mexico with the
practices of statues of thirty
three other US states including
almost all western states and
all the states which border New
Mexico now there's no federal
requirement the pharmacist.
Doses this is a requirement.
This imposed by the state of New
Mexico so.
This will save lives it improved
access to life saving lives
transform medication and.
To make this kind of practical
smaller methadone clinics for
those in rural areas state
usually don't have access to a
pharmacist
five or six days a week coming
into the clinic they may only
have a access to a pharmacist
one day a week to come into but
does so if the patient comes in
not one of those days of the
week they may not be able to get
a take on those from the we can
come to the may not be able to
modify those two condos has that
been prepared so this is really
about being better able to
customize Care.
Initiate treatment and re
initiate treatment for patients
who relapse or not returning to.
One other individuals there
Cortines and good evening Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name's Act Martinez
on the lobbyist for fun American
of care here in New Mexico
I'm I'm kind of just an echo
what what what the Sanchez
already set as well too and and
this bill has been heard this
committee in during the virtual
session and there were some
issues that I think Senator Ivy
Soto fixed it to where we
clarified that should be on the
board of pharmacy enough board
of nursing and then when we
apply that amendment we just ran
out of time the building get
hurt again I think there's been
a lot of interest question with
the administration and the
legislative body Dr drive
catches me some pretty good
presentation Legislative Health
and Human Services we got that a
lot of that committee all
unanimously so we have
bipartisan support and now we
want to talk to our technical
you guys because you guys are
for real on the experts on how
to get this thing up through an
understated clarified correctly
so with that which was support
this legislation.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chair.
So I I do not support this.
What this.
There's a reason that we have
pharmacists measure out
methadone it is a very precise
this dispensation Mr chair
Senators and the reason that we
have pharmacists do that is
because that is a safety of
patient safety measure
any methadone clinic that is
operating at all all monitor one
X. basically have to have a the
pharmacist on staff it's my
understanding.
if they are operating without
that they are not operating in a
way that that is is prioritized
it prioritizing patient safety
Mr chair methadone is big
business methadone is big money
what this does this doesn't
increase patient safety this
doesn't increase patient access
for the funds do is reduce
reduce some costs some internal
costs for these methadone.
That that cost savings is not
passed on to the patient as as
far as I know everything still
build out using the same code
whether whether you have the
lower rate nurse doing this or
the higher rate pharmacists
you're still building out to
insurance Mr chair at the same
rate so they're made in the same
amount of money that would lower
costs that is what this bill
accomplishes and it does so at
the expense of of patient safety
hi fly and I am not a fan of
this bill.
A new.
All of these.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator you know.
Yes.
Yes.
So.
Now.
Yes.
Thank you.
Earlier.
Our offices.
Seven o'clock.
Well as of seven one or five
thank you very
Well some of you all the build
yourself of my office supplies
on your own initiative for the
course yeah.
But the.
The.
But as the as the hours grow
longer and the need for a longer
will start some food so I figure
that
The automatic firearm sales we
have.
Show nobody as proponents
registered center schools and I
show probably about it's like
maybe seven or eight opponents
so just so I'm understanding of
the of the way will progress on
the opponents is it is the
opposition organized opposition
and knows they have a
spokesperson and they got it so
it is going to court at the
time.
I don't see that anybody
stepping forward to that means
that we'll do is we'll take the
time we'll we'll do of up to ten
minutes of advocacy centers
souls up to ten minutes of
advocacy need that much higher
to feel have it and then and
it'll be up to ten minutes of
opposition and we'll go through
the names and give everyone a
corresponding amount of time go
ahead Center souls thank you at
all the fairly short here on the
front end and so that I'll have
some time to possibly re but
some of the things that might be
said in opposition this is based
on the Hawaii law on automatic
weapons and I want to first
point out that in the prior
committee that the whole portion
on silencers suppressors all of
that has been removed there was
rather good discussion about
those areas that those are
highly regulated have long
waiting periods federal
regulations on registration and
other kinds of things and so
that whole section which is
mostly on page three somewhere
around lines five six seven have
been completely taken out
through the amendment that was
in health and public affairs
committee
for the most part what this does
is it does not take away
anyone's weapons but it prevents
the sale the transfer the
changing of ownership of
firearms particularly ones that
are considered on the the first
page of the assault pistol types
of ones are some specific
definitions for those but also
ones that could be modified from
semi automatic to automatic
typically these kinds of things
are things like bump stocks and
things of that sort that have
been used in a couple of very
high profile mass shooting types
of things the
And so it does have a penalty
for people who install remove or
alter firearms with the intent
to convert them into automatic
firearms are deemed of
manufactured automatic firearms
with this again the key things
it does not take anything away
from anyone it just prevents the
sale transfer it cetera I'm
fully aware this does nothing if
somebody down in our area were
to go to Texas and by one
they're not going to be state
police at the border checking to
see that they're not bringing
them in I do not see that that
would be considered a transfer
but within the state of New
Mexico that that would not be
legal and with that I would I
would be available for for
questions thank you so.
We'll go to the opposition.
Moon will recognize everyone of
up to one minute Eugene foreman.
Present.
Strug maintenance.
Which is good so also over the
names I'm gonna go through the
order of so natus ski Tom Kate.
Can showing Joe Cole was in Leri
Sonntag during the sort Tom Kate
and Eric Rasmussen everyone we
recognized for up to one minute
who shows up so eight eski here
you hear the sounds you hear me.
Mr S. Q. regulations over one
minute.
Thank you Mr chairman many of
the sponsor certain health and
public affairs these move to
file this bill by the horrific
shooting involved a bill
regulates nothing more years to
go item by item sold disposal
Hughes from private school
automatic firearms usually semi
automatic fire rifle barreling
system sixteen inches
Representative Lujan one of
sixteen inches shop comes with a
barrel on because they futures
will these record.
As for the initial excuse I'm
coming around and you standard
full metal jacket for House
confused for the purpose of this
bill was given those facts
Division long you've already he
would not violate displays for
for crime three of those items
automatic farms sure program
comes regulate equivalently for
more heavily than suppressors
some of the the sponsor had for
rural expresses those also here
thank you thank you Mr us Tom
K..
All you recognize up to a minute
Sir.
All all of our.
This is for us to go to this
will all regulated national
farms Act Reform Act the fees.
That has to do.
All of us to be yeah.
extensive background check
for the background check.
Find.
Are they gave you.
State Rep without.
This
group is here it also for a lot
higher out of state I want to
bring it back.
That is federal.
these are all about the
executive in the state.
Session.
I they do a lot of that will be
fine it is it is that you do
have basically the same process
without eight hundred dollars
actually.
I.
Basically the same
plus.
For I basically I the fear.
Just one of.
All.
In.
This is for the generation or
two all the all thank you thank
you Mr K..
Can showing.
My only comment is that there
are no police for this bill so I
can.
Joe covers of.
Mr chairman members of
our smart of him let's go and
for reasons of state this
gentleman here he seems to know
a lot about the existing cross
in the fact that the.
I think this this bill.
Those are aimed at law abiding
citizens in the state.
Criminals we get anything they
want to.
Any places that.
Thank thank you.
Sonntag.
During was on them or they're
not on their list sort.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and careless sort them
with the national shooting
sports foundation we are
fireman's to trade association
keeping my testimony to one
point for time purposes there is
language on page three line
eleven and thirteen that would
be a and ninety five percent of
all its an imitation currently
available in the state of New
Mexico I don't think that's the
intent of the legislation but
that input is coming from for
the ammunition which is one of
the largest firearm ammunition
manufacturers in the country
so that word segment is used
throughout the language and
boards are intended segment a
segment for effectiveness for
self defense hunting and it also
targets you want to pull it that
doesn't segment when you target
to because it will ricochet in
constitutional damage down range
as it travels beyond
Representative you may be aware
of so that language.
I would hope could be changed we
do oppose the bill for other
reasons one last point I want to
make Tom covered a lot of bases
this legislation really does go
to vindicate those folks who do
say that the gun control
proponents will never be happy
will never be satisfied because
the guns complicate the
contemplate on page three of
this bill are the most heavily
regulated farms our country they
are not used in crime.
But this would be in the future
transfer of them entire
collections value the loss some
people have their entire estate
attached to machine guns raises
that do better than Warren
Buffett's investments and they
will be lost if this bill is
passed so I do respectfully ask
that you table bill thank you
Rasmussen.
Yes Sir Mr chairman members of
the committee
I guess for the first
discretion the final bill this
is the automatic firearm sales
of that
again like we discussed.
The lotus of New.
If reductions related to
provide.
Designing a six thousand dollars
so it is not using drugs is that
would be one of the first
quarter of as as as as all a
pharmacist rather small
Division.
It is the perfect informed.
A request for.
What is on is on every single.
Is this something the future
area for being provided for
One of the other things which
there was.
We'll
have.
Read more of the and the full
not worry are.
Well we've.
On so it is the state that's
okay livewire actually paid for.
We would have to.
Regarding.
Else as well as the.
We'll be right.
Call.
Background checks.
This.
You cannot go I have the tax.
Live far from thank you for your
taxes and I.
And bring it back to the state.
Complete the opposition speakers
members did you have anything
you want to you had a few more
minutes Senator want to read
this thank you of a couple of
things that were brought up is
in that section one under new
material on where it's
describing what an assault
pistol is one of the things that
would be controlled by this it
requires two or more of the
following and so when it talks
about the shroud that's not
talking about a shroud on a
rifle that talk about shroud on
a pistol that allows it to be
the barrel to be held with a
second hand and so that's not
relevant to that it requires two
of those and so very much this
does tend to to restrict those
assault pistol types of things
which again requires two of that
a through F. group to be
considered within that that
section
most of the other as I indicated
yeah we took out the whole thing
on suppressors of for that
reason
Most of the others there is that
section on the ammunition and
particularly it does also
include the ones where the
ammunition is designed
specifically to Pierce armor
teflon coated things of that
nature of those are important
for law enforcement and others
that are designed specifically
as more weapons of war rather
than things that are used for
hunting or things of that sort
so with that I'm gonna vote for
questions view from committee
questions.
Anyone at all.
Soto centers to point to Senator
percent someone over there at
the.
Service of yours at thank you
all.
Some of the work.
That we have the two issues.
Out of us on this bill one of
them is as well that this is.
in the list of things that that.
Support is implicated in the
breast case.
That are eligible for for
regulation by the states I
actually don't see that.
Being as being something that in
the world are.
R. for Heller would permit
The other thing is is the this
is the national firearms act.
And and the fact that that these
are already highly regulated
through federal law and and I
actually see this as an issue
where.
we're actually in the sense of.
Have reached out to the issue
and and that to the extent that.
What we will do this act will be
out for a.
To the federal law
You know I think I think this
privacy clause would.
Would not get down I'm I'm also
concerned.
That if somebody violates the
national firearms act.
of nineteen thirty four.
They're they're facing.
I think five or ten years for
each of violation were as.
For as under this law they would
be facing in two months.
And and so.
And so we're as a lot of the
other.
A lot of the other
bills that we've looked at.
Fill in the gaps.
Of of different places in in
federalizing this is actually.
reducing penalties.
and and putting us in conflict
with federal law.
And
and and and and I also see this
is something that.
Mr chairman I don't I don't see
that we have the.
The authority to
To regulate this area I I I I
will not under the national
firearms act it's ten years in
federal prison forfeiture of all
devices of firearms in
violation.
the individual's right to own or
possess firearms in the future.
That'll be of ten thousand
dollars for certain of the
violations.
And and so.
You know like I said I just I
just I see this is something
that is going to get challenged
and not down and in the meantime
we're taking what is right now a
ten year prison sentence for
somebody who violates the NFA
and we're offering an eighteen
month prison sentence.
That doesn't make a lot of sense
to me.
So a district thank you the one
of the committee.
The table.
Able hello suppression of debate
here we barely talked to called
on one percent you know tabling
should not be used to suppress
debate.
I certainly agree with that I
would from the committee room we
did not see anyone else last to
be recognized for her
you would be able to do.
What is going to postpone the
tabling motion will be taken as
the first precedence but as our
sons or anyone else on the
committee we will be debating
the table emotions so all takes
mortician debate discussion and
we have a Senator only.
Access to selected here more
from learn earns this committee
about.
I.
Senator sort of existence are.
I feel from our for our
jurisdiction and so.
But I was more than three five
income
Attorney members I.
Senator.
Others on the committee.
Thank I guess Mr chair Senator
and I don't know if you you have
an answer to the side I need to
have to have a and I for some
member the right I guess.
Since we do have this historical
yes under Pruitt now what are
you aware of of any any
historical laws that would be
similar to this that that.
It might find some.
Some comfort to us who were
worried about about this being
upheld.
If if it does pass.
Mr chair and senator I am by no
means an expert in this area I
do not know the details of those
laws you all would be much more
knowledgeable about that then I
and things would fall under that
again I think that the key parts
of this particular legislation
deal more with the assault
pistol section which is under
section eighty.
were the eighty one
rather than the pieces that are
further down which talk more
about the the automatic weapon
and so I think that's really
more where the crux of this bill
lies but I don't know about the
Supreme Court ruling that
recently came down to whether
that applies to this I've read
some of the F. I. R. there are
two pieces that are different I
just got a report that this that
shows that this may actually
reduce the penalties in some
areas.
That I think is more with the
assault weapon in some of those
rather than what is defined here
as an assault pistol I don't
know if that falls under that
same definition.
And so I probably succeeded in
convincing you that I know very
little about the specific things
you're asking about.
Care center and and Mr Terry a
Iran I'll you know the.
The FIR seems to suggest I guess
this was the DPS that was state
and they didn't think it would
run a fell through and I think
based on the language in that
concurrence says that this would
still allow.
if for laws prohibiting the
carrying of dangerous or unusual
weapons so I think to the extent
that these could be categorized
as dangerous or unusual weapons
but but Mister chair I think
we're gonna see throughout this
throughout the country I'm I'm
something of a for the stuff I
think we're gonna see throughout
the country
these issues going up to the
courts and that and and we just
need to have.
Go through that process with the
courts and that we have this new
decision to really suss out what
it means
in the meantime if we can.
Do anything to to help
reduce the impact of gun
violence on New Mexicans and.
Open to the public project the
committee members your motion
will have presence of
anyone else.
So much like to join the
discussion with two I I want to
thank centers sold for your gun
owner Lujan I think as I've said
many times as many people like
you or the people who should be
leading the discussion and
debate about gun safety and of
and I put myself in that same
category to the the I don't
think the bill would remotely
stands a constitutional scrutiny
under latest Supreme Court
rulings.
Not happy about the Supreme
Court rulings I think they're
absurd the Clarence Thomas is
absurd generally speaking but
but but but in this case he's
far beyond the pale to suggest
that the only thing that
constitutionally can limit.
Gun safety would be that that
was historically contemplated by
the founders in seventeen ninety
I think with the second
amendment second amendment
rights were ratified it is
seventeen ninety one thank you
so
yes so it's absurd and we know
it's absurd and you know it's a
rationalization to trying to
achieve a predetermined and I
think that's regrettable but
that's the nature of the United
States Supreme Court at times
the states and and I think
that's unfortunate.
That's certainly not what the
American people are at and
you know I would have liked to
ask and I will continue to ask
my friends who Representative
the NRA and others my
understanding is that the
members in our area generally
pretty supportive of some of
these on safety measures of line
I hope that's true because I I
would count myself among them.
You of New but I I do think that
from our analysis that you're
potentially lessening the
penalties on automatic weapons
under federal law this point
etcetera I was sort of a this is
an area that were the federal
government's pretty heavily
regulated I don't know of a
preemptive but they may arguably
preemptive but they certainly
regulate machine guns and
Senator Ivey Soto his conclusion
is like that of our staff in my
own which is that the federal
laws right now have far
stricter.
sentencing.
Penalties than than your bill
would have for something like a
machine go on that evidence or
whether you define assault
pistol kind of issues so if you
don't mind me asking Senator to
have a pistol do you own a
pistol.
Not one that most people would
consider a pistol it it's more
of a pellet gun pistol all right
so so and you don't have to
answer that's a personal
question but unifying assault
pistol as month we've got a
category of two or more
characteristics to say for
example and I mean is it
emission magazine that attached
to the postal outside the pistol
grip.
if your pistol and I do you may
have an extended magazine on
that it may add another four
five eight rounds to the to the
pistol.
And that's an ammunition
magazine that attach to the
pistol and it's outside the
pistol grip so that would mean
that that's an assault pistol by
you know attaching extended
magazine what would have to have
multiple characteristics I got
the that make them is one of the
characteristics of the second
one's a threaded barrel I'm I'm
not understanding but all
continue to talk to but we'll
see how the bill goes the I'm
I'm not understanding ever how
the use of a suppressor or
barrel extender and the items
you identify their silencer how
that really lends itself to I
think what you're trying to
attack here you know what what I
think you're trying to tackle I
hope you're trying to tech is
the mass killings
in mass tragedies Senator if I
might that was the section this
the press service silencer all
of those as well you know you
can out in the the prior
amendment good.
but likewise the section that
says well you're gonna find
assault pistols of the we have a
shroud that encircles the barrel
of permits the shooter hold the
fire with a second hand without
being burned again I'm I'm not
drawing the link between that
and trying to.
Put an end to or curtail mass
murders and and I'm not sure how
that works of the and then you
need to provide again US office
still by the weight of the
pistol you're saying a
manufacture waited fifty houses
or more when it's unloaded so
that would suggest that the
heavier the pistol is the more
you perceive that to be a
dangerous assault type pistol
and I'm not sure I understand
that do do you can you explain
that formula but why they have
your gun more dangerous than a
lighter and Mr chair at I cannot
I mean that came out of the
languages in the whole why the
law.
And then among the other
categories here's a centerfire
pistol with an overall length of
twelve inches or more of
centerfire pistols pretty common
that's probably the most common
pistols one of two and then
insure twelve eight of twelve
which is a word again doesn't I
don't understand how that
attacks mass killers
just because a longer gun and I
have friends maybe due to our
competitive sportsman
who target shoot for Olympics or
other competitions and started
shooting only in New I don't
know what the length of their of
additional may be but that may
be implicated here in that and I
don't I don't as we try to do it
over here trying to attack my
reference to you should target
competitively and and defined as
a result pistol so I won't keep
going it just seems to be that
that I.
Appreciate we're trying to do I
think the president I'd states
is indicated is our to to ban
assault weapons I think the
governor's indicated a desire to
ban assault weapons the reality
is that we never have a very
good definition of what
constitutes an assault weapon
and I see everyone nodded their
heads in the affirmative I go
down to the hardware store here
in Santa Fe have done it and you
can you can make anything look
like assault will be painted
black to put all kinds of nasty
things on it and will all kinds
of military looking camo and
and then it looks really nasty
was horrible
if you think of us all of that
but it may not be anything more
than maybe you're you're.
Palate is what you're describing
you know so I I just don't think
we have a good definition of
what is assault weapon is I know
it's hard I think some states
have tried to list all of the
weapons that might constitute an
assault weapon I've seen the
list it's what dozens and dozens
and hundreds of of guns and and
my expectation is as soon as we
try to find a gun and say this
is a banned assault weapons
somebody will go in and find
something that tweaks that
definition just a little bit
thanks that category it seems
like it's a but so.
Target we're chasing but I swear
we translucent I
Like all of us and turn on the
news and I just can't believe.
the country we live in sometimes
when it comes to to masculine
so.
Hey with those without the
motion for the committee is a
tabling motions that motion is
not debatable
similar that motion is not to
move to a halt and I'll take the
motion at this time on the
tabling motion anally.
Senator Paypen yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores yes federal news
yes Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stewart
Senator Wirth now.
Senator Duhigg contract Senator
Lopez yes this bill is tabled
thank you Sir thank you.
Well next here.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino on Senate
bill three ten.
Good.
Thank you senator please go
ahead and get started.
Their presentation thank you
madam chairman and members of
the committee Senate bill three
ten is a bill that the.
Tries to clarify of the the
current state definition of
crisis triage center and makes
clear that these emerging
facilities are part of our
behavioral health response in
this state and that they have a
valuable role to play.
And that they under certain
circumstances may accept
People brought in by police
officers are EMTs who are not
voluntarily seeking to help.
and my expert witness on this is
Jamie.
Jamie Michael from billion a
County she's the head of the
health of health and Human
Services department of Dona Ana
County and she's the one that
brought this issue to the
attention of the interim
committee this summer.
and I believe she's on zoom.
And if she wanted to say some
things we amended this bill in
in the.
The Senate health and public
affairs committee to make clear
exactly what we were after and
and miss to Michael will will
will be able to and.
Director Michael go ahead and go
ahead and proceed.
Thank you very much thank you
senator Ortiz Pino thank you
Mister chair members of the
committee we are here today to
ask for a couple changes to the
the legislation allowing law
enforcement officers to bring
people to crisis triage centers
to reduce the use at emergency
departments and jails for people
who are experiencing a
behavioral health emergency the
evidence is very clear that
emergency departments and jails
are not the most appropriate
place for people well when
they're having an emergency and
now that we have crisis triage
centers in our state we want to
be able to utilize them as a
valuation facilities instead of
the emergency department or the
jail and I will stand for
questions.
Thank you and senator you have
four people signed up as
proponents Dorothy Seton Leri
haraam Charlie mark as grace
Phillips is that your
coordinated support the you want
to go ahead and I didn't
coordinated if they like to
speak I'm I'm happy with them
speaking with if you would like
to speak at I think that's.
Go ahead and have the staff.
By the here yes Charlie only
come up this week.
Sure.
And public events have to admit
that Madam chair to a.
Hello at the Mr chairman members
of the committee of Charlie mark
is registered lobbyists for the
county of Dona Ana this was
started many years ago with uh
Senator Paypen and it's evolved
to what it is today
the the one thing is as we talk
to other counties and they
recognize as this is this this
is a better place to take on
then were we taken today
and and hopefully it works out
of you know to to be what it's
intended and that is a triage
center tend to treat these
individuals that have
We'll go for what they of.
Yeah they're in crisis basically
and and it's a way to treat them
so we do stand support and thank
you for your your support as
well.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and grace Phillips
general counsel for New Mexico
counties our organization is in
full support of this legislation
we think that crisis triage is
an essential piece of a and
effective behavioral health
system and our law enforcement
need an alternative to jails and
and ER's for people that they
are find who are in crisis.
Thanks.
The.
We have.
The fear.
That's fine yeah.
Okay do you want to she on the
yep that's fine.
Missing for about one one minute
please.
Okay thank you madam chair
members of the committee just
speaking in behalf of the
veterans military families
caucus but I'm also speaking as
an individual who spent thirteen
years in prison with this very
demographic of clients who made
it all the way into prison and
if they had had prices triage in
the beginning it would save a
lot of police time a lot of
emergency room time and a lot of
grief and families so I thank
you for allowing me to speak and
I support the bill and thank the
sponsor.
Thank you Mr we did not.
We did not have anyone signed up
in opposition so that it members
the committee Senator Baca of
thank you madam chair thank you
Senator I was just curious about
it does the definition you have
in here of crisis triage center
underneath that and subsection
one it says is licensed by the
department of health
Are these health facilities all
licensed by the department of
health to see if there is Madam
chairman and and and Senator
Baca yes there they are license
the there's a very specific
licensing crisis we have centers
have to receive and there are
only three right now of the one
and done yet it was the first
and and the there's one in
Albuquerque that the been
license their operating
temporarily out of the gateway
Center up yeah out of the out in
the
whenever they call it on the
corner of the as soon the and
and San Matteo but but the Santa
Fe has one and and curry and
Roosevelt counties are talking
about trying to to produce what
but right now they're only three
existing ones.
Thank you madam chair and
senator I was just wondering if
that was even necessary language
I think this is a pretty good
idea of where you're from the
supporter from with the veterans
of the I think it's make sense
anyway I'm would you pass on it.
Furthermore have a motion I want
to start with right so this
would be passed on.
There were thank you madam which
is just a question Senator can
you explain so there was a the
fact committee yes that adds
professional or.
That was requested Mr chairman
and and senator Wirth that was
at the request actually of of
Jamie Michael from Los crucis
because
There is a licensed art
therapist who works at the
crisis triage center and this
makes it possible for them to be
employed there and and and and
and so we include.
Just madam chair I guess the so
that changing the definition
though in the whole mental
health and disabilities code.
It is I'm reading it and and
madam chairman thank you senator
that that is in it is in the
code already they are in the
code already.
Mr chair
so then Mr.
Ma'am hold on you you is that
that my expert witness she may I
I'm not sure who it is but you
need to to wait to be recognized
you can't jump in I with this
agency Michael she could explain
exactly why we made that change
okay.
That was my fault.
Yes yes okay please go ahead.
I'm sorry yes Jamie Michael
the reason we added the the art
therapist is we do have an art
therapist working in our
facility but this also makes the
list of qualified professionals
in this statute match exactly
the list of qualified
professionals that are in the
Medicaid behavioral health rule
so chapter title eight chapter
three twenty one.
List all of these specialized
behavioral health provider types
so now the to list near each
other.
Great thank you.
Yeah that's if that helps that's
what I needed thank you.
Representative and just postal
center where I have the
opportunity under this
discussion to check in with the
regulation licensing department.
that was the proximate to my
location right now and
apparently we do license.
Our therapists.
And they are counselors and so
it's.
The end of each appropriate.
Further the second from the
committee.
I have two questions so.
And and
Are we might maybe yes into this
as well but but so for there are
those are therapists we do
license them but are they
independent practitioners now.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Yes madam chair they are
independent licensed
practitioners.
Okay so they can they can
practice independently now
regardless of putting this
language here is that correct.
Yes that is correct okay I just
wanted to make sure we're not
feeding independence just in
this Senator my other question
is is that and I might be
thinking of something different
but my understanding was that
with the crisis crisis triage
centers there's a federal law
that caps the number of folks
they can have at one time is
sixteen is that something
different.
Madam chairman I believe you
thinking of the Medicaid
restrictions on residential
inpatient treatment facilities
that it is different okay these
are very short term facility of
up up to maybe seventy two hours
again and stabilized and then
they move them to
some other program that they
need that or that or the release
amid getting stable as all the
needed to be done okay okay that
I appreciate that finish as this
is concerned that if we have if
they were cap to sixteen and our
same everyone take everyone
there.
That would be able to taken
because they're gonna be maxed
out by something like that
that's not the case today if so
what what is the oil and I think
there's already if you have a
motion so I wanted to pass
motion.
Is there any objection to that
motion.
Scene nine show all members
present.
Voting for the past Senator Ivy
Soto said we're Senator Stewart
Senator o'neill Senator Duhigg
senator Wirth Senator Baca
Senator Pirtle and senator of
mourners you have in the past
Senator thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee next we're going
to be going to SB two twenty two
Senator Pirtle state.
I don't think so.
I.
Nine.
Yeah.
This for.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee today after you've
sent a bill to twenty two
essentially what's come about
with the passage of the Water
data act is the removal of water
right water rights records out
of the local offices it is
creating quite the panic in my
area just with the complexity of
water rights and the issues that
have a rose in other areas where
those records removed and then
it poses quite an interesting
problem that we face as as
legislators and it puts the
public and the water rights
owners and basically that in a
situation where they're now
having to travel just to prove
up their water rights or
challenge Water Rights whenever
the situation arises that that
they may need to do so and so
essentially what happens is the
documents are going to be moved
Albuquerque which in itself is
kind of scary because the each
water right documents say I had
a farm of a hundred and sixty
acres which is pretty average
because of the home stating that
occurred in Roswell and at a
value of about ten to twelve
thousand dollars per acre you
can see how if one of these
records was lost or somehow
found to be incomplete due to
the incompetence of of human
beings just being human
sometimes you make mistakes how
that could severely affect
somebody with their water right
so what this aims to do is
ensure that the original
documents don't leave so that we
don't accidentally lose anything
in that all all Water Rights
would be kept within the
district to office or any office
in that matter and madam chair I
do have Mr Chris Cortez from
Atkins engineering on zoom as an
expert who can go into a little
bit more detail because you're
gonna hear that there was never
anything lost or there haven't
been any issues and he can speak
specifically to those issues
that he's had to work on
whatever those documents were
lost altered or mishandled.
Yes we can if if he's on.
I.
Mr Cortez go head.
madam chair and members the
committee monitors Cortez on the
operations manager and Water
Rights analyst with Atkins
engineering associates which is
a water resource engineering
environmental firm Federal for
about forty years here in
southeastern New Mexico I'd like
to speak and in favor of this
A bill proposing that the Water
Rights records be retained in
the district offices
I don't see it as mutually
exclusive to the Watergate Act
but I can't I can't speak having
process the hundreds and
hundreds of applications and
documents
every year that I think is very
critical that the local offices
the files be available to the
water users in the districts
for access many of farmers as
you know I averages farmers is
quite
Hi fifty seven years I think is
the average and
having access to the local files
for.
To be able to go down and
witness on these records and
captain the local offices for a
very long time.
We're not opposed course the
digitization digitizing
documents thanks very important
but having them available here
is accessible to people is very
critical not only for the
processing of applications for
analysis it's a part of the
economy
you're involved with the bankers
lending organizations title
companies people not only trying
to process water rights
applications but also to make
decisions about.
Purchases for things they may or
may not be able to do much that
needs to occur in a timely
fashion in the instance of
farmers for people looking to
accomplish things rapidly.
And in my experience that.
There are
There have been instances where
documents have not made it to
the database online would have
made it to the database timely
fashion and so the processing
and retention locally is is
critical to the ongoing
functioning of these offices and
making them available to the
water its users I don't like Mr
macro said you know a the value
of these things is very high to
the users.
each acre Water Rights is very
valuable it represents not only
I've seen a lot of projects of
projects in a day there are
since projects value things are
transitions to different
generations you know the files
for example the reservation go
back a hundred years they're all
part of an active lawsuit that
hasn't been settled which is the
education under costs twenty
two.
Thank you for twenty six hundred
to a two nine four in twenty two
six hundred and the District
Court and so these are very
critical records and the
retention of locally for access
not only to the district users
but also the state government
agencies I believe it's critical
and I obviously support this
bill and would be willing to
stand for any questions.
Right.
Strippers has of we you had have
one person signed up as a
proponent
severly it seemed this is India
thank god that stricter drugs of
New Mexico new year about five
and half minutes and here time
if you'd like your proponent to
to go we can we can do that
sounds good thank you madam
chair.
Miss Hattie's pleasing a message
saying that are you are you
there.
Chair Senators.
The state is not here to be here
all right
we have signed up in opposition
our state engineer Mike Hammond.
Come on up to the microphone.
In the interest of time if you
could keep your comments to
about three minutes thank you
madam chair members of the cut
the committee.
we have of registered in our FY
are.
Very detailed
fix explanation by the agency
that opposes this legislation
because of the immense impact to
the agency and the fact that we
have perform these types of
of abstracts and and records
management within the many bases
throughout New Mexico we've
developed a very expertise
staff of over time we have a
great record of managing these
records and and the we've put
through the process of providing
the necessary work to digitize
these records may come available
for public access in our water
system so anyone can access
those records at any time that's
the whole purpose behind the
abstracting and digitizing of
the records of the the main
issue is that we've got expert
staff residing in the Santa Fe
and Albuquerque area office that
that can quickly manage this
process and we've also
negotiated and worked with the
sponsor as well as the flock of.
The Picos valley artesian
Conservancy district to actually
have
the back eight exact the digital
copy rendered at the office in
the Roswell office under a sixty
day period in order for that
record to be available to the
public while we do this work
that will is estimated to take
up to six years but those
records are always available
upon request and this exact
replica of the digital records
will be available in the Roswell
office and through PVC the
during the tenure of of
performing this work so we
believe it's a great compromise
and we willing to move forward
under that scenario and I stand
for any questions you may have.
Thank you and senator I
understand you have a amendment
has that been passed up to the
room.
Go to.
Yes Representative thank you
madam chair the amendment
essentially does exactly what
the the state engineer just
stated you know I think we're
we're dealing with something
that's six seven ten years and
it's my belief that that is the
government's job do exist for to
serve the people and so this
would just ensure that if
there's a question of water
right if there is a question
from a banker as to who owns
what in that document is in
Albuquerque that those people
should not have to then be put
out try to find it try to find
where it is that there would be
a copy available so this would
just go to provide that into
statute that with relation to
the digitization of documents
which is what something is is
what we all want right because
during COVID these documents
were accessible and it was
that's how we know that if if
they do leave is going to put a
huge hardship on people just
from that experience that than
they would be available so we
want that but we want to ensure
that that they are accessible to
the local people that need to
access them and that's exactly
what this would do.
Thank you as I think you're
you're moving that amendment.
The amendment chair discussion
on the amendment.
Senator Wirth for just one
understand.
The tragedy here with the
amendment are you good with us
now.
Thank you madam chair of the
Senator Wirth.
I believe this addresses are are
issues of concern.
Yes we have committed to bring
the original records back to the
Roswell office on completion of
the project.
Roger I appreciate that again
several brought this to my
attention before the session and
I think he raises some legit.
Some some crazy accident happens
or something we lose original
records I just think it's worth
it's worth putting protections
in place I appreciate.
Figure out a way to accomplish
both what it sounds like.
Right any further discussion on
the amendment.
Any objection to adopting the
amendment.
The line please show Senators
Ivy Soto Stuart o'neill do Hank
were Baca Pirtle and mourners
voting in favor of the amendment
is adopted that from the bills
amended.
A
motion for the pass.
And their directions of that
motion.
And then process Senators Ivy
Soto Stuart o'neill Food Network
pop up fertile in Moore's rolled
in favor to passes amendment.
Thank you senator
Senator Stuart SP three eighty
three.
And all of this no everyone we
have fifteen minutes to our
hearts stop so.
If.
Senate.
I
thank you madam chair members of
the committee I have with me
correct for staff yes process
the frost at.
With the PED this bill is coming
to you we have a situation where
the FBI has notified Public
Education Department the current
state laws not in compliance
with federal requirements for
background checks.
Something our state agencies
have had to address in recent
years PD PED is work with the
FBI and the department of public
safety to ensure that this
current version of the bill
meets of federal and state
requirements so essentially what
it does is is at this more.
A staff that need to go through
this of background check it
ensures that PED does not share
the criminal history with other
entities I'm gonna let of brick
take a little about it and then
we do have an amendment.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity today this
is a really important bill for
the public education department
we want to make sure that we can
continue to issue new licenses
to teachers and past June
thirtieth
it's possible that the FBI would
stop doing criminal history
record checks for the agency
the we are we are presently on
the waiver and we as Senator
Stuart mentioned that we
that allows us to continue at
present to do that background
checks we we are not having any
more of licenses all all school
staff have to be licensed we're
just we just have to
specifically call out what each
of those positions are we can no
longer say in any other license
that that PED issues.
And so madam chair the envelope
amendment five one nine point
one this was actually sent to us
by the trial attorneys
on page sixteen.
Seth.
Have built here.
Period Mr following.
Nothing in this subsection shall
apply to compliance with
discovery requests or subpoenas
that are issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
Discussion on the amendment
Furthermore we are all supposed
to our attorneys assist really
needed and can Department really
telecom but in court of
jurisdiction that you can't do
on the server.
Six were us to like what was a
would be made.
Reserve yes so to the extent
that these are not subject to it
for a.
Up for it discovery requests for
subpoenas wouldn't make a
difference.
Because that doesn't apply to
prop up my question for the
expert is given that these are
federally record regulated
you'll.
Seven Mike my question the
expert is a given that these are
federally regulated.
Is there anything.
That that would either allow us
or stop us based on.
On federal law to shares about
some such information if
requested.
I speak about the amendment yes.
What I can say is that we have
not had the opportunity to
discuss this particular
amendment with the with the FBI
so we have provided the FBI with
this information but have not
yet received feedback from them
as to how it might affect
Whether or not we would be
allowed to continue doing
criminal history record checks
in the future.
Get up madam chair I'm I would
make my concern about this
amendment is that is that the
criminal history checks are
regulated by the FBI.
You have to have and and or I
number in order to be able to
even get into the system it's
fairly regular US one of things
I really like about this bill is
my understanding on how this
bill is constructed is no longer
are we doing all background
checks
Through the schools but now it's
centrally through the PED and
then the PED informs the schools
that there is an issue.
Is and the and so which I think
is consistent with the federal
requirements and I just I would
just be concerned about adopting
this at this time before we hear
back from the FBI
as to their feelings on on this
because that this could put us
out of compliance.
Right.
Further discussion on the
amendment.
All I'm not that I'm I'm not I
don't think this would put us
out of compliance Senator
my guess is that this is come up
in a case where the judge.
To develop innovative explicit
language and so that explicit at
some point along the line and
that was identified as a
something to to address and so
that's why we're seeing this
ammendment
I don't I don't I don't see
compliance issues with that so I
think then Senator more money
right that we don't necessarily
needed I also don't think it
doesn't harm
So tired the PED attorneys
looked at this I mean there
might question with the F. B. I.
that this was accepted by the
folks that wrote the building
project.
Further discussion on the
amendment.
Let's let's do a roll call vote
on the amendment.
Center I'm so the moment.
Senator Moores.
No.
Thank you yes.
Senator yes Senator Wirth yes
Senator debate yes that
amendment is adopted ported to
vote FAQ on the bill as amended
for fifteen from the committee.
Etcetera etcetera I guess that I
think I think diversity doesn't
take your rules fantastic I
really appreciate that but with
the tax system that happens you
may also like this so I would
love to pass.
As it has been.
All right is there any objection
to the do passed motion.
Scene nine chair Senators Ivy
Soto o'neill Stewart to head for
and members voting yes and you
have to pass this month thank
you so much right
Senate bill two forty six.
Thank you very much of Madam
chair members of the committee.
Six is revised uniform law of
Caryl axe
we do have an amendment.
that was submitted and while the
amendment is being passed out
Jack Burton pointed out to me
where I missed and at and so let
me just tell you all that well
that amendment is being put it
up and that is on page thirty
two.
up on lines.
Is a page three two
for the.
The thirty thirty three.
What lines.
The state.
Well here we go not opened see a
page thirty two lines twenty one
and twenty two.
Thirty two lines twenty one and
twenty two notarial public
should be notarial officer.
For.
Senator can you say that again
sure page thirty two at the end
of line twenty one begin on
twenty two notary public there
should be notarial officer.
Okay that a making that
amendment that I am and I
appreciate the eagle eye of Mr
Jack Burton and in saying that
are any discussions on the
committee on that amendment.
Any objection to adopt another
moment.
C. line show Senators Ivy Soto
Stuart o'neill do have worth and
Moores voting yes the amendment
is adopted and then madam chair
I do have a pre prepared
amendment which just simply
clarifies that
complaints regarding real Lona
all go to the ethics commission.
If it's pursuant to rule on a
but that doesn't stop someone
from correcting something or
criminal charges this is just
simply for real on a compliance
and this language was run by the
secretary of state's office the
state ethics commission and the
minister Ross of the course
there okay.
Discussion on that amendment.
Madam where did where the
complaints going now for a while
so they right now they go to the
state ethics commission so that
is not a change is just
clarifying that if for example
I'm an attorney if I'm
performing a notarial Act and
someone is question but the
notarial act.
That goes to state ethics
commission it doesn't go to any
other regulatory body.
And madam chair is that a good
idea we want all our lawyers
have a lot of the ethics
commission what we don't want
them going to the the board on
the issues of the notarial.
Act itself I agree with that
maybe you do want to go to the
war.
Again think about what the
borders and I'm sorry that
disciplinary board orders.
I just don't know I'm and I'm
not sure that Greenwood that I
mean again I think that the.
This is this weird role that
lawyer because basically you
know you're treating a lawyer
differently putting a lot of the
ethics commission not not as a
lawyer.
I get that but you've got I'm
here acting you know clearly it
says here licensed to practice
law so.
And this is this is the
challenging part here's what.
What had are they wearing what
other skills do they is a
lawyer.
Boring when they're doing this
but ministerial Act I don't know
I does that pose some concern
that you're putting the state
bar to the ethics commission.
In that Mr Chairman up we're
happy to retreat on this.
it was just trying to be trying
to clarify some stuff but this
if we could revisit another tech
after I would suggest that that
that that's one that's the I
would want to hear from someone
like lawyer friends that did
raise a number of issues about
this law in the past your and
just make sure that we
understand what we're doing as I
was that the I wouldn't support
that financial maybe there's a
you can convince me of this bill
moves forward that makes sense
but I do think that there's two
lanes and this gets tricky to
put.
All the lawyers under ethics
commission way not a not a
problem Mr chair Senator Wirth
so I would withdraw that
amendment at this time madam
chair members of the committee
the rest of this bill what it
does is that it it clarifies the
position of automatic to Carol
officer does not make a change
in who can be an automatic
materials or except for one
thing and that is the secretary
of state and members of
centerstate staff have have not
had automatic notarial powers
before this will give them the
automatic detail powers system
to administer the act itself up
and then it also.
A judicial officers
it makes clear and this was in
and and issue that that was
brought to us by the Supreme
Court that judicial officers
have been doing a lot of things
that are considered to be under
this act would appear to be a
notarial act however it is
within their judicial.
role and framework and so as
long as it is perform a judicial
officer within the scope of
their duties and the record is
filed in the court of the
judicial officer this act would
not apply.
If it's not corrected followed
within within that quarter or
not within their duties this act
would apply and that was at the
request of the state's spring
court that's on page five lines
thirteen to eighteen.
That is really the main
substantive change the rest of
this quite candidly is is up
aligning language after we
passed the bill there are some
places where we said no Republic
limit notary office which are
Los or other places where we
needed to just simply
clarify
how somebody goes about being in
Terrel officer we do also the
with regard to the out of
medical care officers they do
have to take a class in order to
activate their automatic
notarial status in addition to
filing a sealed just to make
sure they know what they're
doing.
So with that madam chair all we
have to stand for questions.
Questions from the committee and
madam chair I do have three
people who have been waiting to
speak one of them is Selena
Jones from the AOC another one
is Linda Bachman for the
secretary of state's office and
the third is Becky brand for the
state ethics commission.
Call public service as.
Over well thank you.
For.
Good evening everyone Lindsey
Bachman director of legislative
and executive affairs for the
secretary of state's office that
we provided feedback on the
initial draft of this bill with
the sponsor and we are grateful
that those suggestions have
incorporated into the bill and
we are supportive of the bill at
this time.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Selena Jones with
the administrative office of the
courts we thank the sponsor for
including these amendments that
clarified that official
traditional acts are not
governed by the requirements for
loan.
And then I think Becky batches
on zoom and if she's not there
they were spoken and I.
Thank you madam chairman and
committee it's Rebecca branches
students six mission and we work
with the sponsor we thank him
for bringing this bill forward
we do stand in support of that
we can get clarify some issues
that have come up during our
first year of education of these
matters thank.
All right all know the we're at
our heard stop time but what is
the will of the committee is
that discussion.
Pardon.
Of the best.
The table.
But the US.
All right so roll call vote.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am
Senator Moores.
Senator Stewart I just.
Senator will yes.
Yes very having to pass thank
you very much of that
judiciary's NMSA.
