We have a quorum center thank
you thank you welcome everyone
to Friday version of the Senate
Judiciary so as you know we work
really hard last Wednesday
despite discover days ago on of
Senate bill seven and I believe.
Senator Wirth Majority Leader
worth have as the amendments all
finalized and should be a have
been distributed so we can go
directly to the amendments but
before I do that I just want
everybody to know you know we're
under.
Pardon we're under time
constraints
you know there's a reason for
the three hour limit on our
meeting and just because it's
three hours doesn't mean we have
to go all three hours so just
know that that we have a lot of
what always a lot to cover and
then I reserve the right to cut
people short of their going on
too long
also just wanted wanted to know
that you know the municipal
judges have expressed concern
and we hear that we want their
we want their input but the ship
is sailed this train is leaving
the station but there's plenty
of opportunities this bill is
going to if it passes today it's
going to Senate finance and at
that time the municipal judges
are more than welcome to weigh
and verbally written wise and
you know we just have to keep
this ball rolling that this is a
really important we have so many
bills in front of us and with
judiciary I don't know if
everyone's notice how many bills
were getting so we really have
to keep it moving okay so having
said that I want to go through
Senator Wirth to present the
amendments to Senate bill seven.
Thank you Mr chair actually I
think it's Senator Ivy Soto as
amendment was made and what's
been presented to the committee
is exactly what was discussed at
the committee so I might be able
to Senator Ivey Soto since his
name's on the amended but it's a
friendly amendment addresses the
issues that were discussed on
Wednesday.
I think very much Mr chairman Mr
leader and and do we have the
amendments are on a computer
where we can share on this been
us perfect right so.
It is concerns with the
discussion that we had.
Right is on page three line ten.
We which is the existing
language in the bill in that
subsection B. we struck the the
dates.
Right and so and so that would
become operative.
Effective date of the bill you
don't need to put a date them
because it's not it's not
operative part of effective date
and then at the at the end of
that sentence an existing
subsection be there on page at
the top it's great are we added
then no later than September one
twenty twenty one the department
shall without requiring a
reinstatement fee.
Reinstate the driver's license
or nonresident operating
privilege of every person was
license or nonresident operating
privilege is suspended so we
plan on payment or failure to
appear and what lies ahead Liz
otherwise eligible to drive so
basically then on the effective
date in the act people can
implement the the first sentence
and then as of September one
twenty twenty one that's the
deadline for the second sentence
to be
To be our our our and act up and
up and so I think I think we
address the concerns both about
making me take care people make
sure that we give in to be
enough time to be able to do
this in a proper manner of
correctly but also where we
allow those people who need
immediate relief to get relief
from us the wait ten weeks to go
ahead and get taken care of
after ten weeks so that Mr
chairman Senator Wirth we have
to Ms Oakes actually your first
visit to make sure that she
feels like we've we've covered
up the correct things in this
and if not I would be over there
any questions that are not I
would would be passed on the
amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Ivey Soto this looks identical
to what we have addressed on
Wednesday so this is a friendly
amendment and thank you very
much Mr chair and Senator Ivy
Soto.
Okay now we have a Senator
Pirtle would like to speak
Senator.
Thank you Mr president and or Mr
press.
Mr chair on the floor one day
and I'm already confused thank
you Mr chair and senator I do
have a question at this changes
the law retroactively is is that
potentially unconstitutional
with regard to people's licenses
that have been suspended under
current law.
Yes that's the question this is
actually retroactively changed
law because it doesn't change
whether there license had been
suspended.
Just simply changes the
continuing suspension going
forward.
Provided that the suspension as
a result of nonpayment of fines
are filtered.
And and the case of non payment
plans available here I would
also notes and apparel and keds
because there's this actually is
is an important issue that the
suspension is not ordered by a
judge this is been
administratively imposed
suspension so we're not we are
not by doing this we're not I'm
doing in judges substance or
judge's order in the process of
doing this we are simply
changing the administrative
procedure moving forward on this
issue.
Thank you Mr chair and senator I
am getting messages from of at
least one of my other minority
members that they're not being
allowed in this if this cat can
make sure.
everybody's in that would like
to participate well I appreciate
that Mr chair and senator I have
a bill that I'm I'm gonna use
that exact argument so thank you
very much.
Okay well but what can't can we
let that person that are stand
Senator in that's waiting to get
in.
I just admitted of the more into
the okay they were in our.
Wanted to let the steam Senator.
Senator wealthiest in some of
the more this year okay Senator
Moores welcome welcome so
senator Morris this is an update
we just adopted the amendment
that we we went over in detail
with last last meeting.
So.
Actually Mr chair if I may we're
just presented and discussed and
answer the question are we still
need to actually about the
amendment that's what I'm sorry
I meant to say that but you
interrupted me so to work on the
motion to adopt these said
amendment so
Perhaps is there anyone who
opposes said amendment amendment
so with Mr call the roll with
this amendment fine in the eyes
of all of our esteemed
colleagues.
And center malls and Senator
Moores.
Okay so the amendment has been
adopted.
And so now back on the bill.
This time I would make a motion
produce passed as amended is
there a second.
Okay.
So all right so we have a second
so once again the clerk shall
call the roll and Senate bill
seven as amended.
No.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
Senator Lopez.
Yes.
Course.
Senator Pirtle.
No.
Sure.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
We have a two passed five to two
hundred thank you the Mr chair
representative pearl.
Yes thank you Mr chair it
appears that the Senator Moores
maybe having some technical
issues so if you would like if
you want.
Given just a second right.
Or just leave it open right once
he finally gets on yes welcome
to vote once he finally gets on
for the record.
Okay all right so thank you
thank you Senator Wirth and
thank you wonderful expert
monitors air thank you okay so
moving along we're now going to
go to Senate bill thirty six
with the senator Michael Padilla
to present.
So Michael Padilla Senator
Padilla can come in.
I'm here now great great and
Senator Padilla did you want to
to introduce your your experts
at this time thank you Mr
chairman yes I do have some
others that are joining me a
second judicial district
attorney Raul Torrez and then I
also have Matt Baca from the
attorney general's office I
think we all know him in his
capacity there and other role
cities filled I'd like to
introduce the piece legislation
now Mister chairman yes and then
as as a I've learned you earlier
via email no I know that you
have an extensive I rate
amendment of the we haven't had
a chance to analyze so the plan
here is to go full on into the
bill the larger picture get
testimony from all the folks
supporting your bill anybody
who's opposed go to committee
discussion and then we're going
to roll it over so that we have
time to consider this needs very
lengthy amendments does that
work for you Senator it does Mr
chairman and and I also want to
introduce I don't see her in the
the meeting room yet but I know
she's coming and her name is
Alyse assault and she's the
advocate that brought this to me
originally she will be with us
momentarily on the amendment I
appreciate your indulgence we
did receive the FIR and we
immediately jumped on it got
that to your committee I do want
to note though that there are
really three specific things I
know it looks lengthy but there
are three definitions that we
were missing in the piece of
legislation that we wanted to
make sure we're there for you so
with your permission I'll go
ahead and start sure that's
great thank you Senator thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee I do wanna let you
know this is a an issue that is
very near and dear to my heart
as I think that's one of the
reasons that I was approached on
this okay so miss Eliza sultan
is with us now Mr chairman just
want to confirm that for you she
will be one of the speakers
today but essentially with
Senate bill thirty six does is
it creates a new section of the
victims of crime act that
essentially allows for remote
video.
testimony at a preliminary
examination or a criminal trial
trial if the court makes a
specific finding that that that
it's necessary to protect the
witnesses welfare
the court may allow for remote
testimony we have a lot of this
technology already across the
state in a lot of our judicial
districts so I feel very good
about that part and then if the
if the level of the distressed
from in person testimony
significant the court can decide
to allow for this remote video
testing that's in real time by
the way there in our other acts
already on the books that
require for that allow for video
testimony which would not be a
two way interaction and I did
ask district attorney Raul
Torrez to come with us today to
address that Senator Duhigg was
kind enough to contact me ahead
of this hearing and I want to
make sure that I had to sit
satisfactory answer for her
there's a little more to what
Senator Duhigg and I spoke about
Mr chairman one of the things
that's the most critical you
know that we need to overcome
here is in the sixth amendment
to the constitution the
confrontation clause I do want
to tell you that we've done a
ton of research on this and in
the nineteen ninety case
Maryland versus Craig was a U.
S. Supreme Court decision that
allowed
closed circuit television at the
time to present testimony by an
alleged child sex abuse victim
the defendant Sandra Craig was
charged with sexually abusing a
minor child and then at the
trial the child is reportedly
unable to testify in the
physical presence of the
defendant so the judge attorneys
on both sides that the the
witness and others were in one
room and they placed the
defendant in another room and
adjust to Sandra day o'connor
well so the case went all the
way to the Maryland Supreme
Court which overturned the
conviction but then that was
appeal to the US Supreme Court
and justice Sandra day o'connor
did right for the majority there
and the four things that she
pointed out that we're not
missed by the could be a remote
testimony at the time the right
of personal examination which
occurred the that we.
Witness is going to testify
under oath which occurred and
that the witness will submit to
cross examination which occurred
and if the jury may observe the
demeanor of the witness and
making his statement and that
did occur also and so that's why
that was upheld in that
conviction was was held up for
was held excuse me so those are
sort of the highlights Mr chair
I'm just kind of jumping around
all of this technology but I
would like to have my expert
witnesses say a few words to you
I'm gonna start with the
attorney general's office I want
to thank Mr Baca for joining us
today then we will and and we
also have Mr Torrez DA Torrez
but before we do that I would
like for you to hear for two to
three minutes five minutes no
more than five minutes from
allies assault in a white this
matter was brought to my
attention and is now before you
and a line you can speak minutes
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is elisa sultan I am the mother
of two children ages four and
seven who had to testify at the
criminal trial of their father
he was convicted in state
District Court on two counts of
criminal sexual penetration and
one count of criminal sexual
contact.
He's currently serving thirty
six years in the of New Mexico
prison system he has a history
of being violent and making
threats toward me and others
with his firearms I'm I did
approach Senator Padilla because
I know that he has a very good
record on children's issues and
that he he's advocated children
the reason I'm here today is I
want to tell you about my
family's experience with first
being victimized by the offender
more so by the criminal justice
system in New Mexico.
To give you a little bit of
relevance I want to tell you
that when my kids were two and
four my brother called me and
encourage me to take a parenting
class that educate your children
about sexual abuse I thought
they were too little for this
but he encouraged me to have
these an awkward conversation
with my kids about sexual abuse
in the on education includes
telling your children to use
anatomical
terms when describing if someone
has touched them inappropriately
only six months later after I
had this conversation with my
children my two year old
daughter came forward and told
me that her father was sexually
abusing her.
I did what any parent would do
and I
listen to her I believe her and
I took action and I called the
police the next morning at the
same exam sexual assault nurse
exam of my daughter and my son
were examined and they found
physical evidence of sexual
abuse on my daughter.
The same nurse.
We are very clear to me that my
kids would be expected to
testify in person in front of
their father if this went to
trial and she correctly explain
to me that our lives would be
turned upside down as well
prosecutors told me from the
start that my kids I'm reminding
you that there too they were
tuned for at the time would be
expected to testify or the case
would not go forward due to the
fact that our safety and our
lives were in danger I did not
feel like I have a choice on.
The during the two years leading
up to the case I regularly
fielded questions from my
children will not have his guns
in court will data be able to
kill us well that'd be able to
heard us and I didn't exactly
know what I was committing to
them to do but I knew that they
had to testify and what happened
was in New Mexico I learned.
I was actually horrified to
learn that a child victims of
sexual assault is expected to
walk into a room full of
strangers in the court room
seven witness chair across from
the perpetrator who in this case
once their father and and
threatened their lives and to
tell and to tell the truth I
want to be clear that the trauma
induced on my children by this
process is
it is completely separate from
the a sexual abuse that my
daughter suffered my son who's
seven had a nervous breakdown
after the trial he had to be
prescribed valium and Xanax to
control his panic attacks he's
actually.
One who encouraged me to pursue
this legislative initiative
because he doesn't want other
kids to have to go through what
he and his sister went through.
On a recall clause yes on our
quest for justice I learned that
there are too many children who
do not get justice because they
are too afraid to testify and
cannot go to trial I am grateful
for the justice we got I'm
grateful for the attorney
general's office to the New
Mexico state police and to
Senator Padilla and all of the
legislators who are supporting
this legislation
I'm hoping that you would
considered I respectfully ask
could you pass on this we can
together address this issue and
make it a more humane system for
for Chuck children like mine who
have to go through the justice
system thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee thank you.
Thank you so much and so Mr
chairman thank you advise the
salt and we really deeply
appreciate you sharing your
story I would like to go Mr
chair to the attorney general's
office at this time and Mr
Bacchus going to represent the
involvement that they've had in
developing this legislation not
just this year but this is been
a multi year effort here so.
Mr chairman thank you Senator
Padilla analyze of course for
bringing for this list
legislation our office
originally became involved in
this particular issue as we
prosecuted the case involving
allies those children after
eight sort of languished in in
the a judicial system for some
time allies that found her way
to our office with the same
fervor that she brings today in
advocating in front of you we
were able to take the case on
and ultimately I achieve what I
I think is this was a successful
result in the case
you know the both Senator
Padilla analyze I have already
spoken to the the broad policy
principle that we're trying to
address here which is to account
for the significant problem of
that of testifying in front of
an offender causes the child all
speak just very briefly on some
of the technical aspects of the
bill I'm sure that district
attorney put as will do the same
and then and then I'll be happy
to answer any questions that the
committee may have.
as senator pedia mention there
are some existing protections
already in law but the standards
I think are too high and these
do not account for effectively
what Alisa and Senator Padilla
have brought before you today
the current standard is that on
the showing of unreasonable and
unnecessary mental or emotional
harm.
That the state can petition that
witness testified remotely at a
deposition and then that
deposition can be entered into
evidence at trial
importantly the defendant is
still permitted to be in the
same room as the child as Alisa
pointed out when that deposition
takes place so again I think
what we're trying to achieve
here is to to to lessen that
burden that trauma that the
child approach
experiences when they have this
sort of testimony in their case
the the Supreme Court has
promulgated rules pursuant to
that statute
this the committee Committee is
similar in spirit of the
commenter to that rule similar
in spirit to work what this bill
tries to achieve but in practice
that the procedure is rarely
used by prosecutors in the court
room for a number of reasons it
requires a psychological exam a
barrier that this bill removes
will does not remove completely
but given some discretion to the
judge to make a decision without
it or to order one an
independent evaluation at that
but to back to the point the
pool is rarely used because
prosecutors are reticent to put
the emotional state of the
victim at issue.
As a technical aspect when a
psychologist performs an exam on
a child it's been held by our
Supreme Court that the privilege
between the the therapist and
the child is waived at that
point and so there are some
really some technical trial
issues that further create a
barrier for entry introducing
this type of testimony
So what this bill does is allows
you know that child on a lesser
showing up.
And still again I want to
emphasize that the judge has the
discretion to say yes or no to
this would allow the child to
testify via video conference a
defendant is allowed to be
present on the line but not in
the same room as the child which
applies a spoke to in terms of
what that physical presence
means importantly it applies to
children and incapacitated
adults
Not exactly the focus of the
testimony today but that is a
significant issue in terms of
the impact of these types of
cases on think prostrated adults
as well
this would apply it at a pre
land more it at trial loan
doesn't apply in any other
testimonial settings and then as
I mentioned the judge has the
discretion to make a finding of
necessity in a case like this
without a psychological
evaluation the judge can take
evidence understand the child's.
Situation and then the judge can
make an informed decision
without putting the child
through a psych about and then
in the event that the judge does
feel like a second value is
appropriate then the court will
prove that an independent
evaluator I'm not one chosen by
either the prosecutor or defense
so those are just a few of that
technical highlights of the bill
as I mentioned you know that you
know as an aside from providing
this sort of testimony are
office obviously stands in full
support of this type of reform
in and hope that you you all
take a serious look at it and
with that of a closing stand for
any question to if the committee
has in the Mr chair.
Mr Baca thank you I thank you Mr
chairman and thank you Mr Baca
and the attorney general's
office for weighing in on this a
little more deeply involved in
the actual drafting of the of
the legislation and and I would
what will be the second judicial
district attorney Raul Torrez
has been actively involved in
this as well we had a very
lengthy conversation about the
comments from Senator Duhigg and
I think that were very helpful
by the way and I would like to
maybe us to mold that into some
is conversation as well thank
you Mr your Mr chair Senator
Padilla
up first I want to thank Senator
Padilla in for dancing this
legislation and for allies a for
giving it voice in in giving the
members of the committee of
clear sense of what's at stake
to echo what the attorney
general's office has already
testified to this bill does
three basic things it updates
existing law to keep pace with
technology.
Right now we have the
opportunity in in narrow
circumstances to
Submit a child for a videotaped
deposition but what we don't
have the opportunity to do is
engage in a live one on one
conversation or dialogue in the
way that we are doing right now
so that's just a very basic
technical change but it has big
consequences for trial
presentation we need whenever
you do a videotaped deposition
in lieu of live testimony which
you're not able to do either as
a defense attorney or as a
prosecutor is to adapt your
questioning for your cross
examination based on the
testimony or presentation of
evidence that's ongoing in a
trial you basically videotaped
deposition and it is what it is
very rarely however do
prosecutors or defense attorneys
proceed with the trial without
adapting their presentation
based on the testimony of other
witnesses the second thing is
noted by the attorney general's
office is that this expands the
coverage that we are looking to
include in this bill not only
for children but for adjudicated
incapacitated adults what we
have found is that both children
and educated incapacitated
adults those are adults with
disabilities
have a particular time and face
heightened trauma in this kind
of setting in this kind of
environment and I would
apologize at the outset to both
Senator Padilla into the members
of the committee this the
language of this bill was a
originally included in a
separate piece of legislation
that is house bill one forty
three the definitions that were
missing from this bill occurred
because we severed this language
and and gave it to Senator
Padilla as a framework to use
and if we fail to include the
definition for adjudicated
incapacitated adults I can tell
you right now I know that the
the chair mention that you're
gonna be rolling over the bill
that language comes directly
from the at the.
All protective services act and
we can go into that later on
during the discussion but
there but there that definition
exist elsewhere in our statutory
framework I think separate and
apart from keeping pace with
technology and expanding the
coverage the most important
aspect of this bill is that it
returns discretion to trial
judges to make decisions about
whether or not a child would it
be on duly traumatized and would
be unable to communicate their
testimony to the Trier of fact
without requiring a
psychological examinations it
provides the judicial officer
the opportunity to order an
examination if they want one if
they feel like they can't make
that determination in the
absence of a psychological
examination but there's one
critical element here if you
look at the the text of the bill
it is that the court itself will
order an independent examination
rather than relying on
examination ordered by one of
the parties either the
prosecutor or the defense
attorney and that gives the
court more direct control over
the the nature of that
examination and it also
eliminates this idea that we
would be waving privilege the
the core message here is that we
should not require children to
undergo multiple examinations
and thereby encourage new forms
of secondary trauma so that they
can prove to a trial judge that
they're gonna be so traumatized
a trial that they shouldn't have
to testify it's it's it defeats
the purpose of the bill and it's
exactly the reason why
prosecutors currently rarely if
ever use this authority I asked
inside my office we currently
only have one other case where
we have asked to have a
videotaped deposition and as if
on cue the minute we ask for one
there was an order directing
that the child be subjected to
a.
A defense expert examination and
if you think about it if the
entire purpose of this
legislation is to shield child
victims from additional trauma
and we shouldn't be traumatizing
victims by ordering adversarial
examinations again it doesn't
eliminate and it isn't tell the
judge that they shouldn't do
those examinations but it
relieves the burden and gives
that discretion back to the
District Court to make that
determination I'll reserve my
comments I know there are lots
of other issues related to
confrontation related to the
standards that are currently
used in the uniform child
witness protective act I'm happy
to answer those questions and
look forward to working with you
on this important legislation.
Thank you thank you Mr district
attorney Mr chairman yes go
ahead I just wanted one brief
item and so I was on mute I
apologize thank you district
attorney Torrez the other two
terms in the amendment I know
we're not you know we're gonna
give you some time to look at
that I and I appreciate that it
the other two terms were child
want to make sure that that was
defined correctly and then also
a lengthy paragraph on the
bottom of page three outlining
remote video testimony what that
meant and that it was under oath
and all testing so that's there
for you so those are the three
terms that we're not defined in
the regional peace legislation
thank you thank you thank you
senator and now we're gonna go
to the audience for public
comment so first we'll go with
people who are in support of
this legislation and I have
first I have Jason Espinoza with
New Mexico child first network
speaking for it and if our zoom
Meister
cat can let him and that would
be great.
Mr chair
and not in the.
Thank you zoom Meister so next
we're gonna go to when Kate
this.
With the New Mexico coalition
against.
Cetera.
Next out but but when did you
want to join us.
Yes thank you.
Good afternoon Mr chair and
members of the committee I am
going cadence from the New
Mexico coalition against
domestic violence I'm the
director Policy and we are here
in support of Senate bill thirty
six I agree with all of the
things that all of the experts
have said in front of me and
agree that this is something
that is needed to reduce trauma
in children I'm also pleased
that this bill does include
incapacitated adults I have had
several several incidents where
there have been survive is
survivors of domestic violence
to have traumatic brain injuries
who struggle with our court
proceedings.
And so this is something that's
pretty widespread in domestic
violence victims were just
finding out through research
that it's if the a common injury
and is adults have a lot of
problems
with executive functioning
a deficit that complicate their
behavior in court so I think
that this bill will also assist
in that area as well.
Thank thank you grant thank you
and next will go to Fernando
Trujillo with both futures New
Mexico.
It
just left the gym room he was in
here
okay and then finally on behalf
of such of this bill we have
Sandra for care drowns field
with indivisible Santa Fe.
Mr chairman of the committee
distractions also not in the
waiting room okay.
Mr chairman yes I I won't read
it but I do have a letter from
the Albuquerque chamber of
commerce fully endorsing the let
the legislation as well it's a
lengthy letter but it just goes
like if I can just read two
sentences I'm not gonna read to
you what is your the chamber
strongly support Senate bill
thirty six and thanks the bill
sponsor for bringing this
measure forward child victims
and witnesses and certain
incapacitated or developmentally
disabled adult victims and
witnesses should be able provide
testimony in court proceedings
video this video period and then
they go on on a couple of
reasons why they feel that way
but I want you to have this as
well thank you great thank you
sent and I think it was emailed
all committee members thank you
okay so now we're gonna go to
folks speaking against this
legislation we're gonna lead off
with Ben Bauer with the public
defender's office.
My sister is banned.
There.
Our is in the same room
currently.
Welcome to join us.
Our I just ask you to on mute.
Okay I'm sorry.
Hello.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is better
power.
I'm the chief public defender
they're gonna be a few people
speaking.
Okay thank you I'm a needed.
Can you hear me yes okay thank
you Benatar chief public
defender there are several
people who will be speaking so I
will keep my comments on a
specific topic and and try to be
brief I'm speaking to the public
defender but also as a trial
attorney.
Of twenty six years
I have been a prosecutor for
five years I had specialized
training in prosecuting child
sex abuse cases I presented
witnesses and testimony.
In courts I have prepared child
witnesses to testify that
includes having them go to the
court room to familiarize
themselves with the physical
layout see who the participants
would be all the things that
would reduce trauma so that the
trial can be as comfortable as
possible testifying at trial is
a truth seeking process and I
think the expanding use of
remote testimony by any witness
but perhaps especially with
children kind of takes away from
that truth seeking process
and we are.
I I can tell you that one of the
traumatized children is not
first first of all traumatizing
them in trial is not in the best
interest of the defendant or the
defense attorney or anyone else
in the room and so we we do our
best to to be nice to the trial
to make sure that there is
comfortable as possible but
there are ways already in
existence as others will talk to
you about to address the
concerns that the proponents of
this bill happen I think the
sponsor for bringing four I know
that this is that these this
bills brought forward with the
best of intentions but for me as
this is brought forward by
prosecutors this in the house
bill which is sort of a
companion which would limit.
Pre trial interviews pretty
substantially unfortunately I
think that rather than allowing
the child to strength to testify
and as a witness or as an
alleged victim what we do is
instead insulate the state's
case rather than protecting
children for so for that reason
I would ask the committee not
support the bill thank you thank
you Mr Bauer next up we have
Rikki Lee Chavez with the New
Mexico criminal defense lawyers
association.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Rikki Lee Chavez I'm the
legislative coordinator for the
New Mexico criminal defense
lawyers association I'd like to
start my comments by thanking
our sponsor I do know that he
and our elected officials do
seek to improve our criminal
justice system and protect New
Mexico citizens and for that
work I'm not I am very grateful
and appreciative I also want to
address my comments by also
stating that my comments are not
meant to downplay or disregard
victims or the trauma that
victims DO suffering Ecker
however NMCDLA does oppose the
legislation that is before you
the protections of four to all
in our constitution should not
be diminished without proper
process.
Our system currently affords are
prosecuting bodies with the
appropriate level of procedure
before get going against the
rights under our confrontation
clause guarantee to all in our
sixth amendment for those
reasons we encourage you to
oppose this legislation and
thank you for your time.
Thank you thank you Rikki Lee
all right next we have Kim
Chavez Cook with the public
defender's office.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender for those of you
who don't know me I have been
advocating on legislation to
this body for eight sessions now
and I am currently as of about a
year ago the a public defender
for the departments hello
Division statewide so I want
that contacts there for you when
I when I give you my.
First I want to say that I am
surprised to hear that their
work that does that have a
mother was told that her
children were one had to go
testify in person in front of
of the defendant when we have a
video deposition alternatives
already in statute and court
rule and so I think that a lot
of the issues that are raised
are addressed by that we have
another attorney from the LAPD
who will go into more detail on
what the current procedures
available are I want to say that
yeah I understand the attorney
general's offices frustration
that the current standard might
be difficult to meet but
unfortunately that cut standard
is constitutional and so we
can't alleviate it by statute it
is a high standard but it's a
state high standard for a reason
while victims interests are
certainly weighty they must be
balanced against the weighty
interests of a defendant's
rights as well by the time I
case roll into the courtroom for
trial we have to put weight on
the defendant's right to a fair
trial their constitutional
rights to due process and to
confront the witnesses against
them their liberty interest is
also we and so that's why the
constitution mandates
confrontation which is involves
an effective cross examination
which are Supreme Court time and
time again has said is the most
crucial way to get at the truth.
As attorneys as Mister Bower
mentions do not cross examine
child victims with the goal of
traumatizing them but we do have
a constitutional role of our own
as the sixth amendment right to
counsel entitles people to an
effective defense and it is just
a fact of of psychology and
reality that child witnesses are
susceptible to poor memory
confusion inaccuracies and often
have mistaken identities I'm not
saying that's true in every case
but it can happen in there for
the defense attorney's
obligation to test the accuracy
of of of allegations against
their client so that brings me
back to the the confrontation
standard and I agree fully with
the the folks the proponents who
have have indicated that the
factors set out in this bill
more or less captured the
necessity task that articulated
in Maryland to be crag but that
is not the end of the question
for constitutionality that's not
the end of the inquiry so the
the first thing I want to
highlight is that there's a
second prong to the
confrontation task that this
bill doesn't address at all
which is other indicia of
reliability of testimony and as
I just mentioned child witnesses
have inherent issues sometimes
with that reliability so that
were raised in a particular case
a confrontation test would still
require inquiry into those
issues but even just focusing on
the three for elements this this
bill would require that that you
have to show that a witness
would be traumatized by the
presence of the defendant that
they would suffer significant
emotional distress and that the
trauma would impair their
ability to communicate those are
inherently psychological
expertise topics those are not
finding the judge can make
without an expert opinion and so
while I understand that the bill
leaves open the possibility for.
For a judge to order up an
evaluation it disincentive vises
judges from doing that and in my
humble opinion it would
absolutely violate the rules of
evidence to make findings or
offer opinions on those
questions from anyone other than
an expert who had evaluated the
child and so that is a very
serious concern for me with this
piece of legislation I think if
it ensured that the evidence to
support those findings was
competent evidence we would be
getting much closer to a
constitutional piece of
legislation so with that in mind
I will say because those
findings are the only piece of
the bill that purport to render
a constitutional guiding the
evidentiary proof for the
findings to me renders the bill
unconstitutional so in
conclusion and I'm sorry to take
so much time we are did topics
I know I do great.
I am leaving other issues to
other people that in conclusion
I just wanted to reiterate that
you know this being the theme
Judiciary Committee and
anticipating a rigorous
discussion I intend to hang out
in the in the zoom waiting room
and if there are any questions
that come up that to which my
analysis might be helpful I make
myself available and I thank you
for your time and for your
consideration of this of this
important issue I would
encourage you to oppose this
bill however thank you thank you
can thank you so next we go to
Jonathan Ibarra also of the
public defender's office.
Good afternoon thank you
chairman and senators.
My name is Jonathan Ibarra I am
a.
Currently a public defender I
was actually a prosecutor for
about a dozen years I was a
District Court judge for awhile
and then I've been with the
public defenders for about eight
years and.
On top of the other things that
I've done I've also been on a
number of different rules
committees for the Supreme Court
over the years and on five
different rules committees I was
the person representing all of
the DA's in the state on one
I've been the person
representing all the PED's in
the state on the another one so
so.
I can tell you as a member of
the criminal rules committee
currently we're looking at this
been working on this looking at
trying to expand from what I I
will for which is mentioned as
far as the rule that that goes
with that statute in this case
bringing in some of the uniform
child witness protective act
which is only barely mentioned
in the a DNA analysis and and do
A. toward as briefly mentioned
earlier but it already has a
pretty good framework that came
from a from a multi states
Committee amendment it's it's a
uniform act for a reason and you
know because a lot of people
from all across the country look
at it focused on and and came
forward with what's there
the rules committee is looking
at that also with Maryland V.
Craig the state Supreme Court
case that was discussed earlier
and trying to make sure that you
know what's in that in the act
and what's in the rule is going
to be the same so so we're we're
already working on that the I
helped I I help drafting
language with that with the
elected now elected D. A. and
the thirteenth judicial district
Barbaro levels of us have been
working on this
so so we're already looking at
it and and I think that going
off on another statute that
doesn't really address all the
issues like mistrust cook talked
about with the constitutionality
issues
I I just think that's
problematic I wouldn't know
that.
The statute isn't what allows at
this point the the state to be
able to file a motion in any
particular case Maryland B.
Craig is a binding precedent
okay any any of us in the system
can use that president in order
to file a motion to ask for
relief I as already being put
into this bill so getting a bill
involved that doesn't answer all
those questions and further
complicates the issue I think is
is contrary to frankly what we
should want we should want to
keep the state if they have an
appropriate case to file a
motion using Maryland versus
Craig as the the basis for that
motion the judge can still
requests all the types of relief
that this bill is putting in
there without needlessly
complicating the issue and so I
think that what this committee
should do is allow the the
Supreme Court appointed
committee which is for judges a
judicial and educator and two
defense attorneys into
prosecutors that's is on the
committee.
Allow us to continue our work to
put together a rule that will
adequately address these issues
that will take into account the
constitutional issues and.
And then once that rule is in
place and if it's not working we
can go back there we can come
back to Legislature whatever we
need to do but we're already
we're working on it and so let
us thank you thank you Mr Byron
the end out finally finally we
have Jennifer brown do you have
anything you also with the
public defender's office so you
know we're kind of running up
against the time was Jennifer I
mean you could just short but
did you have anything to a vital
to at yes I I wanted to talk
about my experience as a trial
attorney I am the district
defender for the second judicial
district at the law office the
public defender's but I have
been practicing in New Mexico
for eighteen years I was a trial
attorney I've handled a lot of
cases where trial of witnesses
and I just wanted I'll be brief
since we're running out of time
but I I cross examined and
Senator trial witnesses and I
agree with Mr Bower and Kim
Chavez Cook where we never want
to traumatize I understand these
cases are not easy for anybody
and it is never our intent to
traumatize however in in these
cases we a lot of cases and what
the ones I'm I'm mostly talking
about our child where the child
are the are the be witnesses
they are there the entire a lot
of times they are the the entire
case against our clients and the
cross examination of of of child
witnesses is extremely difficult
and we we do it very delicately
but it is important in this
important part
of the judicial process and I'm
you know doing that by video we
have to build a road you know
over poor with with the witness
because we don't want to
traumatize a many further and
also to impeach them is
extremely difficult by video my
you know our my trees have been
having difficulty X. impeaching
and cross examining witnesses at
pulmonary hearings now that we.
And you know how to do we have
to do that way because of the
current pandemic so I've had to
cross examine a lot of of
witnesses young witnesses who or
not able to read are very very
difficult a difficult time
reading and it can be very hard
and of course we always try you
know to be delicate with them so
by doing it by video I just want
to let you know members of the
committee and in New Mister
chairman no that it keeps going
it's going to be difficult and
it's going to affect the
defendants cross examination
rights confrontation rights as
well as our due process rights
and their six apartment the
sixth amendment rights to
present a defense so I just want
to give that my perspective as a
trial attorney thank you thank
you very much and so now we're
going to go back to the Sanchez
Senator Padilla before we go to
the committee did you have
anything that you wanted to say
thank you Mr chairman and I I
really appreciate everyone's
comments I thought they were
very well intentioned and and
and well thought out I have
three points just to comment on
on on things that I heard I I do
want to remind the committee of
the nineteen ninety decision
with the for specific items in
in the the majority
document written by justice
Sandra day o'connor that
protected all the protections of
the constitution for the for the
defendant or the alleged
defendant
I I do wanna let the committee
know that that forty four states
have adopted this measure
already and we are one of six
states that are still operating
under this in my opinion
barbaric arcane very backwards
way of looking at and at getting
this done in New I would say
that we talk about accuracy and
the ability of the child to to
remember and to accurately
report what's happening with
them I would say that by doing
it the way that we do it now
that is what truly harms the
ability of the child and that's
why we're here today that's what
harms the child's ability to to
to to put everything together
you know for the umpteenth time
and and I you know I I think
that's something that that
should be a pretty important
point here
you know I a.
I really don't have anything
else to say you know at this
point but I do want to you know
let the committee know that
we do have others that wanted to
speak today and wanted to add
some additional support to this
measure to this discussion today
including a couple of other DA
so if if it's all right and with
your you're very gracious that
permission Mr chairman when we
come back to act on the
amendment I guess in your next
meeting or are we gonna do that
respect your time line are we
wanna do that I would ask that
those other individuals be
allowed to speak as well there
were some issues with the you
know signing up by eight AM and
we're all just trying to learn
how to do this in operate in
this New World thank you Mr okay
thank you thank you will
definitely take that under
consideration and so now let's
go to the committee I have three
panelists on the on the list.
Senator Duhigg Senator Lopez and
Senator Ivy Soto in that order
so Senator do I think you're up
thank you thank you Mr chair
although I will say I I I
believe that Senator Lopez
actually raised her hand before
I did okay deal to her okay
Senator Lopez.
Thank you Senator Duhigg and
first of all Mr chairman I want
to say thank you to this all
time for you know being here in
front of us and sharing
of you and your family I am so
sorry that that has transpired
taken place and of course you
thank you to Senator Padilla for
bringing this legislation
forward.
you know there's there are so
many and and missile Tonya there
are several other families aware
of also we're this is been an
issue and I know we're not the
first and they'll be I know
hopefully we can change that
this.
The end of which the way in is
Senator Padilla also said it to
me it is barbaric as to what we
do input victims of of the of
this particular sexual assault
crime if what we put them
through a what I will say to you
is I appreciate that in the
amendment to the proposed that
we're also including persons
with disabilities.
Because when you have a child
who it may not be able to fully
grasp and I see a child even
though they would be adults
there's there's still that the
mental capacity of our system
what that person can.
Remember to be in front of the
court building you know cross
examined and such there are a
lot of things that do happen
even though they may look fine
there's still a lot of other
issues also I know a couple of
cases where we have adults which
are automatic brain injury who
cannot respond the way that you
know their their frustration is
there too but they're being
cross examined so I'm aware of
several cases on this on this
type of
Cases that that you were
proposing that you you've shared
so thank you.
Mr chairman I just wanted to
bring to the attention of the
committee and and it was
mentioned also to that there's
another measure in the house
house bill one forty three of
which I'm also a co sponsor it I
think I'm is attempting to to
deal with the same issue you
know I did raise this also in
front of courts corrections and
justice inner two summers ago
seems like forever and without
being in person but of course at
that point in time you know the
the issue about of course we
understand the confrontation
clause and you know the rights
there with but of course what
was sure to be at that time was
well there's there there are
ample ways for a child to have
to you have to testify but when
you also look as to what can be
done if a of a mental health
examination is required that to
causes more trauma and also
labels the child as time
progresses because you have an
evaluation that sits there and
to me that also harms as the
child grows older and I think
that's something that the system
the justice system is not
supposed to be what I say
leaning towards and also Mister
chairman and our judiciary works
wonderful in many many instances
but I also know that there are
judges who do not pay attention
accordingly.
and I know of some in several
districts around the state of
New Mexico so I always have a
concern as to where and what we
do for with regards to the
rights of victims.
So again just a concern to see
what we're doing also so that we
have I think a a balanced
approach with the measure also
again house bill one forty three
whose being sponsored by
Representative Meredith Dixon on
the house side so just an FYI Mr
chair but again thank you and I
think this is an important issue
that we do need to look at and
see how we can make sure that
our victims are also protected
in that we don't traumatize them
even more thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator Lopez Senator
doing.
Thank you Mr chairman
and and thank you Senator
Padilla for bringing this bill
and and thank you missile time
for for being here and speaking
to us today I am I am
heartbroken to hear why what
happened to your family I'm I'm
also angry that.
Thank your children were put
through that because they should
not have been and they didn't
need to offend even even without
this legislation that we're here
talking about today that never
should have happened and I'm
really really sorry about that
I am one hundred percent for the
intent of this legislation and
for protect I've I've worked
with children and and both
criminal and civil cases who
have been.
Trump has both by by what
happened that the reason they're
there in that case in the first
place and through going through
the legal system it is scary
it's scary for adults it's it is
a terrifying thing to go through
especially for child especially
for a child that
And I I want to make sure that
we are protecting children and
and I love that this brings an
incapacitated adults.
That said I have real concerns
about this piece of legislation
in the form that it is and now
because if we don't do it right
and it doesn't pass
constitutional muster.
It's not going to accomplish
that goal of protecting those
kids it's going to get a
headline and that's it but it's
not going to be an actual
solution
and so it the actual solution is
what we need
So I.
Give me give me a second to kind
of collect my thoughts
There's a number of the comments
that were made by Mr Barr and Mr
Chavez Cook regarding the
constitutional challenges that
the sizes legislation faces I
think are are are absolutely
correct I think in its current
form it does not meet that
reliability right reliability
prong
And and I'm thrilled to hear
from Mr bar at that the the
Supreme Court committee is
working on this issue
But even even putting that
aside.
I have real concerns about.
The the portion of this bill
that would allow a judge to make
a psychological determination
without the benefit of of any
expert
sevens on that issue judges are
not.
Change to do that they're not
psychologists
and I I'm trying to think of any
other area of the law where we
would be May letting judges make
a determination on an expert
issue without without requiring
any as for evidence to be
provided in and off the top of
my head I can't think of any and
that's for good reason
I also just have questions about
somehow this is drafted because.
For example.
It's it if there's a pre
existing evaluation because we
don't want kids to be have to go
through evaluations over and
over and over again that that's
absolutely traumatising for
them.
By the way this is drafted it
it's as if there's a pre
existing one that can be used
but then later on it says House.
Any valuation is done by by a
party can't be years
so I think they're just need to
be clarity around what I guess.
Why would there have been a
court ordered evaluation prior
to this point that could be used
as that pre existing.
Evaluation in order to avoid the
multiple valuations at it's just
not making sense to me and and
maybe I'm I'm missing something
there
No wonder just.
Just with the because right now
under the that was at the
uniformed child witness
protection act I understand why
it was districts turning towards
was saying about.
Being able of that there's a
difference between having live
testimony and and using a
deposition and that the trial
strategy changes and and I get
that.
Is the main purpose of this bill
though is the protective of
children.
You're still gonna end up having
a kid who is going being
examined multiple times so they
have the deposition but then
they're also up appearing albeit
remotely again in trial lied I
would you forego any deposition
of that child just because they
were they going to be able to
testify remotely at trial I mean
it's still setting up of the
exit to me it is such a
situation where that it's likely
that they're going to have to
testify multiple times as
opposed to to once during that
deposition that's years and
that's just kind of looking at
the child protective part of
those as opposed to to the trial
strategy part of us but overall
my my big concerns are and are
the constitutionality and and
the issues with that with
confrontation clause I I don't
think that this passes muster
right now
and and I want something that
does and so personally I'm I'm
inclined at this point I would
love to see the rule that comes
out of that committee and see
how how this issue is addressed
and and use of the existing
mechanisms that we have in law.
To protect children between now
and that and frankly if if folks
are using that then shame on
them shame on on whatever DA
told you Miss Alton that you had
to have your children there in
person
That they did you a disservice
in doing that but but but not
using the existing mechanisms
that are there is not a reason
to.
To push through and bill that's
not going to hold up.
and not meet constitutional
muster and then we're right back
where we started.
Thank you senator doing Senator
Ivey Soto Mr chairman my lead to
comment or what we want to go
through the committee now we
will get to you before when we
finalize thank you thank you
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you Mr.
I.
I I just.
Twenty first of all on.
And and and my heart of my
discussed at.
At what happened to the
sometimes children in this
process.
That number should not happen.
And but but if this does what we
have before us are is a bill
that.
That concerns me greatly and it
comes with a few reasons why
we're we're creating additional
conflicting sections of wall.
So we have right now we have two
different sections of law.
That that impact this area.
I would.
Right so first of all we have.
section thirty eight dash nine
dash seventeen.
Thank.
This is beautiful.
This is beyond the appoint Act
was provided in any prosecution
for criminal sexual penetration
procession contacted the very
challenges.
That we're against the.
The children's.
In in in in the case that was
related to us.
The district attorney and after
noticed opposing counsel the
District Court may for good
cause shown taking a videotaped
deposition of any alleged victim
under the age of sixteen years.
The deposition taken before the
judge's chambers in the presence
of the district trying to the
defense is trying to.
Examination cross examining
alleged victims opportunity.
At the taking of this deposition
of the second amendment is
permitted at trial.
Under budget rules of evidence.
At the section.
It's
heard at the trial and entered
into the record in lieu.
Of the direct testimony.
So.
Sectional.
Yes instructional right.
In addition to that section of
law.
We also have the.
Child witness our protective
measures.
They.
Joblessness protective measures.
Does that mean
to.
To.
testified by what is called
alternative method alternative
map that.
Is it's been definition but
effectively when it comes into
in a proceeding.
Is it much child does not give
testimony in an open forum and
you find a fact that the
detective position of the of the
child witness that complies with
the following.
This presents my district judge
the defendant was represented by
counsel after the imposition.
The the fed was president of the
W. at the at the deposition at
the time was given an adequate
opportunity to cross examine the
witness protection of the child
witness and the judge deemed
necessary.
And then you also have the
ability under the alternate
method and appropriating.
Where where are.
The.
The the the deposition.
circuit television.
Technology.
Council able to communicate with
each other during the
deposition.
And Michael technology.
So that so that actually.
The
different statutes.
It
does require because of the
statue has so it's up to.
But.
And so to that does not have to
be present you for the child.
So
that conflicts with each other.
We want to bring stepped.
Conflict with the other two
things by the way what.
The first two is six years
younger and.
Once again as a junior yeah.
Differently in this statute.
This is child.
That that is
not what
you're talking I did have a
chance to look at the compact
bills that is the compatibility.
Is.
Is it just a moment to bring.
The problem played for the jury
and.
But it doesn't require that
there be any complications so
so.
One.
This
Hi
issues.
Companies.
Is is that they are in the
world.
Criminal proceedings.
Maybe.
The criminal proceeding.
But that's that is being
amended.
Which amends the victims of
crime act.
Specified crimes that.
So.
One.
Incentivized to.
In this particular.
We.
The application.
President.
Two twenty one specified crimes
and.
It could be applicables.
The ability of the Courts to be
able to protect children but
that's what this not.
Expect of these bills the
weather was one of the Senate.
These six.
Right the.
Hi impacts.
To me.
Because of crimes acts.
Which exists in them.
On.
R. dash twenty six.
At the one that's.
So.
Because of the concern I have
with the victims of crimes that
is that is that actually let me
let me find the find a place for
quick so that you all can
understand.
When my when my concern comes
at.
Is.
Sectors thirty six.
Thirty one twenty six no so.
Twenty six.
The.
When you say that because it's
just too which is the purpose of
the victims of crime.
This is the victims of crime act
is to ensure that the provisions
of article two section twenty
for the constitution of New
Mexico.
In statute which is okay the
victims of crime act is an
extension.
The extension of this particular
us.
The constitution of article two
section twenty four of the
constitution why does that
matter in this particular case
that matters.
Cause us.
Yeah so that's introduce.
US.
That
for violations all the.
This bill we are subject
district judges.
It's.
The.
Disagrees with the district
judges.
Past
and we respect.
I see
this
as.
It is.
Is open to money damages.
Missions.
Introduced.
We need.
Concern that I have.
Is that.
Rest.
And.
Rest in statute.
All.
It's.
Look.
Turkey in terms of these and
there's a reason why we need to
be very careful.
These when we adopt the.
It is there is a significant
and and and and someone just
alerted me that it sounds like
I'm yelling and.
Actually it it will committee
everybody would know that I'm
simply punctuating what I'm
saying please don't take this is
yelling in it but
but the
We.
We.
To be very careful that we don't
violate separation of powers.
Violating separation of powers
so.
Yes that the
The state Supreme Court has
decided.
In the case that this is
state ex rel and I have verses
make pride in New Mexico two
point four nineteen seventy five
but they decided at that time
was that constitutional New
Mexico the legislature lacks the
power lacks the.
To prescribed by statute
practice and procedure.
As in the past tempted to do so
certainly statute to regulate
practice and procedure.
Can.
Be made.
The
constitutional power is vested
exclusively in this court's.
Right now I'm on page two forty
six as well as setting to
another case and then with with
those that we find
and and this also that was
brought up in a case dealing
with which was Albuquerque
restaurant crisis center buses
Blackmore and what we are trying
to do here in this bill actually
is to regulate the practice.
The evidence for practice.
This is an unconstitutional
statute if we adopt it.
The committee in the spring
court is already looking at this
issue.
Comes with the point of this.
Regulate us.
This bill.
We need to include a question to
put into to something else at
eight this bill.
US eight.
D. A. didn't pursue this.
This bill would still.
For the chat.
Gestione anything.
Yes.
Situations are just be able to
be seen personally for money
damages if somebody disagrees
there's.
May.
Statute.
Okay
one point.
Hi the statutes.
Thank thank you senator I was
that we thank you make did you
want to wrap it up we Senator
Baca waiting to speak thank you
make your point very forcefully
are you guys
thank you for okay thank you
Senator Baca you're up next.
Senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
sponsor for bringing this
forward you know I'm just going
to address real briefly a couple
of the issues that were just
brought up and and throughout
you know one of one of the items
that are the of the good senator
from Albuquerque just brought up
was evidentiary issues at all
tell you what the the amendment
I appreciate the amendment
because in the amendment it
gives
that's a clear definition of
what exactly and I'm trying to
pull it up here what exactly
remote meetings are you know and
you one second here.
And you know so what what it
does in remote video testimony
is testimony outside the court
rooms where okay so that's the
one caviar it's outside the
courtroom it is under oath it's
subject to cross examination
transmitted they can be cross
examined through it you can hear
CEO of and and and they can be
asked questions but they're on
able in this is a key part
unable to see or hear the
defendant during testimony
except as may be necessary for
purposes of identification as C.
I. I think that's the key
provision because that really
goes a long line with the case
law that was just mentioned
and and what it says in there is
that it's necessary to protect
the child witness for trauma
that would be cost by testifying
in physical presence of the
defendant at at least for such
trauma might impair the child's
ability to communicate that
that's out of Maryland B. Craig
and and that lines up with that
amendment and so what it does in
my opinion is since we're
following that case law we
provided for in the definitions
of remote video testimony on it
it really gives us better
evidence because now you don't
have a child sitting there in
fear with the defendant in the
courtroom you have a child where
he can't see or she can't see
the defendant.
So they're removed from that
dramatic situation how can the
evidence be of a lower grade
then that was sitting in that
room with the defendant that
they're terrified of or what
have you Mr chair the evidence
is just better.
And so I would I would tend to
take exception with that that
that would be of a lesser degree
or or and be less reliable would
be far more reliable because
that stress does not exist C.
missile time is sitting here
today because she was failed she
was built somewhere along the
way part of my argument is not
because of the DA you're also I
don't feel there's a need to
share with them all you can do
right now is put forward a
motion Mr chair you put forward
a motion you Senator Pirtle the
judge in the district judge
decides I'm gonna do knight a
motion Roman approved the
motion.
This actually protects the judge
this bill because this budget
this bill gives clear guidelines
to the judge well here she must.
Provided for in allowing that
remote testimony so under that
guidance the judge has a full
back you know and and we're the
fall back he gets to blame it on
us we put it in statute as the
way it should be.
So now that the judges in
opening himself up to litigation
or or up to a lawsuit it's
actually protected because of
the because of the bill like
this so I you know going going
on here
you know.
I feel that this answers a lot
of the problems that we have
with children sitting in court
it gives us a path it protects
the judge it defines exactly
what remote what remote
testimony is and it tells us who
qualifies for that children and
some adults and gives us a clear
guideline of who the car valve
this isn't for everybody this is
for a minute a minute fraction
of the of the victims or alleged
victims in a crime it's
protective of them I I I don't
see really any you know any
flaws in it the one flaw that I
did C. is corrected in the
amendment I I I I didn't see a
definition for the remote
testimony I think we address
that I will go over that again
but I think overall it's a good
bill I'm happy to support this
bill today and I think the
sponsor for bringing four.
Thank you Senator Baca and
finally we can go to our chair
Senators savant this.
Thank you Mr chairman my little
week these days on one thing but
of the weather so I will try not
to
mercifully have my comment short
but I do have a question I I am
always proud of this committee
by the good debate the
discussion and thought that all
of you give it is the question I
have really is for I think
you're probably be for one of
the public defender's.
Which is unpersuaded that the US
Supreme Court has given us good
guidance parameters under which
would be allowed and we
constitutional muster so my
question is why is that correct
the testimony earlier that that
we have forty four states have
enacted but the need to enact
wait legislation.
That would would intend to
clarify the Supreme Court
parameters in other words first
of all can somebody confirm that
information is accurate I'll
guess I'll address it to maybe
one of the
public defenders because the end
of your argument would be public
defenders the this is
unnecessary with that Mr white
the forty four states students
somebody answer that question
for this press Kimberly Travis
Cloke or or Mr Bauer somebody
wanted answered centers
throughout this question.
Welcome to come back in.
Chair Mister chairman Senator
about this I haven't read it the
actual bills or statutes in the
other from the other states to
compare I don't know what the
differences might be
I would suspect that they don't
authorize up findings without
any expert testimony but I could
be wrong some of the states
might do that they might have
different rules of evidence that
allow for such things my guess
is that it was done to make it
to incentivize judges to grant
these requests but that doesn't
change my assessment that the
requests can already be made
under current law by filing a
motion the I believe the FIR
references State V. Thomas which
is a case that sort of collect
all of the various cases over
the years recent years since
videoconferencing became
possible in which video
testimony testimony was
requested by the state not under
an existing statute but just as
a matter of procedure and
referencing constitutionality
under the confrontation clause
and those were evaluated case by
case granted most of those cases
involved expert witnesses who
just didn't want to travel to
come testify and so they were
all found should those requests
were deemed unconstitutional in
those cases but and and I I know
that sounds tangential but the
point being that I I suspect
that part of the motivation here
is to make judges more inclined
to grant these requests I would
however maintain my position
that judges need to do a full
constitutional analysis in every
case and that that that is the
the procedure that is now
currently available when I guess
that's probably a fair
conclusion one is the states did
that because of what I call my
practitioners on this call we're
all practicing law these days
and a whole new way we're taking
all of our hearings by video
means some taking depositions
that they can be of a hundred
depositions this year.
By video zoom means those
divisions we play in court this
is really a test once a it seems
this is miss of is allowed now
mmhm it I think I would have
just summarized by really
sharing largely observation made
by Senator Ivy Soto on March
more which I think that we're
creating a great deal of
ambiguity and conflict within
the statute will make things
worse and then work where also I
look at these particularly
Center subparagraph B. the
subparagraph right disorder
having a although I will tell
you that I'm concerned by it
does balance in a is is that
when you on video means allowed
based on the witness is welfare
I think there has to be some
balancing my judge of the rights
of the accused against the
against the witnesses welfare
there's no place for that in
your bill anywhere there's no
mention of any consideration
really given of the rights of
the accused it's all based on
the level of emotional distress
on to the witness of the trauma
suffered by the person and some
programs to a degree and that no
balancing it all part of the
judge which I think the judge
would do.
This subparagraph begins right
here is which says that the
judge can always use extra
dressing owning under certain
circumstances and can always
rely solely on existing on
Richard doesn't allow party to
hire their own expert in the
half court considered
conflicting opinions invest
money of race experts all of
that is pretty consistent one
way a lot of us we practice what
we hear different sides two
sides of an issue are you so
without be laboring the the
points made earlier I share some
of those same concerns and will
be unable to support the bill in
its present form thank you sure
thank you senator and and out if
we can go now to the sponsor you
sponsors Senator pretty at.
Fantastic discussions very very
thought provoking you know that
you're coming back before us
first up in our next meeting so
I'm sure you have plenty to up
to say on on all of these
different points so if you can
summarize because it's three
o'clock and we have to go on to
our next next presentation but
we really of wow this is quite a
quite a hearing and quite it is
very very good at everybody for
participating thank you and
senator you want to wrap it up
knowing full well you get to
come back before us okay all
right thank you Mr chairman and
thank you the chairman's about
this as well and and members of
the committee no I I thought
this was very healthy discussion
and very very helpful to me and
I think advocates we do want to
come back and summarize each one
of the key points I was making
notes as we were going I think
some of the key things I want to
mention before we wrap up today
is that this has already on
numerous occasions and and has
already been we have a decision
by the Supreme Court on on this
very matter and the for items
that I continue to to mention
before in protections of these
are also obviously protections
for that the defendant as well I
don't know that I I agree with
everything that was said I want
to be able to argue those that
are your respond to those one of
the key points you know couple
the key points were just that
you know the day after the
opposing attorneys not being
able to hire their own experts I
really like that because what
that does is it's an independent
view of what's going on with
this child rather than someone
being the crackers at his child
or trying to make something
sound one where the other there
was commentary on you know what
there be a a deposition well
it's actually called out right
in the legislation you know
preliminary examination and not
an attorney but I'm assuming
that that is a deposition
and then there were just a
couple of other things related
to confusion of that I that I
heard confusion on other laws
that may be passed in this
session and other laws what we
do that every day of the week
during the legislature we we
during during the session.
We pass stuff that has to be
reconciled the past things that
have to go to expert after the
fact so I don't think that
that's the the the really solid
argument stand on because we we
do that all the time and and we
have to figure that out we and I
know that that several members
here have served on those those
commissions to get that resolved
and to write those those were
those differences into into a
permanent law I guess and then
you know
Let's see what else that I want
to mention here I think that you
know it was all very good I I
think that we do need to protect
everybody's rights here and I
think that that's exactly what
has happened here that I will
just one more time mention the
four points in the in the
nineteen ninety decision that I
think are critical here in the
right of personal examination
still occurs
the a witness that will testify
under oath that still occurs a
witness will submit to cross
examination that still occurs
that the jury may observe the
demeanor of the witness and
making this statement the
difference for what's on our
books now is that this now
becomes this is real time with
the back and forth and and the
cross examination will occur
rather than a taped and it's
it's it's really basically over
at that point on what the
witness said and so we look
forward to responding again I'm
gonna meet with Mike my crew
here we're gonna get together
we're gonna come back again I
want to once again thank missile
tan for being courageous enough
to be here I want to thank the
at the district attorney and the
attorney general's office Matt
Baca and in all of your comments
by the way were very very good
and very helpful and I really
appreciate them thank you
senator so with that we're going
to move on to our next item on
the agenda miss which years here
you Mr hello yes yes I just
wanted to point out one factoid
you're going to go ahead
Senators much reference has been
made to the uniform child
witness
testimony about her new methods
act and so I just want to point
out that the bill was adopted in
New Mexico in two thousand and
eleven it was house bill one
ninety six the sponsor was state
representative bill o'neill
thank you.
carried that legislation.
Already provides for everything
that's being asked in the.
Thank you for the Santa Fe
Senator thank you thank you so
okay moving moving along.
I don't know where we're not
voting on this what's the work
yeah we're rolling it over
because they have we have a five
page amendment that you're
looking at we're gonna bring it
up first thing next next our
judiciary meeting thank you I'll
have technical issues I would
like at the end of the meeting
go back to our first bill
started record vote on that one
yes yes I can we can we do that
now member yeah let's do that
now could not wait no yeah.
Yes he really means yet another
so Emily can you have Senator
Moores down as a no.
On Senate bill seven.
Okay.
Thank you thank you Mr.
Switching gears yes we have a
presentation on the overview of
funding recommendations and I
know Dr John Courtney and Allen
were being of the LFC will be
very specific knowing that we
can read you know if there's
there are actual like handouts
that would you know just assume
that we can we can go over that
so anyway Dr Courtney and Alan
you're on can you join us now.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon good afternoon members
of the committee I'm John
Courtney deputy director at the
legislative finance committee
I'm joined today by Ellen right
in and Amanda Dick petal we're
both fiscal analyst for us and
we're joining you talk about
some previous research that
we've done LFC on the criminal
justice justice system.
Provide a summary of that and
also to provide the current year
budget recommendation from from
LFC so if Ellen is on.
Which.
Once seen her.
Let's see I got it maybe I can
share it here.
Me just a moment hello and
other.
All right.
We'll go.
I was in the waiting room but
waiting to be let in.
For the.
I was the name is listed as
Jacqueline Martinez because the
only person in the waiting room
is Jacqueline Martinez Mr chair
yes we we share if you.
We we find efficiencies where we
can Mr chair.
a.
So let's see here I've I've got
it I got the presentation also
this will go and bring it up for
us.
Your screen.
I'm I'm I'm on now I'm sorry I'm
able to staff line
I can I can share a
presentation.
Thank you all see it.
It's okay I'll note I don't mind
driving.
All right so thanks again Mr
chairman so your members here's
an overview of what will discuss
today
Will will highlight as I said
not only some selected reports
and research that we've done
LESC over the last ten years but
also give you an update for the
FY twenty two LFC budget
recommendation which is as
Representative and our our
volume publications which I
believe you ought you're all
familiar with volumes one
Williams to in volumes three so
start with the background is to
get to give you some context of
the current situation with the
most recent data we have as far
as crime rates in New Mexico
prison population X. cetera I
will give you a review of key
LFC program findings to our
evaluation and and fiscal
analyst work over the last ten
years we've conducted over a
dozen research projects relating
to public safety issues since
twenty twelve
And we'll also have a number of
recommendations to improve the
New Mexico criminal justice
system and the way we organize
this is is kind of by access
points and so throughout the
presentation you'll you'll see
us talking discussing things are
mostly in terms of one of four
access points on the first being
really before crying starts
talking about potential
solutions for.
Social conditions that are
highly highly corresponded crime
we'll talk about the potential
ways we can improve policing and
expanding a diversionary
treatment programs will also
talk about programs within
prisons themselves and then
reentry into the community which
is represented by item for their
so with that is an overview of
the head and jump in to the is
the the first date a slide first
let's look at the most recent
trends regarding violent
property crime in New Mexico as
you can see we're above national
rates on both violent and
property crime and all the all
the recent trends to have have
differed for each of both
started increasing around twenty
fourteen and we flagged this I
believe when we did our our
Bernalillo county crime a
program evaluation a couple of
years back I'm so violent crimes
Representative on there on the
left hand.
Part of the slide there and your
your axes are years as a
function of violent crimes per
one hundred thousand residents
same for property crimes you can
see violent crime and above the
national average and diverging
further starting in twenty
fourteen flattening out in
twenty nineteen I am property
crime you can see a.
Similar divergence where it's
been dropping nationally but we
do start to see an uptick in New
Mexico starting in twenty
fifteen
And then bringing bringing that
back down in subsequent years
I'm I want to also give you kind
of a a long view of the violent
crime rate
if.
Many of you remember
the the early to mid nineties
you might remember that we saw
similar violent crime spike in
New Mexico I remember this
because I was living in
Albuquerque at the time and
we're approaching the same
levels of violent crime that we
saw in the early to mid nineties
and we've remained above the
national average where we differ
urged in the early nineties
going on quite some time now
well well the national rate has
has declined for number of years
I'm.
We the Bernalillo county crime
report that we conducted in two
thousand eighteen that I
previously mentioned we found
that you know it is when it
comes to crime rates as as goes
Albuquerque goes much of the
state when we're talking about
averages and so we dug into a
bit deeper to that violent crime
rate in Albuquerque
you can see here on the left
hand side of the page I'm.
We see that that those trends
follow much.
Much as we saw in the previous
grant where the that graph is
representing your over your I
changed violent crime rates each
year for the last ten years with
a few exceptions we've seen
increases when we dug deeper
into this I'm I get all noted
that crime rates are are a
result of crime reporting and
there can be variation in crime
reporting from year to year but
some of the things that that
don't tend to very are
homicides
And for property crime
a car theft.
Because of insurance claim in
that case and so on the right
hand side of the page there we
have an updated graph showing
homicide rates in New Mexico in
the United States and
Representative by data from EPD
one of the things that we found
in that twenty eighteen
evaluation is that as crime
increased in New Mexico us from
two fourteen twenty fourteen
onward one of the things that we
didn't really see was a
corresponding increase in
processing of offenders in the
criminal justice system and so
what will have a few slides on
that that subsequent to this but
basically you saw as crime rates
increased you saw a lower number
of arrests you saw fewer people
being booked into county jails
you saw fewer people going
through the the criminal justice
system whether that's diversion
programs or or incarceration and
we're continuing to see of a
decline in in many and many of
those metrics.
This is this is one example of
that president emissions are
down and recidivism rates are
rising of forecast project
continued declines in the prison
population you can see there on
the left hand side of the of the
page
the recidivism rate
Representative by the a yellow
line grant and then stacked
admissions showing.
Decrease in in prison admissions
on the on the right hand side of
the page are you see the.
Population in Mexico prisons for
both men and Representative and
little and women represented in
red by the dotted line and the
recent decrease which has been
more pronounced for the.
For the male population.
Right with this just a moment
Mister chairman I'm gonna turn
this over to Ellen so she can
drive from here on out.
Thank you John and Mr chair
members of the committee can I
just confirm that you all can
see nice to hear me yes.
Thank you
so as John mentioned we know
there are key access points to
the criminal justice system the
first would be prior to arrest
the next is at the point of
arrests or initial detention.
Once individuals are
incarcerated and upon re entry
to community from incarceration.
Research has identified some of
the most pressing issues that
each of these access points to
create a self perpetuating
pipeline through the criminal
justice system and contribute to
the state's corporate justice
outcomes including high crime
rates.
Many areas where New Mexico has
poor socioeconomic outcomes
correspond with later criminal
behaviors.
Madam offenders who commit low
level crimes are often not
connected to affected
diversionary or treatment
programs to address the
underlying causes driving those
behaviors this is especially
prominent with drug related
offenses.
You often end up incarcerated in
our prison system where
programming is both insufficient
to meet their needs and is not
effectively targeted to address
individual inmates need against
substance use disorder it stands
out or as ineffectively treated
in prison.
After the release from prison
offenders lack sufficient access
to programming again often for
substance abuse and a lot of
time have their parole revoked
for technical parole violations
generally for drug use which
leads from back in the in the
present but I still do not have
these needs addressed.
Next few slides will be
reviewing LFC research into each
of these issues in more detail.
Exelon so so I'll start down
that path to talk about many of
the social conditions in New
Mexico that tend to spot
correspond with later criminal
behavior I'm leaving early this
afternoon you all were
discussing ways to avoid
childhood trauma in the criminal
justice system there's more and
more research coming out linking
childhood trauma as often
measured by adverse childhood
experiences which Representative
Vance of neglect
abuse and family dysfunction I'm
to future criminal behavior in
individuals involved in criminal
activity tend to have higher
rates of childhood trauma now
the presence of of these and the
other factors we mention here I
childhood poverty also been
linked to to corresponding with
crime unemployment listed drug
use I'm all the things that we
we talk about here
The presence of these factors
doesn't mean any individual with
an ace or reason poverty well
then turn to crime but the
higher probability of the social
conditions for offenders really
highlights the the importance of
some of the prevention early
intervention programming we'll
be discussing later and so on
the on the right hand side of
this slide here I want to point
out to grant in particular one
on the top right you can see
that the rates of reported
illicit drug use to in the past
month has been on the increase
and and this this state is a
little dated back to twenty
eighteen it's it's national data
and so this is the most recent
available you can see where
there's been a bit of a
divergence between New Mexico in
the United States I also want to
mention one of the things that
we found in in two reports now
the the Bernalillo county crime
report from twenty eighteen and
then another report that we did
a health note looking at stop
substance abuse treatment in New
Mexico where we we're seeing a
big spike in on the use of meant
methamphetamine in New Mexico to
the point where the the overdose
death rate has almost quadrupled
since since twenty twelve to
twenty twelve if you can see
there it fifty eight total
that's with the rate of three
twenty eighteen hundred ninety
four with the rate of of almost.
Next next slide.
All right.
Good afternoon members Mr
chairman so in issue at the rest
in pre trial stage if the
individuals who commit low level
crimes are not connected to
affected diversionary or
treatment programs.
Now this doesn't necessarily
mean those programs don't exist
for example programs like adult
drug court have excess capacity
indicating that courts are
recurring payments to fully
utilize the program.
Prosecution level LFC county
district attorney's referred
thirteen percent fewer cases to
diversionary programs in FY
twenty and FY twenty one.
LFC staff and the lack of
evidence based policing
practices at the Albuquerque
police department.
Police violence in oversight are
also concerns impacting the
Albuquerque police department as
well as other law enforcement
agencies.
I do have a note here the New
Mexico Law Enforcement board is
responsible for overseeing and
sorry overseen police officer
training and conduct but has no
power to enforce compliance with
its reporting or investigations
interestingly granting the law
enforcement academy board this
power was one of the
recommendations that came out of
the Civil Rights Commission that
was formed in the first twenty
twenty special legislative
session.
Thanks Amanda and Mr chair
members of the committee once
individuals end up in New
Mexico's president system they
don't have access to the most
effective programming to address
underlying needs they contribute
to criminal behavior including
substance use disorder treatment
on New Mexico run some evidence
based programs I'm cert RO the
corrections department around
some evidence based programs LFC
is research has found these
programs are sometimes not
effectively implemented or run
as their intended to be run yes
most programs outcomes aren't
measured we can't reliably are
consistently determine if this
programming is improving.
The evidence based residential
drug abuse program is one of the
department's largest in prison
approaches and one of the few
actually measures but this part
of the reason rates are
extremely erratic and this
prompted a quality concerns and
really makes it difficult to
judge act program.
This research has also found
that only a small fraction of
inmates were given complete risk
needs assessments making it
difficult to establish the gap
between services available and
services needed but also making
it difficult for the department
to target programming where it
will most of actively addressed
in may need.
Lack of effective effectively
targeted programming related to
substance abuse are particularly
concerning because a growing
share president missions are for
individuals whose highest charge
was drug related.
Between FY sixteen FY twenty as
a C. illustrated in the slide on
the right side in the chart on
the right hand side of the
slide.
The overall prison population
declined but the share of
admissions for offenders is
highest charged with drug
possession from eight percent
this two eleven point six
percent.
In FY twenty seventy percent of
drug possession emissions were
for simple possession offenses
and those inmates served in
average of almost fifteen months
in prison and cost the state
about six point five million
dollars.
After these are released from
prison they also face shortages
of effective programming often
offenders see their parole
revoked for technical parole
violations and it's most
commonly tied to substance abuse
again.
It's difficult to know how
effective the community but the
corrections department's
community corrections
programming is because the
department only reports
recidivism rates for two
programs in men's and women's
recovery centers and those only
serve a very small fraction of
offenders.
But what we do know is that
offenders often aren't receiving
the report the treatment that
they require through corrections
department program the research
found that while about forty
percent of offenders in the
community received full rest
needs assessments in nine
percent of those who were
identified as needing substance
use disorder treatment we're
certified professionals
Department substance abuse
substance abuse programs.
Additionally LFC is noted that
statute does not require
individuals are intensive
supervision for C. programming
aimed at treatment.
The lack of resources available
to offenders in the community
makes it difficult for them to
receive effective treatment and
this often leads them to commit
technical parole violations
which are generally fail drug
tests or missed appointments in
FY twenty eight seventy two
percent of protestations were
due to technical violations
Austin the state about thirteen
point six million dollars.
So returning to the criminal
justice we reviewed earlier how
do we solve these problems in
the last part of our
presentation we're going to
review recommended strategies to
people out of this pipeline
through effective interventions
and will also explain how LSU's
FY twenty two budget
recommendations supports these
goals.
So instead of seeing social and
economic factors drive people
into the criminal justice system
let's divert people out of the
pipeline by investing in
prevention and early
intervention programs that
address the root causes of
crime.
And rather than see people move
from low level offenses in the
present let's divert people out
of the pipeline I improving
policing expanding diversionary
treatment programs and improving
pre trial services.
Instead of seeing people exit
prison without the tools to
succeed in the community.
People think life by ensuring
resources are directed the fact
in prison programming aimed at
recidivism reduction.
And finally once people have
been released from prison let's
start them out of the pit one
reincorporation I expanding
programming and treatment
options and reducing parole
revocations for technical
violations I'm gonna turn it
over to John to start to explain
how we can achieve that.
Thanks I'm.
So Mr chairman members that you
know obviously that this
wouldn't be a of one size fits
all approach approach so to
speak but I I do want to talk
about some of the the tools and
resources that that we have in
our office and that we published
on that are also available
available to you you know we've
been working with the pew
macarthur results first
initiative for almost a decade
now and and for those unfamiliar
with the initiatives
If there has developed
partnerships with a number of
states to help them develop a
cost benefit approach which fits
in with with our staff approach
LFC to where we were really
looking to identify what works
using analyses such as cost
benefit analysis are using
outcomes such as are targeted
how much we believe a program
might reduce reduce recidivism
by the value of those programs
by monetizing that reduction
recidivism so I'm.
We we have.
Two steps or strategies that are
listed here our first
policymakers adopt broad general
policies that authorized drive
mistreated actions and second
agency management frontline
staff implement evidence based
practices and monitor progress
you know on its on face value
that sounds.
D. easy but I think you I think
Ellen highlighted some of the
hurdles that we have to face in
terms of figuring out where our
needs are and also monitoring
implementation and see what
we're actually getting when
these programs are implemented
but on the right hand side of
the page here you can see an
example of some of the analysis
that we've conducted at all see
that this is from that results
first a cost benefit approach
where we look at a number of
programs and you can see that we
monetize potential benefits to
those programs assuming that
their run as they should be on
or also also referred to is run
with complete fidelity I'm and
you can see the potential cost
benefit for each of those
programs we also have analysis
that can tell us what we might
expect in terms of programs
impact on reducing recidivism.
Next slide.
So
we'll start will pause here just
to give you kind of an overview
of where we were will be going
next this is a summary of many
of the Representative the
recommendations that are in
Ellen and Amanda is our budget
recommendation that are
reflected in volume two we're
aware there's been increases in
some of these areas that we
discussed so I will go item by
item but we'll go into this in
more detail.
Just a few minutes next slide.
Okay so so this series of slides
is is digging more into that
solutions in the criminal
justice pipeline that Ellen
mention and and for this one you
know we we say one potential
solutions to invest in
prevention early intervention of
programming to address root
causes of crime and I we don't
suggest that that we have the
causes of crime figured out any
any of you who have never taken
a class in criminology know that
that determining the the cause
of crime.
Is is worthy of of the
dissertation and more but we
have through that ten years of
research sound a number of
corresponding again social
conditions that we previously
mentioned that could be
addressed through a number of
programs
that that will reduce some of
those are some of those outcomes
I'll also see that for the
programs we mention here each of
these programs has been
scientifically proven to to
reduce crime over the long term
and this isn't to say the other
programs or similar programs
wouldn't have the same effect
but we don't we don't
necessarily have data around
those programs so in this area
for the FY twenty two budget we
have a total of four forty one
point two million for home
visiting which is a seven
million dollar increase we have
three point seven million at
CYFD identified for evidence
based child maltreatment
prevention and early
intervention and I also want to
mention that swifties pilot
piloting I'll turn the response
program that that the
legislature passed last year you
need to be three seventy six and
and four counties in the
legislature funded and basically
what this is is is for somebody
for a family that is undergoing
Or experiencing some of these
social challenges that we
mentioned earlier giving them an
Avenue to reach out for services
through CYFD that's that's a bit
more collaborative in much less
contentious so CYFD wouldn't
respond to that call with an
investigation instead they would
they would connect the family
with with that needs assessment
and try to figure out what
services might help them before
before the social challenges
raised the level of needing an
investigation or removing child
from the home there are other
opportunities for improvement
the programs listed here nurse
family partnership which is is
within that forty one point two
million it's a portion of that
hi family functional therapy
multi systemic therapy which
actually a Secretary Blalock
give a really good presentation
earlier this week to I believe
Senate finance committee where
they talked about their efforts
to bring some of those early
intervention programs back
online at CYFD and then
expanding availability of
substance use disorder treatment
statewide few has been.
if you foundation has been
working not through results for
us but another project that they
have on substance use disorders
and I actually just saw that
they released a report earlier
today talking about some
specific recommendations that
they have for our for improving
substance use disorder treatment
in New Mexico and and that's
something that all all share
with your staff a subsequent to
this and and if you're
interested that that'll be
available to you as well.
One of our other recommended the
Dacians identified areas for
solutions is to improve policing
into improve policing LSE's FY
twenty two budget recommendation
reinvesting the savings from the
public safety department into
initiatives that are aimed at
improving please pack practices
an oversight this includes five
hundred thousand dollars for
training best practices both for
the state police and for law
enforcement officers statewide
through the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy it also
includes three hundred fifty
thousand dollars specifically
aimed at giving the Law
Enforcement Academy board the
resources it needs to operate
effectively.
But there's still a lot of other
opportunities to policymakers
could receive to improve
policing I'm just to name a
couple with regard to the law
enforcement academy board making
law enforcement protection fund
distributions to local law
enforcement agencies contingent
on cooperation with the boards
reporting requirements and with
its investigation would enable
the board to get the information
it requires to carry out its
mission and additionally
establishing the board as an
independent agency with full
time staff would help carry out
investigations into officer
contact on that and it would
also help preclude conflict of
interest concerns in state
police officers disciplinary
proceedings.
Right to expand Ivers Neri in
treatment programs in improved
pre trial services the LFC
budget includes one million
dollars per line our main
assisted diversion programs and
HSD the recommendation also re
invest two point two million
from administrative and overhead
support I think it
administrative office of the
courts it directly to district
and magistrate courts to improve
court access pre trial services.
There are still other
opportunities for improvement
such is the district attorney
this is working to leverage and
broadened diversionary programs
establishing measures for the
courts to track pre trial
outcomes and potential rates and
reduce incarceration for low
level crimes in re investors
resources into treatment
programs within the community.
To ensure resources are directed
to effective prison programming
aimed at recidivism reduction
LFC is FY twenty two budget
recommendation reinvested beings
from prison population declines
to provide an additional seven
hundred thousand dollars to
expand evidence based
programming in prisons and an
additional one point three
million dollars to expand the
corrections department's
recidivism reduction division.
Again however there are many
other opportunities for
improvement policymakers may
want to present I would highly
in this presentation we often
don't know how well the
corrections department's
programs work to ensure rigorous
continue monitoring and
evaluation of the efficacy of
these programs policy makers may
wish to consider establishing an
independent oversight agency or
providing additional resources
to the courts corrections and
justice committee to conduct
oversight duties.
Additionally ensuring the use of
existing medical and geriatric
for all statutes and reducing
the use of in house parole would
decrease costs to the state and
likely to better outcomes for
those offenders.
FY twenty two budget
recommendation includes funding
aimed at expanding programming
in treatment options by
reinvesting one point nine
million dollars in savings from
prison population declines into
expanding evidence based
community corrections
programming it also includes a
million dollars to administer by
annual risk needs assessments to
all offenders under supervision
member reducing the practice of
re incarcerated offenders for
technical violations isn't
really something that can be
achieved solely through the
budget or even primarily through
the project.
Significant probation and parole
reform is necessary to ensure
offenders are no longer sent
back to prison for technical
violations that are rooted in
addiction poverty.
Reducing technical parole
violations by seventy five
percent could save over ten
million dollars a year.
Additionally policymakers might
want to consider legislation
requiring that intensive
supervision include treatment
programming.
That concludes our presentation
Mr chairman members of the
committee and we would be happy
to stand for any questions.
Well thank you thanks to all of
you the three of you doctor
Courtney and Amanda and Alan
well done well done so can we
got to the committee with any
questions.
Yes Senator Ivey Soto your first
step.
Mr chair and thank you all for
the presentation.
I was hoping that you would go
back to the part about this.
Enforcement Academy.
And and what recommendations are
and are those recommendations
and and the
others recommendations in a bill
at this point or what is the
status of which one and if you
have the slide back up that be
great.
Yes
if you give me just a moment I
will put the slides back up.
on on that particular slide.
Senator
and Mr chair
of these
I suggestions are not currently
in a bill to my knowledge these
are suggestions that were laid
out in LFC is a volume one
document our.
seeing performance analysis
document that we put out every
year and they're just identified
as areas where policy makers
could try and empower the Law
Enforcement Academy board I'm
not fully answer your question
Senator.
No not to approve a bill on this
issue I appreciate that you guys
are looking at this very I think
we struggle for the last several
years with regard to the law
enforcement academy board in
terms of their their
responsibility with regard to
certification of of of members
law enforcement in New Mexico
and it's it's right so the so I
mean we with the wrong person
County Board as a board that
oversees the academy of people
going into.
law enforcement but in fact
actually this is a duty that
asked with people's entire
career and whether or not they
keep their certification and one
of the things that that
for you all think about as you
as you decide what to do with
this recommendation
Is you know we've been.
In a number of other areas we
have been.
trying to separate out the
administrators of a program from
the enforcers of the program.
And and and one of the places
where quest most enforcement has
been of placed has been with
regard to the state office
question.
And so what what things that you
may want to think about is is is
whether not to create crap State
law a law enforcement
certification board I for Kate
the law enforcement county point
of job part of the county and
maybe that would oversee the
other academies and training of
law enforcement come again but
in terms of the discipline part
of that have maybe a law
enforcement board that would be
under the state ethics
commission it's a specialized.
But statute we can add
responsibilities to them.
And that way then we would be
separating out the
responsibilities of training for
sprint for maintenance for
cation that one person would
have and keep that in the
different place while also
maintaining the voices of
experience law enforcement
personnel in that process if we
created
Committee that would serve and
set up this commission with
regard to that area but but then
allow that independence to take
place as well as again keeping
the enforcement separate from
the administration so I just
just.
As you are proceeding on looking
at these positions.
Thank you senator.
Chair all right Sir Ron you're
up next.
Yes thank you.
Yes.
I
think we have to.
Back.
In the last couple weeks we've
we've I confronted the fact that
we want to get a space agency
the defense system to come to
Albuquerque they didn't come
here one of the reasons again
was crime.
Many of you will have to here we
often talk about raising three
children in New Mexico great
kids went to our good schools
public schools colleges degrees
I want to live in New Mexico but
they won't for one simple reason
is it's not safe for them to be
in Albuquerque.
Not safe and raise their
families we know that.
The twenty year olds know that.
And they've accepted that and
and it's it over which you can
understand how discouraging it
has this see this and I think I
think we thought today that The
presentation began a lot with
discussions about the fact that
New Mexico's above the national
average that's the word we use
throughout the presentation they
were above the national average.
Let's let's be straight we're
we're the worst.
We're not above the national
average with the worst.
When it comes to crime we take
us if each if you do in the
federally look at us the state
over a period of the last
several years where is that is
against.
We have we have to confront
that.
Soon enough to say were above
the national average.
We're gonna we're gonna really
change this.
It it's it's hurting us in
everything we do is concerning
our economic development we all
talk about the reforming our
economy an increase in the
private sector to to creating
greater diversity talk about all
these things none of those are
going to happen if people no one
is safe and I'm concerned
because of the some of the
presentation is that we're
seeing an increase the number of
incidents and increase in rates
of crime we're seeing a decrease
in arrests.
We're seeing an increase the
number of bookings we're seeing
a decrease the number of
criminal with no the case is
being prosecuted in yes it's
possible that's happening
because of the version programs.
Another possible explanations
we've given up.
Just give it up we're seeing
increasing increasing increasing
numbers of crime if you were
right.
Increasing increasing crime
fewer bookings increase increase
grant fewer prosecutions.
So we we have to ask ourselves
so we can we just give up.
The.
We did give up what is going to
take for us to not give up.
We'll take for us to accept the
fact that we can control our
fate.
With the policies and priorities
with frankly leadership.
Because it's it's hard for me
not to not to look at this and
so we feel we we we're failing
badly.
in our job when it comes to
crime New Mexico the safety of
our communities essential part
of our where kids.
More houses in our streets.
We don't have the I really don't
see much point to to really
anything we're doing I'll just
I'll just a couple things that
struck out of me the the
methamphetamine.
The statistics quadrupling
since twenty twelve it should be
a crisis.
We talk about is the crisis that
we think about it talk about it
no we move one more
It is is all this related to our
property to our our the court
will statistics in terms of
adverse childhood experiences
yes problem we all all true.
But we given up.
Because sometimes that's what I
feel it is that we we accepted
this as our fate The New Mexico
is going to be of work the state
of crime ridden state.
it does look at when I look able
to the budget presentation.
I look at the last numbers but
look at those numbers quickly
forty one million forty two
forty three million dollars on
home visitation programs work
for child intervention the
nursing family therapies and so
forth forty forty one forty two
three million dollars that
versus the increase in the
previous question of less than a
million dollars.
Myself five hundred thousand
dollars for better policing
practices three hundred and
fifty thousand dollars for the
law enforcement academy word
total of a hundred fifty
thousand dollars.
Compare that to the forty three
million dollars and social
programs to combat crime.
We should be we should be able
to the bill more scientific
about this we should be able to
put money into a program maybe a
given community are given County
and see how it works and
compared to others that are
comparable where we don't put
that money and see whether that
really made a difference or not.
But but it's hard for me not to
say the fact that we're we're
putting massive amounts of
money.
In trying to combat crime with
therapies and interventions and
substance abuse all of which I
support all of which I know
work.
But if we're spending forty
three million dollars the budget
on that and in less than a
million dollars to improve our
policing.
I can't help but ask myself
whether we're we're really using
the budget process to explore
things that are really going to
work.
It is very hard not to not to
come to a conclusion that we
have been doing the last four
five six maybe ten years is not
working.
Wesker's of those questions and
also realize that that it is not
enough to to soften this this
problem that this this problem
is really at the heart of the
route what what ails our state.
In this committee in our job is
to figure out why we haven't
been able to make progress on
this and and I'm sorry I I
really can't be proud of myself
on the job I've done.
Despite twenty years here when
it comes to when it comes to
making our community safer and
it's it's heartbreaking.
To see the young people
who we should be loving to have
here to one of your other
families who love our state but
but maybe they know
is not the place they feel safe
to raise a family and and and
and I I hope I will have a
different message.
When we we really begin to give
this the weight and the
importance of does and not not
accept anything less than in
confronting very very harsh
reality
I hope I will do that thank you
Mr chairman.
well said I'm very very sorry
provoking.
yes finally Senator doing.
Thank you Mr I just wanted to
our flag something for the
committee there is a mention
about
Reincorporation reincorporation
because of technical operation
and parole violations which
costs the state I think there's
a thirteen point six million
dollars I you're gonna be seeing
a bill come before you in this
committee on that exact topic
will seek to to lower our to
implement a step program and
that will keep folks from being
reincorporated simply because of
and dirty drug test are missed
appointment and and give them a
chance to address those
violations without immediately
going to incarceration so stay
tuned for that thanks so much
thank you senator doing thank
you for sponsoring that bill
those of us on the courts and
corrections Justice Committee
your notice subjects so out
technical probation Sir that's
just a third of the folks that
are in prison right now and
technical parole violations for
you sure that's the figure so
thank you for sponsoring that
and I just have a couple
questions and then we can let
everybody go thanks again for
this presentation I wanted to
ask Amanda
you madam variants the comment
that whether or not the programs
exist you know the substance
abuse programs that's a big
question for me I just but my
information goes back.
A couple decades back when I was
doing this kind of work where
was tremendously frustrating
because there weren't programs
is is your sense that there are
no there are more programs than
we might think in New Mexico I'm
sure they're never enough but is
that your sense Amanda from your
researcher is a kind of an open
question in terms of substance
abuse programs the folks in the
criminal justice system have
access to.
Mr chair I can definitely get
you more information on that in
John right now a little bit more
but the point I was really
trying to get at is we do have
several of these programs such
as adult drug court senator
diversionary programs with the
district attorney offices we
have those that are well
established even those ones that
are readily available and well
established just aren't being
utilized.
I don't.
Mr chairman I I would I would
concur with Amanda that that
number of the programs that do
exist are under utilized you
know I would also say that that
the lack of use of risk needs
assessment for a lot of the
offenders that are in the system
particularly at that and see the
of presents a situation we're
we're we don't have a really
good handle on the need for
programs I'd also add that again
the legislature passed a bill a
couple years back house bill two
fifty that that defines
evidence based programming and
it asks DFA and LFC to identify
to work together to identify
agencies to to do these program
inventories so justice as you
say so we can have a list of
programs know how much we're
spending on them how what the
capacity is so that we can start
to match those things up so it's
it's something we're we're
definitely working on behind the
scenes as staff to get you more
we're good information on that
Mr chairman thank you doctor if
you know it's just irresistible
to say as part as a you know
someone running for office or a
elector official treatment
instead of incarceration yes I
mean who could disagree with
that but you know those programs
don't necessarily like it just
it's just been an issue for me
just because I can I'm just
informed by my own work
experience but it goes back a
long time so so anyway thank you
for that and then I was just
gonna say it is there a reason
why the corrections department
and we asked this every year why
they can't come up with the
recidivism rate other than for a
couple pilot programs like whose
responsibility is that to come
up with a recidivism rate for.
Parolees for no matter women
coming out of prison within
three years or they were
incarcerated why is is that is
that possible does exist and I
just don't know about it and
what and why not I mean you know
the DO state should be able to
do that right.
Mr chair over over the last
decade I've I've stayed I would
say we've seen a range of
capabilities from the
corrections department on that
and and for a time in.
The early twenty tends we did
have pretty decent data around
what programming there was who
is participating and some
outcome data I'm in in one of
our reports we actually of
calculated
that the existing drug treatment
program in prison was actually
making things worse it was
actually increasing recidivism
which the secretary at the time
took that very seriously replace
the program with a number
another evidence based program
but I'm and correct me if I'm
wrong I'll and we don't have
really good data around this new
program or or the outcomes that
we're we're we're getting from
it so I I think it's something
we're interested in continuing
to work with the corrections
department on
and and hoping that that
I believe they got a new update
to their I. T. system not too
long ago so so hoping with that
I see Ellen kind of raising up
you might want to want to add to
this big go ahead I'll.
Thanks Mr chair members of the
committee the corrections
department is currently in the
midst of updating a massive
update to its I. T. system it's
a vendor management system and
if the department reports a
number of metrics related to
recidivism but you are tied to
specific programs so or in
prison programming we have
recidivism rates for the
residential drug abuse program
as I noted there's just some I
have some data quality concerns
about it just given it's a
rabbit Graeser.
and we have recidivism rates or
education in GDP programs and we
have recidivism rates for the
men's and women's recovery
centers that are in the
community otherwise we don't
really have risen data tied to
recidivism for most the programs
and in fact you know it's it's
difficult to you know even
understand sort of how many
people are in what programs at
what prisons with a capacity of
those programs of those presents
are so it's hard to even know
sort of what's happening let
alone if it's a fact that the
corrections department would
likely say that it's current I.
T. system is a limitation to
providing some of that data is
updated IT system which I think
is now scheduled to complete in
June but has been pushed back a
year for the past couple of
years
they they would probably say
that Intel then they just don't
have the capabilities to produce
that kind of information without
a large amount of manual work
and labor
So I I mean I it.
I don't necessarily think in New
I. T. system is going to be a
solar bullet to solve this
problem I I think I. T. systems
rarely are that effective
but hopefully it will lead to
some improvements in that
reporting right because you know
thank you Alan it's just it's
refreshing to have the focus
thank you have had you know this
afternoon on facts the factual
rather than the anecdotal and
and so it would your recidivism
is just the basic measurement I
know I just have to do that when
I would write the requests for
distance house you know what
target recidivism rate you know
people want to know it's it's it
shouldn't be so impossible in a
larger issue to all of us as
legislators you know we got into
this a little bit and rules and
a lot of you on this committee
or in rules this morning I mean
to what degree do we actually
have oversight over this
government you know because we
we have these interim committees
and I'm on CCJ and in the the
OCD's as all will work on that
are working nothing changes you
know I mean they cut they cut
the releases to programs in the
middle of a print pandemic to
like comment safe transitional
programs like hope hope works
you know and they just okay well
we'll get back to you and
nothing changes and I just I
feel you know systemically I the
part of the reason why I'm so
this about Senator Ivy Soto is
built like this morning of the
tend to go to a more
professional legislature through
the recommendations of the
ethics commission is because at
the moment we just don't have a
whole lot to say so once we are
banished into our personal lives
when the session and so anyway
that's my two cents worth and on
that does anybody else have any
comments or questions or
concerns and we're almost
exactly at four o'clock so this
is really good but we you know
we can improve and maybe do it
sooner yes I Senator Lopez.
I thank you Mr chairman I
apologize I had to step away not
step but zoom away.
Number eight in the in **** and
learning the terminology ****.
You know I I as we talk about
recidivism and I it may have
been part of the discussion but
I also wanted to stir again you
know focus on the women in
prison.
We've had so many increases over
the years I I hope that that is
also one of the areas that we
begin to look at because
recidivism rate I know is hype
but there are so many other
issues that go along with their
family
you know trafficking issues and
such and I know there's still
much work for us to do and
senator Sanchez I agree with
what many of your comments that
you made
You know it's but it's still to
me goes back if you for those of
us who were around to go back to
Reagan president Reagan and some
of the release that happened
back in the day with the mental
health issues you know that this
is a to me it's it's us a
snowball effect that has
continued to move up you know
what happened under governor
Martinez with the mental health
system.
It just continues to exacerbate
what we're trying to do with our
our small amount of money that
we have so I'm still hopeful I
don't give up hope that you
know.
We have work to do and I'm
hoping that we can put together
a plan a system working with the
behavioural health collaborative
and others that we can utilize
to really put ourselves back on
is on solid ground we can begin
to help our families and
families are reacting because of
all of the other issues that we
know I mean we have them in many
of our communities on the
families that are hurting and I
still go back Mr chairman to
Maslow hierarchy if you can't
get that bottom rung take care
of you never going to get to
that self actualization wrong
you just want it's because of
who we are as humans this and
without and thank you thank you
senator that number it is almost
precisely for collect so for the
committee our next meeting will
not be Monday it will be wed
stay because Monday we have a
four sessions so Wednesday is
our next committee and hopefully
our terminal B. all ready back
in here hold with his voice and
so on that does if anybody has
any other issues I think we can
not adjourn this meeting and I
have the gavel so this is okay
okay zero J. okay thanks
everyone thank you.
