The presentations I've got
about.
Seven eight proponents of the
all party presentation.
we have for Mr chair as part of
our consolidated presentation
for your presentation.
A little
bit like a jungle yeah twenty
and.
NM Dona Ana and Los Alamos
County clerk's.
And and is there are.
And the Mescalero Apache Law yes
Mr.
This call.
Representative Lopez Askin then
we waste this Joseph little and.
Close.
Mr hall.
So the.
Bill McArthur.
Kathryn Clark and Rosalynn the
windows those are not part of
your presentation.
They they're not part of our our
coordinated support but I would
especially the Catholic
collection is the county clerk
of Santa Fe.
That we have to and then on then
for the opposition is there any
kind of a coordinated opposition
yes there was a female Senator.
There are three of us present
here in Israel for for the who
is here present John bel tree.
I still remember.
Positive there are less.
Ted in.
Yeah.
Lee and Eric and your.
Thank you the last one again
please.
The only other person have
registered in opposition is not
part of the the group is Kelly
part of
no they are.
And then does the opposition
group have a spokesperson.
coordinator at parliament
species not years such short
notice so I guess I will be.
The the only reason I'm asking
is I'm leave it up to you to
recognize people and decide how
long to and speaks next you tell
me otherwise otherwise there
will get a minute okay thank you
so very much.
All right the.
Senator looks like you got for
his part of the coordinated and
then again I've got three other
registered proponents all give
each of them a minute and so
what you take about eight
minutes for your presentation
reserves much of that as you
wish okay.
Mr speaker.
How we see.
All right.
So Mr chair
Okay well that's kind of there
do thank you Mr chair so despite
recent progress in strengthening
voting opportunities for New
Mexicans New Mexico still lags
behind most other states in our
percentage of system to register
to vote and the folks who
actually go exercise that right
went at election time and so
that tells us that that we still
have more work to do and that's
why house bill four of the New
Mexico voting rights act is
before you today one of the
central components of house bill
four is the native American
voting rights act I'll see that
sections thirteen through twenty
three and it doesn't number of
things Mr chair and ensures that
precinct boundaries will be
aligned with the political
boundaries of nations tribes in
public because it requires
tribal language translation of
the polls are expansive enhances
early voting opportunities I in
in their tribal communities it
allows for the use of official
buildings on tribal lands as
mailing addresses for tribal
members for the purposes of
election mail and also provides
necessary resources to our
county clerk's office that they
can comply with all aspects of
the native American voting
rights act.
Apart from from that have large
component of this bill Mr chair
the other things that this does
is that it would allow voters to
have an option to voluntarily
automatically receive absentee
ballots by signing up for a
voluntary permanent absentee
list are automatically restores
voting rights for folks who have
been convicted of a felony that
are no longer incarcerated it
ensures access to comprehensive
same day voter registration it
streamlines the process of
updating voter information so
that we can keep our voter rolls
clean it phases in secure
automatic registration on
similar to systems that we've
seen adopted and some other
states it ensures that we are
we have secure and we're doing
everything we can to protect
voter data and it also mandates
the ability availability of
monitored secure containers also
referred to as drop boxes in
every county although we did add
an amendment in the Senate
Judiciary that would codify as a
rule that's already in place
around that where county clerks
it to drop boxes aren't right
for their county they can apply
for a waiver of that requirement
with the secretary of state.
So House Bill endorsed can help
us on towards the goal of
ensuring that every New Mexican
on has the ability to exercise
their rights fully and fairly
without unnecessary burdens and
our elections are are safe
secure index.
with that I will
I have my my co sponsor speakers
well thank you said thank you
chairman and members of the
committee thank you for the time
I know you all are busy and I
know that it's getting late in
the session so we appreciate you
making the time not much to add
other than
seeing grateful for the
opportunity here apologize for
my tardiness we were walking in
and out of meetings but I'm here
to stay stand with my colleagues
in as many questions you might
have.
The end of the secretary of
state wants to add anything but
you'll probably hear from her a
lot during the discussion just
have an answer to questions Mr
chair.
A few of those.
all orders.
Sure if they if they wouldn't
mind canceling up here I'm just
going to give them we're at
about four minutes Mr chair so
give them about one minute each.
No these ones all right all
right so.
Minute free relations.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members the committee Amanda
Lopez us doing an accounting
clerk I represent a hundred and
thirty seven thousand
approximately voters in Dona Ana
and I'm here solely on behalf of
my County not speaking for the
clerk's affiliate I would like
to offer my support of this bill
specifically because every every
single basically Astrid point
bullet point you read I have
dealt with.
People in my community.
Who have struggled with access
and this increases access we're
all better for more
participation and I hope this
moves forward and you support
this thank you.
Thank you Mr chair of the let's
almost county clerk is online.
And I only met Maestas.
All the.
You know I I don't know
but while we we wait to figure
that out who.
Yeah
I Mr little could could come.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members my name is Joseph a
little I Representative the New
Mexico native vote which an
organization that works with
tribal communities throughout
the state in various voting
issues as was pointed out by the
president by the presenters
earlier the provisions in the in
this current bill we feel are
great support to in in native
communities to allow them to
exercise their voting rights to
the maximum as much as possible
with these changes are they
provided much so that the native
Amanda Navajo Human Rights
Commission reports on voting
rights issues for the Navajo
Nation is endorsed this
legislation the all in public
council of governors has passed
and Orson by resolution New
Mexico Apache tribe also
indicate to the supporters
litigation medication into the
litigation I'm sorry but support
the the that legislation and we
were hoping that they were
hoping that their lobbyists to
be here and be adopted a little
bit more directly so with that
we support this legislation and
hope it moves toward thank you.
All thank you at I don't think
Mr Pam is here if we could have
the Santa Fe county clerk go
ahead and step in for the the
time that he would have had.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Santa Fe County clerk Kathryn
Clark I have the third largest
county second highest in voter
participation and probably one
of the highest for tribal
participation we use the highest
where the highest rate of
absentee ballot use my County
and my voters love drop boxes
They actually request more of
them and they absolutely want to
be able to opt in to a frequent
use absentee list instead of
having to register every
election one of the most
important things is that
Fallon's when we see them in the
clerk's offices we their
paperwork is often screwed up
and we want to make sure we
streamline that process so
they're not stuck in paperwork
limbo it's really unfair it for
automatic voter registration
allows voters data to follow the
voters of the voter roll which
we always hear about is out of
date makes it more up to date
and also smooths out that
registration process so it's not
all happening during elections
and are trying to run the
election but it's happening
throughout the years so that it
lessens the burdens on clerks
and finally for tribes it
recognizes the singular postal
challenges that tribes face and
it's very unfair to make sure
that they the very unfair that
they have to rely solely on the
postal service many of them and
it formalizes an appeal process
for actual treatment for ballot
box request so now that there's
always an appeal process to make
sure that everyone's request for
doctor boxes heard this bill
makes voting easy accessible
makes it fair and I hope you
support thank you so much.
Thank you and Mister chair I
believe that clerk namely masses
is online and she did call and
heard the it should ended up for
to.
I have that here.
Well Mister chair will will go
head and hands proceed.
Sure you.
Also read.
A request the.
The the model.
All.
This is the roll Senator.
We.
Everyone is looking for the.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much Sir.
Chairs of artists in committee
my name is Ramona goals the and
I support voting for all
qualified voters but I oppose H.
B. four is written sedition
should not be forced to opt out
it should be their choice to opt
in what about the dementia
patient that was getting her and
ID and was red registered to
vote despite her power of
attorney telling them no they
even assign her party it forces
those who have religious
religious objections or just
choose not to register to have
to opt out the secretary of
state will be allowed to utilize
other departments person when
they're departments are short
and have heavy loads as well is
the sos provide financing the
employees of these other
departments to help her register
voters I would like to recognize
John bell tree at this time.
Thank you for your okay thank
you.
A good afternoon Mister chair
ladies and gentleman on John
filtering New Mexico election
transparency network chairman I
am opposed to HB for for the
following reasons that allows
convicted felons to vote
immediately upon release even if
still on parole mandates
increased use of job boxes it
creates a permanent absentee
voter list completely eroding
secure and verifiable absentee
voting practices this bill
mandates the department of motor
vehicles to automatically
register New Mexicans who
interact with the agency without
their consent.
The automatic registration
mandate includes New Mexico
residents who may not be here
legally which increases the
likelihood of non US citizens to
be registered to vote HB voting
right protection does the
opposite in my opinion of its
name this bill strips the
nation.
I'm sorry this bill.
Is the nation's worst for
stripping away election security
therefore I urge you to please
do not pass HB for thank you.
Miss India Canada.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and Committee members.
My name is Kay cannon and I
oppose this bill decline to
state.
DTS mix up about approximately
twenty five percent of voters in
New Mexico Larkin apt to swing
almost any election yet DTS gets
penalized because they choose
not to participate in party
politics why go so far to make
criminals out of folders to
legally have a right to
auditable system and the same
access to both of them the
secretary of state give access
to potable to third party
vendors corporation such as Eric
and rock the boat but not only
citizen she get the voter rolls
out to the Republican to
Democrat the Libertarian Party.
Corporation but not independent
voter D. T. S. this file is New
Mexico constitution article four
section twenty six.
Indicated that less than twenty
percent of the state it's in
this county had great confidence
and now election system and yet
they are continuing for us to
use the system that they do not
track we need Democrats on our
side others can see and
understand that action I Rio the
needs to be addressed this isn't
about party not we need about
the will of the people being
based thank you for your time.
Chairs of Hernandez we have
Carla Sonntag's on zoom.
Jill have two minutes.
This on.
Yes Sir thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee on
Carlos ontact speaking today on
behalf of better together New
Mexico we support voters rights
at the ability for people to
easily go to the state but this
is the help is not the answer we
strongly oppose this legislation
with all due respect to the
Sanchez I really hope that this
committee this is the committee
of of common sense and you look
at things from a legal
perspective and I am praying
that you will do that with this
bill we've had over fifty eight
thousand people start email sent
to you and others opposing this
legislation you've heard a lot
of the reasons I.
We believe in second chances for
felons but now this bill takes
away the.
It does not eliminate their
voting rights at all they never
lose that right when you commit
a felony you need to do the
time.
And then you can reapply for
your budget of voting at the
same time stop.
Have I did disconnect I'm sorry
we do have automatic voter
registration that is violating
some people's rights they should
be able to go in and register to
vote when they want to not have
that done and then be told by
mailed a postcard at the
register.
We pray that you will look at
this strong and oppose this
legislation thank you.
Thank you Liane and Derek.
One minute.
He's a on.
Finance in any.
At the end.
Legislative yes my name is Lee
and a direct from the
interamerican tribal members
Navajo Nation following reasons
I I tribal member I can speak
specifically to the fact that I
believe that the remote areas
lack the infrastructure to
actually accommodate which you
actually want to provide to
composing the spell you have to
put in the electronic
infrastructure and internet and
the two people are trying to
muscle educators so that is
something that is going to be a
barrier in regards to being a
prisoner I can speak to the fact
that they are many of our jails
and prisons are privatized and
do that overcrowding and lack
of.
At human resources which is
security guards and and as
support personnel will not will
it's an impediment because our
the prisons are overcrowded and
for a person to have a going
rate and not being allowed at
this information television and
information presented the
educated and sound voting
decisions because that is
lacking right now for most of
the can get showers.
They can get out to make phone
calls so to add this an extra
layer of voter rights.
Why I think it's a gift it's
actually do that the prisons are
not prepared for I think this
film is the we thought about
that I am concerned about the
lack of integrity overall for
this bill I think it is too
large and I would suggest go
back from and and and look at
each of these pieces
individually I believe that also
are people should not be
deprived of the right choice it
should I join this partition not
part of what what how a lifeboat
and how what kind of what would
likely and what issues so please
and that's not something I
believe the state has a right to
make for individuals thank you
for your time us to oppose H. B.
four.
Thank you Leri Sonntag.
One minute.
General.
Okay.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee on
Larry order tax the state
registered voter.
County.
I'm concerned the last thing
that we want to do is to move
away from election integrity and
this bill does exactly that
having a permanent voter
absentee list will exponentially
increase the number of ballots
that are going to be mailed to
people that no longer live at an
address may no longer be in our
state four have been deceased
the automatic voter registration
portions of this bill are also
very problematic it opens the
opportunity for residents of our
state who may not be here
legally to be automatically
registered to vote there's for
all these reasons and others
that you heard strongly oppose
house bill four thank you.
Erin Clements.
The last half she may be under
David.
Thank you.
Yes okay thank you most of the
polls have confirmed that more
than sixty percent of population
do not trust our election system
as it is right now is many many
people stated this number is
growing and it contains people
from all parties this is a
crisis and you also care about
that people have been crying out
for common sense reform like
voter ID and getting rid of
internet connectivity full books
thousands upon thousands of
people The New Mexico have
contacted this legislature in
opposition to this bill the
complete failure of most of the
members of this legislation to
address these concerns is only
going to fuel increasing the
distrust of our election system
the permanent absentee ballots
proposed by this hon'ble
increased pride there's no
excuse to propose such a thing
in the face of the crisis of
public confidence that currently
exists New Mexico I personally
know election take the leaders
and Democrat and Republican
states alike to have permanent
absentee list in their state
elections in the state are
terribly corrupted and few
people trust the results voting
for a bill like this is a vote
against the people in New Mexico
and against the that you all to
vote for this bill is a vote for
election fraud.
Thank you very much you for ten
minutes.
What.
Well sorry miss for heart of
test scores.
Sorry your recognize up to then
have.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members Kelly K. Fajardo I'm
actually here on behalf of
Charlie Marcus who's the
registered lobbyists for the
Mexico business coalition HB
four one danger voting rights
and voting system integrity the
following ways.
Right to permanent absentee
voter list and dean and roading
secure an invite and verifiable
absentee voting proper processes
permanent absentee voter photo.
Motor rules for increased will
increase issues and for a move
in the state of New Mexico for
that for all the other reasons
stated New Mexico business
coalition respectively opposes
the bill thank you Mr chairman.
If you again right of two
members the committee we've gone
through all the registered
proponents and opponents they're
the one as senator doing you've
still got about three minutes
left and your time Mr chairman I
think we can just kind of the
committee.
Question.
No questions pleasure the
committee.
Risotto's us as we recognize
Senator it'll take a motion to
do passer Ivey Soto is there
something else.
We have a actually I don't
questions but I would.
Please.
I'm sorry for the good good to
see you as an agency figures are
the ones that no thank you Mr
reflections thank you Senator
Baca.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
sent and speaker for being here
today
I I was submitted by the clerks
of Philly is the
In writing the.
In a letter in in opposition to
HB for did you talk to the
clerk's prior to Mr chair
submitting your bill will be in
the Tate were they at the table
with you will be able to voice
their concerns directly to you.
Mr chair Senator so I can tell
you that when I got the a draft
of age before I sent that on to
the the vice chair of the course
affiliate and ask them to share
it with all the clerks and then
as we have new drafts I I would
do the same thing and I would
send them up to him and ask him
to share them with them and I've
had a couple of discussions with
the clerks is talking about
you'd mostly SB one eighty but
there were some discussion about
age before in some of those
discussions.
I thank you Mr chair will just
to just be one eighty the they
actually took a neutral position
to that and this when they took
a interposing position to that
were were any of their concerns
alleviated by you did you
include any of their amendments
that they suggested or any of
that sort so Mr chair Senator
when we.
As we the I don't know if you
recall the amendment that we
adopted in rules but one of the
the one part of that amendment
was to address their concerns
about drops so in some counties
they don't feel that the have
drop boxes works for their
county for for variety of of non
reasons and so they were so we
included in rules did that
amendments to so that they could
request a waiver of that
requirement for the secretary of
state's office that actually is
already existing in rural Act it
a lot of the stuff about the
drop boxes I think that maybe
possibly all of it is already
existing in rural and we're just
codifying here but we want to
codify that way for peace as
well.
just does it trouble you Mr
chair and senator that the the
clerks are in opposition to this
they're the ones that have to
actually administer these
elections are proposing here is
is that doesn't to trouble you
at all the they're posing as Mr
Kirk and Mr chair Senator so I
think we heard from some clerks
today here who are are
supporting this and it would
have also heard from that list
Alamos County clerk but she
wasn't able to to get on
so I think there is a there's
certainly disagreement amongst
the clerks but Mr chair Senator
I would also noted that the we
have that we have a different
job from the clerks there are
election administrators we are
as policy makers.
Thank you for that explanation I
really appreciate it because I
have no idea what's Mr chair
Senator I didn't I didn't mean
for that to be patronizing I I.
I I but but my point is is that
we we do have very different
jobs and we don't go.
Well we'll leave it there.
Okay yeah because of Mister
chair I I mean the state
submitted to me just a little
while ago and and they took a
better photo their body so the
majority of them oppose it one
of the things they cited was an
unfunded mandate and in that Mr
chair and senator they they
stated that actually secretary
state or some somewhere in the
range of two million dollars
from twenty twenty two could you
address that issue please Mr
chair of leaders of the
secretaries Mr chair and senator
thank you for bringing that
issue up in fact for the last
six years since I've been
secretary of state I have asked
this legislature for adequate
amount of money to conduct
elections in the state and every
single year my budget request
has been shorted.
Mister chairman Senator as it
was last year Mr chair Senator
so we were able to take
advantage of the opportunity to
go before the board of finance
in January which approved
emergency funds to my office and
I just got word this morning Mr
chair and senator that those
emergency funds were put into
our account this morning and
we're making those payments out
of the clerk's literally as we
speak.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
point out that shorting of
budget request doesn't
necessarily mean that you have a
declining budget in your office
correct let's clarify that no Mr
chair sounded sounded as if you
if Mr chair you're stating madam
secretary that the budget
actually went down it did not it
went up you might have not
gotten what you wanted to budget
did go up correct Mr chair
Senator that's true as to the
cost of everything so to the
cost of elections increase and
we've asked every year for what
we know we need to pay Mr chair
and senator do you Mr chair and
and madam secretary Senator see
that there's going to be of a
budget deficiency with these
changes implemented because
because of clerks seem to think
that there will be Mr chair and
senator so we are actually very
opt optimistic about the current
status of our budget request
this year coming over to the
Senate side from the house it's
in really good shape we're
getting pretty much everything
we've asked for Mr chair Senator
so far.
Okay okay so so they're they're
concerned you feel are on wanted
Mr chairman and secretary you
feel like they're going to have
the money they need to conduct
all these changes in here Mr
chair and senator we are going
to be adequately funded yes okay
thank you Mr chair I guess
they're just wrong within the
Philly and I I find that strange
that the you all aren't on the
same page Mr chair and secretary
with just going through the bill
here I would I would call your
attention to page three of the
oil and.
Richard in changing for some
and.
You.
On
page three you have in your
pursuant to section.
The qualified elector may become
registrable by an automatic
voter registration at the motor
vehicle division of the taxation
reviewed revenue department or
other state or local public
office designated by the
secretary of state pointed
actual language of the employee
not just the motor vehicle
division fly why Mr chair and
secretary should us to this
legislature empower you to
appoint public office is as you
see fit for on a medical.
Mr chairman and senator that's
existing language if it's under
lined in money to page three D.
O. O. D..
and so Mister chairman Senator
this is just carrying through
the language in existing law
firm State to clarify that this
automated process for automatic
process can also be available at
the state agencies as well Mr
chair Senator.
What if they seem different to
me one says you mean registrable
at this one and this one seems
to be different if there was
repetitive way at it I guess can
you tell me the differences are
so Mister chair and senator at
so currently under both federal
and existing state law any state
agency can be designated of
voter registration third party
voter registration agent in
their also certain departments
Mr chair and senator that
receive federal funding that are
required under federal law to
already provided that
opportunity so for example the
Human Services department
already provides the opportunity
to register to vote pursuant to
federal law and so the
clarification of do Mr chair and
senator is that as we are
implementing this automatic
process that it can also be you
know not just AT and BT but at
those other agencies as well Mr
chair Senator but but it doesn't
say that Mr chairman secretariat
says or other state or local
public offices designated by the
secretary of state that that to
me Mr chair doesn't say that
exactly were on course funding
this to two federal law it it's
it's just seems to give you a
broader authority over any state
or local public office and and
that just seems a little bit
brought to me I don't know that
you would that.
Also if it be appropriate this
time I would I would be the
movie Mr chair you for I would
move an amendment where on page
three line twenty two starting
at the comma streaking through
line twenty three at the end of
the quotation which I don't know
why there's a quotation with no
less striking through that and
inserting a period.
In Mr chair Senator years
respect actually said after the
COVID I don't see I'm looking at
page three line twenty two I
don't see a comma to.
Richard doesn't change in.
Mr chair I I know well about
that is is looking at that so
this is only in order to do
secure automatic voter
registration they have to have
citizenship information about
the individuals this will only
ever be agencies that are that
are all of that already are
getting citizenship information
about people who are going to
them so it's probably not going
to be live outdoor.
Recreation.
hello I'm sorry okay no no there
is no common sorry so page three
line twenty two from four to the
insert into the sentence on
online twenty three insert a
period so would strike the last
of that it would strike or other
state or local public office
designated by the secretary of
state period and again that.
Tatian market not sure what's
here.
That amendment and I would just
leave it to motor vehicle
division of tax and revenue
department and really just get
rid of that other product for
the because I don't even know
what a local public offices
which is a county building.
Mr chair Senator I this is
unfriendly because what it's
going to set up as an
inconsistent approach so as as
madam secretary already said we
already have other state
agencies that are doing voter
registration it's not just MBT
and so this would set up an
inconsistent approach to that
would registration amongst our
state agencies which I think is.
Is is likely to to because of
some confusion.
Mr chairman I thought you said
that they're already doing that
so.
Not but not Mr chair just under
not automatically because that
will start that would to start
with this bill passed and was
signed so going forward there
would be an inconsistent
administration of voter
registration among state
agencies under understood thank
you Mr chairman and senator I I
I think I'll stick with my
amendment of the language I see
there's just it's too broad from
to be comfortable with all of
that and we'll see where it
goes.
The motion for the committee.
Doctors want to restate just one
more time and then we'll take
action.
Page three line twenty two from
or stricken through page a line
twenty three to the end of the
quotation inserting a period at
the end Department.
Online twenty two.
Anymore.
Further discussion.
Roll call of Mr just a Moores
mask why is just sloppy drafting
that quotations and there I
don't see any beginning
codes would be.
I don't see it is it is a
sloppiness or what what happened
there those are local Tatian in
there that I'm missing line
three Senator Mr chair at the
end of the section.
Mr.
Your question.
Based on the amendment all right
we'll do roll call members.
Senator Paypen yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Wirth yes.
Thank you so.
Senator Stewart.
Senator was no.
Senator no Senator but this
element fails.
Members other questions.
That number was right now for
New yes you representative about
this thank you Mr chair the
other thing I want to address on
page ten and eleven and this is
a concern I have.
It amended here because I have
to look exactly like the last
one I just attempted this is
this is very troubling.
the felon voting
We're putting in here where a
person has not and I repeat not
completed her sentence when they
have a point when you're out on
school on full with this allows
you to vote on folders I do have
that right Mister chairman
Senator Mr chair Senator we yet
we took a simplified approach to
to voting for returning citizens
based on New Mexico's experience
currently where we require folks
to get this paperwork and and go
through all the steps after
after they've completed their
their sons which just isn't
working Mr chair history has
shown that the in New Mexico
taking that that kind of a more
intimate perhaps more nuanced
approach does not functionally
work for for a lot of our
returning citizens so yes we're
taking a simplified approach
here where if you're in you
can't vote if you're out you
can.
Thank you Mr chair gosh it
stinks to get in trouble I guess
and I'm sorry it has to be so
hard on you know for things I
guess you know you gotta go
through all the steps and it's
inconvenient for of after
they've committed to be
convicted of a felony I think
it's I think it's that these
policy decisions that we make
that you referred to are part of
the problem we have a both in
corrections in a lot of other
places in the state and so you
know I would just caution this
committee and and and going
forward our body this this type
of activity really
I mean with no inconvenience to
we're we're we're going out of
our way to make it work we're
using taxpayer money taxpayers
agencies to to make this type of
a to make these concessions all
state to people that have been
by a jury of their peers by
convicted of a crime a felony
not a not a misdemeanor serious
crime and for just a you know we
don't want to put up that's all
I got Mr is there more.
Mr chair Senator Baca is tilting
at windmills because we know
what the both going to happen
this is already been pre cooked
pre determined and as the
secretary knows I'm very
disappointed in that read an
opportunity last year to
something bipartisanship to make
our Republic stronger but the
advocates wanted to be able to
leave here and high five each
other said we did it Minnesota I
remember that years from now in
a Republic is weaker if we still
have Republic they can tell
their grandchildren want to what
what was once like to live in a
Republic because I think that's
the directions countries going
right or left that's where we
are we had opportunity to work
in a bipartisan manner to make
our election laws better
together but the advocates and
others in here wanted to do it
their way and said screw it.
There are right with rights on
the streets and tax on the
capital because that's what this
these two and that's that it's
me that for concerns me so I
also have a lot of concerns here
and I you know I saw the
affiliates were here and I'm
getting text messages from I've
met Mr chair the the affiliates
with they have supported this if
you had just worked with some
acute work with us maybe we
could have supported it but with
the affiliates of actually
supported another here would you
guys have support of this if
that it happened.
The answer is no.
not set to.
in the for the what concerned
also about the fifth phones and
I'm not going to propose an
amendment amendment on that but
we've worked on in this
legislature trying to do
restitution all four of the
victims of crime and we can't
get rid of them so phones have
been ordered to pay restitution
they can't pay we can't we can't
believe blood out of a turn up
and yet there's going given the
rights to vote again and your
families are still hurting
that's that Mr chair secretary
Mattis and vice chair so these
folks who are gonna be
automatically registered.
They're gonna be automatically
registered not gonna get the
opportunity at the government
offices not to register Mr chair
Senator.
Are you said some about them
being able to write a postcard
later on but say at child
support references eight you
want your right right sure Mr
Mack and now I want are they
gonna be able to say no I don't
want to register right there on
the spot.
Mr chair Senator so they'll be
informed that they've been
registered at the time and the
be informed that they're going
to receive this postcard that
they can use if they don't want
to be registered and if they get
that postcard don't want to be
registered some that back in it
will be as though they were
never registered at all it's
completely what amount sure
senator secretary they can't
just say don't bother I can't
say don't bother sending me a
postcard Department don't mail
it no caught no go through the
exercise there are people who
have a religious objection
conscientious objection to
participate in a range of games
that we all participate in.
Their religious objections to
your infringing on their
religious object action because
you want to get richer everyone
without other lawsuits at the
federal level about conscience
objectors not wanting to play in
some of these games.
So I think we open ourselves up
to a lawsuit madam secretary
that hope you're asking for a
budget increase to pay for that
are you are you are are you
prepared in your budget of the
year to minimize budget choose
to provide to the fan this
apostle that's coming your way
Mr chair and senator we are by
far not the first state to
implement this type of process
and the I'm very close with my
colleagues from both red and
blue states that have similar
processes like this and they it
is well set up to to
constitutional muster Mr chair.
Mr will see about that so all
these folks are being gonna be
registered as declined to stay
its my understanding that that
Mr chair Senator no when they at
the time when they're doing that
transaction and they're told
that they're being register
they're given the opportunity to
pick a party at this time if
they wish to if they don't use
any of that time they can do so
at any time afterwards either
online or when they get the
postcard or or anytime they they
so choose but I just same day
registration but they're
specifically offer that
opportunity at the time
So I think IT makes it worse Mr
chair Senator sectors that are
being offered to pick a party
but the not being offered at the
want to register.
I don't want to participate but
you know can you want to be a
communist or Democrat or
Republican that's your choice
you have to register I think
that's that's unfair
and so I imagine a lot of
workers in whatever I don't care
so how a lot of will end up as
DTS is Mr chair Senator
Secretary Stewart those the
testing to be able to
participate in our election
since we don't have open
primaries.
And Mr chair Senator
same day registration they can
certainly choose to the party at
the time I if they choose when
they show up to vote so Mr
Senator they're gonna have to.
Show up right after they've
they're never wanted to register
show up as a constant show up
election change their party
affiliation Republican Democrat
libertarian.
And then change it back up
because we don't have open
primaries so were replaced we
encouraging people to pull we're
saying Hey participate but the
public policy of this body has
been that before decline the
states cannot vote in the
primary elections as you and I
know most of our elections are
won I won in the primaries your
reserves right my district.
Our elections also we're telling
whole lot of people but they
can't participate even though
the registered parcels on the
back but they're not to
participate in less we do open
primaries so hopefully will have
a five debate about that on the
floor here surely when the
school gets there because I
think it's if you really going
after open up participation
Alexion's you got open up some
primary system you got it and it
doesn't make us any good not to
do that
I think everyone our other I'll
definitely agrees in the tribal
aspects of this bill but I do
notice that there's tribes that
choose not to have elections or
choose not to let women
participate in government
processes I represented one such
tribe and their decision is that
women are allowed to participate
in any government entity the
bill they don't have elections
there's or anything that
make some our elections in here
that that they have to let women
vote in participating government
are we still going to allow that
to happen.
Mr chair Senator they still have
sovereignty so we cannot
encroach on sovereignty the
sovereignty of.
Our tribes and pueblos so we're
still going to have women in the
state of New Mexico not the
able to participate in
government affairs and elections
is what I'm saying so just bill
does nothing to do that nothing
to make women participate in a
number of governments around the
state I think I think that
should have been that that
should have been talked about a
lot.
Anyways I think there's a lot of
issues are often run all the
amendment so we'll probably see
later on on this issue are here
because I know they're both
going to be the same as it was
last time but this bill does
that to me because we had an
opportunity to try to make this
public better in you all chose
to go domicile state of doing
what was
Probably the right thing to do
thank you Mr chair.
Members question Senator Ivey
Soto.
Thank you very much.
And
A few questions for the
secretary of state.
The
Well that that is for me as I've
really bad allergies the good
news for you this.
The bill cycle.
We are a lot of testimony during
the look at the smile and the
president.
So there's a lot of COVID during
the.
For the public.
Of people concerned about this
bill.
Does.
Up
there sponsored.
This A. B. R. is automatically
refresh before for.
Madam chair and senator know the
better always picks their party.
And.
Well doing automatic
registration.
Results ballots being mailed.
Mr chair.
But.
Share madam secretary.
Well does have a a false or
permanent us was.
Which is separate from the
automatic voter registration
that's correct Mr chair and the
person loops.
And fills out of national change
of address do we keep sending
the ads to the old address.
Mr chair we do not.
Representative Barreras Mr chair
they'll be permanent at all
entry list until they update
their voter registration with
your new address.
Okay.
I do want to get back to page
three line twenty two.
This is.
I've I am curious.
About what local public offices
you envision.
I I just Interstate offices
writers Services.
Exchange there's the
universities that responsibility
in law.
what what local offices the.
Miss Mister chairman Senator
email at this point in time you
know with the.
The delayed implementation date
of of several years yet if this
bill should pass
you know I don't think we have
any specific local offices in
mind I could envision any
basically any office where
you're as an otherwise qualified
elector I E. S. citizen and
obtaining Services
and and that this is a service
you know that you're interested
in providing and that we are
interested and and working with
you to find
so I'm I'm trying to think of a
good example I can't really at
the top of my head but the long
story short is that the the
point of this is not to be
limiting in those possibilities
but any any agency local or
state.
Where you are verifying
citizenship.
we can we can work with that
agency Mr chair Senator to do
this.
I I I Mr chair Dr I did I I find
interesting
several years ago I ran this is
as you remember Representative
has to spend.
For for the the government's
responsible for ensuring that it
will be registered the person
excluded from coverage for
failure to.
And and I got several questions
about well exactly how to use
and lance was.
They don't necessarily know.
So.
Yeah but it's.
Some of the some of the live and
I think that.
Of the
So that's section doesn't go
into effect.
Until July one twenty twenty
five percent.
Mr chair Senator if.
At that's can Mr Secretary
that's also the case for the
automatic voter registration.
Yes madam chair and senator and
white white with the delay on
the automatic voter registration
to level two.
So Mister chairman Senator my
office specifically requested
that delay in implementation we
are currently doing an overhaul
of our voter registration
election management system and
we it you know we anticipate
needing.
Until the primary and general of
twenty twenty four to it to get
that working really well for
what we need to now Mr chair and
senator and so when we're
talking about doing enhancements
changing the way systems
currently work we want to make
sure that things are working.
As well as they can for what we
need now before we start to do
any changes Mr chair Senator at
Mr.
But the current system could you
possibly not the current system.
The table there Mr chair and
senator yes but we we also have
a a long till someone three list
of enhancements and improvements
that that are currently on track
to be made and we would so we
would be you know pushing off
some of those other
functionality improvements
Mister chairman Senator to
implement this right away so yes
what we could do it you know
might be a little ugly in terms
of just the amount of elbow
grease that would be involved.
Some of them would not be he was
general.
That that would be accurate Mr
chair Senator
Mister century.
Of them talk about the fact
that.
In the in house bill four we
have actually do both front end
and back end.
We asked people but then I think
the client we register.
Was that the one that we had
last year the.
and so Mister chair and senator
I believe this is a more nuanced
version from what we saw last
year if my memory serves me
correctly in the indie what this
particular bill mandates is that
information being provided on
the front end as well as a it
has already been discussed the
you know and I think the
specific concern was around
shoot choice of party and making
sure that folks can leave that
agency Mister chairman Senator
having opted into a party if
they so choose at that time so
you have that Mr secretary to do
at that in this restriction yes
correct madam chair and senator
did not act that allows that is
and so that.
Some some.
That was.
Resulted in very long lines of
the primaries.
Mr chair and senator it
certainly could have.
Not I I would appreciate that
is.
Last year this year.
Last year I will concerns about.
What about the system the
ability to handle.
But I also had
some Senator concerns about the
effect that would have of those
prices.
and we had we just simply that
the combination of the two.
and so you know that's a
Those substantial differences.
The model that is did not focus.
That was last year.
That was
That I think would cause
tremendous want to cast because
what about if we.
It would.
Registered everybody's details.
restaurants.
And
I just think that would create a
lot of chaos with the voters and
with the administrators.
much of which.
hopefully and in the.
The mother lives.
this gentleman and secretary
how.
As to the date.
On July one twenty twenty five.
So Mr chair Senator at well as
you know a request our office
and with county clerks over the
years if we're required to get
something done we get it done
That being said were already in
the process of the
The system upgrade but I wrote
referenced earlier that's sort
of for us I think I need to be
first and foremost primary front
and center and we do and fully
anticipate are working through
that process by the twenty
twenty four election cycle and
then giving us that time that we
need Mr chair and senator.
I would just get there I would
like to see these.
Stop gap in case your there as
we have often done the SEC or
some other mechanism.
More if it wasn't administrative
right so.
Of
course so what would have.
But but certainly it's a.
Thank you to your.
So.
Thank you Mr.
Where we were as professionals
we have a due pass motion from
Senator Stewart.
Any other discussion.
On the do passed motion.
Senator Paypen.
No.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores of.
Rural New.
Center part of no.
Yes.
Wirth yes.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator
Senator yes the past.
Okay so for.
Their master's so you still
services.
There might just.
So you no longer do.
Senator I see.
Changes for committee members.
Please please exit quietly.
Senate bill thirty three.
we roll over the request of the
sponsors Center o'neill Senate
bill three eighty eight.
Senator o'neill.
Well certainly on Senate bill
three eighty eight I'll let you
know there is nobody registered
in support or opposition.
Three eighty eight so.
This our family type of.
Please.
Thank you very thank you Mr
chair members.
Senator Senate bill three eighty
eight amends existing statute to
raise minimum age at which a
child may be held in custody
were detained from eleven years
to twelve years old with me is
Carmelo Romero whose with
earlier you services center and
she's gonna briefly briefly
explain why why this in the
context of juvenile delinquency
why is this eleven to twelve
years old import.
And that's how we need to know
and then will stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
chairman senators and members of
the committee
what we're trying to do today
with this piece of legislation
is to bring New Mexico in
alignment with national best
practices New Mexico is
considered one of the leaders in
juvenile justice improvement
strategies and reform across the
nation New Mexico partners with
the office of juvenile justice
delinquency prevention Danny
Casey foundation impact justice
the prison rape elimination act
pre of resource center in moving
this reform work forward.
Today.
If you look at me just come to
the table into this show on this
thank you this and that
important so twelve the impact
of making the distinction
between eleven twelve year old
is relative to the size of
mental capacity and thinking
about brain development in
essence it's an elementary
school age child verses a middle
school age child in detention
setting this change will in fact
the burden of housing youth in
separate areas for youth who are
younger versus older in age
seventeen or eighteen years old
this will system population
control and the continuation of
best practices for conditions of
confinement it course strategy
in our children's co thank you
thank you Comeaux and now we
stand for questions you news
again low restrict registered
opposition support Senator Ivey
Soto thank you
carries.
I think out of the thirteen why
are you going to.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
senator the reason we have
looked at our current data at
our facility from FY nineteen to
FY twenty two we've only had ten
youth in between the age we are
still doing some research on
youth who are between the ages
of twelve and thirteen and and
what it looks like for the age
range in our facility so it's at
current ongoing review and
research in the particular age
range.
So while this gentleman.
While I understand that there
are some who were to make a.
Trying to officer thirteenth
with the product it would be
unfriendly.
I think it's best opportunities.
We can come back and revisit Mr
chair this is you know that that
research is ongoing I think a
lot about this you know we all
know Nico Stallis has really
been behind this and they really
thought it through and it just
not comfortable with going to
thirteen at but it duly noted.
The committee members question
Senator Moores said about so you
to and families services thank
you don't the judges have the
discretion anyways of the to the
chain why we take and if so why
are we taking away from the
judge's discretion.
Thank you Mr Senator Mister
chair Mister Senator Moores at
this time there is a risk
assessment instrument that
actually
through the New Mexico
children's code looks at how we
detained youth in our facility
and so when a you've just picked
up in in the community by law
enforcement this risk assessment
tool is utilized to determine if
they meet criteria for
detention.
With so Mr chair Senator so of
the risk assessment is there in
the judgment that decision in
the process why would we take
away the discretion.
Mr chair Senator you know of
first of all we've received no
opposition from any kind of
Judiciary.
Person you know basically we
rely on the X. the expertise of
folks such as Carmelo who works
closely with these juveniles and
and you know this what they're
doing is is saying this is not
appropriate you know and and
that was a problem then I think
we would have to have heard
about it but we haven't heard
any opposition from the
judiciary let alone the notion
that they were taking away their
power in anyway.
Mr chair Senator sometimes some
different.
I just think we hear a lot about
giving judge flexibility and
there were so the ones right
there making decisions do we
talk about that a long lot in
this committee
so I'm just hesitant you gotta
give me from a no to a yes and
why we take the job that power
away from a judge on them right
now I don't see why the hell in
reasons although the judge to
make that decision where we as a
body make that decision I'm just
not saying that Mr chair Senator
you know the juvenile judges
that I've come into contact with
I mean they rely again it's a
partnership between the folks
that work ground level with
these kids and you know that
they have they're not interested
and and micromanaging this is
just a directive that we as
policy people are making I mean
we would use a state that's
twelve you know the difference
between eleven and twelve years
old is huge
with the research and and and
good people to do this kind of
work so I'm just saying you know
there's plenty of other ways the
judges can hold on to their
power reclaim their power
certainly not this this bill I
don't think in any significant
way of facts addition judges
power to since this is my
opinion but I always respect
your thank you Mr chair things
that I just to your point of
something which in my comments
chair and that's that seems to
be what we're doing but thank
you I appreciate you thank you
very much.
Mr chair Senator I you know you
keep seeing the difference
between eleven to twelve but
this bill doesn't actually do
that it it takes away the
differentiation between eleven
to twelve and more makes it the
differentiation between twelve
and thirteen.
Because now we're saying twelve
and under shall not be held in a
detention and therefore we are
treating them like an eleven.
So it's just not clear to me the
distinction that that's being
made here Senator see we're
we're you're actually through
your bill or the way I am
hearing it is you're maintaining
that a twelve year old is like
an eleven year old and that's
why we shall not taking them so
the changes actually from twelve
to thirteen so I just I I guess
I guess I'm not understanding
that explanation Mr chair
Senator I just feel like the
message of this bill is eleven
years old is too young to be
thrust into the juvenile justice
system so
I mean I don't I don't really up
I think we just disagree I don't
see a problem with that I don't
see any ambiguity here but I I
mean I I understand what you're
saying but I'm not quite sure.
I don't know to me my brains I
think what you're saying is that
twelve years old is too young to
be thrust some juvenile.
System right that's why we're
not detaining them set.
Yes that's correct.
So are we so.
You're all healed Center doing.
So Mr chair Senator so this time
I a child under the age of
twelve channel be held in
detention services that so under
this bill all of your old would
be eleven year old wouldn't be
where is now it's that ten
eleven year olds are held in
detention and ten year olds
member I understand thank you I
was reading it to say twelve and
under so it is under the age of
twelve so now it is just an
eleven year old that okay okay
see that.
Thank you for that explanation
the committee questions
comments action.
Produ passenger doing the survey
of junction to do past.
So Senator Moores a Senator
Baca.
Of those in support show Senator
o'neill the Soto Stewart doing
conservatives you have in the
past thank you.
Fifty S..
So.
Senator two sixty four center
Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman honorable
members this is the Senate bill
two hundred sixty four dealing
with our investment statute the
material quick story back in two
thousand seven Senate bill one
sixty two is introduced by
senator Neville on it took away
the magic words from the Senate
doesn't statute separate
incident of embezzlement for
conversion constitutes a
separate and distinct offense
the purpose of that bill was to
was to charge in the aggregate
was brought to us by the DA's
association at the time.
And and then the magic words
that we're going to put into
this bill today or hopefully as
in any consecutive twelve month
period.
I sat on that committee back in
the day with two brilliant
lawyers who happen to be here
today and we in amendment of
House Judiciary Committee
amendment we remove the magic
words
in any twelve month period.
Thinking that will what we took
off we took off the separate
incident sentence and left it at
that.
The courts you know read the
statute as it is to compare to
the previous statute and so
we're back in the same place I
would like a this committee to
consider charging embezzlement
allowing dust to charge
investment in the aggregate it's
easier to charge here to convict
and and essentially caps
embezzlement at nine years so
that defendants cannot be
stacked nine eighteen twenty
seven thirty six forty five X.
such a with that'll stand for
questions.
Thank you so much sis that
nobody registered in support or
opposition of this bill.
We will go to the audience as a
result members of the committee
with questions.
They're doing this forever so.
Thank you Mr chair Senator I
remember when we were looking at
a different bill bill during the
interim that also took this.
Kind of actor get approach and
having double jeopardy concerns
That and it wasn't this bill but
but just because it has the same
aggregation I'm I'm just
wondering if if there's any of
the same concerns here so I get
caught embezzling.
Two hundred fifty dollars in
January
and then and and I actually get
caught and and punished for it
and then in June I go to the
same thing with five hundred
dollars but now it's being
combined you know with another.
Two two hundred fifty dollars
but now it's being combined so I
have more of a misdemeanor
rather than a petty misdemeanor.
What happened when I've already
been punished once for that
first having misdemeanor of the
first two hundred fifty is
they're not double jeopardy
concerns with that thank you Mr
Rybak you Senator no that's
that's an interesting point
there would be double jeopardy
concerns if you added that first
one.
To the charging document of the
second one and so this would
allow any consecutive twelve
month period not just a calendar
year.
Mr chair Senator I.
I don't I'm not sure why that.
I mean how how do you do the
aggregation without looking at
those past actions.
I have already been made already
been.
Prosecuted and convicted for.
What it's it's to me it doesn't
matter if it's calendar year or.
Or just any twelve months I in
the past versus or whether since
early in the charging document
or not and and and Mr chair I I
don't practice criminal law this
is not my area but I don't
understand how we could possibly
look to a prior conviction use
that as a basis for the
punishment.
In that in a new case and and
there's there's no concern that
we are punishing someone twice
for the same action I understand
that point at the end Mister
chairman Senator hi
that's an interesting dilemma I
don't know.
Some can be successfully
prosecuted that fast although
they could be convicted of a
misdemeanor and then later on
they find out there's a series
of actions and there's more
investment.
Crimes going on but I do know we
combined in the larceny statute
a while back
we're also going to consider it
doing it with retail theft.
it's just it's much easier to
prosecute if you if you combine
it in that situation.
Every past crime and conviction
goes to is a sentencing issue I
think the dust if there was an
investment in January the
connection in June and that a
subsequent
You know maybe in may June or
July that that twelve month
period to start in may and so
there's a sense of injustice I
I.
I could see that argument but it
would it would be clean on the
indictment it would not be
double jeopardy because they're
not charging twice for the exact
same crime.
Mr chair Senator I and I'm
double double jeopardy maybe is
the right we are being if you
were being punished twice for
the same crime isn't.
Try to avoid.
In our lives Mr chair Senator do
it I.
Think of most of those moments
are with a single bit small
store to see all of the Floyer
of New Mexico from things that
nature so I think
They would be reported and
audited in the same
investigation but I just I don't
I don't share the same concern
with double jeopardy.
But but Mr chair Senator the
language of this bill doesn't
say.
Embezzlement against the same
victim this this could be any.
So you can have.
A whole string of the Muslims
from from various folks get
caught and then the only time I
I'm what I'm concerned about is
folks who get caught for for one
of these and they get Kaufer
second one and then it's it's
being use to and then they're
being punished twice potentially
for that first one
That that's the situation I just
and I just wonder if there is.
I can't think of any language to
address that situation something
off the top of my head but I
feel like that is a situation
that should be accounted for
anytime we're going to take this
kind of an aggregation approach
because otherwise we're
profession people twice for the
same thing.
That's all Mr the service so
thank you.
Services.
If if I get it D. W. I. N. in
January.
D. W. I. N. October.
I think convicted for the first
in line trying to get a second.
How much.
point perfect for Mister
chairman Senator Ivy Soto is is
acquired by the DA's office
you'll be charged with a DWI
second.
So they take it out the previous
ones in the us late charge Mr
chairman and I was at the not
just at sentencing but in the
charging document which would
enhance the penalties of that
crime.
And when somebody.
With somebody else
For you.
Read out of if you're connected
with the by thank you.
How you revert to.
The chairman of the risotto if
you lose all three of the
hearings will be revoked for
life but there's like a ten year
parole so to speak you can
petition the District Court to
spend one time correct okay.
And then you have to petition
District Court or.
Director you have to prove a
great many things essentially
that you re have been here stone
cold sober.
At.
But if you just happen to have
that their conviction is
a month after the ten years.
Additional of.
Correct.
The one.
Mr Chairman representative I
believe you're correct.
Hey we with a virtual thunder
Act yeah so it's I mean if we
this.
We have in other areas of the
law.
So what I right see this is.
The state we really.
Mr Chairman said Silvercity yes
but in all fairness to the
courts we
They look at the bill we we
passed they looked at the new
language which did not include.
The lines we took out back in
seventy eight separate incident
of investment for conversion
constitutes a separate and
distinct defense we remove that
in said that.
The now we want to save now we
we we really mean questions are
not.
Okay mission.
Whether committee members
questions.
Service so would do best in.
Other quick question.
Do Raul.
Senator Baca yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Morris yes.
Senator Stewart asked.
Senator Wirth I yes Senator.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
Senator so for the past.
The motion was the central for
somebody to all of the past
their.
I will come back to for seventy
two.
A little bit.
Nine.
Ninety five.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee services to.
For somebody to the end of the
bill on sponsoring.
Because I'm gonna be with you
all seven one.
I'm gonna be here with you.
Helpful push myself back.
Sauce or something
want to notify.
The committee
of the Senate bill
Two ninety five is updates to
the mayor's licensure laws it
expands who's able to
who's able to officiate at a
wedding so people don't need to
get a fake ordinations of they
want to do that
it also allows people that they
want to to get married by
contracted the county clerk's
office and dispense with having
a ceremony.
it gets rid of child marriage
New Mexico is one of the states
that currently does not have a
minimum age to get married.
As long as there's somebody
who's pregnant.
it clarifies the rights and
responsibilities of the parties
in both the void and voidable
marriage.
To ensure that the that we even
though the marriages void
voidable or void to ensure that
community property child support
spousal support and halogens is
still taken into consideration.
It
it brings in the the language.
from the federal law that was
recently passed.
on on marriage.
And it
It goes through all of chapter
forty.
Which is domestic relations.
To strike the various different
places where it does not husband
and wife and on and change the
to the spouses parties to the
marriage etcetera.
and so with that Mr chairman
I'll be happy to stand for for
questions.
Thank you for checking let's see
we've got.
Registered in support or
opposition so members of the
committee.
And I.
Were you looking very puzzled
very close was soon so on.
With Mr chair Senator this is
something the affiliates are
asking to do work for where this
comes from researchers.
Mr chairman and Senator Moores
no this did not come to the
point believe this came from the
fact that I'm done just simply
aware that there are a number of
things that needed to be updated
with regard to the there's a
loss in the state having advised
for number of years on those
issues.
and so
Support and for example and I
should mention social New Mexico
in eighteen sixty five outlawed
the marriage of first cousins in
eighteen sixty eight we were
treated on that policy but today
we have match dot com there's no
reason for processes to where.
There are federal agencies know
that the full coverage of course
not.
and all right so this little
wanted from.
The usually release a sixteen
year old community merry of the
of the proposal approval on our
world just recall.
It's always been.
Mr chairman and were you guys
one of the folks or one one of
the Mr Chairman seven was the
they can't vote at sixteen yes.
and and nor should they be
allowed to get married at
sixteen.
There's actually first of all if
they lose their rights.
With regard to each other for
with regard to.
any children or anything given
what the state laws today by not
get by waiting till they're
eighteen and there's actually a
fair amount of research as to
the impact of what happens for
people get married at a very
young age I would personally
like to make it twenty five.
Thirty five.
Yes.
The San local
So that they feel still go
researchers are they still go
off to the doctor or whatever
also compared with just a.
We would recognize it as a
voidable marriage in New Mexico
this gentleman some of our so
that so as avoidable mirrors
that means that they are married
unless the minor prior to the
their nineteenth birthday.
there are blils of four but the
county clerk's office to accept
the marriage or there's a cause
of action in import to the
management.
What we call it is correct.
With the lawyers thank you Mr.
There were thank you Mr chair
can you address the section nine
raises a bunch of the.
You mentioned this is income
from the county clerk's of can
you just walk through.
What's being changed here why.
Why you're you're raising all
these fees and the second that
we charge on multiple
transactions each one of the
coverage Mr.
Certainly Mr chairman and so
with that change that the
lessons in the state.
I think the fifty sixty years.
there but attempts to change it
over time.
what this does is it goes to
fifty dollars for the marriage
license if you're getting
there's a license in the county
where you have an address.
Either Representative Sweetser.
It's a hundred dollars of the
the person has an interest in
that county I will tell you
there are numerous people who
drive to New Mexico to get
America's license because we are
so much cheaper than all of the
states around us.
So Mr chair.
Basically the this so what we're
we're not just raising the fee
from twenty five to fifty that
were for with one out of another
provision that goes up to a
hundred dollars as you mentioned
there one more.
As.
The the the personalities in the
county correct and again.
So is this something the clerks
ask former I mean can you
imagine this is not point bills
is just something that I just
have and again I forget that
this is twenty five dollars the
issue but there is the what the
fees here are I'm just concerned
about the increases the more I.
Nineteen years of being here and
seeing these getting a raise
just trying to make sure sure
what we accomplishing by raising
the fees does it does it is you
do you think it's going to
result in the last I just I mean
it's what do you find out trying
to accomplish for the certainly
this chairman and senator Wirth
first of all the Senate approved
a bill that senators defended
scary two years ago to raise the
fee two hundred dollars for all
Americans.
what what this one does is fifty
dollars if you live in the
county.
hundred dollars to be the person
to the committee.
And so in the in the again the
reason for that.
I'm not looking at having fewer
filings per se Texas for example
is a hundred fifty dollars for
mers les.
So we'll still have some people
governor from Texas the state
themselves fifty Bucks at the
gate in the marriage.
I'm not sure that's the right
way to start a marriage and then
the last.
A lot of people do that.
And so in terms of the twenty
five to fifty.
The the the expense of the
platforms that are used for the
bears licensure frankly they
keep going up.
It's so and so that accounts for
that hundred dollars is simply
to account for the fact that
again people are going to come
from outside it's got like a
larger stacks so Mister what's
what's the current the recording
inform submitted by person
desiring to be registered their
marriage officer Mr chairman and
senator Wirth there is no form.
That's a brand and share what
the building after recording a
declaration submitted by number
the armed forces was deployed
are activated to a duty
assignment station outside the
state Mr chairman Senator Wirth
right now there is no such for.
Mr incentives this this bill is
creating a form that will and
for that is that is correct
that.
Yes the the first important.
on armed forces is section
fourteen of the bill the second
form.
for register bears officer is to
fifteen of the bill Mr up.
And against us the provision do
and provision here also new new
fees for the new forms I just
don't like the fee for part of
this bill so again Mr chair how
how do I mean I think it's a
separate issue quite frankly
than what you're trying to do is
get you want to do everything in
one bill but I would.
Well this chair I I get that but
I do want to vote against your
bill because it's got a bunch of
the increases in here so you
know Mr chair I I propose and
then at the to strike section
nine and we numbers and what
that would do is to limit the
issue once the past come back
get the county clerk's involved
this may not be enough because
you said that maybe they want
they want more so that Mr that
that would be.
Service.
Question section nine Mr
Chairman.
Begetting Alliance
Representative seventeen the
chairman I would prefer a more
nuanced approach that is the one
I am not a friendly amendment on
the other hand if you'll give me
a vote on the bill I'll live
with it.
And if it's chair it would.
So those of yeah I'll just I'll
vote for the bill again my
concern is I want to go against
the bill because the feet
provisions and it just feels
like it's a separate issue and
feel like there's a bunch of
things in the and and again I
just.
I'm not sure I I need to go back
and look at the centers the
Phanteks both but I'm guessing
from the code against that one
but.
Anyway Mr that's.
Sure but I would accept that as
for the.
Motions to strike section begin
on page seventeen.
Further discussion on the
amendment.
We went up decision to the.
Dr.
So we wanted to go over.
I thought I heard a yes no
Senator was sort of judging them
yeah all right.
So friendly but showing the
numbers Moores that for a Baca
were some of this do we can
still work in support of the
members of the men's adopted so
with you still have a four
stress all at.
Others.
Questions s'mores thank you Mr
secretary of second time so I'm
looking at here a little closer
I see that you're are allowing
us to provide what long with a
lot of other folks why.
This gentleman
I'll be happy to your next
marriage from the work.
So people
Mr chairman and senator Morris.
Yes first of all what he is
looking at is Senator officer.
Obeys to the bill fifteen and
and so not only do we allow the
Civil officer to do it but have
you been in public office for
eight years you get to do for
the rest your life as retired
civil officer.
and and so the reason for that
frankly is because as elector
officials we serve in a position
public trust.
Six.
Fair enough I have been asked
thank you.
Who knows about the.
Thank you Mr chairman hi I I
don't really have a I like the
amendment to Senator Wirth of Mr
chair Senator the issue I'm
having is is a restriction on
the age that you placed in in
their I I know many people who
were married under the age of
eight are still married and have
been married for many many years
and
side just a Hey that that
absolute restriction with that
with the you know before the
parent could side for them
essentially authorize it but now
we're just saying they can issue
of marriage license under the
age of eighteen is that correct.
Mr chairman that is correct okay
yet you know I if you have some
flexibility on that you know I
could support your billable with
that under the age of eighteen I
just think it's too stringent
like I said I I have many
friends under the age of
eighteen and I I can think of
just off hand many people that
that I know that and so I just I
just don't know why we would get
into that right now the the
already have to get some
authorization from legal
guardian or a parent twitch I
think it is sufficient they
would you know those are the
people that this
Is there is there any appetite
flexibility on on changing that
number.
Mr chairman of the.
If you were to do that.
basically you would restore Act.
Up to line nineteen.
Nine.
We actually.
No never mind you just restore
line a graphic.
You just restore paragraph eight
to its current for I could
support your bill with that but
you know I just I'd like to know
your thoughts on it would that
be a friendly amendment if I
move that the it would be a
equally friendly as it was with
senator Wirth at.
Prices from
I would move that amendment that
then restored section Mr chair
section eight section as I
subparagraph he so basically
nine.
Lines twelve through twenty
three.
What is suggesting is straight
all of the strike throughs.
The strike all of the new
language so that the original
language and subsection may
would remain.
The.
There is sixteen with that would
allow if if you had if you just
both both parents or judicial
authorization.
and it would what that would
what we would still do with
striking subsection B..
Is that there would be a hard
floor at sixteen right now we
don't have a hard floor
seventeen.
Right now we don't have a hard
floor I'm sorry at eight sixty
right now we don't have a hard
point sixty.
If somebody's pregnant and.
So if somebody were sixteen or
seventeen the need to have their
parents permission.
Some of the.
We're going to yes
I will.
For purposes of the discussion.
The benefit limit.
Discussion.
The roll call.
Yes I rowing out you need to
fill.
Seventy loss.
Mr chairman that's a good reason
president discussion.
Really.
The wells.
Senator Baca yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores friendly yes.
This is to Senator Pirtle yes.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator focusing of the bills.
Nothing else.
There are so you're gonna have a
hard time getting my vote but
folks will see with maybe I
agree with the the concerns I
have of principally at least as
far as I've gotten older slower
good things in the bill there's
some things that cause me a lot
of concern so help me maybe
maybe I'm misreading if you look
on section five begin on page
nine.
I.
This is a section that relates
to voidable.
Marriages.
And interesting to me is the
language the new language to be
on page ten eleventh Alaska's
focused over there with.
Trying to figure out whether
you're striving language and
then it's the languages be
proposes was going back in but.
Here's here's we're this the
it's really strange for me is
you're you're describing certain
marriages as void voidable wins.
More marriages that four
suspects.
Senator saying for example
patients up to see that no cause
of action is required it was a
big it's a void marriage.
Avoidable merged and there's
never any kind of a lot of court
proceedings.
Simply file looks like a
certificate of some time.
But then if you look at the top
of page eleven it's as the court
may assist question grant
alimony.
Until the minor mansa maybe
three merry's appreciation
nineteen.
So we're we're get all puzzles
is were.
I'm trying to treat this is the
in in the area of contract law
so we were Senators of Lloyd
marriage we're avoidable
marriage but then we're
recognizing certain
characteristics of a valid
marriage so we're essentially
saying yeah this is this is what
this is voidable marriage we're
voiding the marriage but the
court may grant alimony.
Four were taken to consideration
things like community property
child support.
And and these are all of these
things are all within the bill
here.
This makes sense.
Did it make sense to me to say
that this this is avoid marriage
voidable marriage we're gonna
voided but we're gonna have a
court treated as it was of a
legitimate marriage right by
awarding alimony child support
committee property divisions the
the concepts seem in conflict.
Is there a way to reconcile the
this year there is.
So.
Up in and so the issues become
first of all existing law right
now.
Provides that if you marry
someone under the legislative
age that the judge could award
alimony.
Well they well they declare the
the bears what.
And so that's that's already
existing.
now we we added.
After that.
We had after that that the.
The course also apply the law as
a state regarding committee
property transport in the same
manner as if the marriage have
been and it's a lot lawfully the
reason being.
Is that typically first of all
well well avoidable avoidable
marriage.
Once they hit the age of
nineteen.
It is no longer avoidable.
And and so present existing low
because I see you're you're
adding that language you bill
your existing law is until the
he had reached the age of
eighteen hi I like to make it
affordable for one more year.
Given what will for one more
year because the family court
often or child support to be
paid through the through the
jobs at age of ninety.
So so I just simply alignment
with where the the family court
is on these issues.
Up.
What we have this we have this
idiosyncrasy that happens.
And that is you have a marriage
that is.
In the case of under the
preferred permitted age what
will in the case of incestuous
for polygamous is void this you.
That doesn't change the fact
that someone as dedicated part
of themselves to this
relationship.
American existed.
That doesn't change the fact
that that in in many cases.
When you're dealing with child
marriage.
When you're dealing with
polygamous or plural marriage
you have people who are who are
weak in terms of their status in
society.
Who may not have a lot of
resources.
And so therefore we want to.
it was a policy decision that
came out of ****.
That we should make sure that
even though it's void.
Even though it's avoidable
there's declared void or to
others is void of any seo that
we still apply these principles
because we recognize that there
is someone who is trying to exit
what may be a bad situation.
And yet we just simply say it
was going to have a CO.
The property rights.
They have though they have no
other rights in terms of of
exiting that marriage jobs what
would happen regardless but but
but the rest of it would it.
And so it's a way of frankly.
Recognizing that many of these
situations are exploitative.
Yeah I get all that is is again
you're you're still complaining
in my mind concepts which are
inconsistent if you're you're
still going to follow Alan and
bills are you still call your
child support so called the
community property but under
your scenario emerges voice.
From inception sure yes so so
how can there be elsewhere
centers on the thank you behind
it is the that that individual
may be or should be compensated
some of our supporters amount.
But but to call it alimony.
For something that was never a
marriage.
Again this is difficult for me
to reconcile so I'm not and then
you have persuaded for that Mr
Mr chairman I I do understand
that like I said existing law
right now because it alimony.
that is it's you don't see it on
the bill because we were
building place forty dash one
dash nine.
In forty dash one dash nine.
It says.
So
It talks about the cause of
actually boosted by the minor
next friend either parent legal
guardian or by the district
attorney in the case of binders
no party to the marriage maybe
over the privative age shall be
allowed to apply for or David
pre from the court declaring the
marriage point but the minor may
do so and the court may in its
discretion grant alimony until
the minor because of age or re
berries.
The party should live together
until they arrive at the age
under which the marriage is
permitted by statute in the more
shall be deemed legal and
binding that is been the policy
of the state of New Mexico since
eighteen seventy six.
So this does not change that.
It does expand upon it but the
but the conflict between the two
already existed.
M. as existed program under two
years.
Yes no very good reason you know
that means the you know the fact
that we somebody screwed up on a
years ago than always resonated
with me that's the reason the
continuing the I just I just
want to try to show you I wasn't
trying to be overly creative
whatever that not going to let
me just a couple of questions
different subjects change
appears on such an important
page eight.
The the new language at the
bottom of page eight.
Rely twenty two.
This would re new language that
a marriage so afraid we on the
limits of the state.
You make references chapter
forty that is declared for you.
Contrary the compact it is void
in this state not was that in
laws in the state for the
marriage was celebrated
contracted so there's a I don't
want states we're talking about
the.
The state of Arkansas good
simple maybe.
Where somebody Chattfield we
have.
What's.
Martial
Arkansas
so.
Sen.
I'm not going to get a look in
Arkansas okay so so America's
marriage in Arkansas is
recognize but why this language
in the state of New Mexico that
marriage is not recognised it
complex with the compact we have
with the that states.
Section one of the compact that
we have with the United States
is that polygamous or plural
marriages.
Our forever prohibited that's
that that reference to the
compact is only that this is
correct lose only to
particularly.
Then the next of on page nine
subsection B..
New bio station give full faith
and credit.
To any marriage between
individuals lights along US
salen isis in another state.
Mr chairman that language come
straight from the federal that
was recently passed.
Although I will say that the
federal and state gender
identity.
But.
That does not subsection B..
A new language their conflict
with the language that I just
referred to the preceding
subsection eight.
Mr chairman it is not because of
section B. says between two
individuals and public
administration by definition has
more than two individuals.
State your full for the credit
to America team to individuals.
From another state of the
preceding paragraph says that a
marriage.
Is the clear voice.
But that's then only in the case
of a polygamous marriages
correct.
Jumping ahead then to page
twelve.
Similar to my questions earlier
on like twenty two this is when
the clearing incestuous marriage
of different type of America of
the four.
So that when you have an
incestuous marriage which is
void reporter show up libel laws
of the state regarding community
property child support spousal
support as of the marriage have
been lawful so get back to the
question I was asked early in
I don't think that's what we've
always done it for a hundred
years but so it's still
troubling we were passionate
saying this is a the lawyers
this is never a marriage but
we're going to apply committee
property child support spousal
support principles and and then
it gets even more interesting to
me because if you look on page
thirteen your new language will
is that we will apply laws
regarding heritage.
As of the margin Center lawfully
so then.
this is the worst area of law
we're passionate survivors yet
which is due to your up line
sense sensually principles of
intestacy I assume right or or
probate law so it's it's avoid
marriage but you take
Harrington's.
As it was a lawful marriage
resume is what this language
with we do right so yeah this
gentleman you would think you
would take it according to
intestacy suggestions on this
gentleman up so first of all.
We're very clear as if the
parents have been entered into
law into law because it wasn't
entered into law.
But let's say.
I we're not may and I married my
granddaughter.
Pods are I would pre decease.
Odds are she was never happy.
In the marriage.
Maybe I was there before I had
other kids.
She doesn't feel like she could
get out of the marriage.
For variety of reasons family
pressures religion whatever.
I die.
And my kids right first marriage
teller.
See a.
We're asking the court to do is
to function as part of equity.
And our district courts are
courts of equity.
Our district courts will where
appropriate.
Take a contract.
That is declared void.
Sometimes under different
circumstances.
Let's say but the equitable
solution is the following.
That's what we're flying here
are these principles of equity.
Yeah I wish we were saying that
way no member I really do wish
we were a which were just all
right given the court that
discussion because again I've
been looking at Senator Baca
somewhere in here is correct I
could see was could be a pretty
significant issue were you might
have a large state and you end
up with a dispute between errors
where.
The your in your example the
children from the state of a
prior marriage are gonna say
that the.
second marriage was void.
and therefore never existed and
that the a person who was very
and avoid marriage does not take
by intestate succession that's
what the first.
Children would argue the second
The more the merrier child if
we're bored the void marriages
gonna say this language says I
take.
As if the marriage is been
entered lawfully which would
tend potentially that that
person takes the entire state
right four act probably half of
the state or the Safia if it's
intestate succession so this
could have some very interesting
ramifications I think of the
various factors with a I.
I don't have a good solution and
I guess you're you're trying to
you're trying to attack
something.
That presumably needs to be
attacked but I again I wish we
were doing this a little bit or
maybe just to what you're saying
which is.
Let's just treat this as a as a
matter of equity and course of
antiquity without trying to save
this is void but we're.
Use all the principles of
marriage for probate law for
succession intestacy all those
wild rose.
As it was a marriage.
Will conflict for the homeless
the rest then be able to get
over it.
Because I don't have a
definitive solution.
What else.
Right.
Server.
K.
so this.
I am trying to determine what
fills you in here.
Course I came upon section
twenty seven.
Pastry.
Thanks to our faxes three.
Mr chairman and senator if you
look immediately above that
section.
You will see the exact same
language.
Crossed out for the previous.
So we adopted that language.
In nineteen seventy three.
I look at the language and I
thought what why is that there.
To get Italy.
That is the fingerprint of being
there for somebody.
And I don't know who it's there
for.
It was strike it.
Once I find out with the session
whites there.
The idea let me lay it out and
repeal it in ten years because
sixty years from now it should
be gone.
If it shouldn't be there it
should be there I have no
allegiance to it I was simply
trying to be
I was able to try not to take to
heart of I ever.
To it.
Thank you for but like the way.
This whole marriage document is
written community it it's kind
of.
It's not clear and it's it's.
Has a lot of legal stuff in it.
I just don't really understand
everything you've done in this
bill kind of my first feelings
about it it's just to.
So you're just doing this
because you're trying to clean
up the marriage statutes mean no
one came to you just you woke up
one morning and decide if you're
gonna do this this gentleman had
a program I do that I know
during first.
If you pick something different
that we could all agree to
rather than something like this
will help.
We'll have our hobbies.
Just go back to sleep yes I.
So.
One of the day we all have our
own this.
Thank.
Anyone else.
Do we have a motion.
Mr Chairman I will say that I
don't know if it would.
I do understand what you're
saying in terms of the concern
that you raised.
Up you know I certainly would be
very open to.
We're talking about a cause of
action.
I get a that the that the court
sitting as a court of equity.
Right we could.
We could add that language.
And and then it's up to you
whether it be of of more shall.
Is that something you'd be
interested in that I would ask
that we.
going to hear the next bill
while I go and find the right
place.
The legislative unless unless
there's objection we're gonna
roll over the bill and maybe
take into consideration the
suggestions and comments like to
work on center to make that what
you're asking sounds like I was
asking that we rolled over from
today.
you're you're well good luck
let's say we want to work on it
the work.
I'd like to have you read like
to have you the committee for
the other actions and mature and
all be here all right now here.
go to work I think the next item
on.
Mr chair can we just make a
motion.
For me there's not of any work
done make a motion there was no
there was no action by the
committee but we were still on
going to make a motion to table.
Motion is tabled.
Not available Emily.
On the roll call Senator Paypen
yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Wirth.
Senator Pirtle is Senator
Stewart.
Yes.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator yes bill stable.
My way of keeping you in the
committee will next year.
Senate I'm gonna wait also on.
Seventy one someone be with you
all the rest of the night and I
know of that Representative
Senator Stefanics others who
want to join.
That particular bill we go back
to four seventy two I can't from
progress with the committee real
quick I think we knew for
seventy two pretty quickly I
jumped over.
So Senator would you take the
chair for a moment while I
present for seventy two.
Four seventy two okay very
simple issue this last year.
I wanted to.
Retire mortgage on a principal
residence like contacted my
lenders a very large national
lenders to ask for the pay off
balance and I was told they were
given to me by pay the fee
and they told me that I could
avoid the fee if I would accept
the payoff balance in in writing
by mail but wanted immediate
payoff to electronically helpful
and it was going to charge to
return the for that so this bill
quite simply prohibits that is a
lending practice that of the
consumer requests of balance on
a credit card a loan mortgage
anything of that kind that the
lender to not charge a fee to
use by the borrower of of that
outstanding balance that's all
this bill does.
Will stand for questions.
Mr chair knowing to sign up and
support or opposition Senator.
Thank you Mr Senator so you
don't have a half they don't for
the legislative tampering.
Says all of that within the
account information I could I
could access the power balance
would pay them a fee to do so
while well there's a because all
all of modern put every loan
that I have says.
How much monthly rate interest
rate is the interest per month
and what the pay off would be
right right now it's a nice
small community bank valley bank
of commerce rules expo hi this
point recommend five stars well.
Well you may not want to go home
loan from Mister Cooper.
but the there you go.
Well.
Mr with that same pair of our.
School leaders and jobs
we have that problem so I had to
go wild you said that was.
Yeah there I see Mr Cooper so
what I think I said the the
lender in this case.
Yeah.
Members good bass Mr chair this
that the just this a lot when I
was doing
And often one of the reasons
there saleable mail to you and
then by the time the amount to
the help balances different
and so that you get into this
little over numbers that we have
a motion for do pass is there
any objection to that motion.
C. line please show senator
Morris Pirtle Bach were survived
as Duhigg Stewart and I'm so
funding yes to pass.
Next I will be requested to
build three thirty six continue
on the agenda it's it's written
for now anyway.
Committee members just so you
know.
One way of giving you a hard
stop time tonight I'm not doing
that we're getting to that time
in the section which will be
hard to predict that I've got
the dinner coming I believe it's
seven my intention is take a
break so the committee that I'm
not a big fan of eating during
the committee meeting so we'll
take a break at seven because of
the food arrives the time for
about a half hour but with my I
hope that we get through the
entirety of the agenda tonight
so that's for the folks that are
here in the audience as well to
So three thirty six wait for
Senator Padilla.
Center were sent fifty.
Hi good morning good afternoon
Mister chair and members we have
a Senate Judiciary Committee
substitutes point two two five
two zero seven point four.
Do not pass on Senate bill fifty
and move the Senate Judiciary
Cup Committee subsea for
discussion.
Two oh seven point four that's
correct.
So Mister chair would you like
me to proceed my administration
was the.
Have
the registered owner experts
estimate through.
Use the phone with.
reference there coordinated
opposition.
Mr chairman of Mr Browde here on
Saturday he can hear again I
don't current Mason is a
homeowner and she's at a
doctor's appointment there to
adoration the here and then Mr
Fleming is I was tied up in
court so stop.
And he can make a presentation
to the extent that.
That number of people who use
use of Mr I do and I think
there's a bunch of folks here in
support of we show hands maybe
just would be good.
Working
a perfect.
Do.
Mr and I forgot Julie onako
travelers twenty in opposition I
apologize for starters.
Yes Representative you is here
honor I like I said.
So.
You're speaking for others who
are you so I'll show you just
referenced.
Just to prove knows more about
it than I do.
All of this group.
This.
Okay thank.
Throughout the season.
Your.
Thank you Mr chair so Senate
bill fifty is a.
Right to repair bill thirty five
other states have passed
legislation along this lines and
this bill would add New Mexico
to the list that allows for a
resolution process between
sellers and purchasers when
construction defects arise and
it creates a notice process to
allow a contractor and
subcontractors to be given a
chance to address.
The issue that has arisen and
fix it before we end up in court
the substitute that was worked
on by the home builders
Basically creates that process
and then does something I think
it's very important that some of
the criticism to this bill was
that we were somehow taking away
the right to go to court
that's not all the case it does
insert in front of automatic
process whereby on notice is
given and there's a chance to
address construction defects but
at the end of that process
assuming the situation is not
resolved it defaults to the
remedy that the parties have
agreed to and their underlying
contract so if there is a
provision that calls for
arbitration that's certainly the
reduction ago if there's not a
provision for arbitration or
mediation then certainly they
would have the right to go to
court so that's the general gist
of what we're doing here what
I'd like to do is use the time
here for you all to hear from
our experts and really to
understand why this has become
such a a big issue in real
challenge for both contractors
and subcontractors so I'm gonna
yield at this point I'm not sure
who's going to go yes.
You might Mr chairman.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is mackenzie
Gresham I started in own a
browser homes a large scale
general contractor in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe
full disclaimer I've not been
named in one of these one of the
students that we're talking
about today but I deal with
subcontractors who face many in
many cases more than dozens
which all of let Jim Griffin
talk about because that's this
is really a subcontractor issue
more than a general contractor
issue what I will say is what's
happening is creating spiraling
general liability costs and in
many cases driving
subcontractors out of the
business altogether which is
really hampering our ability
impeding our ability to address
housing affordability so given
the spirit of time I'm gonna hit
it off.
My name is Jim Griffin's I am
with Aspin block for a masonry
contractors working between the
land and the Santa Fe quarter.
I have been named in these multi
point of construction the
federal lawsuits in fact over
fifty of them in the last
several years I can tell you for
a fact prior to the lawsuit
being filed as a contractor and
the builder I work for no notice
was provided which specifically
stated this house has a
construction defect nor were we
given an opportunity to inspect
the house and either agree
disagree to get to a point where
there was a dispute.
Never in over fifty.
The genesis of how these multi
plaintiff lawsuits come up is
not in New Mexico problem
expected to United States
problem Senator Wirth noted over
thirty five states have passed
the right to queue of Bill and
one state reads very basically
the act requires homeowners to
first tell the contractors in
writing about any concerns they
have with the workmanship of the
home give them an opportunity to
correct this issue that's all SB
fifty is us to comply with what
the states have done to prevent
these multi plaintiff lawsuits
without giving the contractor
builder the opportunity to
address what may be a
construction defect.
The genesis of how these
lawsuits come about is not the
homeowner contacting a law firm
in saying I've tried to work
this out with my my builder or
my contractor.
I know what.
It's not the way it's happening
I have a copy of a confidential
letter that gets sent to
homeowners in basically what.
What is going on is the law
firms will contact each
homeowner within a subdivision
or development and they write a
letter which states.
Verbatim.
The this law firm is
investigating the possibility of
defects in your development we
often discover defects in
building code violations and
critical components of the
homes.
In addition to certain code
violations.
The end issues the issues
identified below are present in
production homes like the one
you know all.
They further go on and asked can
state the.
We have successfully recovered
in excess of one billion for our
clients.
Then they further go on and ask
the homeowner to fill out a form
that says tell us if you have
any construction defects.
But that form specifically tells
the homeowner but don't tell
anyone else because you violated
attorney client privilege so
we're never given the
opportunity to talk to the
homeowner or even inspect the
house.
For nor is the builder that we
would work for as a result.
Two major insurance companies
have pulled out of New Mexico
Cincinnati in bituminous we're
hanging on by a thread with one
company several contractors of
that tried to go out of state to
provide insurance coverage.
My insurance has gone up by six
times as Ralph largely as a
result of these multi point of
lawsuits six times that it's not
just me that's across all of the
contracting community.
The cost that gets passed
homeowners on top of what's
already a challenging.
Affordable housing market is
just has to stop and that's all
just be fifty dollars thank you
and and Mr chair just in the
final kind of minute and a half
I want to let you know this
issue came to my attention from
clients of mine who received I
believe there also they do
picnics invite all the members
of a certain homeowners.
Association or members of a
development to come to the
picnic and they brought in the
similar type of letter and just
were extremely concerned they
were very happy with their.
With their unit and had no
reason to believe there was any
issue whatsoever with the units
and they were trying to figure
out what the heck was going on
and so I think it raised flags
there we certainly in the
session been talking a lot about
insurance companies
and unfortunately what's
happening in these cases when
the general contractor passes
along to the to the subs they
turn it over the insurance and
quite frankly insurance
companies rather than gets
dragged into a legal lawsuit are
settling the cases and then
raising the premiums and then
saying they won't insure so
again
I certainly am a lever in access
to the courts but I do think
that this is one of those
situations where there needs to
be some protections and that's
what this bill does not violate
the yield Mister chair that
shepherds here as council on who
can address specific legal
issues in the bill.
Thank you Mr.
By the time you just want to be
to address questions we're about
a minute so we list you got
something you want to add in
about thirty seconds or so
Mister shepherd I just picked
the state in my forty one years
of being a trial or that's all I
did learn the new where the
court is at least effective
least productive way to resolve
the dispute so I was asked about
this bill that I look at it is a
very good way in some instances
to avoid these deficiencies
productive that will still
happen at times I think this
bill is a big step in trying to
get those resolved things an
opportunity to resolve them
those who are not on either side
where they would
sever.
All right of opposition.
Groups.
Yes Representative your
recognize rotate Mentzer and
please use the microphone.
runner at a hands can I actually
borrowed a lot of the stable
years.
Good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Scott booth one of the attorneys
the cast and law firm of our law
practice Representative strictly
single family homeowners for
construction disputes with their
builders I'm here in opposition
of SB five hundred
fundamental problem with their
bill is that it does not address
the actual issues that are at
stake and there are number of
issues in the construction
industry right now in fact the
principal issues are primarily
their sub standard construction
primarily intractability is a
mass developments a lot of the
out of state corporate home
builders we have homeowners who
are not being protected by the
home builders limited warranties
or these two ten home warranties
a home builders are always
buying and even that the bill
now tries revert to fear only
remedy they don't protect
homeowners we also have of other
industry groups like the
national association of home
builders providing that in
effect for sub standard
performance standards other
trying to force on homeowners
and consumers and Fundamenta the
biggest issue here's unfair risk
transfer from the general
contractor to the subcontractors
you have these large general
contractors were charging as
much as I can for the homes
Ruiloba in the construction out
to the lowest bidding
subcontractor possible the same
time forcing the subcontractor
to sign draconian contract with
additional insured endorsements
and all kinds of other draconian
allegations and to fix the
problems at the end of the day
when they're doing the best they
can with a little bit and I know
they have to bid low to get the
job.
The reality is in Arizona or in
New Mexico here there are two
eighty or twenty three thousand
five hundred ninety five
qualifying parties there's over
fifteen thousand companies the
lawsuits that our firm is
brought we counted it's against
ten general contractors is
really all we're talking about
in turn most of these general
contractors and sue all the
subcontractors under the current
law the homeowner than have to
sue a couple of the principal
subcontractors but it's the
general contractor who cast a
broad net.
Now the issue we have here that
we've heard about how the cases
start I'm just not at all in my
experience I don't know what
other firms do or others
practice are but that is not how
we handle there's no barbecues
things like that yes letters can
be sent to communities
identified if you have issues
give us a call it's at our house
that's all it is if there's
concerns with that the state bar
is remedies we've never had a
single complaint or issue with
with that so again those are
issues are also not been
addressed by this bill so that's
a red herring issues for today
the issue today on sub standard
construction we have numerous
clients throughout the entire
day with significant defects we
have foundations with massive
cracking we have homes that are
three four five years old with
half the floor tiles are cracked
and retract we have water
intrusion mold dry rot we
actually have where the she's
not even there anymore these are
homes are less than ten years
old and it's because of improper
installation issues now the big
question that we get to is what
happens to the home owner when
they tell the builder under
warranty come fix the builder
will sometimes come out do
things other times a so you're
out of warranty go pound sand
homeowners don't call attorneys
because their first choice
that's because I know where else
to go and the issues we have are
significant the defects in the
damages we've got homes were the
walls of lifted up so much you
can see daylight between the
wall and the floor the builder
said go pound sand there's
nothing they're going to do
whether that homeowner actually
or that bills are passed the
claim they're the noticed the
subcontractor homeowners no idea
because they don't know who that
subcontractor is.
and there's numerous instances
of faulty construction
significant defects and damages
and from the homeowner's
perspective the builders
unilaterally drafted impose
contracts don't provide much of
course you're protection you
have contracts of adhesion
there's on third party in power
if you're caught we also lack of
sophistication by most
homeowners against these large
corporate home builders of.
Floors of attorneys working on
behalf.
And then we also the express
warranties that fail to protect
the homeowners there typically
limit to one in two years and
that's it home should certainly
last more than a year to any new
car has a power train warranty
significantly longer than that
the builders also now set forth
the unilateral quality standards
that often fall well below
industry standard practices with
the two ten home warranty same
thing it's industry groups to
prepare these documents these
warranties are there are worth
the paper they're written on
they have their own self to
provide quality before they're
triggered it usually means a
structure has to be
uninhabitable for a load bearing
member is gonna fail its path
you can have tremendous damage
before this formula ever taken
to do anything so again these
aren't worth the paper they're
written on I don't assist me
look for the course of insane we
had honorable Benjamin Chavez
one of our cases in two thousand
nineteen send your Horton's
arbitration clauses on recently
favorable one party and
therefore at some simply
unconscionable a year later in a
faulty K. he rolled the
arbitration provisions are
substance on possible and avoid
honorable Victor Lopez in two
thousand twenty one rolled your
Horton's arbitration clause
substantive on constable against
public policy therefore on
reasonable Joshua Allison twenty
twenty one declared void and
unenforceable honorable James
Noel of the arbitration
positions something
unconscionable and procedures on
constable Energy Mexico law
unenforceable.
I'll talk about two ten home
warranties it's not just me
saying they're not worth the
paper they're written on in a
case called on brown over Yemen
are R. C. out of the Arizona
Supreme Court the court ruled
the PWC warranty protects
against non conforming
tolerances it establishes for
certain construction components
within the warranty period most
of which are than the wanted to
here the PWC Ortiz insufficient
to substitute the implied
working certainly not superior
from the home buyer or the
public's perspective.
And again the warranties only
apply to specific construction
components that leave you with
leaving others on covered twice
a print court found on
fundamental unfair and there's
on a federal District Court
found the same thing and
interest time just go to the
conclusion that provides this
the staff deck in favor of the
defendants the home builder and
that's with those warranties
that they want to revert to our
in fact you look at these
warranties it shields the
builders from liability the
first thing that you sent home
warranties they say the warranty
does not cover building code
violations so you don't have to
comply with the code anymore
it's limited to one or two years
has very lax tolerance.
Helps get through some of this
The problem is the home builders
right now or also already
protected New Mexico law already
gives a ten year statute of
repose for all construction so
many contractors not liable for
anything they've built after ten
years if the house or building
falls down your eleven.
Numbers off Scot free there's
nothing that can be done to
protect it there's a two year
statute of limitations for the
appropriation contract claims
again the claim for breach of
contract import based after two
years from discovery the builder
is going to have protection same
thing for your spatula Tatian
for Krillin negligence.
Also we talk about the right to
repair this is nothing new yes
there are other states are part
of that what I can tell you
there's only three of those
other states that have a four
step process like this one this
is very unusual and in those
other states highly regulated
which this bill does not have
but many CC in ours and
communities already have a
dispute resolution process with
the notice of the defect before
you can file arbitration demand
in my experience we've done this
for a number of years we've
always provided notice to the
home builders very detailed
notice of of those issues and
they've never come out inspected
and made a repair in fact that
one of my clients was here
Saturday Oct Carmen Mazen and
forces you can't be here today
but she has stuck on the back of
our house that's really falling
off you put your hand in the
cracks you can see the last
that's resting coming through
she called faulty and said come
out and fix it they responded
you're out of warranty we can't
do anything so we were hired we
submitted a notice under the CC
in ours with the excel
spreadsheets and stucco cracks
Rio home line by line you know
the responsibility or in eight
minutes.
Ask for one more the thirty
second thirty seconds
information this bill does not
do what it's supposed to do it
doesn't protect the consumer get
blocks access to the court if
you actually look at it says
you're done with repairs process
you can go back and get another
notice to the bills it forces
homeowners to hire a lawyer to
comply with it does not require
code compliance it's never
ending it also has a lot of
devil in the detail the sixty
days if the builder for combat
inspection yes something so
you're bad covers multiple test
it is sixty days given your
working thing again very good
thank you Mr thank you all
right.
The committee questions comments
they were.
Sure Senator.
I live here.
Mr chair Senator Stewart I'm
happy to I think that certainly
the issues within the contracts
and the fact that there are
potentially arbitration clauses
that are drafted in such a way
that they're not enforceable in
no way are we trying to change
any of that certainly obviously
if if the court determines that
there is a fat arbitration
clause that's exactly what the
court should be doing I think
what's been happening here is
that basically.
The contractors have not been
given a chance to address the
problem that exists because
what's happening is the lawsuit
gets filed and basically all of
a sudden you're forced into a
into a court situation there's
insurance companies involved
it's tender to the insurance
companies settlements are
reached and the and the
underlying fundamental issue the
COVID supposedly trigger the
problem hasn't the contractors
never had chance to have that
fixed and so again I think that
what this is trying to do is
simply give the contractor and
the sub a chance to fix the
problem if there stucco.
Under this bill this quite
frankly would address some of
the issues that are being
flagged out there in terms of
the time frames there's a
provision for the for the
homeowner to give the contractor
notice and there's a there's a
time frame there's about I guess
let Mr shepherd walked is
specific time frames that are in
the bill the whole point of this
is to avoid ending up in
lawsuits that's what so it's
interesting that that you know
you hear the other side of this
page is we've got to have the
course because that is we need
to be able to get.
Problems resolved these folks
are here because they want this
legislation they want a chance
to be able to fix the darn thing
and avoid having to go into a
lawsuit and and have the court
be the the solution here that's
what the bill does so I think I
think it's you're hearing two
sides of this and and I'm not in
any way suggesting that there
are times when the court may
well find that that a provision
of the contract is problematic
and that's certainly not what
we're trying to do here is a
point that what we're trying to
do though is create a process to
get the problem fixed within a
relatively short time period
which I can assure you is a much
shorter time period than the
average time it takes to go to
court to resolve a construction
dispute construction disputes by
their very nature should be
resolved you know I would say
outside of a a court process is
just not the best process to
resolve this dispute but again
that's up to the parties and
what they've agreed to do
obviously if there's a bad
provision that quarter set aside
this in no way trying to justify
that what it's saying those that
when there's a good arbitration
provision and I do a long time I
get brought in to mediate and
arbitrate cases just like this
and just to sit down figure out
what's going on and get it
resolved.
This this bill is trying to
avoid the need to go to
arbitration or go to just give
the the contractor chance to fix
the problem that's what the bill
does so Mister chairman.
I think I carried the LESC.
this is not a new problem.
About this for a long.
I don't remember exactly what
happened to them obviously
nothing happens.
Well I was probably knew in the
state Hey here's a nice little
bill for you health.
And and then approach them all
to you that the the chair of the
committee when he was a
representative carried one of
these bills and he knows very
well about the challenges again
wearing two hats as an architect
and living in the world of
trying to find the right balance
but yeah it's something that's
been around again we're really
trying to figure out a solution
here to a problem that's
creating huge huge challenges
for the industry in the
subcontractors finally it's
already sort of sketched it out
just offered to do a brief run
through lines.
Three.
So what I'll do then and
protests have Mr shower kind of
walk through what the bill.
With the.
Yes Senator Stewart and without
going through the exact page
there are the times of the
thirty days extent or what it
does is the up the homeowner
will prepare a list and we'll
have a reasonable element to it
to where somebody had understand
what the issues are then the
contractor will have X. amount
of days in order to respond to
that and under this bill the
contractor can agree to do a
repair can talk to the homeowner
about paying the money and and
they both agree on an amount of
money to take care of the repair
or if they're still a dispute
then nothing happens and they
can go to court or they can go
to arbitration if that's
allowed.
So what and then if there is
agreed upon repair there's a
certain amount of time and
regional issues which lawyers
always use in which there's time
to get things mobilize if you
need a permit to get the permit
and then the work yes to get
under way if it's under the
delayed then again all bets are
off and the homeowner can then
take the remedy of what's in the
contract or poor so really what
this bill is is it's I called
the time out bill it's a simple
it doesn't change any law it
it's not owners on anyone it's a
limited period of time which in
most instances probably will
take sixty to ninety days for
most average repairs.
And there's a time out we get it
done that way in a in that cases
where there's bad things going
on the mission is talked about
this bill probably is not going
to address those but then we go
back where we were which is they
can go to court thank you god
arbitration but we allow those
contractors and homeowners that
don't want to go to court and
wait years for resolution an
opportunity to get it done
ninety hundred twenty days.
Right thank you.
Thank.
Others.
good.
Thank you Mr chair.
Excuse me
So so why not have this be a
voluntary alternative.
For those homeowners who want to
do this so that homeowners who
wanted wanted to take this
approach can and those who want
to go to court.
Mr court.
Mr chair Senator.
So.
Mr chairman and madam vice chair
first of all I think that
certainly the the the two
parties have a contract and a
contract gonna spill spell out
their rights and and their
remedies
I think that the challenge is.
Making sure that there's an
opportunity and I love going
into a timeout bill it's it's
it's a sixty to ninety day
opportunity to fix the problem.
And and again I I just think
that that.
Otherwise you know where they
are they're they're gonna follow
whatever their their contract
provides which which probably
sentiment arbitration if they've
got an arbitration clause or
they could hire a good lawyer
and challenge the arbitration
clause and I think what's what's
happened though is in and this
is this is what came to me from
my clients
basically presented with the
idea that there is a.
Problem with their house what
direction to go down a path
towards litigation for let's go
figure out the problem that
exists the clients looking to me
we want figured out that there
wasn't even a problem that
existed and and again they they
decided to stay away from the
whole thing they made that
choice but again I just think
this is this is trying to
address something that's gotten
out of control and it's reached
a point on yield Mister chairman
Senator the if I could add
years ago the course wanted to
get this feature is also they
said we'll do voluntary
mediation.
That mediation Alamos's is
compelled by the court because
there are a lot of people would
volunteer to do it I think
invalid because a lot of people
realize when they did it the
problem was taken care of when
they sat down and talked and
they were required to things got
resolved so I think the answer
to your question I think that by
having the homeowners needing to
do this those that are
frustrated of those I don't
think the process might work
have to go through it and they
are going to find out often
times it works as it does in
mediation with a court.
Sure all all of all listen to
the the rest of the discussion.
You.
Service of.
I'm of.
About.
The short warranty period
for about.
A lot of these questions is
because arches always cooperate.
You don't.
Realize that there was
wondering
Mr chairman senator Wirth.
Make this applicant will to a
construction professional was
provided at least a.
Five or ten year warranty.
So that.
The reason for the construction
of that.
Thank you madam something comes
up.
And if they haven't provided.
Well.
That.
Thank you.
Happen thank you Mr booth.
So Mister chair I think probably
having Mr bishop who is the
general contractor kind of
respond to that and and his
world and.
What the warranty issue looks
like.
Mr chairman Mr etcetera so in
answer to your question the way
these warranties are typically
structured is they have kind of
a phase out period based on the
type of coverage and the type of
coverage is really tied to how
long those things should perform
or show that they are going to
are going to have inherent
defects so I got finishes you
know tile grout or things like
that that's usually gonna show
itself if I'm having an issue if
it's inherently because of the
tile grout that's going to
happen in the first year if I
have something going on with an
enrollment chemical system
usually two years of of
comprehensive coverage for that
if there's going to be an issue
that exposes itself in a
mechanical system like a leaf or
you know a faulty air
conditioner that's usually gonna
expose itself in the first
couple of seasons that has to be
in its useful life the
structural coverage that we
typically find in again I'll
also add warranties are not
mandated under state statute we
have a ten year.
You know such a proposed which
ultimately makes us accountable
for everything that construction
if there were an issue for the
homeowner but the structural
coverage is for anything that
might take a little bit longer
to manifest itself that's why
that has a ten year coverage
period so I don't know if that
answers your question
the warranty coverage is I think
really come down to who is
executing them I think builders
that execute them don't get sued
builders that don't usually do
get brought in to litigation and
I don't think that
You know I don't necessarily
know that this bill is going to
completely avert that but it
will help the good actors if you
will created default the default
step going down the road first
is Hey let's fix this let's get
an opportunity to fix this if
I'm non responsive as a as a
builder and as a general
contractor let's go to the next
stage of dispute resolution or
go to court if if that proves
fruitless.
And and Mr chairman and special
that's.
They is right.
We're trying to figure out how
to divide distinguish between
risk factors.
As we want to do that.
What the how long is your tier
work for.
And.
It is
Right because.
Because otherwise I think I
would choose and as.
I wake up in the morning.
I think myself I'm gonna be
rental space.
I may not notice something.
But I do notice and.
It may take me awhile to get
around to figure out what to do.
You know and so and so if there
were.
I guess I'm I'm just saying I
would feel more comfortable with
the.
Do we have something.
Something a more distinguished
major
on that but thank you Mr.
Others.
So Senator Wirth tribe this is
something that I try to tackle
years ago.
An interesting story maybe maybe
although.
Went to school college couple
degrees in architecture and got
a license in architect back in
nineteen eighty eight southern
California after graduate school
there I did what was called
their production housing which
is six I think we're talking
about here where we're doing
house by the hundreds southern
California San Diego you get the
picture.
And that's how I became a
lawyer.
is because of the litigation.
That there was a great deal of
on housing condominium
production housing projects in
southern California in the year
two years after that when I'm
finished Law School of twelve to
practices specialist reviewing
construction defects a lot of
construction defect were.
In so.
More of the problem.
Have questions about whether
this is the solution.
So Senator Wirth when we I think
and act and I would appreciate
the contractors trainer and
others met with me came to see
me Los crucis so all the time
talking about this
you're gonna give someone
concerns of the time.
The one page two related
subsection three section three
line twenty one so the purchaser
shall first comply with the
provisions of the section before
filing a dwelling action of and
to all the action is a complaint
court that's defined.
So this would require the
purchaser to go through these
procedures and process before
they can file complaints the
right so so actually the Mr
chair definition of of dwelling
action means a complaining court
for the mechanism for dispute
resolution the construction
contract between the parties so
yes it is that I think I think
that Mr shepherd's
characterization of it as a
sixty ninety day time out bill
is a good one.
And I and I told the
participants and with a ninety
nine and I hope that.
My colleagues on the committee
will agree.
That I I don't support
legislation that requires a pre
requisite filed court
The only place we do this the
medical malpractice act and
where thank and I've got a bill
to.
Eliminate the medical practice
act because very frankly that
process requiring.
The panel review medical retail
because of job right in those
was that in the practice so it's
a joke you go the medical review
panel not really care what they
decide because with the size and
we make a difference but you
gotta go through it step and
we've begun to eliminate that
step is a prerequisite so.
The bill right right now do you
require all of these actions on
the go through these actions
that we have to do before you
file a complaint said before you
file a complaint
and and then of course what
would happen is of of of
homeowner for a con when our
phones are an attorney with
violent action the first thing
shepherd Fansler is in this file
motion to stay.
gonna file motion to stay the
complaint you're not you're
headed for but we just what you
do to find a lawyer Senator
Wirth fine where we did cases
together for single or is going
to do when when the homeowner or
somebody files a complaint
quarter going to gonna file a
motion to stay the civil action
against a judge got to go
through this process because the
legislature's about this process
because gonna say it that's the
law reads.
And and then
then we start getting into these
processes and and procedures.
Which I've got to tell all of
you were working on this bill.
I think just don't work all that
well at least let me know if
there's a problem and I noticed
a problem see the problem and I
Representative Lara contractors
a lot of subcontractors in in
years past cases.
And I'm repeating the I'm on the
internet because as an architect
we've got to play for the design
work and and so I've been on
I've been on the.
The defense of this case
The there's a number of things
to build a district problematic
for me so just go through them
with you quickly
Subparagraph B. on page three.
Find that once the seller
receives notice that was
provided for the the homeowner
and the homeowner and contractor
as opposed to the other terms
are using your closing thirty
the reason for us to understand
as opposed to seller and buyer
but so the once the home builder
receives notice.
From the homeowner if you look
at paragraph it says that notice
does not constitute a notice of
claim or currency is defined by
their insurance co insurance
policy to note your notice
requirements the liability
carrier that that language all
Bill problematic to me because
you're essentially saying the
notice here is intended for one
particular purpose one specific
purpose with Mr this process is
not to constitute notice for any
other profession
Good lawyers you know notices
notice right and so we say well
this has notice for one purpose
but it's not notice for other
purposes that that's problematic
to me.
Even though you say with the
purpose of the purpose of the
notice only to amicably resolve
the issue.
I find that the bill has a lot
of redundancy for candidly and
lot of unnecessary for singles
language.
there's a lot of language I
think ultimately would just lead
to more litigation more
disagreement can only so if you
look on page four.
To talk about an inspection
that's going to be a lot of the
homeowners going to offer
inspection inspections be
conducted at a reasonable time
the building dispute about what
reason the times in the.
The the goes on to say I'm
looking online to the seller and
the construction problem
professional may use reasonable
measures including testing to
determine the nature because
this is a big issue here because
what happens is when you want to
come find a problem you're going
to do some potentially
destructive testing as a result
of that could contract you know
you're gonna be Jack hammering
the slab if you're looking at a
foundation or you're looking for
rebar looking for plumbing
electrical sub right.
Going to be doing some very
serious demolition work.
So if you go then this authorize
us to happen since the the
contractor may use the testing
to determine the nature because
of each alleged defect.
Then it says the construction
professional shall restore the
dwelling within sixty days of
the testing that's a long time
to live with the tort on wall
Jack camera bathroom floors torn
up kitchen sixty days with your
house.
Essentially.
On.
In a construction zone that's
that's I think one reasonable to
expect to expect to log hundreds
Committee out of sheet rock wall
taken sheet rock take of the
insulation maybe take off the
stucco and and then say well
you.
Connors at six issue affects.
So I think that that's and
regional.
You'll you'll see on page four
so perhaps two and three all
online thank you twenty one of
things the contractor may do is
offer monetary compensation the
purchaser.
There's always gonna be
disagreement about what's gonna
be the monetary compensation
done always enjoying could
contract if you're not here and
you you're not you're not.
I've done a lot of construction
work in addition to just the
behind the drafting board stuff
and and have done a lot of the
building we've we've done
commercial and residential
buildings.
The
The language of the bill in the
program three.
I think is really the heart of
what I suggested to the to the
construction industry to do hear
what we had in that moment you
look at page four line twenty
one says that the contractor
response may be to invoke any
remedies provided the
construction contract that
really is where I've really
suggested everybody in the New
Mexico with with.
Maybe continuing to pay for the
response of the contractor may
be to make a written offer that
shell describe in reasonable
detail all the repairs or
replacements.
At a reasonable estimated the
date by which is a.
And
It goes on the status of section
is not prohibitive offering
money money come compensation
instead of rendition of the
repair that to me that members
of the right that that
legislation says well we can we
can offer to fix it or we can
offer to pay for that and and.
We're not gonna prohibit you
from doing that that that to me
is also evident in the animal
years anybody to go shooting in
New Mexico so yeah you can pay
your way out of the of the
circumstance.
The purchaser shall be here
really is the heart of the bill
I think on page five subsection
if the purchaser shall of the
seller of the of the homebuyer
show of the contract for the
opportunity to make repairs
replacements that gets back to
Mr several what I said earlier
UNIFIL the complaint you get a
motion to stay and then the law
here if we were to enact this
would say that the contractor
has the right to repair replace
and all we really says they have
to do so within a reasonable
amount of time but we don't
really establish a big well how
and when to do that I know that
I know there's some deadlines in
here but there.
They're pretty squishy.
Public spaces there's language
in here says well that the
deadlines for getting the work
done is dependent on getting a
building permit you all looking
at you guys and I don't really
have County Los crucis getting a
bill looks to people around the
room it was going to I've been
there
you know.
I've heard horror stories due
respect about trying to get a
building permit in Santa Fe you
know.
That's kind of a joke is the.
Trying to get a building permit
in this in the state of this is
an act of god.
so you know you're going to give
the contractor that amount of
time to to get started before
the get a building permit the
homeowners released captive to
that before there's any kind of
remedy.
The.
But that's part of if the
purchaser of the home where
shallow the up to make the
repair that's that's Madam
that's pretty pretty clear
supper of Jesus the the
purchaser and seller Munich
associate for release of claims.
That's also evident to me that's
not necessary in statute.
Purchases the homebuyer the
contractor Minegishi for
release.
There there's monetary
compensation and satisfactions
with yes that's active then it
isn't coming from the kind of
litigation participate readers
Senator K. they can release the
coins that that that seems to be
on the certainly.
Then when you get down to
subsection H. we start getting
into some of the efforts that I
think are good I was trying
create a timeline but as I said
earlier there's a lot of hours
for the contract so heroes as
the the if you look at supper of
one the contractor in the home
homebuyer.
show coordinate the repairs
within thirty days after the
sellers notice of the intent to
repair or replace so that's good
that's a but it but it says.
That patient coordinator repairs
within thirty days then say the
completion that really is the
ultimate issue right it's easy
to say well we'll get started
with the repairs within thirty
days will really start the
repairs but
When you guys too many times
with six of the the sept comes
out and starts and then he's
supposed to be there for schools
without using but another part
but we have his guys they don't
show up and so before you know
if we supply for complete with
I'm really interested in the
ability because we're gonna do
something like this or that I I
really surprising contract
whatever reason but but the
deadline for completion of
repairs it's it's not enough to
give you a deadline to start
making a reporter to.
Because very frankly that's
easy.
Reporter I know started the
repairs are done the demo for
the repairs to the really the
cues the completion of your
call.
The page six the the first
paragraph there at the top is is
very problematic.
The law.
But this is an engineering
review the five cases this this
would essentially say that when
the contractor brings and
somebody new to do the repair
work the person who does the
repair work is only liable for
that person's work those for the
the secondary contractor in the
spaces in that that that's not
gonna work in the home right.
The first contractor didn't do
the job.
It's not it's not acceptable.
And we take a moment as an aside
the having a lot of construction
defect for.
The principal problem in this in
this area is unrealistic
expectations of buyers.
I used to always tell a lot of
points with the committee is
you know buying Swiss watch you
know construction has
differences she rocks and
tolerances and expectations and
stucco texture may differ here
and there and so forth and these
are things that we accept as
part of the construction process
it's not a it's not a Rolex but
but nonetheless.
Homeowners expectations are
oftentimes that.
And.
Realistic but but that that
language not programs and with
simply says that the
construction professional it was
not involved in the
construction.
is only liable to the homebuyer.
Who contract only for that
construction professional scope
of work so again the the person
who comes in to do the
replacement repair work is gonna
say I'm home only response for
what I did not on anybody else's
and again to the homeowner
that's not that's not a good
solution.
The the the language on some
paragraphs two one eight is the
language of referring to earlier
says repairs are places shall
begin as agreed by the purchaser
and seller by the homeowner the
contractors of sure the the
workshop again.
But then it just says with
reasonable efforts to begin
within thirty days and again no
no representation or guarantee
will be completed righteousness
would we're gonna get started
and this is the language below
that says a permit is required
reasonable efforts shall be made
to begin repairs let's face it
guys the contractor could could
delay this very substantially
but not really pushing the
building for and that's pretty
easy to do with the government
has so much harder to push the
government to give you a permit
to get them to not give you a
permit just means you don't push
it right you don't call me don't
go down there you don't have to
you'll never get a building
permit and that's a good way to
really delay that so.
The amount of money for me.
The look at page six a program
three this is where we start
getting into problematic
language to again says all
repairs replacement shall be
completed using reasonable care
under the circumstances that's
why we litigate right.
Will
every year we can there's a lot
of really good contractors is
from we recognize that some
really exceptional some of us
and and I know you were and I
think it's exceptionally good
work.
But what is going to be
reasonable care under the
circumstances.
Is gonna be disagreement about
I've seen a lot of homeowners.
Get really upset about they want
the texture on the sheet rock.
is reasonable expectations with
here there there were the same
but the work at minimum regional
current circumstances that's
going to be a dispute.
That goes on state should be
complete within the commercial
reasonable time consider the
nature of the repair access
issues unforeseen events while
and that's pretty broad you know
the we're going to get done.
Depending on unforeseen events.
To brought for me please.
Eight seven one three the
purchaser and seller may
negotiate a release and waiver
upon satisfaction again that's
axiomatic right that's kind of
the best statute this is if you
guys agree on a settlement you
can do so okay.
and you can sign a release a
release and waiver.
In paragraph six we get into
what I would be a nightmare for
contractors which retreats this
as at the conclusion of the
repairs placements the purchaser
may re initiate the process
regarding any claim for
inadequate report.
Way I would not want to have the
contractor right
this language says the
homeowners missions this process
has to go to the repair work and
they don't like it they re
initiate this process again and
and what's.
Right.
says a purchaser may set a new
notice after submission of the
original and the sellers
operational period that can
connect another inspection
partial complies with all of the
requirements B. through H.
preacher additional construction
defects identified.
One thousand nine hundred right
you got and I'm happy homeowners
are already unhappy with the
they come and you have to do the
work and this language says they
can do this over and over and
over again the times as they
want to know limit.
And that.
So needless to say hi my.
Thanks for the bill.
But I but I want someone
recognizes a problem.
Been around for a long time for
decades really and and I hope we
can find the solution I I
suggested to the all my friends
were contractors including more.
As I said we do a lot of the
structures of the solution made
by the contracts the parties
right I agree with Center were
sent with many good observation
doing doing construction defect
work in court is a nightmare.
Boxes of documents.
oftentimes
dollars rapper for a two by four
Maybe times of change I know
those laptops and tablets and
all that but I still think that
a lot of notes get written on
the lunch rappers and I'm seeing
my contractor smiling and
nodding their heads that's still
the way it gets done.
So so when I when I go litigated
case boxes of documents receipts
invoices notes.
It's it's it's just for one
minute the the most fundamental
thing for maintenance if you set
up a set of plans I level set of
plans hi my resume all their
long time more the work is done
but to the average juror the set
of plans with the winds and
words on it it's completely
meaningless so you put that you
put a construction defect case
in front of a jury start adding
specifications and start talking
about.
Three thousand is a contract
concrete in the mix and so we
had a water and so forth and I
got to jurors are places where
they live sexy criminal cases
are they like some of the Dieter
doctors in our practice those
will features a jury boy there's
nothing like for the health of
your two weeks into a
construction defect cases with
one engineers and subcontractors
come into this just looking you
Mr Senator it is a nightmare
right is the capital worst case
ever of them so you know I I
encourage contractors to to get
in arbitration I always pushed
arbitration of the it's a good
way to do things principally
because in our in arbitration
case you don't have a jury.
And usually the arbitrator who
we would often take a an engine
contractor or design
professional interconnected you
don't have to explain what you
know three thousand PSI contract
concrete means if you have a
Europe of jury of of people off
the street that'll take you two
days to explain why the rebar
pattern matters or why the the
so preparation compaction matter
right that takes two days to
explain that to but you give of
arbitration cases somebody who's
a professional Intel on that in
the to the compaction of the
density and they got it right
they can look at the compaction
yes we know exactly what
happened in the bill to exactly
what the company failed.
I think that really is the
solution to the issue I'm gonna
select
for the next with nation but I
think you all deserve it because
I think thank I think you're
with some problems Senator.
Mr chair listening to you go
through it.
Sounds like there's a lot of.
Language changes that that could
be made.
That would both.
Addresses some of the concerns
that you raise which which which
I I share and still accomplish
the the point of the bill I
wonder if this is one where
where it's worth seeing if we
can get another sub that.
Take some of that feedback into
consideration take another look
at.
So you're posing questions I
think and I think you so with
the issue for me from this is
the there's no there's no lack
of the this is this is a half
this is a half practices if if
the bill is going to say you
can't go to court tell you all
of these procedures and
processes.
There's just a
few years ago required
prerequisite to phone for.
Thanks and this this requires
that we represent the following
a I think I've been real clear
with part numbers will never
support that number support risk
any restricted access of course
and you can understand the
problem so we're going to.
Maybe Mr statue limitations made
a dispute later whether this
actually patients was told as a
result of bringing the complaint
and having of a state file.
A lot of issues come up in my
mind whenever you put a
prerequisite to finance specific
need is addressed on page eight
I mean stature repose Shelby
during the repairman placement
provision for the item specify.
Section M. line ten.
No appreciate going up to the
yeah yeah that that that last
issue is taken care of it's it's
still leaves me with the
fundamental issues are worth
which is should we should we
enact a law that says you got to
do something before you to file
a lawsuit and that's that's it
in that show from the system.
You may think there's a way to
solve a.
Just a secure policy for and and
and Mr chair and senator I.
You know I and and and I
understand that policy and I I
think I probably have the same
as so much of what you were
talking about was really other
than.
That point that seems like even
if that is still in there and.
But at the so passes the flight
probably you're not voting
against it there would still be
in much better.
Just a lot of those other issues
that the racing so that's that's
that's my thinking on that I the
Mr chairman again realistically
at this point if we do that.
Yes I just think that I don't
know how long this bill's been
in this committee but it's been
here for awhile and I have no
issue with that whatsoever given
what we've been doing in this
committee I just think it's a at
this point we.
Take the vote see what happens
and obviously there's a whole
journey this bill would have to
go on before we become lost and
certainly other options to I
mean if it were to move forward
I think you've got folks that
certainly listen very carefully
to what's been said and and.
No there's ways to continue to
work on a language as it moves
but if we stop and trying to
that now I think it's.
Probably into the bill so I just
think I would I would ask that
it does take a vote and and
certainly respect completely I
mean I get this is a challenging
one it really is there's a real
problem here in the and if we do
nothing you know than going to
continue to have this problem
and so that's that's the the
dilemma we're in so thank you Mr
chair.
I thank you Mr chair now with
setting that.
This is all all back up just a
little bit pre law life I did a
lot of real state lot of a lot
of repair work a lot of things
like that many times and to hire
subcontractors Mr chair and I'll
tell you what I have problems
with subcontractors really get I
I mean it when for they would
finish the work really did work
that was sub standard whatnot
and you know I know you think
I'm going one way with this but
also like this opportunity I can
afford and turning back that I
can go and see somebody to to
take up my case to my action and
you know in a town like mine
there was gonna be a class
action there
really no remedy was pay
thousand dollars to make
hundreds of dollars Mr chair or
you know just live with it and
and that's what you get and so I
think in a different way aside
from the technicalities within
this bill which by the way we
just heard the thirty page bill
on the floor that never came to
the judiciary the needed a ton
of work but we kind of ignored
that one and so I think a lot of
times that happens in this
building which is
I'm not going to point it out I
would.
My client mobile clients my
colleagues down on the floor
Norwich you Mr chair but anyway
that that went through we've
ordered all that stuff and I
felt like this is this is a
consumer bill this bill helps
give an option to consumers
would have we've had an issue
with construction in in my
opinion and you give someone
alternative taxed the litigating
they get to send notice to go
through the process they're not
involved with retainers and
hundreds of dollars.
of fees to get into court and
and all that did they send
notice to tell contractors Hey
this is.
Can you come back in and repair
it and I think that at that
point the contractor would be
glad to get that I think a lot
of these guys never get noticed
or just getting sued at the end
of the day we look at the look
on the dock and again served now
you know but it would just tell
them Hey can you come back and
prepare this and and what
subcontractor that I know and I
know a lot of
would go and do that to avoid
litigation you save it's it's
judicial economical.
It saves the consumer money it
saves the subcontractor money so
I mean the concept here I think
is is admiral and I think it you
know what short cut supports and
some people may not like that
but maybe action like that I'm
contract attorneys well but I
think it's just a good idea good
idea for a the small businesses
good idea for people and so
anyway I plan on supporting it I
think issues to be resolved at
some point thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman in order
to do pass.
Two passed this proper motion
anybody else on the committee.
Yeah Mr chair I.
I would really like it if.
The parties would be willing to.
Try to talk to the exact.
But what try to talk some things
out.
I understand what what center
for the state about.
Where we are in the session.
But I also understand that
This first three day session we
have almost half session.
And because because the issues
that I.
They are double state with the.
Problems are really.
And after.
Yep there's Mr saying well.
It is for the court of windfall
for but then you also spend the
twenty minutes talking about a
number of other issues that
could result.
And so
Get out it's not practices to
level out the source insurers.
If we have a disagreement with.
With their personal tax.
And.
One of the.
But.
But I think some of these issues
to be resolved.
I think we need to figure out a
way to distinguish between the
good the.
I thought I would I personally.
Appreciate it.
If.
If.
Well this little.
Let the parties try to talk to
see if there's something.
So Mr chairman again the same
point that Senator do it maybe I
think there's a policy decision
here I certainly again we take a
vote see what happens
I assure you that that you're
right there's still a whole
journey on the other side of the
the other chamber
and certainly I'd love to have
you sit down with these folks
and work on this thing but I
mean it's that that this point
for that well I might be
offering your services Senator.
So I I mean I I get what you're
saying I just think
realistically again being in a
position to be able to bring
this bill back.
By Wednesday and and this
committees got a lot of work to
do I mean it's just we're in
this unique get again I I hear
what you're saying about it was
a thirty day session but this
bill would be in a thirty day
session in less than a mess from
the governor with far fewer
bills and I just know we got a
ton of bills and this and this
committee so I mean again I just
think at this point it's.
No Mr chair to it's your call
but I think there is a motion
you know on the table on just we
take the vote and see where we
go out with a commitment let me
just assure you if the bill
moves forward it doesn't mean
this is the end of trying to
tune it up and continue to make
it better I think that is the
point and been raised are good
ones and there's I think there's
a lot of things that can be.
Tightened up and narrowed on
this if it moves forward.
Right we have a property passed
motion before the committee will
take a roll call vote on the
motion.
Senator Baca yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes.
Thank you yes.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator do that.
Senator Ivey Soto the.
Senator snow it would be best Mr
chair.
Committee members let's see let
me see we have some we have
enough time.
Yes.
Senator.
To present their own set of done
to yeah okay.
We're we're we're at or seven
o'clock right and there's food
for the committee.
I'm trying to find that there's
something that we can do
quickly.
Because I appreciate Senator I
and I am here I think that's
gonna be an extended discussion.
Discussions of
Senator Padilla you're here.
Love.
District three thirty six.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee coming
before you with a need for this
horse racing Bill when we
started the session introduced
the bill had major major divine
major discomfort with what we're
trying to accomplish which was
to shore up the horse racing
industry around insurances right
here is to the hits of policy
and jockey insurance of coming
before you with us Senate tax
business and transportation
committees of.
Percent of the three thirty six
all draw your attention because
I know that the hours getting
late to page to over nine ten we
essentially reassigned for four
point six percent of the gaming
taxes collected so we reduce the
overall attacks twenty one and
for tents for the general
purpose and then if you go over
to that page three starting on
line six we take that four point
six percent and we apply it to
the it's a process federal
requirement and jockey insurance
lot of this is already done
today Mr chairman and committee
and we just that this group was
really splintered really divided
I think I know you want to move
fast but I will tell you that it
was able to bring together the
horsemen the breeders as well as
the racinos the race tracks with
the seniors and and brought
everybody together you'll see if
you want to just ask for some
hands or whatever it certainly
up to you and then I will say
that just to further protect the
purses that are paid out to the
horsemen what's a what there
were some means made about me
when the bill was introduced
that this this but I want to put
the word in their online three
on page three solely for purpose
for persons so that we ensure
that we protect those
individuals I have is he with me
here for the reason commission
and will take any questions
whenever you're ready.
We have both proponents and
opponents another US file photo.
Mr Chairman was a was able to
bring back up to fifteen
meetings with the the three
groups the horsemen the breeders
and the racinos and and I'm very
proud of that work and you hear
that from all of them if they
all stood up and spoke and so
make sure I've got to this is
all hands on or those with the
last minute.
We do we have anybody here in
opposition at all.
Right so you have on the side of
Joe Thompson.
Renaissance is Jason Thompson.
In support so one minute please.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of.
My name is Joe Thompson and I'm
a registered lobbyist for the
breeders the apprentice
arraignment G. Sweetser I want
to thank the Jason Weaks for and
certainly our sponsors Senator
Padilla for bringing everybody
together is actually something
that was really cool to be part
of and grateful for the
opportunity and hope you
supported.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Jason Thompson I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
horsemen's association L. not a
print disagreement G. Sweetser
but well the echo the sentiments
of missed the other Mr Thompson
This is an industry that's
that's a pretty intense
disagreements over the last
several years but this is a good
example of being able to get the
group together and come to a
compromise and Community meant
that we can all be happy with
and grateful to be part of it
definitely think Senator Padilla
for his work Mr weeks everybody
else involved the tracks be able
to come together and and get
something we can all work with
us so I would really appreciate
your time and urgent for to pass
thank you.
Members the committee I have one
more yet that that offered over
three or with okay we want.
Mr chairman members of the
committee on Fred Heinrich can
someone park racetrack and
casino Senator Padilla asked me
to come and and address you as
well we thank you for the time
selling part fully supports this
bill and we want to thank him
and you for all your work for
the state of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman so there
you did hear from the force and
the breeders and the reason you
know it's all in agreement on
this the term so we can't.
Committees that source.
Well we're not a quorum stay
with a second.
So question.
As one make sure I understand is
going to significant new section
law section two.
It looks like.
Talk about section one.
Figure out what's going on in
section.
This is a new excise tax on
gaming.
Call the gaming taxes all you.
We didn't make any changes to
that Mr chairman.
Earlier I used to.
Sufficiency taxes included here
this little all state local
growth factors.
We will.
The state covering some of the
pharmacy back in thirty minutes.
You want to address out here I
mean if I can transfer chairman
thank you so the section for if
you look at refers back to
section two just as the
effective date.
January first two thousand
twenty seven so we thought that
we would make sure that that was
mentioned that.
Okay so this affected for a few
years.
seven just about our take a
right.
The this replaces.
All state and local to.
So the local from Canada taxes
yes.
The.
C. O. in thirty a little as
thirty minutes seven thirty.
Is repealed and.
State.
The state.
Your state.
Get rid of the.
Into the municipality tax as
well as.
This is is.
On the.
Now in their.
This.
This is when I think of the is
currently sees.
This is.
This is a new issue state.
Because this is.
We have Mr.
But we're.
Opening.
Our.
The.
Commission this is no
effectiveness of use.
This is to absorb the.
State risk commission show
review.
Section three.
Section
three can stay in for
this one please there's an
emergency.
Yes.
Yeah.
A lot of the.
Thank you.
I first.
Our.
Four
four seven.
Four seven one.
Thanks.
Twenty one percent is.
For section.
Six these.
Yes.
After.
Hi
this is.
That is the direct threat.
Experiences and.
The existing wall has a doctor
language about as straight to.
So.
The state.
That's.
Representative.
Senator.
Goes back to the existing law.
This state is seeking to.
It's going back to how it is you
have to get rid of the phrase no
because.
Because the tax rate is back to
the region is to drive this back
to the original.
That's what I might need help
explain.
I thank you explain Senators.
Will.
I think that talk to everybody
else.
One of the turn it off.
One.
Just in general.
This
she's.
Good.
Okay well I'm.
Care.
Today.
I.
Senator.
I was.
Is
basically we have to do exist in
statute which were meant for
only mending in until twenty
twenty seven eight.
It's and lasted
for that it would get the state
we're transaction financial
contracts would simply said.
S. whatever our role we did say
that.
Because it's a repeal and
replace.
Basically.
New.
K. five.
Services and
all that so this is.
Change.
That's the reason why you're
doing it.
Agent.
To those this is a yes this is
is.
That part again to.
Please.
We don't this
place is all these things and
that.
The way to do that just with.
General.
All they had to do yes I do this
every.
It is essential for and then
it would have been back to the
proper.
Mr.
Yeah we're we're on actually
living.
So this is.
C. go over so if they needed
more.
It just.
This.
Yes.
Yeah it was like a minute.
But that's alright it's not so
much as well actually we believe
we're just fine it's just the
state programs interacting with
I okay so.
So it's just three okay.
Work for in America yeah.
This is the primary have like
seven or
six or seven good six of the.
Sure it's a seven percent
cybersecurity.
Currently.
Want to see some.
Yes.
Right
now.
He's the coach of the.
Sorry.
It to.
State.
We
Yeah and that's I'm doing fine.
To the.
Life that we passed.
the end of life.
Lawsuit against the state
sanctioned the.
Tensions have.
This is.
Seven.
It is a neighborhood.
The.
You hear the year that I.
The the end of the she was here
the year that I got the two out
of this committee at like two in
the morning when you hear that
you're.
Yeah anyone who walks up to you
right after into those leads me
in the right.
We took like two hours of two
members of the committee.
Three hours eleven the two.
To a point that if he was
listening to all.
Just.
Since not following the the
right.
Mexico as well as usual.
About a fifth of.
To.
Okay Sir.
The subject I was.
The
team.
I
got.
Of the job.
The way you treated.
But I also love to seventy
morning sessions.
Practices.
Everybody.
Use.
Also make sure
but not to.
Positions.
This.
Well Marcello that are doing
very well.
I tried to send.
All of your needs.
The other side I can just have
the D. Wonda.
I think as.
At.
Your government good the senior.
Okay yeah good.
Strong she's
Working on house bill seven
which is the ocean okay is that
all school before.
Please.
Our.
You would
we would been a champion for.
To have.
Right.
Bristol.
Yes.
The.
Yeah.
The store.
The grant.
Those two.
To.
The table my sentences testified
in the Tennessee.
How's Representative this isn't
M. S. W..
Volunteer to do that asked for
his company he works for to be.
Yeah this is kind of hard that
he.
Is that what you're of two.
Because you make it.
You know I'm much better now
when I was a baby legislature.
Certainly.
That is.
I'm I'm a lot better now than it
used to be.
Stuff text.
More.
R. as in other day.
And that is for.
Are we gonna be three of us will
be in both general that tend to
go together.
No need for federal workers.
The federal.
We have.
So there are.
This is on the way this morning.
She's done a phenomenal job.
All.
Senator one committee with the
wrong present information I read
that was.
Confirmation.
I started speaking.
Senator sure.
It
was older cases and it just got
put on this.
The bank
just thinking with this much
legislation we do we try to do a
lot I got to stop.
I use this to.
The ten
he told me this would come.
The fifth.
It is with
the representative and to jobs
part of this time last time
many have ma'am he's fifty.
Three fifty three actions
Morial's some.
Actually this is.
Seven percent of those only two
overs.
One session.
It's pales there's.
Fourteen bills.
Yeah
this is the best job I should.
Representative.
The I'd I'll I construction of
the bills.
The construction.
This is good and if I have
caffeine after two PM of the two
in the morning easy.
Can do it.
The small smidgen caffeine that.
But the lady.
The most frustrating thing.
Even
taking up candy to.
This morning that's that's
terrible.
Madam chair thank you.
Our job.
We'll see.
If we can.
Yes.
And
Could
be funny that lead and then my.
These actions of that's works as
the years.
And so that is on the next look.
I
handles.
Once.
Just a few.
News Sen.
The pharmacist some of the.
Some.
She
is this.
I'm gonna say I.
Right isn't as far
as.
There's.
For.
We've we've got those or charge.
There's a report from the active
sessions to.
Can see what we.
C. L. C. L. with us so I and.
That this is.
Is that such a herculean task
begins.
But try to support anyway you I
know.
Thank yes I have well you wrote
it.
The most important yeah about
that I do appreciate I do want
to take a look at that.
