Yeah. Give us a presentation. I
think for about 15 minutes.
Go ahead. Thank you, Senator.
Members of the committee Um
Sonia Chavez, newly appointed
director of the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy.
Um
I'm finishing my 12th week
there. So brand new, um, happy I
feel like I'm too loud.
These. These microphones are
very awkward. Um, but
unfortunately when it when it
feels loud to you, we know for
sure They're hearing it online
so everybody can hear me.
Um, happy to give you an update
on what's been going on at the
academy. At least I can talk
about the last three months
since I've been there. I can
tell you that, Um there's a lot
of great momentum. I feel
excited to have started when I
did. Um, As you know, the there
has not been a director there
for a little while The last two
were fired. So, um, and then
they had an interim director
with Ben Baker.
And I'm grateful for the work
that he did while he was there
because he was able to clear
some cases hire some people.
Um and get us going in a very
positive direction.
So I believe part of what you
guys want to hear about is the
progress that we've made at the
academy as a result of Senate
Bill 19 from last year, which
essentially by for Kate ID the
functions of the academy, so the
law enforcement sort of cation
board, um was receded, so we
have a new board. There is one
Um, carry over from the previous
sport. And that's Sheriff
Mendoza from Santa Fe County.
Um and then we have the creation
of the newly seated training and
Standards Council Standard and
Training Council. So first with
the certification board, um I
participate in my first meeting
with the board in December.
At that meeting. We
Let me back up. The entire board
has been seated with the
exception of the chair. Um Julie
ball sitting here from the
public Defender's office is a
member of that board. I'm
grateful for her support and her
presence here today. Um, we
don't yet have a chairman. Um so
let this be a petition to
Solicit your retired state
district court. Friends must be
a Republican. Um, it's not for
lack of trying. We're
soliciting, Um, in all areas of
the state, um, trying to get
good representation, so it would
be nice to have someone from a
more rural area.
But just, you know, efforts are
underway, um to
To get to get a chairman
appointed. In the meantime, our
vice chairman is rising Star
Summer Mirrorball. She's the
chief of police at test Pueblo.
Um she's doing a fine job,
facilitating the meetings and
helping us with some decision
making.
So the first board meeting that
I participated in was the first
week of December.
Um, During that week, we
presented 21 misconduct cases.
We presented 21 misconduct
cases, and I can tell you so far
in the job. The review of these
cases is taking about 80% of my
time and that's okay. It's um
It's a taxing process, but I see
the value in in what we're doing
there. At that first meeting, I
recommended the revocation of
seven certifications.
Um and we had the remaining
were, um, I think we had three
dismissals and the rest were
suspensions.
Um so a lot of good work being
done there. Um, we average I'm
learning at about 100 misconduct
cases. Um
At a time. So apparently at
about this time last year, we
were at over 300 cases. Um,
thanks to the efforts of Ben
Baker in the great staff. There
they full court press. The
review, um, of many of those
cases, so we stand at about 100
cases right now.
I got the next, um
Load of cases on my desk
yesterday. So our next meeting
is in March, and we will present
another 20 to 25 of those cases.
so no that, um that process is
is good. It's moving forward. We
are looking for a chairman. But
in the meantime, the work is
progressing on the other side of
the house is the Training and
Standards Council. The newly
created
That's a big council about 24
people from all over New Mexico,
including the directors of all
nine satellite satellite
academies, so a lot of exciting
things happening on this side of
the house. Um, of note is a job
training analysis that I'm told,
Um the academy has been asking
for funding for for 10 years.
will you all thankfully
Um, last year funded that it's
about a million and a half
dollars, um, to update the basic
curriculum at the academy. It's
been over 10 years, I'm told
since that's been updated, so we
hired, um, a contractor and
we're in the thick of that right
now, Um, one of the best things
about it is we're soliciting and
getting great input from
Agencies, police agencies all
over the state. So we've been
socializing that since I got
here with the Chiefs, and the
sheriff's, um, requesting their
participation, so the new
curriculum will be, um, you
know, in response to our law
enforcement leaders in New
Mexico and will be reflective of
the needs that they see.
Um, being necessary and relevant
for our basic curriculum.
The other thing. We're, um
Embarking on there is a revision
update.
Repeal and replace of the New
Mexico administrative Code. The
end Mac as it relates to the Law
enforcement Academy.
Um, I have to say that before
coming here I was in federal
government and I didn't know
what the end Mac was, but I'm
no. Now it's the Bible there.
But the end Mac as it relates to
Law enforcement Academy has not
been updated and over 40 years,
so it's particularly important
at this time that we are
ensuring that our rules are
relative to some of the things
that are happening in the law
enforcement community as we are
in very challenging times.
So the hope that is, is that
within the next 12 to 18 months,
those rules will be, um more
relevant and more reflective of
the challenges that law
enforcement officers are facing
That process also is a very
inclusive process, soliciting
public comment. Um, we have
different working groups from
Uh, public safety
telecommunications, our
dispatchers and also large law
enforcement community.
Who are working diligently to
give us input so we can expect a
lot of, uh, growing pains with
the adoption of the new rules,
but it's very exciting because
it will be much more relative to
meet the needs of our law
enforcement partners. Um
Mm hmm. Also, I would ask for
your support in helping us
solicit for the CEO position for
that law enforcement
certification board. That person
will be my counterpart who will
oversee the misconduct cases.
Um, that was posted last week on
the governor's website. Um, it's
a great job. It's an important
job.
Um, so any help that you all
could give in soliciting for
that, Um, that's about all I
have, and I'm happy to answer.
Thank you.
Any questions from the
committee.
I'll just say we are. We did the
confirmation of a bunch of the
folks from this
During this interim, and I was
just so impressed by the breath
of experience on there. It's
very, very cool to see
All of that going forward. Thank
you.
That are worth. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um
So a couple things I appreciate
you acknowledging the
legislation from last session,
and I know that, uh
Senator My Estes and senator
Pope worked on that Also, we're
working, uh, this year on
another bill that's been
introduced. I think it's sent a
bill 13 that that I understand.
Doesn't have a message but was a
continuation.
Of the work that they were
doing. I do want to give a
Shout out to a constituent
Rachel Feldman, who's been very
involved and an incredibly
helpful in putting together the
bill last year and moving
forward. I guess my question has
to do with
Kind of the the vacancy issues
that exist. Um
In law enforcement. I think
that's a big issue, and I'm just
curious if you can give us
Kind of a sense of. I mean,
obviously you're new in the
position, but really what?
And and I want to make sure I
understand how the law
enforcement Academy deals with
that issue, so vacancy with
respect to, you know, dispatched
positions. How law enforcement?
Um agencies are managed when it
comes to overtime. Those types
of issues so just some comments
on that would be great. Madam
Chair, Senator.
Um
Vacancy rates in New Mexico are
concerning for every single
police agency, Um, part of the
proposal in seventh Senate Bill
13 would be to task. The law
enforcement academy with
Overseeing a comprehensive, um,
recruitment and
Retain retaining type of
program. Um, I would look
forward to the opportunity to,
you know, further discuss and
implement something like that
eventually.
But I can tell you, Um I'm going
to give you an example of what
we're doing in terms of
recruiting, and it's not
necessarily in the positive, but
Um
When there are nine different
satellite academies, and they
all, um, submit their
Cadet applications to our
Academy for final approval.
Um So we look through those We
trust that these directors are
making good decisions based on
the rules and the regulations to
admit these cadets to the
academies, and they do a fine
job every now and then.
Something slips through the
crack. So this week, for
example, I made five very
uncomfortable phone calls to
chiefs and commanders, different
places in New Mexico.
Um
I'm gonna give you two examples
of of why I said no to two
applications of some cadets.
Um, one of them. Um, I'm on the
application there asked. Have
you ever been arrested or
convicted of a crime? And he
said no.
But attached to it was his
police report.
Highlighted that we found that
said that he had been arrested.
So we circle back. We ask
questions. We give them every
opportunity to provide
information to clarify, Um,
anyway, bottom line. He wasn't
truthful.
His commander calls and says,
I'm you know.
I'm very concerned. This has
never happened that you know
you. You said no to two of our
Two of our cadets.
Um and I explained
He said. Well,
The cadet says he wasn't
actually arrested. He was
detained.
And I said, Well, then, he
should have answered that
correctly. He should have said
no. However, I was detained and
there will be a police report.
Because then it comes across as
him being untruthful.
The commander who I know who
I've worked with.
Said. Can I just counsel them
counsel him and let him through
the academy and I said no.
And the reason is
Truth. Truthfulness is an
absolute You can't be truthful
Part of the time can't be
partially truthful part of the
time And if we allow that cadet
into the academy after having
been untruthful on his
application, we're validating to
him that it's okay to be
untruthful.
We had another applicant from
the same department.
Who had five misdemeanor
Convictions. Okay. He was honest
about all of them. He put them
all on there.
His commander called and said,
But he listed them all. He was
truthful, and they were
misdemeanors because the rules
say
You can have been convicted of a
misdemeanor.
And I said, Commander, think
about what was in the headlines
last week for a particular
agency.
The names of those officers are
going to be on my desk in short
order.
And what is it saying, if we are
allowing a new cadet?
With five
Credit card theft credit card
fraud.
To d w i s assault and battery.
That is not the kind of person
we want to allow to be a police
officer.
So after the discussion
Um, he agreed. Thank you. You're
right. I said, I understand that
you guys have pressure to meet
certain numbers in terms of your
recruiting.
But we cannot lower the bar and
we cannot sacrifice
The integrity of what we're
trying to do. We have to work
extra hard, especially now to
restore the public's faith.
In our policing world.
So you ask Senator Worth what
are we doing to recruit?
We're doing the best we can to
spread a problem. Positive
message, and I can tell you I've
been, um and ad hoc recruiter
when I was the United States
marshal for New Mexico and my 22
years as an FBI agent, I recruit
all the time.
But
It's not about meeting
A number and I said, Wouldn't
you rather have 4100 percenters?
Than 60 30% because the reality
is most of these misconduct
cases that I'm seeing. They're
coming in the first three years,
so right now, that's what we're
doing to help recruiting were
saying no to people that really
Shouldn't be.
In our policing world.
And I appreciate that. And I
think really one of the
Ideas behind and I mean, it
sounds like
It's a lot to ask, especially
for you kind of starting out and
putting a whole nother level of
Of mandates on there, but I
think the whole idea behind it
was to really give you a pool.
That's just that much more
bigger, so that you're not in
that situation where you're it's
the gray area and and, of
course, and I just You know, I
want to give a shout out to Ben
Ben Baker. I think again. I
appreciate very much.
The work that he's done on this,
and there's been. You know, this
committee has has
You know, the body can build the
omnibus crime bill. I think
there's been some really good
changes that have been made. And
these are tough discussions to
have Mhm, but I think there's
something that needs to
continue. And and again. I just
I hope you can see us as a
resource. Thank you. And as we
kind of
Because this I'm sure Santa Bill
13 will be back in full force in
a year and will be German. And
so it will be something to work
on, and I think it sounds like
you'll be in a again in a
position.
Having been there and
Gotten it. You know all the
things that happen when you
start a new position like this
and thinking means, but
Thank you, Senator McCain A. I
say this because we We hear a
lot about you know, no one wants
to be a police officer anymore.
You know, they don't believe in
the profession and I always say
this
Again. I participate in a lot of
recruiting fairs and you know,
we're standing next to corporate
America that have, you know they
have big salaries and lots of
giveaways and people love to go
to the tables with the
giveaways. And there we are a
little government agencies. We
don't have fancy giveaways, but
our lines are always the
longest. Our lines are always
the longest.
Yes, People still want to work
as police officers they really
do and it's up to us to
Two per preserve. What is good,
and there is a lot of good
Thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you. Other comments from
the committee. Thank you So much
for your presentation.
We're gonna pause for just a
moment before we head to your
bill. Some of your work with the
chair Madame Charlotte for the
record to show that all
Republicans
No, thank you.
Like to point out all
Republicans here and all the
Democrats, except for one or
not,
Yeah.
Yeah.
Madam Chair. Um, I know this
isn't rules Committee where we
share the room if we could get
the election.
Books for copies of the election
code. Um
Thank you all
Thank you all for your patients
were waiting that the chair
judiciary is currently putting
on another bill and in another
committee, and we're waiting for
another member who was
Regrets, however
fancy microphone system.
I didn't touch it.
Help President I didn't touch
it. Are you sure you but I'll be
culpable. Try and figure this
out. Um, my regrets for being
delayed. Hope you all know it
was
Another committee presenting a
bill that took quite a bit of
discussion and debate. We have
four items on the agenda. My
goal is to try and get through
all of them this evening,
although I have a commitment
that will require me to be
excused and so may require one
or others to preside in my
absence.
I do love that of the four items
on the Internet. I think three
of them are going to be
Very quick, and so I'm going to
take them in an order that I
think we can dispose of.
As much work as possible in the
quickly and then allow time for
the debate and discussion on the
item that I think will require
more so, Senator Worth you're
here on Senate Bill five.
Um, do we have
Senator had a meal on the law
enforcement fund.
Is he? Okay? I also think that
all encourage members that will
probably go there second, Just
because again, I think that will
be relatively quick.
And then the appellate
nominations Commission senator
doing my understanding There's
an amendment on that, but I
think we'll make that also very
quick.
And so I think we can knock
those three out very quickly and
then we'll allow adequate time
for cannabis regulation changes,
which I think will take some
more time, so we'll do them in
that order 5175 and one senator
Worth Senate BILL members, uh,
Senate Bill five is a bill to
prohibit firearms employing
places.
Uh, last session, Um, there was
a similar bill Senate Bill 40
for that, uh, after the Senate
on 28 to 9 made it to the
committee's just didn't get her
on the house.
Ah!
Mr Chair. This bill was endorsed
by Courts Corrections Committee,
which you chaired. That was the
0.1 version that got the
message, the 0.2 version that we
introduced actually had some
important changes That came as a
result of the hearing during the
interim committee. When when, um
We heard this bill,
specifically, um on two of the
Bill. Ah Lion 11, a section was
added for a person conducting
lawful non election related
business nearer than 100 ft from
the door through which voters
may enter to vote or near than
50 ft from a postal. We took
outpost of container.
Is not guilty of unlawful
possession of a firearm. So
someone who innocently walks by
a mall to conduct business of
any kind could be a jog. Um, it
just addresses that I have
handed out to you, Mr Chair and
the committee members and I also
gave them to everyone on the
floor. A pink markup Copy, which
shows the changes that were
there were good changes to make.
Completely clear that early
voting was also covered. Senator
Moore's, um, correctly, I think
pointed out the postal
collection box was an undefined
term. And so we did agree to
have that Mr Chair based on the
rules. I do come today with a
Senate Judiciary Committee
Committee amendment, which I've
also given to everyone.
22766.2 and this address is two
of the specific issues raised
that I said I would look into
and in reviewing the criminal
code actually found parallel
language that I think makes a
lot of sense in this bill and
addresses concerns regarding
certified law enforcement
officers who are off duty now
being establishment.
And we can go through that when
you're ready, and then the
second will allows for a gun to
be left in a vehicle. Hiebert
spent quite a bit of time on
when you have a parking lot in
front of a polling place, um and
space in front of a school.
There's an exception under the
New Mexico Co. Don inside a
vehicle, even though you miss
Sure, I'm not sure how you'd
like to proceed if you want to
the amendment first.
Um and I can kind of walk
through that. Like to hear the
moment for senator. Well, let's
see if we can get it on and then
We'll hear the public comment,
so I'm I'd move 0.227666 0.24
discussion.
There were to explain the
amendment. So basically what
this does is expands on the
exceptions in the bill, Um, that
are on Page one of the original
Bill. Senate Bill five.
Originally only certified law
enforcement offers officers in
performance of their duty or
other security personnel with
written authorization of the
appropriate municipal county
election were exempted.
What this does is create four
different exemptions. Subsection
B. One of the amendment is the
certified law enforcement. So
that's the same.
Subsection B two is an exemption
for a law enforcement officer
who is certified pursuant to the
Law Enforcement Training Act,
acting in accordance with the
policies of the officers Law
Enforcement Agency. Uh, this
language comes specifically out
of
The section 30-7 Dash three,
which is unlawful caring of a
firearm in a license and
thinking was if you can
Come into a liquor
establishment, a bar as a law
enforcement officer who
certified but not on duty. Uh,
that I think Senator Baca raised
that issue. And so this just
tracks what you can do in a bar
and same exact language. Section
B three is the same as in the
original bill.
And then section before mirrors
language from 30-7 Dash 2.1,
which is unlawful caring of a
deadly weapon on school
premises. There is a specific
exception in that statute
attracts this language. So a
person older than and I copied
it exactly. And we may want to
talk about the age here because
this uses 19 years of age.
In a private, automobile or
other private means of
conveyance for lawful protection
of persons or another person's
property. So that is an
exception. Um
In 30-7 dash 2.1 to the other to
the other. Otherwise ban on guns
on on school. So when you pick
your child up at school, and you
have a gun in the truck or in
the car, that's an exception
that exists. That issue I think
was senator neighbor talked
about that, especially in rural
areas with parking lots. And so
we've tracked
The same language. I do think we
should discuss the age limits.
Uh, it didn't make me pause. I
think I understand why it was
19.
Because again you have 18 year
olds who probably some issue
there, But I'm not sure that
that needs to be the same for
polling places. So I leave that
open to discussion, but that's
what the amendment does.
And when we get done with this,
there is one technical little
grammatical thing, but that's a
separate. I'll note so certainly
Stanford questions
Before us is a proposed
amendment to Senate Bill five.
Amendment proposed by Senator
Worth
Earlier friendly amendment.
That's the motion before US
discussion on the motion to
amend
Senator doing Did you have
something on that Arabia? So it
was that a hand up?
Risotto.
I think
Miss Sherman. Uh, so okay, so my
understanding then I just want
to make sure there is
This amendment.
Is that subsection a, then would
be unlawful possession of a
firearm at a polling place
consists of
Possession of a loaded or
unloaded firearm by any person.
Within.
Is that correct?
So what page one would be
Yes. So on Page one line, 22
after person strike the rest of
the language and the original
bill and then this like up to
the world, but then correct the
word with it.
Ah, so this
So again. I'm just gonna read on
Page one line 22 after person
strike the remainder of the
line.
And then strike lines 20.
Three and 24.
And strike line 20 through 25
through the comma, So you are
correct within stays. Okay? Yes.
And then Okay, so it's unlawful.
So so the unlawful possession of
firearm
At a polling place consists of
possession of a loaded
Or unloaded firearm by any
person within is would be page
One is that correct?
So Mr That is correct. Okay,
Very good, and then
And then we have then
Page two, then would be that
100 FT. 200 ft in the 50 ft And
then and then you have a new
subsection B. Sure that's
exactly correct.
And then on
And then the new subsection B.
Uh, I tend to agree with
What the
With the suggestion that you
make at least the inference of
the suggestion that you make, at
least within subsection or
within paragraph four.
That
That, uh
Paragraph four should be a
person older than 18 years of
age and a private automobile
make the ocean Center, please.
Make the motion.
Processing at the moment, you
suggested won't try to make
progress as we go, But go ahead.
I mean,
Sure, sure, like an opportunity.
Time for you to make agreement
with everyone on the committee
understand that, and I'm I just
want to make sure that I have a
I mean, if we're talking about
voting, though, any person
voted, though, would be over the
age of 18. And so I'm I'm I'm
trying to
I'm so I'm trying. I'm trying to
process why we would say a
person older than than then.
Older than 18, or if we would
just simply say
In a private automobile or other
private means of conveyance.
So I guess I'm wondering if we
should simply strike 18 and
certain 19 or if which we should
strike a person older than 19
years of age altogether, and so
that it would simply say in a
private automobile.
Or other private means of
conveyance.
So, Mr Chair and Senator, I'd be
more comfortable. You know
someone who's coming to the pole
there and I don't 19 I
understand why it was in there
for thought. I just think 18.
Is, as you say, is is the age
when someone's coming to vote.
Okay?
And
Uh,
And if I may, Mr Urban Center
Mars is that on this planter on
different it is on this point,
Mr Chair. If I may be one of the
youngest, I would point out that
Bill I worked on about 10 years
ago to complicate your pondering
a little bit more, Mr Chairman
and sort of more Zach actually,
not just in the primary,
actually, at 817.
And a regular local election.
As well as in a primary
election. You're absolutely
correct.
Um
Right. And so I think it I think
it actually makes sense to
simply strike.
Frank everything up because
young people who would be going
To vote and and and that and the
other person would be
Would be covered by the by the
incidental language.
Of non election related
If they're if they're there for
non election related purposes.
Right? And but but it's in a
private automobile and and so I
think it would be covered by
that purpose. So, Mr Chairman, I
would. I would suggest that we
strike from the
On on paragraph four of the
Of the amendment. We would
strike
Uh, from the word a through the
word age.
So that paragraph four would
begin in a private automobile.
So that it would it would not
apply to any private automobile
or other private means advanced
for lawful protection.
Of the persons or other persons
property, But of course that
would also require it to remain
in the person's. I'm sorry,
Senator Episode Don't really
still need the word of a person
after paragraphs, Paragraph
four.
The provisions of this section
do not apply to thank you. Thank
you. Yes, you are correct. So,
yes. So it would thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you, madam
Chair, madam, for example.
Uh, yes. So it will be striking
the words older than
Through a judge.
So older than 19 years of age,
so that it would read a person.
Would not apply to a person in a
private automobile. Yes, so
striking the words older than 19
years of age.
The motion to motion motion to
amend the proposal. So, Mr Chair
and I apologize or not an issue
from the secretary of state's
perspective with that amendment.
So again, I'm
I'm okay with going that
direction, Although I certainly
want to hear I think so. Thank
you, Mr and and
So that that would read a person
and a private automobile or
other private means of
conveyance for lawful protection
of like the person is for lawful
protection. It seems like it
would make more sense to say a
firearm, private means of
conveyance for lawful
protection. So strike everything
from a
Through in and then certainly
there of a fire read a firearm
in a private autumn.
So I'm hold on a second to
recognize the initial
suggestion.
First three paragraphs preceding
it referred to character and
you're changing it to a
Object, Senator Ivey Soto and
then center Worth Center IV's
Object, Senator Ivey Soto and
then center Worth center Ivy's
own. I actually, I think pro
Thames.
Suggestion is that
It's the center center worth
just mentioning We could stay at
a person with a firearm in a
private office chairman of just
note that the rest I suggest we
just leave it as a person. I
think that's right. We need to
have this. It's specified. I
mean, it's it's it's understood
that the certified law
enforcement officer number one
is going to have a firearm and
that's why they're exempted.
Correct. Likewise for 23 and
four, so I think it works.
The the Motion Clear Center
poodle on the motion to amend
the Mr Chair. I do think with
the age issue if you just add
the language of qualified
elector.
That's the suggestion to the
sponsor. Um and it will take any
suggestions or comments.
although I'm surprised by your
suggestions and pathetic,
ulterior what I understand to be
the Republican position on gun
safety issues. You're you're
making it more strict, uh then
less so, but
I hope you realize that Senator
Morris Mr Chair it doesn't
because what was said earlier is
the other business. So, um, this
section is only two people who
were there Voting.
So if it's only pertaining to
voters, they have to be a
qualified elector to vote.
Unless they're voting illegally,
which, according to the secret
State never happens So
This. This doesn't broaden or
widen it. Just clarifies who we
are speaking about if somebody
is there for other business and
aren't old enough to vote, and
they would still be cut.
So you're proposing an amendment
to the motion? That is before
us? Let me let me take this one
will come back to your perhaps
your amendment right now that
the motion before us, there's a
proper motion to amend, which is
to strike on some paragraph
before.
Older than 19 years of age.
That's the motion before us
right now.
On that on that amendment alone,
Senator Baca.
Thank you, Mr Chair, so my to
understand, then that we're, uh,
we're just gonna work on the
amendment as it stands, and you
would like us to come back to
the amendment if we have for so
on that on that moment, just a
procedural thing. Are we going
to the audience for input on the
amendments or the bill? Because
we haven't done that yet. What
are we doing today? No center
worth, I think I'd asked that
question earlier about how are
we going to do this
procedurally, So I have a number
of individuals who have decided
up to speak in
Supporter opposition and we'll
take them.
After we met the amendment so
that they're they're responding
to her addressing the bill as it
stands before us by the sponsor,
and they may persuade the
committee to change the
amendment to their their input.
Their input is considered
ultimately on the amended form
of the bill. Alright, alright,
Any other questions on the
motionless before? Is there any
objection to adoption of the
amendment, saying none all
members present
In support of the adoption of
that amendment. Then Senator
Portal You had a proposal that
would amend them, right?
Uh, Mr Chair.
Sarah Worth have. There's one
additional technical cleanup
from the rules committee. If you
look at the mock up, I think is
the easiest way to do it. Um, in
subsection B on the second page,
I think it in and inadvertently
struck and Senator Moore's
Amendment.
The A. We need the
Believe the A N so it would read
a person conducting lawful, non
election related business near
than 100 FT from the door
through which voters may enter
to vote or near than 50. FT from
A monitored secured containers
would make that motion.
Any objections, Adoption that
amendment
On that amendment, Mr Chair
Senator worth we had talked. Is
this the only amendment you're
going to present because we had
talked incentive rules. We
struck the postal collection box
because it was undefined were
also talked that we didn't want
to do it on the fly, but
monitored. Secured container was
not not do it. We did not strike
that because you indicated that
we would work on a definition of
that before we got to this
committee.
Did you do that? Or we still
have that same concern we
discussed about in rules. So, Mr
Chair, Senator more section 1-6
Dash nine sub paragraph E for
talks about signage at the
location of a monitored secure
containers, so that is a term
used in the election code, and
it is specifically defined by
rule.
1 10-19, which I know in my
stack here I have so it so it
is. Here It is. 1-10 Dash 19 may
see definition of security
container means a permanent and
secure receptacle that meets the
requirements of sub Dash 6-9 nm
established by the county clerk
whereby voters and those
authorized delivery voted mail
ballot pursuant to Section one
animus a 1978 may return an
official mailing envelope to the
election officials. It was
Change. So, Mr Chairman, um
Senator Worth but we This isn't
a different part of the statute
is going to be a separate act.
And so we're not defining what a
monitor secure
Container is without them,
pointing to the definition, you
said, since it's in a different
act, then we have a problem with
that definition, and we could
have a very squishy definition
of what a monitor. So the
lockbox in front of, um
Your law practice or the
specimen sample lockboxes. That
was so we had talked about
actually pointing to that
definition with an amendment so
that it was clear because these
are in two different points in
the statute. So, Mr Chair I'm
open to again if we want to have
a reference here to 14, which
Just just to eat just e. We can
do that to make sure that it
tracks I I think it would be a
mistake to put a
Statutory definition into a
separate section of law. And so
we have that by ruling so why
don't we miss charge to just
take take
First, Unless I guess you want
to add that to this little
That's a amendment. Let's let's
do the already adopted that
first amount. We have not. You
should hand is adding the word
today back in. That's what
Senator Worth has before us
right now. Is there any
objection to the adoption of
that amendment? Okay, we've
added Emily. You got that? We've
added the word a back in all
right now, Senator Morris,
you're discussing a different
topic from my and then senator.
Word seems to be
Agreeable to amendment that both
of you are proposing and working
on, so you won't want to give us
the specifics of emotional
Leavitt to Senator Ovie Soto.
Might field actually express
what I'm trying to amend better
in articulated better than I am,
If you could, Senator chairman
if I if I may suggest on Page
two line 10 prior to the period
To insert the words as used in
subsection e.
Of Section one Death 6-9.
Okay. I think that addresses my
concern, Senator. But if you're
happy with that
One more time. One more time for
Emily's benefits page to live 10
part of the period.
Insert the words as used in
subsection e.
Of section
One. That's six. That's nine.
And I must say
One more time, please.
Page two.
110 prior to the period.
Insert the words.
As used in subsection.
One. That's 6-9.
That's the proposed amendment
before the committee center
worth
Friendly amendment Morris
acceptable.
All right. Is there any
objection the adoption of that
amendment
That amendment is also adopted
member of the committee.
With the amendment as amended
three times, I think now,
Senator Baca
Um, I wanted to go back to
Section four of the proposed
amendment.
Which now reads a person and a
private, automobile or other
private means of convenience,
convenience for lawful
protection of persons or another
person's property. And just ask
what what? What The purpose of
that last segment was for the
lawful protection of the persons
or another person's property. I
would I would just think that
It would have to be a lawful
possession. It just seems like
strenuous language. So, Mr
Chair, Senator Baca, this
language is I
Tracks from 30-7 Dash 2.1, which
is unlawful carrying of a deadly
weapon on school premises. And
so let me read that specific
exception that I used to build
this a person older than 19
years of age on school premises
in a private, automobile or
other private means of
conveyance comma for law for
protection of the persons or
another person's property, So I
was just trying to track make
sure the statues track can you
Mr Chair and senator articulate
what That means, though, for
lawful
Pretty
So I think the example and
Senate Mr Chair and Senator
Nyberg had a discussion about
this. And so if you, for
example, are concealed carry
holder.
Ah, and you have a gun in your
Truck.
That you consider for your
protection. This means you can
drive the truck to the polling
place. You can get out and
extended my birds an older
person who needed to use a hand
and this would allow them then
to drive in with the car with
the gun. It remains in the
vehicle while they're going to
vote. So I guess I guess my
point is what What is? Let me
give you a
I guess, uh, scenario. What if
the person
Has the rifle in their vehicle.
For hunting.
Then what?
Would discover them.
So, Mr Chair. I think that, uh
Again. It's
Certainly the hunting rifle
could also be for their
protection order. Protect their
property. I mean again, Weapons
can be used for different
purposes, so
Again. I think that would fall
within this Within this
definition. I don't think you'd
get in a situation where someone
with a
Hunting rival couldn't use this
exception and then again with
Senator Nye birds
Issue is if someone comes in
with it with a rifle. Um I would
think that that
It just doesn't seem to read
that way to me. I would think
that cleaner cleaner language
would be for any lawful purpose.
I don't know. What do you think
of that? Mr Chairman, Senator,
Mr. My only concern is that I
think it's important that we're
Consistent throughout the
statute and and the fact that
we've gotta and again this is so
when this issue was flagged for
me, we went back and looked. I
wanted to see what our statutory
Specific exceptions in the same
issue applies in other words,
when someone drives in with a
rifle to pick up their kids from
school.
This is the language that
applies right now.
I just I think it's important to
be consistent and not
minimizing.
You know the fact that
That's not not if we were
rewriting both statutes. I think
we might look at a little
differently, but I was just
trying to be consistent.
And I did a little bit concerned
if we start going a different
direction because we are also
this also will apply on school
premises.
In addition,
I, um I think just just reading
it and I understand your concern
with the consistency, but
Um, you know, consistent,
consisted consistently.
Consistency is, uh, you know is
is useful. If it's correct, I
guess. And so in my in my
thought I would say that you
know that maybe in the other
statue that you've referenced
that that language might be
I don't know. Incorrect, I
guess. But this seems to read to
me for the lawful protection of
the persons or another person's
property. So
If I have a firearm
Under section for here.
I would have to have
The I guess I would have to stay
or have the attempt of use for
protection of property. Only it
seems to read.
So that doesn't mean for self
protection.
It doesn't mean Mr. Chair
Senator for um the example I
gave was hunting. It doesn't It
doesn't seem to cover any of
those. It seems to it attacked
actually doesn't make a whole
lot of sense to me because I
guess if I have the firearm in
my car to protect my car
Then this would work.
Or if I have my firearm in my
car to protect another person's
car.
That would work. But if I have
the firearm in the car to
protect myself really doesn't
address that.
Or to protect another person
doesn't address or if I was
hunting, so that's why I guess I
would think that any lawful
purpose would be, um, I don't
know, cleaner and honestly
attracts a little bit better
thing.
So, Mr Chair if I could suggest,
and again I know you like to get
everything completely cleaned up
in this committee, but
As we did in rules. I think I'm
willing willing to look at this
And assuming this moves forward,
see if and think about it and
make sure we're doing it.
So that it works and potentially
come with a with a tweak on the
floor to address that Unless Mr
Chair, you want to try and do it
right now.
If we're going to come in, and
I'm gonna have a couple of
comments, I think you're gonna
want to do something. Now let me
Senator boxer are you done for
now? I'd like to sure I would
let you weigh in and see what
others have to say. Apart from
my preference for sending out
committee subs, especially this
early in this session. I think
it makes some sense but center
with it. You're going to take a
moment with me and ask other
commitment members to do the
same.
Thank you Do have to make a
change that paragraph Because
read it with me together,
please. If you go back to the
sub paragraph B. It says the
provisions of Section eight do
not apply to
And with the amendment we've got
right now they do not apply to a
person in a private automobile.
Other private means it means
For lawful protection of the
person or persons property the
way it reads right now is the
person is in a private
automobile for the lawful
protection of the person or the
person's property. There's no
reference to a weapon.
So it's a It's an absurd. It's
an absurd, uh, term now, right?
Do do not. We're not all see
that that they're they're in the
private automobile for the
protection of the personal
persons property, which doesn't
it doesn't follow at all. And
and Sarah do X. Tweaking me to
remind me that she wanted to
make some reference to a weapon
in there earlier.
But is that worth you see, the
point that I'm trying to make is
without some change to the
language in that paragraph
somehow.
We're making an exception to a
person in an automobile.
For the lawful protection of the
person or persons property there
in the automobile for the
protection of the person
probably doesn't make sense.
They're not in the automobile
for the so I think you have to
read this stuff and go back to
paragraph A, uh in the original
bill. Unlawful possession of a
firearm at a polling place
consists of possession of a
loaded or unloaded firearm by
any person.
So it does actually track and
these are the exceptions to
that. So if you have a
You know, unlawful possession is
a loaded or unloaded firearm.
And then basically originally
said, other than a certified law
enforcement off or other
security personnel with written
off officials, so I think it's
implicit that you know if you if
you don't have a firearm, this
doesn't apply.
If you have a firearm at a
polling place, which is loaded
or unloaded and your in your in
your car, this is the Senator
Nyberg issue. You drive into the
parking lot. You can leave it in
your car under this amendment
without this amendment. His
concern was that you basically
gotta park 100 ft away and then
walk and leave the gun in the
car. So I think if you read it
with a
You deal with that, because it
only applies to
Possession of a firearm is a
loaded or unloaded firearms, so
that's when it kicks in. Except
for these folks.
And certainly a certified law
enforcement officer.
You know they're going to this
applies. We're not representing
the firearm there because it's
referenced in paragraph A. I
think any certified law
enforcement officer who walks in
without a gun.
Again. This wouldn't even kick
in. So I think if you read the
two together, it can work.
What I'm suggesting is that
where is that? My agreements
with Senator Baca, which is, I
think the cleaner way. While I
appreciate the
Your goal of consistency if you
just strike out everything after
conveyance.
You don't need to the language
for lawful protection of persons
personal property, although we
have that elsewhere the statue,
but I think it's cleaner without
that and leads to a not observed
reading on my my In the other.
The other point, my
understanding of New Mexico law
is that carrying a firearm in a
private vehicles, that's an
inherent right.
Of everyone, And so if they're
in a private automobile, and
they have a firearm in their in
their vehicle
May be exempted.
From from having to prove that
they're lawfully protecting
their personal persons property,
So it just seems like a much
clearer result to and what's on
that again. Apart from the your
goal, a lot of the goal of
consistency and Mr Chair. I'm
okay with that, and I don't
think we need to put in the four
any lawful purpose based on what
the chair is saying. I think it
works to just put a
Period instead of after
conveyance and strike the rest
of it.
Mr Chair.
I would make that motion. Would
you like me to stated
We can We have that repeated,
please? Yes, sure. So, uh, as it
stood, it was a person in a
private automobile or other
private means of convenience.
Um, I would strike the remainder
from the comma up to the period
after proper.
So reads conveyance period.
That's friendly friendly. That's
the motion before us other
discussion any objection to the
adoption of that amendment.
Saying none that amendments
adopted Emily used to with miss.
Very good, Alright.
Many members with the were on
the amendment with various
amendments on the amendment
Still, center every sort of very
much, Mr Man I was Chris. Mr
Chairman that are worth If Miss
Bachmann could describe for us
in the situation where paragraph
three would take place.
Definitely,
help.
And Mr Been, uh, sort of worth
and Miss Bachmann, where votes
until my concern is number
three.
Ah, I don't. I cannot think of
any situation.
Where an election official would
hire armed guards.
For polling place where votes
are being cast.
Right? And Mr Chairman,
The audio is not good. Oh,
We sort of Where are we going?
If you think it should be
struck, moved to strike it.
Yeah, it was Truman. I actually
do. Um, because if it's at a
polling place, um
The
Every sort of
I'm I'm processing, Mr Chairman.
I would like to have to to build
I know throws people off when I
do that, Um
Sure we do have polling places
so you could very well have
A private security by the mall
that wants to be business That's
right within 100 Ft. That wants
to be there. I also think in
these times with elect it does
not hurt to have this as an
exception just in case so that
otherwise you don't have to use
again. There may be something
where you don't want in some
kind of a threat. It just gives
an option. This was in the bill
last year.
You may be absolutely correct
that it
Before, but I just don't in the
bill Unless there's a reason you
think it's an option chairman of
worth
I'm not sure that it doesn't
violate federal law, uh, to have
armed guards specifically for
voting place.
If it is in a mall for other
purposes, that would be a person
conducting lawful, non election
related business.
In fact, if it is for the
building, not for the polling
place that is not election.
If you have armed guards at a
polling place that is
That is
Very concerning to me.
And and in fact we have had
In this country.
And our recent history.
And I can think of in Orange
County.
Of years back where we've had
Universe County, California
where they have armed guards.
Outside of polling places.
Where that was specifically
intended to dissuade Hispanics
from voting.
I can think of other situations
where they've had armed guards.
That were specifically intended
to intimidate people from
voting.
So I'm I'm extremely concerned
about about paragraph three, and
in fact, the Department of
Justice has taken action against
places that have had armed
guards specifically on the
issue. And so, Mr Chairman, I
would I would I would move that
we would In fact, strike
subsection C and move the ore up
to the end of I mean, I mean,
paragraph three and move the or
up to the end of paragraph two.
Uh, because I honestly I cannot
think of a situation where we
would have armed guards for the
purpose of securing a polling
place. Where would be not where
it would not be used in an
intimidating factor. That's the
motion before us the motions to
strike paragraph three
Read number and center worth.
Mr. If I could just have Miss
Bachmann address the committee
that we certainly do not support
the army about these unique
scenarios Need that sort of like
author X office to have security
print in the clerk's budget.
I just wanted to be very clear
that we do not support the
arming of pulling them.
As a result of that was so worth
I had recognized you simply tell
him the amendment.
So, Mr Chair. I think at this
point, I'm going to take it as a
friendly amendment.
With the understanding we're
trying to line this up because I
want to understand and again
What I don't want to do is say
we're not going to fix this now
and then go down on the
You know the floor? I mean,
unless unless someone's gonna
give me a reason. I'm concerned
about the Fed the federal
oversight piece of this and I
don't want it interpreted in any
way to think that we are someone
is basically hiring private
security to go intimidate
voters. That would be absolutely
an unintended consequence. That
would not be a good thing to
happen.
So I'm okay, taking this out.
But I'm also going to continue
to obviously think about about
Could you understand it? Unless
unless there's another member of
the committee that that feels
that it should stay in. I mean,
I just It feels I I understand
what Senator Ivy Soto's stating,
and the last thing in any way we
want to do is have this. It was
never obviously the intent.
To have that happen, But I can
see that certainly if someone if
a county was attempting to
intimidate voters, and all of a
sudden you've got 15 security,
you know, you could have the
kind of intimidation we're
trying to prevent this bill
happen going the other way. And
so I
So I'm I'm willing to live with
that with that not being in
there unless Mr Chair. You think
there's a reason that should
stay in there? I mean again.
It's just I understand the
argument and I can see that.
No. I just wanted to follow our
protocol, which is asking the
sponsor on friendly. I think
your answer was yes, Friendly,
All right.
Yeah. Friendly ish with
All right.
Everybody to on that proposed
amendment. Yeah, it would offer.
Um uh, the scenarios that
That Miss Bachmann brought up.
You know, That's one scenario
there could be many summer
scenarios at this committee
can't come up with, um, another
item that I would think could
you know be a problem is the
schools, schools use resource
officers?
Um, for their protection that
many of the schools where I am
Um, Under that definition, I
many of those officers, retired
law enforcement officers. Um I
don't know that they are
certified enforcement officers.
But they are in fact security
personnel at the school.
And so how would we deal with
that? And so I see, I I
understand what And I'm aware of
that situation that that you're
speaking of Mr Chairman,
Senator in California. But this
It is a different provisions.
Then what? I think that scenario
is and we could wind up having
some issue at the very schools
that your bill sets out to, so I
would just point that out anyone
else on the proposing option the
minute by show of hands, please.
She was center. Baca. Sorry.
Sorry before I let me come back.
Sorry about that, Mr Chair. I do
have a question with regard to
How the malls work or they
reimbursed for allowing or
having and hosting the
elections.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee Senator That really
depends on the county. Um, so
some, I am aware of some
counties in which they
locations, Um, for the user, Mr
Chair that might also cause a
little interesting.
Um, issue with it being election
related if they're being
reimbursed for being there, and
I mean I could see how it could
cause some issue in the reading
if we remove that section, um,
it does constant confusion. Um,
but if it's left in, we ensure
and protect that they're able to
protect their building because
they are now engaging in it. So
The language doesn't hurt
anything. It just adds more
protection for these, um private
entities that are hosting
elections, So I think that we
should leave it in. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you. The motion
before us is to strike What is
now sub paragraph B three.
And read the number.
And at the award or is necessary
to make that amendment work.
That's the matter before us. Is
there objection the adoption of
amendments others in support.
Looks like that amendment is
adopted. Thank you that
amendments adopted alright. Any
other discussion on the amended
there any objection to adoption
of the amendment as a minute?
Members voting for the
amendment.
We still have the public some
public input on the bill as
amended before he gets publicly,
But we've we've done it, but it
was not part of Amendment.
227666.2
It was not on this page.
Because it was not part of new
subsection B.
Ah!
And that was on page two.
Line nine.
To reinsert the article A before
monitored security container.
And after monitored security
container to insert success,
nine and it actually was not
part of this page part, but it's
been adopted by okay, and I just
want to make sure that we were
that we properly adopted that
adopted all of us very well.
Very well.
Right on the bill as amended.
Consistent with the policies and
procedures of the committee. We
asked for people in advance
registered to speak. We have to
proponents and three
Opponents registered the chair
is going to recognize each of
those parents in advance to
speak for up to two minutes. I'm
going to take the opponent's
first
Tara, are you here? Stone? Well
here
You and then we'll hear Bill.
Uh, give me for the
pronunciation but appearance and
appearance and I believe
And then Nate Esky.
As opponents and then we'll come
last to the proponents.
Mr Chairman, Committee members
minutes, please.
I'm sorry, Mr Chairman,
Committee members. Thank you.
Tara Mitchell with the National
Rifle Association.
In opposition to Senate Bill
five. We do appreciate some of
the amendments that have put
Input onto the spill and
addressed
Portions of the concerns we had
with it Generally, we opposed
the creation of gun free zones,
which criminals ignore, which
only disarmed law abiding
citizens. And in the case of
Senate Bill five that would
include concealed handgun
license holders. People have
been approved to carry firearms
by New Mexico DPS After a
background check and
Um, extensive training.
There's also no notice or
signage requirements in the bill
for these newly created gun free
zones, Um, polling locations are
a little more obvious than
perhaps ballot drop boxes. These
monitored security containers.
Um so I think notice provision
If we're going to put, um new
areas off to license holders and
others, um, signage would be
Important to have we also feel
that this bill is inconsistent
with the ruined decision as it
sweeps up not only the actual
buildings where polling places
are located, but the 100 ft Zone
around them. Thank you. Thank
you.
Mr. Beer Bill. Furious, Mr.
Chair members of the Committee
Senator worth
My name is Dr William Fire.
eyes and I'm a retired computer
scientist here in Santa Fe. I'm
one of senator words
Constituents.
I stand opposed this bill as it
is written. I'm one of the
45,000 licensed and trained New
Mexico concealed carry licenses.
I vote in every election, and I
see no reason to prevent me from
carrying my concealed firearm
into understand the issue of
intimidation, But I am not a
threat Knowledge.
I couldn't possibly intimidate
you. You would never
As a law abiding New Mexico and
make new Mexican. I certainly
will comply of this bill passes.
But what would you hope to
accomplish by excluding
concealed carry?
I asked you about Do not pass on
this bill as it stands and
Senator Wirth. Thank you
used to. It s key appearing by
Zoom. You're recognized for two
minutes, sir.
Thank you. Mr Chairman of the
committee Niedowski here on
behalf of 1700 members of the A
rifle and Pistol Club here in
Albuquerque. Let's be five has a
couple issues I'd like to touch
on first. We feel that proving
an offense under this bill
should require enhancements.
rest standard without the
knowledge of the law and intent
to violate it. Public defender
Department specifically
addresses this in the IR Nothing
that there should be
advertisement education of the
bill if enacted innocence from
inadvertently becoming criminals
by continuing behavior they've
done legally all their lives.
We feel the committee could
possibly be assisted in this
regard without the need for
funding an ad campaign.
Secondly, if the bill is about
intimidation, the Senator Worth
mentioned the previous committee
is duplicative with 1-20 Dash.
14 NM ESSAY 2021. There's
already a law on the books deals
with intimidation of anyone
involved in voting process, be
that armed or unarmed
intimidation.
Specifically intimidation Can
this have inducing or attempting
to induce fear in any member of
precinct board Voter Challenger
watcher but use or threatened
use of force violence?
infliction of damage, harm or
loss or any form of economic
retaliation upon any voter
precinct board member Challenger
watcher for the purpose of
impeding or preventing the free
exercise of the elective
franchise?
Fourth degree felony, and we
agree that no one should be
intimidating anyone, let alone
anyone participating in the
voting process. The colloquy on
amendments just that the
community shares this view
because 1-20 dash 14 already
exists and makes it clear what
the standards are a bill with
the intent to address something
below statutory intimidation.
That's something I think the
committee is rightly concerned
about.
What this law seems to actually
target is not that actual
statutory intimidation but the
fact that some people have a
fear of firearms on the persons
of law abiding Americans, not
armed guards, but their fellow
citizens. Government shouldn't
be in the business of catering
to such bear fears. This bill
should know more become law than
one banning dogs from being
leashed in line because someone
may have a crippling fear of
dogs.
I submit to you that if
someone's celebrated the
possibility that someone may
have a concealed firearm in
public places, they refused to
vote and likely don't go to the
grocery store any restaurant or
indeed participate in public
life at all. Frankly, I hope no
one lives like that. Thank you.
Proponents. MEREDITH making
Are you here?
Register and support No Robin
Sanders registered in support.
President not
Robin Sanders is on zoom
Alright, Miss Miss Sanders,
You're recognized for up to two
minutes, man.
Hello.
Yes, Miss Sanders, you're
recognized for up to two
minutes.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Robin Sanders and I'm, an
attorney at the Brennan Center
for Justice, and it's a
nonpartisan law and policy
organization that works to
defend our country's systems of
democracy and justice. I'm here
today to speak on behalf of the
Brennan Center as we are.
Proponents of Senate Bill five,
a report that was issued last
year by US and Giffords Law
Center comprehensively discusses
the risk that guns opposed to
voting elections.
Arizona, Florida, Texas, Georgia
and Louisiana prohibit both open
and concealed carry at the
polls. And although these states
have higher rates of gun
ownership, they have long
recognized that the presence of
guns where people are voting
poses an unacceptable risk to
public safety and the exercise
of constitutional rights.
This law should also be passed
because it stands on strong
constitutional footing Contrary
to what's been said today. This
law indeed would pass the
brewing decision, which required
six states with the strongest
concealed carry application
requirements to significantly
weaken them, the Supreme Court
stated in Bruin unequivocally
and in its predecessor decision
in Heller, that prohibitions on
sensitive places, including but
not limited to polling locations
are presumptively lawful. Under
the Second Amendment, there's no
reason to
Just suggest that picked people
places that are pulling place
adjacent like dropbox is would
also not be constitutional. And
finally, this is a common sense
Regulation that's popular among
U. S citizens of voting age.
A poll that we conducted showed
that 74% of respondents agreed
there should be laws against
carrying firearms and sensitive
locations such as polling
locations, and lastly, to
respond to a comment that was
made about concealed carry. We
think that the law should be
prohibit both open and concealed
carry because the risk of
violence is still palpable, even
when voters are not aware of
others who are possessing guns.
We encourage you all to pass
this bill and we thank you for
the time to speak. Thank you,
Miss Sanders and for staying
with
In your time.
Completes all of the registered
proponents and opponents of the
bill. We're ready to go to
members of the committee,
Senator Morris Others Let me
just see a show of hands real
quick.
Uh, who wish to speak at least
at this point in time, so Morris
and center Ivey Soto, I'm gonna
put the time limitation says my
practice for everyone in their
comments. You're going to manage
your time as you need to send
more as you recognize or up to
five minutes. Thank Mr. Um
Share. I know in the Senate. We
don't have time limits, So I
promise I will. Because it is my
right as a senator. Um
I will say that I I have
appreciate you, Senator worth
You have addressed our concerns
Very you're being fourth. Our
concerns from the senator
neighbor who's not on this
committee, but Senator Hawkins
Center Pirtle let them speak for
themselves and my concerns of
the issues I brought up in
Senate rules and I really
appreciate that. And as I
discussed with you, I want to
get to Yes on this bill.
Um, I do believe in this day and
age. We do need to work more
positions and not worry about
are ratings from the advocacy
groups and I want to get to yes,
and the one area that we talked
about that I would like to get
to. Yes on is if we could
include the concealed carry, and
I heard the art commentary and
and there are good arguments and
I hear the arguments from, um
Um some of the gun floats and
they make good arguments, and I
think that's what would get me
to Yes, on a gun. Um, gun bill
is if we could include an
exception that we just did on
the other exceptions you did. So
I do have an amendment. I would
like to propose that would
include a concealed carry Mr
Chair. Since we were working on
these other amendments. It's not
drafted, but I do have a written
down here. Um, and I believe
Emily, if you could track with
me.
That amendment, since we have
now 12 and three on the
exceptions, we would have to
move the your number two to the
end of number three.
And then insert a new section
four sub paragraph under. I'm
sorry if you're tracking with
me, Emily being for a new
section before a person I'll
give this to you person in
possession of a valid concealed
hand cut license.
Issued by the person by the
Department of Public Safety
pursuant to the provisions of
the Concealed hand can carry act
is not guilty, unlawful
possession of firearms at a
polling place provided at the
farm are provided that the
firearm is concealed. And then
that without, um and that would
get me there, Senator worth and
we would have a bipartisan gun
bill this position if we could
include that one last exception.
I can't speak for my other
colleagues on this side of the
aisle, but that would wish
Suede.
So, Mr Chair. I appreciate this
discussion, and we had it last
year in both committees and on
the floor, a couple of things
that
One. There already is a specific
prohibition in the concealed
carry Act Section two, which is
a limitation on the concealed
carry license. Let me read it.
Nothing in a concealed handgun
Carry act shall be construed as
allowing a licensee in
possession of a valid concealed
handgun license to carry a
concealed handgun on school
premises.
As provided in section 30-7 Dash
2.1, So I think we'd be creating
a basically conflicting language
there where you have a polling
place, uh, on school, and the
second thing is just a
philosophical
Disagreement that we have and
That we had
Last year as well. And I again I
appreciate your desire to get
To something where I could get
your your vote on this, but I
think it would be a fundamental
Difference in the scope of this
bill, so I just friendly
unfriendly. It's unfriendly.
It's an unfriendly amendment
made with good
Morris. So nothing else. Many
members Emily the language
Many members on the proposed
amendment discussion center
Pirtle. Thank you, Mr Chair, and
I think in the opening, um I
think it was discussed that the
whole issue is the intimidation
the way people may feel when
they see the firearms, and so I
just feel that this is a
Olive branch here that if that
is truly the case, and it's it's
only because of the way people
feel intimidated. Um this is a
way that we can have the best of
both worlds. Where Adam all um
someone can conceal carry. These
are people that go through a
rigorous process to ensure that
they are trained with firearms.
And then since they are
concealed, those cannot be any
intimidation and if it becomes
revealed now you have all kinds
of other laws that have been
broken. What happened? Whatever
it is that that we cover harm
their going to and these are
people that are not going to and
so I think it's just a balance
of the two. It really does get
to the intent of the
legislation, which is to
Ensure that people are not using
firearms owns right to exercise
their right to vote, and then
we're not then tramped
themselves. So it is that that
beautiful balance that we can
ensure that to the certain
certain extent and to support
the amendment.
Thank you other committee
members with questions or
comments back, Um
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um, when we went
through the hearing and rules
they specifically brought up and
I heard from you answer to
Senator Morris just a moment ago
regarding the licenses. Um, but
I referred to you back then I
was wondering that it seemed
that you jotted it down that
day. The gun Free Zones Act,
which you've
Um, when you which is what
you've stated that you tried to
kind of make match to this and
and you know, I would remind you
that in there that it
specifically states it provides
that the states and their
political subdivisions may issue
licenses that exempt the license
individuals from prohibition so
specifically within that acted,
authorized the exemption.
Of certain license holders from
from this, So I guess I would
ask you. You said there was some
issue with that. Um, quite why
would you think that would
conflict in any way?
So, Mr Chairman date statute.
It already is on the books that
prevents concealed carry on
school premises.
And so again.
As I understand that that's a
federal statutes that and so
you've got a state statute
that's
Specific on this issue, and I
guess we've got a we've got a
little discussion. This
committee about preemption. Uh
as to how that would apply what
I'm trying to do here is and so
and I understand the
philosophical arguments center
Purtell and maybe a legal
question here to stick with what
we've got.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Senator
is the intent of your bill to
prevent intimidation.
So, Mr Chair and and I think
important distinction was made.
We've got a one on the books
that deals with a criminal
intent required for
intimidation. We also have the
type of intimidation that may
not rise to the level of
criminal intent that many folks,
including the poll workers that
came to me with this bill, feel
when they see guns in polling
places.
And so I do think that, contrary
to the testimony that that
criminal statute covers
Um, situation here. You need
both. You need to have a
criminal statute if it arises to
a certain level, But I think the
point of this is an and again. I
think it's a legitimate, very
legitimate question because the
word intimidation it's used to
catch it orally. Uh and it has a
meeting in the criminal law, but
I also think from a lay
perspective.
Intimidation that people feel
that doesn't necessarily rise.
What this bill will will
address.
And, uh, thank you for that.
Answer, Mr Chair and Senator. So
in in 1, 2014 intimidation is
essentially makes it 1/4 degree
felony. Um, and that intent
requirement, Mr Chair and
senator would seems to me, um
Seems to me the intent of your
building is just a blanket, so
we're actually if we're not
targeting people that are
intimidating other people, then
we're simply targeting people
that are what otherwise be
lawfully carrying a gun, not
intimidating anybody at all. And
is that the populist that we're
targeting with this bill?
So, Mr Chair. I think we're
first of all. I want to be
clear. I do think this lane is
completely open for
constitutional regulation in
this area with polling places
under Bruin.
And I think that that this is
Creating a blanket. You're
correct. I mean, this is the
intimidation that that people
feel with folks with guns and
polling places. This will
prevent that. And I would note
that one of the important things
about this. It's a petty
misdemeanor. We're not trying to
felonies people, but it's a
petty misdemeanor. And again.
We've had lots of discussion
about
You know what? That what That
means, But it's again. I didn't
come in here with great new
felony for obviously.
You know, someone mistakenly
does something there's going to
be a question for a judge. Uh,
but I do think there is a
distinction here that when it
comes to intent that we're
addressing with this bill
Thank you, Mr Chair and senator
and I appreciate, you know, I
appreciate your candidness when
you when you're answering back
to us and amendments you've
already put in. I, uh I hope
that you would reconsider this
amendment going forward, and,
um, the offer still stands
today. It sounds like you
already had an offer of some
bipartisanship in this
committee.
To to go forward, which would I
think, in the eyes of new
Mexicans legitimize your bill to
a higher degree than what it
will now would be a shame for
this to go down or go up on
sorry on a party party line.
vote on the floor rather than
have some bit of cooperation.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Any other committee members with
questions or comments.
I'm gonna respectfully opposed
the amendment. I'll explain. Why
would I hopefully, an
illustration that made me want
to make sure I've got that
tickle accurate.
Um, no surprise. After the last
committee I was in on a waiting
period. I'm a concealed carry
permit holder. Um, if the
exception was to put on this
bill as proposed by this
amendment, I would be able to
carry a firearm into polling
location is my understanding as
a concealed carry permit holder.
The very fact that I have a
concealed carry permit doesn't
mean that like weapon has to be
concealed.
So if you're exempting me by
your amendment
My my missing something in the
reading on this am I Is there
something that would require me
to maintain the weapon is
concealed.
Yeah, the the concern and the
concern I have is that let's say
a person provided the firearms
concealed. Yeah, and I
appreciate that. That's a good
clarification. So, um, yeah. And
you understand that that being
declared question is if I have a
permit, Yeah. What's that?
Well, I'm still gonna so you're
still gonna have a problem with
me? Um, but because, like, well,
the issue then becomes this
which is you know you So you're
you're requiring by your
amendment that I have the weapon
concealed, and I don't know even
are concealed. Carry permit law
doesn't require or different. I
both know any of us know when
you're when you're carrying your
concealed carry weapon.
It's pretty evident to many
people when you when you wish to
have the weapon.
Appear to be concealed and not
really very concealed. So if I'm
wearing a holster if I'm wearing
a shoulder harness, whatever it
may be, it's arguably concealed,
but
It's pretty obvious to anybody
who I wish to open my jacket
suddenly or
Or
Bend in a certain way or
whatever. It may be that I'm
carrying weapons, and I know
those
People and I see them all the
time, Big supermarket or
whatever else they're carrying
it What they call it concealed
carry weapon, but they want very
clearly for everybody know that
they've met him, right, Shiny
weapon on their on their side or
on, you know, uh, under their
jackets, So I think that leads
to a whole different set of
issues Senator, So I appreciate
what you're trying to do, but I
would still be concerned that
People are going to go in there.
Under that exception that we're
gonna have to fight whether
they're whether they're weapons
concealed or not, And who's
gonna Who's gonna decide that
the election official. And are
they gonna
Confront somebody with a with a
weapon on their on their side
and say your weapons not
adequately conceal like I just
really do think this is going to
lead to a lot of problems and
issues so I can't support your
amendments and on the issue
where before the committee would
Senator Moore's proposed
amendment
The sponsor has said. It's not
Friendly amendment. Is there
objection to the adoption of
that amendment.
Risottos Stewart's O'Neill
Senator doing center, Cervantes
opposed the amendment.
Worth? Yes, I'm sorry.
The amendment fails, another
committee members would proposed
and I have a motion.
But can I ask Senator Worth
question about process first? Of
course. So sooner worth you were
intending to have this piers
substitute Bill?
So, Yeah, mr. Chair. I think the
way this committee has always
handled multiple amendments.
Yes, I think it should be
rationed. It'll be clean. The
reason I didn't bring in a
committee sub is because I think
it was important to delineate
exactly the change and then be
able to walk you through the
amendments in the context. I
just thought that was an easier
way to present the bill or
otherwise I would have just
Walked in with one sub that
obviously would have come out
there.
Especially given the work that
we regularly appropriate
So, Mr Chairman, if you have
other people to talk, I'll hold
off on the motion. But I have a
motion when you want one. Thank
you. And I appreciate the
procedural question. I think
that is going to remain the
practice that that I've adopted
for the committee, which is sent
out committee substitutes again
that
Subject to change as we get
later in the session, and
there's not the opportunity to
do so. But we have that
opportunity. Now. I do think
that, um, I'd like to adopt with
the committee's approval process
by which Senator Worth would
have these amendments would
prepare the committee substitute
and the bill would not have to
come back to the committee for
another review and vote that
we're going to rely on the good
faith of the members to
Sure that the committee
substitute reflects all the
changes. We can trust. All the
members of this committee to
assure that that's the case that
the amendments that are adopted
by the committee are reflected
in the absolute without having
to have to come back and check
it. Check your homework. Um,
that begins to fail on us for
some reason, alternative
committee process. All right, Mr
Point. Does that mean we're
going to do vote on it on
Monday? And I mean, all the
Republicans will be here, of
course, because we are always
here. But can the Democrats who
are gonna be here if we wait
till Monday?
I sit around all day.
Sarah Morris. Good, Good Try,
but yeah, the the vote. The vote
tonight would be to adopt the
bill as amended as an and
presented as committee
substitute, and it would not
come back to the committee.
Process again. Unless again
there's some objection by a
member who committee process.
Trust him. I just don't know. I
just want to make sure we have
that hope for the best cross our
figures, Senator Stewart had a
motion but before that center of
risotto is still on the bill as
amended.
I think, Mr Mann, Mr. Man as I
was, I was looking at the
Subsection d of the built it. It
does. It doesn't. Uh and and I
understand this came up as an
issue in
Rules and Senator Worth differed
that he and I had, and I
appreciate that very much, and,
uh, we've we've gone back and
forth and interest the
definition of firearm.
Um and and I've been working on
on kind of a, uh, universal
definition of firearm.
But but for the purpose of this
bill
Uh and I have a fairly extensive
universal definition firearm,
but I think would be appropriate
for us to use for all statutes.
Yeah, for which would apply to a
variety of different scenarios,
however.
For the purpose of this firearm
where you're talking about
somebody going into pollen place
and living a polling place.
Ah!
On a functional basis, I think
What we're really looking at is
Uh, is encompassed by the
language that starts on H two
line 19 and ends
At the end of page of of line,
21.
And I don't think the language
online's 22
And 23 or necessary.
Uh, in terms of the definition
of firearm.
What? What is important in terms
of appalling place is whether
you have a weapon that will or
is designed to or may readily be
converted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosion.
Um and and I think the
For this purpose. The simpler
definition is the better
definition.
Um And and I don't think the, uh
whether or not you have a frame
or receiver of such weapon.
In the absence of such weapons,
in other words, not in terms of
not expelling a projectile or a
firearm, muffler or silence or
In the absence of being able to
expel projectile.
Uh, I don't. I don't think that
that would matter. And Mr
Chairman, I do note that the
former state police chief
Is is in the room. I know that
he doesn't like to be called
out, which is why he sits at the
back of the room. But I would I
would I would, But since he's
here, I don't
Ah, we also
Senator Every sort. I'm sorry.
I'm missing your point. What do
you What do you are You asking
something, or I'm making it
didn't matter what I'm
suggesting that we strike the
last two lines.
Of the bill, so that so that we
have a pithier definition of
firearm.
Uh, which is which would also
meant the last two lines. I
don't think they're necessary
for the purpose of this bill.
So there's a proposed amendment
is, like, understand. That is
correct. So, Mr Chair, we did
have a discussion in rules about
The firearm, muffler or firearm
Silencer on that does make sense
to me. I'm a concerned, though
about deleting the frame or just
would be concerned that someone
could come and we've got a few
folks that
Made a few guns, huh?
Interesting.
Frame of a gun. It just could. I
don't know what that I'd be
concerned that someone would
come in with some part of a gun
and you get into it A weird
semantical argument with that,
So I mean, I would be
comfortable with striking or any
fire muffler or firearm silencer
again. I think Senator Nyberg
brought out those issues up, but
I think my preference would be
to leave.
The first part of framework
receiver of any such weapon in
just
To deal with the potential of
someone bringing parts of a gun
in and creating a
Complicated situation for a
poll.
Certainly.
Uh,
Even if I if if I may and I, you
know, and I'm and I'm and I'm
happy.
To limit it to whatever would
make it a friendly amendment.
With the with the sponsor. I
would point out that that, uh,
what would remain is
In terms of what I'm suggesting.
Would be
That will or is designed to or
may readily be converted.
To expel a projectile by the
action of an explosion. So if
somebody came in with the frame
and an X and a receiver on
unassembled
And they chose to assemble it
there that is something that is
readily converted to expel, Um
To expel a projectile by the
actual action of a projectile.
So in fact, that would what you
just described.
Without the last two lines, in
fact, would would be included.
So, Mr Chair, I think, though,
Or the frame or receiver of any
such weapons situation where the
part is coming in. Sure, and
just the part alone didn't come
in.
And I think that's what I become
Froebel. I just think we should
leave that there and and Mr
Chairman, I'd be fine with that.
So
Uh, Mr Man, if I if I could just
simply ask
Uh, the sponsor to help Emily
with what My motion is then.
So that we're clear since he was
suggested that I modified
So, Mr Chair? No, I just think
instead of striking
Everything online, 22 and 23
basically, uh, you need to put I
believe at the beginning of line
22 the word or
Before.
The frame or receiver of any
such weapon and then put a major
23. That's fine. That's fine.
Yes, that would be my motion.
And that's friendly discussion
on the amendment.
Center Pirtle. Thank you, Mr
Chair, and, um, Senator, and I
think you know, had this
discussion about the framework
receiver in rules.
And I think the best way I can
explain it like giving someone a
d u I for holding a muffler.
Automobile muffler.
Um
It's not a car. You can't drive
it. You know, it's not able to
drive down the road it just to
me. It doesn't make sense. You
can order these parts with
without
Um, I believe in FL most of
these because it's not the part
that, um, houses the explosion.
Um, I mean, I don't see why
somebody would walk in with one
also, but, um, it just does seem
to be ambiguous Language. That's
not necessary. Um, but I do
appreciate at least removing the
muffler firearm silencer because
again, those are useless pieces
that if they're separate from a
weapon and
But I just wanted to make that
point that the frame and
receiver should also be removed.
Um, just
I'm if I was chairman, I would
yield to Senator
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I move
it Do not pass Pirtle.
So pretty
Thank you, Mr Chair. Senator. I
still wanted to get back to this
whole door issue. Um
That that we had in rules.
Um it's actually kept me up at
night. I don't like to let
things keep me up at night
anymore, like to sleep.
Um And so it took me back to the
mall issue and and the use of
the word May and I understand
that this is mirrored language
out of 1-20 Dash 16.
But
The way it reads it.
It, says 100, FT of the door.
This is Page two. Line four sub
paragraph two.
100 FT of the door through which
voters may enter to vote.
And so the use of the word may
can be confusing as in, is it
the door that they could
possibly enter? So is that all
doors that they might enter the
Southeast door? Even though
voting is happening at the
Northeast door? Um and so I
think that that's an issue or is
it a permissive may as in this
is the door that you have
permission to enter to vote?
Uh um. And so I think the the
easy quick fix would be, I
believe, um
That
It's determined by the presiding
judge.
But if we just said, um 100 ft
of the door comma designated by
the presiding judge, Kama,
through which voters may enter
to vote. So that way we are
designating which door There
can't be any confusion As to
what door there's 100 FT. Ban
on, Um
And and so that way, we're we
understand. Um which tour We're
speaking of Adam all because I
think the mall in Roswell has 20
doors in it.
Dr Soto.
He yielded to me. I'm sorry. I
was disregarding everything You
were saying, Um what? What?
were you trying to get a yield
to senator sort of
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'll start
from the top. So on page two
I'm just kidding. You'll decided
driving soda, please.
Yeah, I miss Sherman. I'm I'm
wondering, Actually, if that may
be resolved simply by and I
would ask Miss Bachmann, take a
look at this.
That would be resolved simply by
striking the word may
In both places.
And so that it would be
Through the door.
And the protest would look at it
as well. 100 FT.
Of the of the door through which
voters enter to vote.
And by striking the word may
then it's by simply saying,
Enter to vote. It is the door
through which they enter
development. Mr. Chair. I think
we still end up with the same
issue. You walk through dealers.
You know, pick you out a nice
time, maybe a good belt.
And then walked down the hallway
in front of Martin's jewelry.
And you vote. Is it 100 Ft of
the Dillards door already? Is
there a specific door that that
we're trying to?
Uh, um, Shuffle people to to
ensure that that's the door that
we're speaking of, And so I
think that's the issue I've had.
And again, I feel like I've
talked myself in circles with
this. That's why I lost sleep
over it, But I think if we
designated in statute that
there's a specific door, you
know the one that they put the
white sign in front with the
arrow in red that says
Vote here, and we all like sheep
will walk right through those
doors. Well, it doesn't
necessarily mean that at a, um
all because you could enter
through the Dillards mosey on
around overthrew and that this
would just clarify that there's
a specific door 100 ft within
that door.
And then within 100 ft of any
door that people might enter,
Um, wouldn't be in violation of
this and I would move that on
Page two. Line two after door
insert designated by the
presiding judge.
And then online 12 after door
insert designated by
So, Mr Chair.
I'm not going to consist This
language is identical to wonder.
Is the election nearing within
100 FT. Assistances steak, It's
the same.
100 FT.
Analysis that occurs currently
for where that set
Um
Election again. I can also yield
them, Miss Bachmann if you want
more specifics, but I just don't
think it's friendly. But I
understand
The lack of sleep in terms of
some of these things spinning
your most proper motion for the
member. Thank you, Mr Chair, and
it's on page two.
Line four after door insert
designated by the presiding
judge.
And then on line 12 after door
insert designated any further
discussion on the amendment.
Is there? Objection the adoption
risotto, Stewart O'Neill.
Thanks, Mr Chair. I guess this
is relating to elections so I
can bring that amendment. We can
fix both the second system. See,
um
But I just wanted to on the bill
itself. Just
I know that there seems to be
quite a bit of issue with
hypotheticals, and I
And I understand that, but
This is a very, uh
Sensitive issue for
Everyone.
I understand the sensitivity on
the side of the elections.
But I feel like there's a lack
of sensitivity for the passion
of some of us rural folks that
that
Um
Do hold.
Firearms in it in a different
place than more urban.
People of firearms are some
things that
Um
You know, or in everyday tool.
For many of us or heritage that
Goes back many generations.
And so I know it seems like just
such a small thing to
Your constituents, but
Two people in my area and myself
included. This is this is a much
larger issue, and and I feel
like we we could have got
somewhere that
That would have worked better
for everyone involved, and it's
unfortunate that it's not going
to work.
Under buckle. We're gonna come
to you. I see a lot of law
enforcement officers in the
back. I assume everything's
under control and safe and
sound. No concerns.
And see a lot of uniforms. A lot
of suits back there that
immediately captures my
attention. But, um all right, um
We'll go to center back. I have
released Senator how to meet
tonight. We're clearly not going
to get to that or my
expectation. This would be a
very short matter. We're now in
an hour and a half into it.
We'll meet tomorrow morning at
eight o'clock made arranging
items that were on the agenda
for today. For eight o'clock in
the morning, complete deciding
for tonight. So, Senator Boxer
Mr Chair on that we were here on
time.
The Democrats weren't we are now
at 620.
Probably another 2015 minutes on
this, this bill.
We're away from our families. I
have a little baby at home, and
now you're telling me I have to
show up on a Saturday because
you guys were not here.
We got chastised in the press.
Yesterday for not keeping quorum
when we cannot control the
Corum, you guys control the
quorum and now you're telling us
coming at 830 on a Saturday away
from my family, That's not fair.
That's in fact, that's
hypocritical.
Be chastised in the press.
And then you don't show up to 24
hours later and making a stay
here late on a Friday and coming
in on Saturday.
So if you guys aren't here
This place is gonna melt down.
In fact, this is on you guys
that were here doing this right
now, and I don't appreciate the
comments in the press chastising
us.
I'm wonder if to Santa Fe, New
Mexican is going to write an
article about what you it's not
fair to us and our thank you,
senator. And again. I respect
very much and I love seeing you
with your son and it's a
beautiful thing, and I
appreciate that very much. I
also have plans for this
evening. As you all met. I'm
missing that we're all gonna
have to make sacrifices, and I
regret that they delay in
getting started is is somewhat
on me.
Although again I was in another
committee presenting and also
answering questions from both
Democrats and Republicans there,
too.
Um, and so I'll take some
responsibility for starting
late. That was not on anyone
else in this room other than me,
But my job is the chair is to
make sure that the work is done
of this committee. I had a
schedule in mind thought we
would be able to get all of
these items completed and we're
nowhere near that. And so I have
a responsibility to stay current
with our calendar. I'll just let
most of you know we we don't
have a lot of bills at this
committee yet, but I expect to
have a lot of them tomorrow.
We're going to see just a
blizzard of bills in this
committee in the next two weeks,
and I'm trying to avoid
What
I think it's wise center, which
is where it's 630. It's a Friday
evening. I'm hoping that by any
of the committee after this
bill, you'll get the time to put
your son to bed and spend spend
some time with your family
tonight.
That you might not otherwise yet
if we go till 789 10 o'clock
tonight, and and I generally my
feeling that we don't function
well, when we When we work late
at night, we make errors and we
rushed things and I'm trying to
avoid doing a lot of that late
night work.
At least, certainly this this
early in the session, so, Mr
Chair can I just interject
something here because they're
worth delayed, based on Senator
Do and send. You were in that
you were in the chair, so there
was not a quorum. And here I
will tell you, Mr Chair the
Senator Boxer and I did discuss
on the floor basically.
The only committee that was
going to do a hearing was going
to be taxed had and then I did
hear that The Senate Finance
Committee is in at nine o'clock,
so I didn't really interpret
that to me. No other committee
was going to meet. I thought I
understood it to be just the tax
committee just to be completely
forthright with you.
So again. I guess my point is
that in a situation like this, I
was expecting that we would sit
here tonight and work through
the bills.
And I just think that that we
did vacate the floor.
Schedule.
That we were gonna have tomorrow
and it would have made me if we
were going to be on the floor.
And so again, it's a it's a
challenging situation, given
that that
Again. We we were delayed by an
hour and a half because of the
fact that you are presenting a
bill and others were here. And
so I do think that is a little
bit of it. And again. I think
this has been an incredibly good
discussion and we've made this a
much better bill as this
committee does, so I would just
suggest, you know, I'm happy to
visit and we can talk more about
this. And obviously you're the
chair.
And it's your prerogative to do
it. But I'm also sensitive to
the fact that in this particular
case, you know we sat in the in
this Senate tax comes out a
quorum and proceeded forward.
Um, I appreciate we did not do
that tonight. I think it's
important, especially in this
committee and subcommittees. But
we're here in a situation now
where
Again. We're in this kind of
pickle, and I just want to say I
have some sympathy for the
argument that's being made given
what we went through.
With with the other and given
the discussion that Senator Baca
I and I had on this situation
and not gonna
The other option, I think could
conceivably be would have to
give it up to you. What? I'm
trying to be cognizant of is, Of
course, any agreements between
leadership or respectful to and
recognize an order? I did check
with President Pro TEM first and
I think with the center worth
leader before deciding to
continue the meeting to tomorrow
morning, I'm also
Members. Cognizant of Senate
Bill six cannabis regulation
changes. I think this is an
important issue.
I think it's um
Thank you. Mexicans recognize
we've got dispensaries on every
street corner, and we've got a
law that we enacted that has no
means of enforcement. I don't
think that that's something
we're gonna rush.
And I don't think that's
something we're going to want to
do it seven or 89 o'clock. That
is also important for us to
consider. So, um, I will. I will
here can be members. They all
will be recognized. Appreciative
of the fact that you are allowed
me to share. This meeting also
recognized that different than
the chair.
I'll have to go on it really the
next person to be recognized on.
We're still in this bill. Uh so
I was gonna go to Senator Bach
of some privileges that are sort
of
Mr Senator Purtle. I would just
just very briefly.
My preference, although it would
be not not to meet on the
weekend of this committee, But
if we are sort of Senator
Purtell and and thank you, Mr
Chair, and you know, I had
plans, um, to be back in Roswell
this evening to spend time with
my kids.
Um and then spend the weekend
with them, Um
And then if we're meeting
Saturday that
Basically ensures that I won't
see them at all this weekend.
Which is unfortunate.
But
I, um I have plenty of
amendments for the Cannabis
Regulation Act that we can make
that take as long
As we want to, um
But if we have in the morning
you won't have to worry about it
because I was fortunate that
actions that were outside of my
control. Um, are going to
Not affect the quality time that
my kids get to spend with their
father.
Put the work into amendments.
Maybe you can leave them with
your colleagues.
And we can consider center Baca,
Um, on the scheduling or back to
the bill is, um Mr Chair, I
think could be more more
appropriate at this point to to
deal with the scheduling and
then get back to the bill. Um, I
want to appreciate Mr Chairman
Senator worth for bringing up
those points and dealing with me
honorably on the floor today,
too.
To set a schedule for tomorrow
that everybody could live with.
I would hope and urge the chair
of this committee to consider
that agreement that was in place
to really for the benefit of all
the staff, all the members and
their families and really to
maintain some functionality on
the floor and within committee
by working in good faith with
each other.
I see that Senator Wirth had
full intention of honoring that.
I certainly did. And our
agreement I hope will stay
intact. I can see though. The,
um changing direction in this
committee by altering that
schedule, um, would certainly
cause discord. Um
In other areas of the Senate,
Uh, Senate side of we we
certainly can address things
again on Monday. Um, it was no
fault and I am not blaming the
chair. We all know that it gets
busy. We have have other
commitments to take care of that
stands in the way sometimes of
getting the quorum at a time
that we, um that is reasonable,
but we were delayed exactly two
hours from the scheduled time.
Had we ran on schedule, we would
be having this discussion right
now at 430 instead of 630 again.
No fault to anybody chair
included, Um that's all yield to
others that want to weigh in on
the scheduling issue. The
committee will be in recess for
five minutes.
Thank you all.
Thank you all for the time and
consideration. Took a few more
minutes and 10 minutes. Um, I
have asked to retrieve Senator
how to meal.
Um and I understand he will be
back here promptly.
We will.
Continue to hear Senate Bill
Five. Understand center. Baca
has now the floor with some
potential additional amendment
language will consider
We will hear Senate Bill 175 and
Senate Joint Resolution one.
presuming that we make adequate
progress on those bills. We will
postpone Senate Bill Six do
regrets to the sponsor until
Monday will be the first item up
Monday. Um, and that that is the
resolution of tonight's
proceedings. So, uh, Senator
Bach, you have the floor still
in Senate Bill five.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Sponsor here, So I
talked to the sponsor. Well,
while we're out in the interest
of time, and uh and so, the
amendment I propose as the
amendment that was was added in
Senate rules. Um on and let me
go to the language. It would be
online. Uh, 10 of page two.
And essentially, it would add
the language in that was amended
in during Senate rules, while
early voting is in progress and
on election day, and this would
apply to the monitored secured
containers.
Mr Chair. That's a friendly
amendment.
Could it be repeated, please?
Certainly could. So essentially
with this amendment does is, it
adds on the language that we
added to the polling locations
and Senate rules to specify that
the monitored security
containers would be, uh, would
be, uh, this would be applicable
while early voting is in
progress and on election day so
the amendment would be
Online 10 of Page two after that
amended sentence, while early
voting is in progress.
On and on Election Day period,
Mr Modify made that would that
would go after the reference
that as amended, Yes, Yes. Okay,
so so this would add, And
actually, I think it was your
amendment senator do hig and
Senate rules. That added, um,
while early voting is in
progress and on Election day
If you'll recall that amendment
that you made, we would add that
very same language to the
secured the monitored secured
containers, which is page two
line 10.
And so it would just apply
during that same period at those
containers, as it would at the
polling locations.
Uh, and Mr Chair. This might be
a question from his Bachmann.
But I believe that the time
frame for absentee voting is
longer than the time frame
starts before early voting, And
so we should not so those
monitors security containers are
going to be being used outside
of the timeframe of just
So if you want to limited by
time, it should be.
From the time the absentee vote
ballots probably go out.
Ah!
That that that's fine. Just so
we're just trying to avoid a
having a year round. Um,
inadvertent violation around
those containers, and I'll yield
to Senator Ivey Soto. Mr
Sheriff, that's okay for some
language assistance. Mr. I think
I think, uh,
Uh, it would be instead of while
early voting is in progress, it
would be beginning 28 days
before the election through
election beginning 20 days
before and
Mr Chair that would discussion.
Emily, you with me on the
amendment.
Begin 20 beginning 28 days
before an election.
Through Election Day.
Before the committee is that
amendment? Is there any
objection to the adoption of
that amendment?
The answers are worth, you'll
make sure you've got that
amendment on there, too, as
well. Everybody used to have the
floor. That's all I have. Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Committee
members, Anything else with
emotion?
Okay and
Senator. Everybody you've got to
be recognized. It's not just
I moved a do not pass on Senate
Bill five, and they do pass on
the Senate Judiciary Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill five
to incorporate all of the
amendments evening, so it'll be
a point.
So do you have to be recognized
for what purpose? We're on a do
pass motion with Senate Bill
five as well come out as a
Judiciary committee substitute.
Is there any objection to the
motion for Pastor Center? Morris
Center, Baca, president and
support that we do pass that are
worth on. 75 Sorry about that
gang.
I regret that I thought we
wouldn't get to you tonight.
A small discussion about that.
Cruz back. I came back. Quick
Chairman. Thank you back for
that Senate Bill 175 1st of all,
um
175. We're checking, but we
don't have anyone registered to
speak of.
They all left. Sorry, Mr
Chairman, right?
That's okay. That's what I
thought we wouldn't hear it. So
Senator had a meal. We've agreed
to take your bill, but with some
caveats, which is it'll be
prompt and sure understanding we
don't have anyone to my
knowledge speaking in
opposition, so, Senator Army on
Senate 175. Mr Chairman, This is
a straightforward bill, which
appropriates $35 million from
the General fund to the
Department of Finance and
Administration.
This will be through fiscal
years, 25 through 27 for state
and local law enforcement
officers, correction officers
and probation and parole officer
recruitment. It's a statewide
recruitment effort that wouldn't
only benefit municipalities and
counties, but it also includes
university and tribal agencies,
which would benefit from this
fund.
And with that, Mr Chairman, I'll
take any questions. Thank you,
Senator Emil Committee members,
Questions risotto settled down.
Moved to pass. Thank you,
Senator, Senator Doig.
Oceans do pass any other
committee discussion.
Is there any objection to do?
Pass motion? Quorum present? You
have a do pass. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Have a good night,
Senator do hig on senator and
resolution number one.
The committee substitute.
Chair.
Uh, with the committee
substitute. We didn't rules. All
this bill does is allow the dean
of the law school to use a
designee when she is serving as
the chair of the judicial
nominating Commission. I would
like to offer one amendment to
the title because this will be
going on the ballot. And this is
what the voters see it, says
Appellate Judges Nominee
commission.
Uh, this, in fact applies to
District Court nominee
commissions and Metro Court
phenomenon commissions because
Ah sections.
36 and 37 of Article six of our
Constitution incorporate by
reference each and every
provision of section 35, which
is what we're amending here, so
my motion would be to strike
online 13 appellate judges and
then certainly there of judicial
We'll take that Amendment first
proposed amendment. Is there any
objection that amendment we
have? We have a motion for what
we do have a new path. Just any
discussion committee members
just real quick start doing
carried this before. Do you know
the history? We passed this
Senate before? Haven't we? Mr.
Chair? I believe so. I believe
you've passed it through the
Senate and a number of times.
Yes. Well, I wish you better
luck than I had. But I think we
passed it on the Senate
repeatedly and
Senator Ivey Soto. Really?
I just want to be clear about
the amendment, right?
Yes, the the amendment. I just
want to, um I'm unclear as to
take it out the and replacing it
with a different article. Nope.
The judicial nominating
commission. So line 13 judicial.
Okay, That's fine. That's fine.
Do not fasten, do pass.
No, because it's just an
amendment of an existing kind of
rules Committee substrate.
On the motion before the
committee.
Any other discussion was Senator
Pirtle Center, Baca.
Others and support. There's a do
pass on that matter.
The committee will not meet
