he did not firm so is he there.
Okay.
We'll discuss.
Sorry Mr chair I stepped out of
the room I'm here is that your
tractor our work is that what is
that's that like a harvest thank
let's combine we we've nicknamed
Optimus prime.
So this is our baby that's good
okay well thank you thank you
everyone and welcome to our
first official meeting of the
Senate Judiciary Committee I am
your vice chair substituting for
our chair representative savant
issues going to be with us you
just having trouble with his
voice and I I am I understand it
is not trying to hasten the in
this role so in my first Cherry
of this virtual committee but
but anyway thanks for attending
you know I just want to say this
committee has a long tradition
well it's just it's just a
hallowed tradition through the
decades and I've personally been
very honored to be part of this
committee for the two years now.
I can't remember exactly when
but but anyway well I thought it
would be a good idea.
To us start with introductions
of our find legislators on the
staff and then go to
introductions of staff itself so
I'm just gonna go in
alphabetical order
If you can just go introduce
yourself and just for my benefit
tell me what your astrological
sign is so so Senator Baca is he
here.
I don't think yes so Senator
doing.
Yes I am Senator Katie do Hank
and I represent district ten and
early on Santa Fe counties and
I'm a Virgo.
Nearly as organized as I should
be you know you're a bird okay
we Senator thank you senator
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you
Mr chair my name is Daniel A.
Ivey Soto state senator.
Having done in northeast heights
area of really County and our
quickie and and you ask.
So.
Provocative question.
I was raised.
Scorpio hi my brother's number
twenty A. as Joe Biden's.
And so that's what.
Our ability in myself to be a
Scorpio however.
So a few years ago.
Some research and and realized
by wearing them on the meeting
of the astrological sign say
they realized that not right now
we're actually fourteen.
Not that the Representative is
being thank you it's.
And the last.
On on people's actual article
science and as it turns out.
This is reconfigured mass.
Well we're we're here in is.
Matt Smith the.
And and this is Clark right to
have an incredible requests as I
don't member in the more.
Really sure what hi Bill but
central yes this is something
that I and.
On time for the rest of my life
but apparently NASA has proven
wrong you must have had Mexico
after something on the Russian
space agency that.
At some and and I on the on the
on the comms choose which are up
transcendence on the I've got a
list right here now you know
NASA says it is that.
Thank you senator that has
tremendous ramifications I mean
my goodness for at affects
everybody so some of us need to
follow up with you on that so we
should say you're present
astrological sign from here on
thank you thank you for that
Senator Lopez are you on.
No I Senator Moores
this is on the way to go I'm
sorry Senator Lopez.
good afternoon Mister chairman
and members.
Do you want to you're on mute.
Okay I did that and my last one
too sorry a good afternoon
Mister chairman members of the
committee and our public I am
Linda Lopez Senator district
eleven the southwest quadrant of
Bernalillo county and my
astrological sign is.
Is what hi seas okay okay.
Thank you senator as senator
Morris.
Thank you I and senator mark
Morrison Bernalillo county to
the east of Senator old Neal and
to the north the senator Daniel
Ivey Soto and I do have to point
out the cigarette so does ask
one word question for answer
Richard.
Yes reasons bills are also on
your pages Center Neelam and
give you one each chance to
guess what's on on him.
The soft evidence.
Torrez okay I was close.
What is reasonable but.
Twenty twenty.
So this is our researchers
Mexico.
Unifies a Taurus.
So it loads all right very good
okay Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair IDA and
senator cliff Pirtle from
Roswell I represent questions
Chavis Eddy and Otero counties
and I am told that my sign is
that of the libra which I guess
is standing for the committee
okay thank you senator okay
Senators dork.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman will
today's my birthday what so and
you know this is the age of
Aquarius.
Okay Mr chair not wanting to.
There are plenty that asks us
our program is a couple.
Which is self identifies as a as
a an Aquarius.
Cap or and I don't know where
he's there are not a word he's
all of that.
Okay thank you Sir restored
Senator survived as.
Chair serve on to us.
Or maybe this is saving his
voice.
Okay all right well I am Senator
now and I Representative
district thirteen which is
basically the north out of
Albuquerque and I self identify
as a pie sees but I'm really
concerned after hearing this new
information I need to get with
that Senator Ivey Soto and
figure out my NASA says I think
this is this is like huge but
anyway yes I'm the first day of
high seas actually so okay well
thank you and how can we go to
staff
can still letter going to a
introduced himself and our
provide staff are stellar staff
the symbol for the session.
Hello.
Try it okay if you go on mute
button on your bottom right hand
corner of the screen I'm a
little Erro I'll make sure that
you're using the computer audio
there should be a couple options
are we just talking who were you
talking to.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Can you try to help.
Okay.
This is because.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee can you hear me
now yes.
my name is Philip what a great
day I served as your chief of
staff
I've worked in the legislature
well the first time I page that
was nineteen sixty three so I
have been here while Mr chairman
members all of your staff were
born on the cost.
so we're right in the middle.
All of our members.
It's our goal in your Judiciary
Committee Mr chairman members to
provide you the very best
analysis we can't I encourage
you all to read the bills.
Please read the bills.
we're often inundated with
fiscal impact reports and
spreadsheets and headed out to
cetera please note that the
legislation we consider the
Judiciary Committee up is in the
bills is in the bills themselves
so joining me so I'm a little
out of breath
joining me the session of the
course our committee secretary
Emily Garcia who's been with us
now for a couple years Brandon
Cummings rejoins us as our one
of our analysts.
James out that we don't know
what will be joining us as an
analyst to session as well they
will both be working remotely
and coordinating their efforts
to this office B. J. Trujillo is
our secretary Senator serve on
to secretary so she takes gets
to take all those frontier
telephone calls about the bills
that we're considering.
and kat cook.
Is our super our resume
extravaganza we welcome cat to
the committee and look forward
to working with our very very
very closely so thank you Mr
chairman without I'd you'll back
to the chair thank you thank you
for all of that and we're so
lucky to have the staff and I'm
glad everybody's on the cost so
there's so there's a lot of
research to be done by everyone
that they're interested in that
issue so but seriously today
what just and gender wise we're
gonna go with we have a light
agenda as a Senate bid seven and
and I'm I'll do my bill last
so the second bill will be
Senate bill one oh five and then
my last bill will be Senate bill
eighty one and then just I'm
just going to pretend that were
in our committee room are
wonderful committee room and the
formats the same good senators
present the bill expert
witnesses in attendance and then
going to the audience and
happily cat ours Meister will
facilitate that and then we go
to the committee so having said
all that let's get started so
Senate bill seven Senator Wirth
driver's license suspension
penalties.
You can can't let you in and
your experts and so forth.
I'm here
thank you Mr chair
I'm here to present Senate bill
seven and I have brought a with
me as an expert witness someone
you all know very well one of
golf's former analyst in this
committee.
Now is working on the issue of
fines and fees and and has kind
of brought this bill to me early
last year and it's something
that that I think makes sense
for a lot of reasons Senate bill
seven relates to driver's
licenses and basically changes
penalties are for suspension of
a driver's license up so the
bill specifically.
Ends.
The current practice of
suspending driver's licenses
when someone misses a court
hearing.
Or has fines and fees that are
overdue.
Up again.
Someone who simply as a
financial situation and can't
pay a fee currently can have
their driver's license suspended
this bill ends that practice how
big a problem is this how big an
issue is it well over a three
year period in here in New
Mexico
Two hundred sixteen thousand
driver's license were suspended
because the person could not
afford to pay the debt that they
owed were missed a a a court
hearing and it creates a vicious
cycle again living in our in
that state like New Mexico where
driving is such a key piece of
of our existence to be able to
work it puts up folks in a
terrible position basically
can't pay that they're they're
fine and so they have a choice
they can stop driving and lose
access to the ability to work
for they keep driving
and basically put themselves in
even more jeopardy and so the
idea behind this bill is to take
away
the suspension of a driver's
license as a remedy in these
situations I want to be really
clear it does not eliminate
suspensions and revocations
based on dangerous driving do
you why things of that nature or
overdue child support that's
another remedy that exists
and it it also does not limit
the court's discretion to impose
sanctions in criminal and
traffic cases so it's really a
targeted piece of legislation
are focused on on.
Again addressing the economic
disparity where someone simply
can't pay a fine and ends up
with a loss of the suspension
and off you go into debt cycle
so that's the overview and I'd
like to yield to.
Why expert witness for some
comments and also.
She can proactively address some
of the things that showed up in
one of the FIR is which I think
would be good to get out right
up front so if I could ideal to
Monica also.
Thank you so much senator Wirth
a good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is my call to the criminal
defense attorney I am the state
director of the East Justice
center it's so nice to be back
here with all of you in very
different capacity also Happy
Birthday Senator Stewart.
Also since you all went over
your I'm very excited I'm
actually examine I in case
anybody question for.
The committee.
needless to say I'm very happy
to be here I do my very best to
be brief
Senator Wirth did a wonderful
job Senate bill seven is a
simple correction to a
counterproductive process will
and driver's license suspensions
for miss court hearings an
overdue fines and fees and both
criminal and traffic court
settings and it will allow
reinstatement without a twenty
seven dollar fee I'm so what is
Mexico need this report.
Well I'm.
We believe that driver's license
suspension should be.
Is the driver.
You.
Three you're going you're
having.
Yes great sorry I think my
internet people in stable.
Turn off my camera.
So I'm you'll see.
So.
So.
You
have to leave and re trying.
Okay.
It's probably internet issues on
her and.
Mr chair can you hear me.
Yes I can hear you now okay.
Thank I I will I.
I will do my best to
Start from where I left off so
so what is the Mexico needs
reform
if you look at one of the
handouts that we provided which
has some and PED data you'll see
that eighty eight percent of
drivers license suspensions were
for next court appointment or an
inability to pay not for
dangerous driving the majority
of people living in New Mexico
have limited or no access to
reliable public transportation
nationally only eleven percent
of rural residents have access
to hi I actually have successful
access to public transportation.
This is a dimension that those
that do have access actually put
their lives at risk due to
social distancing requirements
in light of COVID.
Yep roughly seventy two thousand
New Mexicans every year have
their license suspended for this
non public safety reasons reason
excuse me this means that
database and failure to appear
driver's license suspensions for
some possible choice stop
driving and lose access to work
child care health care food and
other basic necessities or keep
driving on a suspended license
and risk criminal charges and
more unaffordable fines and
fees.
So ending this practice will
restore community in many ways
but I'm only gonna highlight
three key points.
first any driver's license
suspensions would actually
improve New Mexico's businesses
and workforce people need to
drive to work employers need
reliable employees that can
drive research shows that when
people lose their license over
forty percent also lose their
jobs.
And those who are able to find
jobs often takes significant pay
cuts there is a wonderful study
done by Arizona State University
that found that restoring just
seven thousand licenses would
increase GDP by one hundred and
forty nine point six million
dollars.
Any agency practice would also
improve public safety that
placed in this court license
suspensions makes all of state
less safe by clogging our courts
and squandering public safety
resources I'm driving on a
suspended license is extremely.
I mean criminal charge even
though the vast majority of
these suspensions remember
eighty eight percent are not
public safety related
Ending this practice would
improve cost efficiency and
allow there's no hand raising
nobody raised their hands yeah
there's.
I'm sorry Mr chairman.
I'm so at practice would
potentially allow New Mexico's
police we need particular cases
also service prosecutors it
would allow them to refocus on
and other crime and it would re
allocate receipts limited public
safety resources.
another key point is that ending
this practice will protect New
Mexico whose drugs from
uninsured motorists suspending
licenses increases insurance
premiums and prevents many
drivers from getting insurance
at all.
If we get rid of this priced
practice it will ensure that
drivers can get and keep
insurance bringing costs down
and making the roads safer for
everyone.
The bottom line is really that.
If someone when someone isn't
able to pay fines and fees
services a court appointment it
does not help to suspend their
driver's license.
Which makes it harder for them
to earn a living take care of
their families pay off their
debts any and comply with court
orders
finally I wanted to address a
few things about cost.
I'm state law authorizes courses
right a host of administrative
fees two people involved in both
the traffic in the criminal
legal system these these are
intended solely to attend to it
and and I'd like to stress it's
an attempt to balance budgets
and an attempt to recoup these
costs associated with the
administration of the system
yes assessing and collecting
these fees has proved to be
inefficient and comes at a
substantial cost to people
serving as a regressive tax on
the most underserved and
economically and secure
communities while simultaneously
undermining the public safety
goals of that system.
What's more is that cities and
counties in many government
agencies actually receive
minimal that revenue from these
fees because most individuals to
whom they are assessed those who
are overwhelmingly people of
color and low income cannot
afford to pay them and when we
forced judges police officers
and even the and the date to go
after money that we know doesn't
exist it comes at an enormous
cost.
We we actually have some local
research and national research
One study
studies conducted in both New
York North Carolina and Florida
demonstrated that many if not
most people can never afford to
get their licenses restored so
those reinstatement fees will
actually never be collected.
The Brennan center for justice
report that actually looked at
three New Mexico counties found
that we spend more than forty
one cents to collect a single
dollar findings you revenue
which is a hundred and fifty
times more than the IRS spends
to collect a dollar of income
tax our largest County Brent Leo
spends a dollar seventeen for
every dollar of fines and fees
collected I mean actually loses
money through the system.
So although there could be brief
costs to the system the
overwhelming system costs when
you look at all of the different
state agencies and the amount of
revenue that they spend on these
particular practices when you
look at that it's there's
actually an enormous opportunity
for cost savings
so with that thank you very much
and I stand for questions.
Some people that we will go to
the audience now are Senator
Wirth did you have anything else
before we go to the audience no
the only thing I would just
close with this I couldn't help
you know after serving on Senate
judiciary for many many years
and thinking about one of our
former chairman who always
brought up the issue of here we
are other find another fee and
we're trying to pay for services
in a way that really really
hurts are those that can least
afford to pay it so this is this
bill goes right at that issue
and is as part of a discussion I
think we really need to have a
whole bunch that's thank you
thank you so now zoom Meister
mistress can we go to the
audience with who would like to
speak on behalf of or first on
behalf of the bill does in
behalf of the bill on behalf of
the bill we have.
We have thirteen people should
speak for the bell so we're not
in the first person we have
found our from the public
defender's office okay if I can
would you of because there's so
many of you can you please keep
it
you know short and then and then
if you if you feel like somebody
has expressed your view you know
we just have limited time here
you know you can just take your
name off the list in a sensitive
way thank you.
Okay.
Do we have anybody.
Mr Bowers in Brazil thank you
can go ahead and I believe.
Thank you Mr members of
committee my name is been about
our chief public defender I am
here in my private capacity and
I'm I'm here and and I'll I'll
make this brief but.
when I was talking is all about
this bill she asked me to tell
the story I'm kind of an expert
witness and the cautionary tale
because.
I had my driver's license
suspended maybe you're nine
years ago when I was acting
chief public defender I was on
my way to a conference driving
from Santa Fe to Albuquerque got
caught in a speed trap that's
the unofficial term you know
four or five state police
officers on motorcycles just
south of Sandia casino and they
were pulling a lot of people
over I got pulled over I was
attacked for going either nine
or eleven miles over the speed
limit.
when I read the citation and
said I calendar that I had to be
in metropolitan court on the
thirtieth of the month.
on the twenty first of the month
I got two pieces of mail one of
them said that I had been toward
prepared with year the other one
said that my license was
suspended our and it turns out
that I was supposed to be there
on the twenty so.
The court NMED were incredibly
on top of their business by
doing these things immediately
and I'm telling you this because
as a lawyer it took me two trips
going to metropolitan court NMED
from Santa Fe and how could I
get there I had to drive on a
suspended license so I'm
admitting right now that I grow
on a suspended license to
metropolitan court I had to find
somebody to get me to the judge
and and these are things that
people that are not lawyers
can't do on their own it's
almost impossible I finally
found the judge who was a little
weirded out by might be more to
talk about this but you know
we've made sure that everything
was done correctly the cost the
warrants and the paperwork to
take to MVD
I want to M. U. D. and I have
the wrong paperwork so I present
one I had to go back to to metro
court I had to again get
different people work go back to
NMED stand in line
I estimate that I made two round
trips on a suspended license
and that I had the reinstatement
fee
yes I had not been a lawyer and
knowing how to do this I very
well might have put it off or
not know how to deal with that I
would be picked up on driving a
suspended license I could have
been incarcerated and I think
it's.
This is why so many of our
clients the public defender's
office get into situations with
the court and with M. D. D. R.
and it is not because they're
bad people it's not because
they're purposely disobeying the
law this is why it's important
to pass this bill I ask you
support thank you.
And I'm done with my confession.
All right.
Next we're going to bring in
Rikki Lee Chavez from the.
Mexico criminal defense lawyers
association I will let her into
the.
Go ahead Rikki lake.
Thank you Mr chairman I
apologize there's a delay would
for us that are watching so I
apologize for adding to that
delay just wanted to make sure I
work we are ready to go Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Rikki Lee
Chavez I am the legislative
coordinator for the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association thank you for having
me for the sake of some of your
new members to the Senate and
judiciary I briefly just wanted
to point out that the New Mexico
defense lawyers is a statewide
association made up of public
and private defense attorneys
we urge you to support Senate
bill seven.
It makes it too easy to get
caught up in cycles of.
One fast track into this loop is
that that is created by fines
and fees the negative impact
that fines and fees in the
justice system have our exit
exasperated on those who reside
in states like New Mexico where
one's ability to drive
themselves is vital the changes
in Senate bill seven aren't
essential piece of the overall
criminal justice reform our
state and many others need to
make when a driver's license is
suspended because of one's
failure to pay the fine or the
feet their place in.
And Graham this is their source
of income or risk driving to
that source of income on a
suspended license and Mr Bauer
pointed out.
NMCDLA encourages this committee
to support this legislation
we're aware of the technical and
financial issues raised in the
FIR but we encourage this body
to find a way to sustain those
public services in a way that
does not disproportionately
impact lower income citizens and
communities of color we
appreciate the Sanchez work on
this bill and hope that you'll
reach out to us with any
concerns or questions you might
have from the defense community
thank you.
Thank you thank you Ricky.
Next up.
Next up Mr chair we have Maria
Griego from the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty I will
occur in.
I apologize for the case she is
not in the waiting room I will
go next to Fernando Trujillo.
And senator hero is from the
ball teachers policy associate
he is a full featured pocket
that that would be if you.
Thank you.
And Trujillo is from the full
picture of the property is the
voltages pocket the.
She was I am a policy associate
with gold futures.
And
The year J. members of the
committee my name is federal law
through your from S. one yard
line New Mexico and I am a
policy associate with all
features for many young women
United.
Just as in support of SB seven a
driver's license is critical for
will be in jobs and economic
mobility licenses and less
miss a beat when it comes to
get.
We.
Getting to work and entertaining
game full can prevent.
Families from eating because
they cannot go to the store for
fear of getting pulled over a
driver's license is a form of ID
and without an ID options become
even less limited Rep alone tell
you without and I do.
Some jobs will not hire an
individual if they do not have
would.
Jagger's license or ID
suspensions of driver's licenses
because of failure to pay or
failure to appear is unnecessary
isn't necessary policy the HSD
score SB seven.
Thanks so next up.
Yes I was just trying to add on
somebody from the waiting room
so next are going to have your
available from the New Mexico
voices for children.
Go ahead and let him into.
The New Mexico voices or.
I'm here.
Afternoon chairman and members
of the committee and thank you
for giving me the opportunity
given public comment in support
of this bill my name's have your
local I'm a Virgo.
What are.
This is old and and a trained
economist.
New Mexico voices for children
we support and promote policies
that help all New Mexican
families thrive we believe this
bill does that the existing
policy as many people have
already mentioned punishes
people for being poor it
punishes them by taking the
driver's license away for
failure to pay and people in the
state need to drive to go to
work to go to the grocery store
to pick up their kids to take a
family member of the hospital in
case of emergency.
If you take a person's license
away common sense and then
Perkel research shows that you
constrain their ability economic
ability and their ability the
family and as a result the.
Reese.
So simply put we think it's bad
policy.
Races.
This bill the free to drive back
and the reforms are represents
and we urge the members of the
committee to support as well
thank you for your time.
Thank you for your good job.
Next up.
All right next up is Kim Chavez
Cook who is also from the public
defender's office I'm admitting
her right now.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee can Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender I don't want to
take too much more of the
committee's time that we do
stand in strong support of SB
seven it would not only I have
significant cost savings to
offset any of the financial
concerns raised in the F. I. R.
but additionally it would really
helped a lot of people get back
on their feet and state employed
contribute back to society and
on that financial point I wanted
to just flag for the committee
hopefully we got it to you in
time but New Mexico state which
is a coalition of a number of
organizations around the state
on issues of public safety in
fiscal responsibility have
issued a new eight minus report
card for this legislation and it
was submitted that to the
committee for the staff but I'm
not within the twenty four hour
also I'm not sure if it needed
to members or not and that the a
minus reflects some work that
could it could be done to
improve the bill even more which
is in the report card I won't
get into it but the strong grade
really reflects the fact that
we're this kind of policy
measure has been implemented in
other states that we have seen
actually an increase in GDP
because people are able to get
jobs keep jobs earn money and
give back to their communities
so I would really urge this
committee to prevent people from
being incarcerated for simply
not being able to afford
reinstating their driver's
licenses and we strongly stand
in strong support thank you.
Thanks Kim.
Next up.
I'm not sure going to bring in
hello hard from the NMAA BFI.
Thank you.
Hello can committee members are
my name is Carol hard.
I am a member of the New Mexico
or bars report on these and I
just wanted to say but I stand
strong support of Senate bill
seven a lot of my part of
already been stated so I'll keep
this brief
suspended driver's license for
failure rate let's have a
productive for our judicial
system to our taxpayers and
those individuals are directly
affected
we can't really expect people to
amend payments if we keep
kicking them while they're down
So yeah just in summary I am
strong supporters Senate bill
seven I thank you guys for your
time and we'll all.
Yeah that's it.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you next carry out next
up.
We have Aaron Jones who is also
from ACLU.
Good afternoon everyone excuse
me chair and members of the
committee my name's parents also
ACLU Mexico we stand a strong
supporter of this legislation
for the reasons Nixon and I
would like to add on when you
when you're you know hit with
the finer the and you don't have
me as a a a thirty dollar fee
can amount to five hundred
dollars for some so as once you
I would encourage the committee
to support this legislation and
thank you on the sponsor I'm for
bringing this bill and for and
for the fines and fees justice
center working to make these
changes.
Thank you very.
Okay do we have others our cat.
There is one more person we have
known of Santa Fe New Mexico and
okay.
If you want to on yourself.
I did you say you monitor not.
Yes yes.
This is thank you thank you very
much well my name is Mona Sir
not and I'm a case manager and
appears per worker.
And I the
has seen this bill seven would
be a huge win for me and I fell
in New Mexicans who had who have
had our driving record
privileges taken away
before and
because of our inability to pay
traffic tickets in the court
dates I'm gonna maintain gainful
employment and contribute to New
Mexico economy like everyone
else so however having a
suspended license makes for
feeling seven makes for filling
simple and everyday responsibly
much much harder this bill gives
New Mexicans a fair chance we
desperately need so I am deaf
plea for the bill and
That's all I have to say right
well thank you Mona and so now
our kids are can we go to our
cat can we
go to any body opposed to this
legislation.
We did not have anybody opposed
to the legislation sign up okay
well now we can go to members of
the committee no cat I you know
I'm not able to see the order
which who's raising their hands
and who's not.
So
However do we have an do we have
an order of people that have put
up their hands.
I believe that Senator Duhigg
raise your hand first and then
Senator I.
Okay thank you cat Senator do
Hey.
Thank you Mr chair
and thank you senator Wirth for
for bringing this bill I.
I think was a great bill and I
have to believe that has Mister
Rojo said you know the use of
these fees and I punishes people
for being poor
and and so I really appreciate
you addressing that issue.
What I I do have questions about
the inclusion of a failure to
appear in the spell and so and
what.
What that the thinking is behind
including including that in
addition to the fees and fines
and also why it.
What if any consequence that
would end up being for failure
to appear if you if you wouldn't
mind addressing that I'd
appreciate it.
So happy to and I and all you'll
to Monica and just just a minute
I think
are you know our chief public
defender Ben Bowers story kind
of really hits the nail on the
head and it's in it's a two
tiered approach again there is a
financial issue certainly so
someone who who is low income
get the citation Justice banded
misses the date and they're
getting a double whammy because
they failed to appear and they
can't pay for and so I think
that was really the thanking up
behind including both but I I
would certainly be able to.
On account for any additional
specifics on that.
Thank you Mr chairman senator
Wirth Senator Duhigg lovely to
meet you all be it true zoom
happy to respond to that so
couple things also I was I'm
former public defender side
Representative so many people on
both of driving licenses
spending.
Home.
I'm and also in other other
charges in which our bench
warrants for failure to appear
and failure to pay come up so
the reason for both and there's
a couple reasons first every
time a bench warrant is issued
whether it's for failure to
appear failure to pay that's the
benchmark for your rest of your
you're driving around or walking
around you can be taken into
custody but on top of it you
were charged a hundred dollar
fee no matter what.
So failure to appear also comes
with a monetary sanction.
In addition often times people
so in two thousand eighteen of
the Supreme Court change some of
the court rules where if
somebody say you know.
If somebody could pay in center
I'm Mr payment instead of
issuing a bench warrant right
off the bat the court would
first have to issue a summons
and would have to be a summons
for that person to appear to a
hearing.
In order to explain sort of
what's happened how come they
haven't been able to make the
payment I've had so many clients
that also agency that hearing
back to you to pay hearing so
often times failure to painful
you're to appear are
inextricably linked
so it's important to include
both I'm also just from a rural
standpoint.
New Mexico's are and that's what
we kind of talk about the access
to public transportation
so we we don't have the best
public transportation there is
the blue bus and some of these
rural areas but quite often the
reason why my clients didn't
make it to court and they had
to say to appear was because
they didn't have reliable
transportation many of which
because their driver's license
was suspended so all of these
things are are inter related the
other reason why people often
miss court which is why then
missed court was notice
there's a lot of notice problems
it's not and and it's a hard
thing to fix I know that there's
different technologies that
people are working on to try to
make that better like sending
text messages to people for
their court hearings but you
know a common problem that I've
seen is that you know somebody
has a your physical address and
then they have their PO box
because we live in a rural place
and a lot of the time that
notice will get sent to the
physical address for there's no
way to get mail instead of the
PO box so there's just so many
problems with notice impacts
people's ability to get to court
which is why we're including the
FDA in there as well I'm thank
you thank you Mr chair and and
senator do K. I hope I answered
your question.
Thank you Mr chair yes yes you
actually did I appreciate that
would you mind also addressing I
in the FIR there were some some
issues raised about potential
conflicts with these interstate
compacts would you mind dressing
that as well.
Yeah I DO the mock up for that.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
Wirth Senator Duhigg I'm more
than happy to address those
conflicts
and.
The first.
To address it is.
I we we gave everybody a handout
it looks like this it's sort of
the all of the state Senate
passed I was license suspension
reform
I'm not sure everybody got that
I hope they did
if you did please take it out
also I used to be a teacher so I
like to sort of interactive way
of doing things so please please
forgive me but if you can't if
you don't have a hand out it's
fine
there's thirteen states that
have passed I was license reform
Of those thirty states I'm gonna
highlight all of the state
they're also parties to the it I
believe it's called the non
resident I'm so sorry.
The president by later compacts
here it is
here all the states that passed
Representative reform there are
also members of nonviolence
president compact which shows
that there actually is no
conflict with this particular
agreement which and I'd like to
also stressed that the agreement
is not a federal law it's
actually an it's it's an
agreement between the states so
main Idaho Mississippi DC taxes
West Virginia
Virginia New York Hawaii I'm all
of the states are members of
that compact already past
records license suspension or
perform for us.
Members of that contact.
What the I know that the FIR
suggested that there was this
issue there are.
However all it does
the the bill that ends is stated
New Mexico will no longer
suspended for this reason right
it doesn't mean that we're not
going to still engage or notify
other states when there are in
fact violations in our state but
our state no longer has a
particular one that is a
violation then we would not to
notify other states that there
wasn't a non resident violator
present
I hope that answers your
question also would like to say
that there's nothing in the
nonresident violator compact
that states that
It said that states have to
suspend licenses and there's
also several states including
Iowa Kentucky South Carolina
South Dakota in Virginia and the
state's all or part of the
compact and have been part of
the compact for years because
they need to contact was created
in the seventies I'm they have
never suspended for failure to
appear our failure to pay and
they are part of the Interstate
com contact I believe the FIR
also brought up an issue with
possible conflicts with of
federal notice requirements
nothing in this bill change
changes any notice requirements
if you have a driver's it you
know if you have a traffic
violation or a criminal
violation the state can still
report to your wrist to your
other state and that happens
what we're not doing is we're no
longer saying we're suspend you
didn't appear for something or
you couldn't pay that's a we're
not doing any more which is
completely above board so I hope
I hope there is responsive to
the question thank you thank you
very much I'll have Mr chair
thank you senator do a Senator
Ivey Soto.
Thank you very much Mr chair
Thank you senator Wirth Ron you.
Warning this legislation forward
hi I think it's not I think it's
a good start our and as
assistant when something on what
that would it's it's it's
because of the fact that
actually we've we've
decriminalized most of the of
the traffic offenses in our
state.
And and and I'll just tell you
are you know what.
Bob and story are Mr more story
interesting and and and I was
curious as to whether or not the
staff limitations asked on in
the activities that I.
But but I will so that you know
when I when I was a prosecutor
we spent a fair amount of time.
And the court disrupting their
day having them at eight work
I'm not to to satisfy the courts
will.
In order for them to come in and
challenge us why it is that they
had not reinstated the reasons
and and then chair this is
trying to get them to reinstate
the license that across are
there was always this this
reinstatement fee that people
would also have to pay with some
people are able to pay on the
spot some people work their
challenges with we're going to
for what we are judges who would
The hundred dollar reinstatement
fee are that existed at the time
and then I think there was a
there was a case that came down
saying that they could waive
additional funds but they could
not win that seat was not
available feet and and and so it
really are
Creating some rural
so we'll issues in terms of of
the complied but how do you
already have people actually
comply when it feels like
we're continually setting them
up in the whole process and so
this is something that that
but it will take you know
Senator doing raise issue
question.
If we if we don't suspend a
license.
Was anybody to a point where
they're supposed to be that.
But you know
Are there are and and the
question of course with the
American version of government
to be more.
Is a is a valid question
but I think I think the issue
our mission becomes all.
You know what what do you do I
don't know forms of enforcement
of that and so should be alright
do that with the house Mr
chairman Senator Wirth has also
been a market could could
address the issue of cost people
to go to court on if we if we
don't suspend Ellis.
Mr chairman and Senator Ivey
Soto happy to answer I'm and you
know this too is a prosecutor
this is just one thing that
would no longer be imposed which
would be the driver's license
suspension however this morning
still issued and in my
experience people will trying to
avoid going to jail at all costs
so many times I have clients
even even clients well
especially clients that we're
extremely innocent of charges
they would tell me just please
please keep me out of jail I
cannot go to jail not even for
one second so just that issuance
of a bench warrant that is a
huge fear it sparks fear very
much so in the hearts of regular
people and in the hearts of
people who have been in the
system in and out nobody wants
to go to jail it's not a place
that anybody wants to be so a
consequence of failing to come
to court is a bench warrant
that will come with a hundred
dollar fee added to whatever it
is at the end of that at the end
of that road disposition of the
case because you still have to
pay a benchmark even if you're
found to be not guilty your your
case gets dismissed you still
are on the hook for that
insurance E. so those are two
consequences you know this is an
attorney I would say there's
other consequences not showing
up to court for example I'm in
this is more technical but it
restarts the rule meaning that
before the state let's say it's
a misdemeanor petty misdemeanor
the state only had six months to
prosecute your case your three
months in your case you don't
come to court looks now the case
since now you know the court has
an extra three months to
litigate it so you have you've
just expanded court jurisdiction
you've given the prosecutor more
time to build their case you
lost any as you might have had
it is it.
It's for discovery violations
all of these things so I would
say that there are significant
consequences to not coming to
court and sort of the getting
away from the more technical
ones I would say the bench
warrant and the bench warrants
he our big ones
and most people don't like
having things hang over their
heads it's really scary even for
people who are used to being in
the system but also for people
that aren't used to being in the
system people that are primarily
and magistrate and municipal
court it is so scary and that
stress it rolls through their
entire lives so removing just
the mobility you know giving
people the ability to actually
move and get a job and take care
of their families this is how we
actually strengthen our
communities so that people can
take care of themselves and
everyone else.
Thank you very much appreciate
that you know when I was a
response that we had a guy.
Hello County load I think those
are things like thirty seven
dollars and yet pay that and.
We got picked up and spend a
night in jail and I saw him at
that that arraignments in and so
we when I had a counselor bench
warrant and you promised to pay
and he laughed and then he got
arrested again for non payment
of the of the result of a thirty
to thirty seven dollars of my
dad and of course
and frontier Texan Center.
Costs you know the kind of.
Well we're getting calls.
On W. on depends on how you how
you figured it's it's on between
in a hundred ten dollars and.
Six different parts.
Once again I look to the
generosity of our attachments
we're losing money on this line
we're just going to discuss that
with.
It was.
Twenty three.
Little money from somebody was
taking place officers off the
street in a startling number
investigating requirements and
going after people who are
dangerous in keeping people safe
we need to be absent.
And what we do I want to address
something in here that does
concern me a little bit I also
have a proposed solution for it
as well and and like to get
Mr chairman Senator Wirth and
and assaults
So those on page three.
Right you're not on page three
that says of course certain.
Those are the ones.
So I'm payment or failure to
appear on your one twenty one is
a little different than the
person's guards icicles
reinstated.
And there are okay the statement
beat out apart from the from
the.
This made it through the thing
the the use of the passive voice
R. O. so it's unclear the
actor is on John R. the prices
from his license reinstated I'm
I'm I'm assuming.
That that because we want to
send shopping private pay
reinstatement the same doctor
person then reply.
In the two they may be able to
court in order to reinstate
their license I'm instruments
are with ms could you could you
explain what is contemplated by
that.
License reinstated on July
second twenty twenty one on the
spot.
Yeah Mr chair center Ivy Soto I
think you raise a good point
because it appears to me that it
requires an affirmative action
which we all know especially
right now with COVID.
You know going through the
process of going to motor
vehicles and getting that whole
read statements going to be an
affirmative action and I think
that's the way it's drafted so
if there's a way to to make this
happen automatically I certainly
think that makes would make
sense.
Thank you Senator Wirth I I'm
I'm kind of along the same lines
on the as as as you are on that
and so my part rise and that I
do not that this will.
So I might I do not and we do
not some implementation issues
and one of the system.
And so.
Suggests nine go through the
bank account is wrong just a
moment.
We bring subsection B..
Some.
And and and and and I'm just
really how would how would be I
think if we did it this way.
Then generated one point twenty
two.
The department's Shalaby in
states.
The driver's license.
Operators privilege to drive.
Are we.
I'm any person whose license was
suspended solid for non payment
or failure to pay prior to July
one twenty twenty one and was
otherwise eligible to drive here
in.
The.
For nonresident operating on
John be required to pay a
reinstatement.
And some of us so I am and I
would like to get results.
The council
but program will do is that is
that we would basically have a
we got people who can show up on
my class and Joel will just
gonna take care of it for them
and and go ahead Lee in state
well we'll give them would be a
six month window to do that
they'll still be some jeopardy
for these folks are not
permitted time
and and the but but they have a
clear direction to do it no
later than that date.
So.
Senator Wirth is that a friendly
amendment well let me yield to a
this all just on the specifics
of the concept is certainly
branding and I and I think that
what Senator I'm so those
getting honest correct I want to
make sure that the time frames.
That that are being proposed
will work because I do think
there's a consequence here
you're gonna six month window
when you're.
There's going to be in this kind
of limbo will DM DM B. gets the
system up to date so Monica.
Mr chairman Senator Wirth
Senator Ivy Soto I I agree with
senator Wirth the concept is
certainly friendly it's so
difficult to to hear all of your
amendments over soon so I'm kind
of just curious if there's I
guess we don't have to have.
If there's any way to this I
think I missed a couple things
probably because of my internet
but I guess first I will just
say that the one thing we would
want driver's license
suspensions to cease immediately
right or as soon as possible the
reinstatement issue of course
recognizing that if we were to
make it automatic the motor you
know motor vehicle division
would need some time to
implement that of course we
wanted to be as soon as possible
but of course recognizing that
it may take time and that is
some people if they did find out
about this particular policy
that they could apply.
Apply to get their driver's
license reinstated without
paying that fee that there were
some mechanism to do that
however I would say it is it is
a friendly amendment I just I
would I
this is an issue that affects so
many people right now I mean
it's just it's amazing how many
we literally only suspend
driver's licenses for this
reason we really don't do it for
any other reason
So that would be my take on it
is that the sooner the better
and we want to stop the practice
as soon as possible.
Thank you Monica and so Senator
Ivy Soto it would be appropriate
to just restate the amendment
the drug make sure make sure
that so a past that.
Mr Mr chair point of order yes
thank you you know we we have
this concern when we talked
about rules and how we're going
to do these up zoom hearings in
this particular community was of
great concern of ours because we
have a long history of pretty
substantial amendments and right
now you would work in the
committee room it's hard enough
to follow these ma'am especially
with verbal amendments were able
to actually have the bill in
front of us to write it down I
don't have that ability right
now and we need our conversation
how we're gonna handle these.
You and I are are good friends
need to rid fixes legislation
all time usually ninety five
percent I believe we job
released were looking at it and
redid and tracking it this is
not the venue to be doing these
comparable I find it very
difficult to follow what is
document did not being able to
read it and track what the
members this I think we have to
come up with a better system
than just a one operable
amendments in trying to track
it.
In this in this business media
doesn't really isn't conducive
for that but like Monica said we
don't have the chat feature we
can't see it in real time what
you're so I'm concerned about
that moving forward no enter
your concern I thank you senator
that's a valid concern I just
additional like we're kind of
stuck with what we're stuck with
right now I we are you okay
proceeding you know just knowing
that we need to revisit this
issue if we can just make it
through today in this primitive
way maybe we can come up with a
better solution are you okay
with that if it's simple
that the center would repeat the
statements okay I'm into this a
simple moment I would be
comfortable for but anything
substance of substances I think
would be very uncomfortable to
me okay thank you chair yes if I
may on that point
the chairman serve on this and I
spoke about this and and you
know it may be something that we
can go through the bill and then
have the amendments ready and
make it the first order of
business next meeting so that
way we can get through it you
know very quickly but that that
was a concern that that I raised
and as well you know okay and
then that's that that we do not
being able to follow them and
even if we have the share of the
screen
Option that I think I've seen on
on soon before you know that
would help as well if we could
get that I don't know if we can
do that with with the way that
we're operating on zoom you know
would also be beneficial.
Thank you senator and Senator
Baca did you have did you want
to weigh in on this this year
hands out maybe the just want to
speak on the bill.
But just on the bill thank you
okay thank you Senator Ivey Soto
what do you what do you what
what are your thoughts now with
this.
What song are certainly I would
not want to.
Bill right there from from
proceeding although I do know
that if we were to.
Do this our our at the very
beginning of the next meeting
that would not make any
differences if we're not moving
from committee to committee
until Monday and you have
another meeting on Friday okay
right our.
I will say though that is not
going to try to see if I can
very quickly.
someplace.
One thing that I can do though I
believe not the hostess disable
screen sharing I may.
Otherwise I could I I just
allowed you to share.
Thank you I'm certainly happy
to.
Share on that particular.
Are here we go.
Okay there we go.
So.
Based on final Senator Wirth and
and and and and assaults.
I'm excited I'm outside the time
frame.
and whatnot so be no later than
September one twenty twenty one
of the mentioned in state.
The driver's license or
nonresident operators privilege
with a person who's license or
not right where are my resident
operators privilege was
suspended prior to July one
twenty twenty one solely for non
payment or failure to appear and
was otherwise eligible dropped
the president shopping required
to pay reinstated Senator could
you give us a page in my number
probably so that would replace
subsection B..
Our and that this so at our age.
Are we beginning on line eleven.
Is where subsection is is aware
that some sections.
Senator Morris I mean this Sims
or if your house maybe being
able to visualize it and I I
think of you know that that
really are you okay with with
this format I mean just knowing
I will revisit this issue and I
think Senator Pirtle makes a
really good point.
Yeah so try to scroll through
the bill to get to that site on
my apologies I I like the the
direction he's going with this
but I'm still trying to get
there to the bill initially
agreed Page three line line is
it not center I'm self was.
Working on this committee action
be delete the current second B.
one nine four one thirteen and
replace that with you section B.
in this is this would be a
friendly amendment.
Okay.
All right so.
So does anyone else want to
weigh in on yes ma'am Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So maybe I misunderstood
something but the are we
concerned about the the the
drivers who have lost their
license now and this wait until
September one for it to be
reinstated.
No I don't I don't quite know
how we got to that we're talking
about what's happening now this
is they're not gonna be their
license will be reinstated until
September one and so they're
going to be driving for six
months without a license because
they have to.
I guess I'd missed the point
of this and perhaps it was just
the work that in the do have to
do I I I I don't I don't wanna
say gives them eight months to
reinstate a license.
Yeah Mr chair if I could I
believe first of all the July
first is when the bill would go
into a fact.
It doesn't have an emergency
clause so July first is when
we're to so so you're right we
do I think Senator Ivey Soto
initially at the proposed
January of twenty twenty two
this shrinks it down to a three
month period after the bill goes
into a fact for them to put.
You know do what they need to do
administratively to have the
system up and ready to go.
And and and and if I may I just
Center were I and I because
there's no effective date of
this bill and action would
actually go into effect on June
eighteenth.
They are not.
Well and Mr chairman you know
that's what I was going to
suggest you know why are we
saying.
If we we need to have the we
should make it B. ninety dates
June June nineteen.
I mean I I just I I think this
really do wants the bill to to
actually give them all that
time.
So this is a problem now why are
we waiting so long I guess
if I could Mr chair I question
is could someone on the
effective date of this bill in
June go to motor vehicles.
And basically have motor
vehicles reinstate their license
without it being done
automatically because that's
what we were trying that's the
center Ivy Soto is trying to
address is to make a catch
everybody so so previously under
the way was drafted I think you
raised a very good point you
could have a whole group of
folks who don't go to motor
vehicles and so they just
continue to drive this actually
is a really positive thing
because this is going to
everyone as of that date you
know automatically be reinstated
but I guess the question for
Senator Ivy Soto is if somebody
in the middle of June when the
bill becomes effective goes to
motor vehicles.
You know under this language art
are they gonna be able to get.
Their license reinstated right
away which is how the bill was
originally drafted with
affirmative action taken by the
person who had lost a license.
Right I appreciate that you know
to the extent that we believe
that the people who are gonna be
diligent about that right away.
I you know I suppose we
Representative
We could potentially make
subsection B. two sentences.
I am so the effectively leave
leave the existing subsection
B..
Although many changes that a
private July one twenty twenty
one say prior to the effective
date of this it's not unless you
want to put an exact date and
then.
When in doubt our this language.
We are about the separate
sentence.
So so that somebody could go and
find out if they wanted to but
then as of September will not in
anybody who was left to have
not.
There's one that would be great
all right July all of our
guests.
Right so we're talking about
basically two months and two
weeks probably two months and
about.
About two hundred to extract
that months so we are giving
birth that want to if you know
the the track months to be able
to go into it on around anybody
grandson Dustin Act months it's
taken care of automatically for
them as of September one.
What is that we don't have a
date to NMED them then it's it's
not necessarily and they don't
get to it right away and and if
we give a date that's too soon
that any questions practice as
well we're just not gonna do it
as with the resources to get it
done by then I think it's maybe
if we if we combine the two that
will what what what to expect
with goals that Senator.
Senator Stewart yes well yes I I
want them to be able to do it
immediately if we're if we're
suspending seventy two thousand
people a year and eighty eight
percent of it is for these two
reasons let's do it now I like
the Senator Ivey Soto is
proposal given date but also in
the beginning
make sure that they can do it
immediately.
So Senator Ivy Soto can you
restate the amendment with this
change.
So the amendment without change.
With the.
A person is license.
At the end of the just a quick
these maybe just to not use the
stated all.
From prior to two point twenty
one so the officers actions were
suspended solid for non payment
or failure to appear and was
otherwise eligible to bronze the
person I was license reinstated
and shall not be required to pay
reinstatement.
Okay.
In July and then then sometime
around twenty twenty one
the department shall reinstate
the driver's license or
nonresident operators privilege
of any president president whose
license or nonresident operators
privilege was suspended so non
payment or failure to appear.
And was otherwise eligible to
drive.
That I don't actually think at
this point then that's not
required Rep Zachary all right
all right and so
With the result provides
sufficient education in repeat
something about the
About the are in state and state
but I think that way and and was
our words permission we could we
can get that rockets Rossi at
once.
Then the next meeting is is as
long as I'm about to start with
rust belt our with our delaying
anything I think I think if we
did it that way that would allow
people as soon as they can to
take care of it you don't have
an apartment some time to be
able to get it right and then
and then
and then we will take care of
everybody else.
The point I would be part of
this all plans and work.
Thank you Senator Wirth missile
missile.
Yeah I'll just I'll just say I
appreciate very much Senator
Stewart up just I think this
does address the gap increase
the ability for someone to go
fix it right away and then does
put the mandate on with
sufficient.
You know with the time frame
there and so I think it
addresses so again I think it's
it's friendly.
So we can R. Senator Ivey Soto
and and committee we can bring
this and at the net beginning at
the next meeting in a written
form work for everybody can look
at it and and then go ahead and
and take it up then correct is
that what we're thinking.
Yeah can I can I suggest one
thing though I I do think
Senator Soto we should put it's
redundant but at the end of the
second paragraph make it very
clear that motor vehicles can't
charge a fee to reinstate.
Yeah just just so there's no
question about that.
Right Senator Ivey Soto.
Yeah.
Okay great so is there any other
comment on either this amendment
or the bill itself and and
Senator Baca did you want to
speak.
You know I'm not seeing any.
Cattle of Bill yes there yes
thank you center about to the
building yes back to the okay of
the so has has OSI waiting on
this at all regarding the Mr
chair any and this can go to and
the sponsor or or any of his
experts on regarding insurance
consequences and how that might
in fact affect rates within the
state.
Mr chair us center Baca I have
not heard from the left side and
I'm or whether.
It's not.
Mr Senator Baca I'm I have not
spoken to OSI but my grandmother
is actually an insurance agent
so I have an ex station with her
and and so my other family
members and confirms that when
your license is suspended
insurance rates actually go up
and some people just can't get
insurance at all or get kicked
off of their insurance so then
we have people that are actually
driving without a valid license
and without insurance so that
this will actually help it
depends on who your provider is.
Can you get on the horn real
quick.
I could try she's very
quarantine but she would be
probably typical stood here
before being.
I guess Mr chair what I
understand for that person you
know for the the person in
particular whose license is
suspended certainly that's going
to increase our insurance right
I guess I'm concerned and
aggregate the populace out there
does it do you know what I know
if you ask her that are spoke
about that or thought about that
but how it impacts rates in
general to have a a person who
might otherwise be suspended who
are now not suspended driving
around a I just just a question
maybe you can address it when
you come back with the amendment
it sounds like we're gonna be
talking about this again on the
other the other item of Mr chair
an expert or sponsor is taxed
ran it looks like taxed rate of
of the weight in written are
they are they here today.
Is there anybody from taxed Rav
that's appearing today.
Senator Wirth is there anybody
from taxed.
Not not to line up I mean again
I don't I don't know who's
waiting out there but I didn't I
didn't.
Thank you Mr chairman it it just
been nice for them to to to
chime in a little bit because
they have extensive issue within
the FIR with with some of the
technical provisions of this
bill and its implementation and
I'm just not sure why they would
write such an extensive summary
of their objections and then not
not come here and show up and
tell us why in person so that's
curious but anyway I'll move on
from that
so can you can you do defying to
me what was.
A penalty assessment is Mr chair
sponsor.
What kind these are we talking
about us so we're not we're not
suspending the license for the
can give me some examples of
that what kinds of fees let me
yield to this all.
Mr chairman and senator Baca so
I'll try not to get too
technical but the breed
interrupts me.
What we have is we have there
are penalty assessment
misdemeanors in the traffic code
penalty assessment misdemeanors
come with the possibility of a
up to ninety days in jail and a
three hundred dollar fine
there's also just penalty
assessment tickets in traffic
and then we have of course petty
misdemeanors and four
misdemeanors we suspend
licenses in New Mexico for every
so instead of your to pay and
failure to appear not just in
traffic in any kind of case
because New Mexico is actually
one of thirteen states that
actually litigate on traffic
offenses in criminal court so
I'm we don't just issued
driver's license suspensions
just for penalty assessment
misdemeanors we actually do it
for for a variety of different
kinds of charges and this is
perfect thank you Senator Ivey
Soto here's a wonderful.
List of some of the different
these are actually all fines for
certain types of traffic
offenses I also can this is sort
of off the a little bit off
topic for driver's license
suspensions but the AOC put out
a really wonderful
fees schedule for each court
depending on what kind of
charges and it shows the total
fees that you would be assigned
depending on what kind of charge
it was and what court you were
in it varies I'm happy to share
that with the numbers if you
would if you're interested
because you know that's the
thing is we have fines and fees
and they're different and
they're different amounts I hope
I answered your question Mr
chairman and senator Baca.
Thank you Mr chair or thank you
want on are you get to a certain
degree sort of gonna build on
that a little bit that okay so
what we're seeing here are motor
vehicle traffic citations things
like that and and you know just
as you stated it doesn't seem
that this bill all limits it
just needs it it seems like
you're in queens just like you
said because it's late so
addressing the entire we the
fees in general so that's of
these traffic these acts
misdemeanor these steps
You don't use that that proposed
by the judge and so I think
that's my problem with this bill
and it's my biggest problem with
the schools that it doesn't it
doesn't just isolate traffic
offenses I would find out much
more palatable yes because no
I'm just looking here quickly
all online you go and so DWI
first offense so you could get
fined up to five hundred dollars
you know all the way up to seven
the fences and again the answer
is we've all seen our structure
of the criminal code steps up
you can have a ten thousand
dollars DWRLF line did you have
a and if you otherwise.
Went in there for for the rest
of the minimum requirement set
forth by the judge are you could
be out on the street and or have
your driver's license never
having rate that you're fine and
and so that that troubles me it
was it was more oriented towards
traffic fines I think you know
that would that would Mr chair
addressed what we're looking for
because that's really the broad
scope of that's that's kind of
what we're after we're not work
I I don't think the intent you
can correct me if I'm wrong
Sanchez the intent was not to
include people with more serious
offenses that have fines imposed
by them by the court it was kind
of to free up I would think at
least the people that have the
twenty five dollar traffic
ticket didn't pay the check and
balance issue of bench work
thrown in jail now they'll next
thing and all that the three
hundred dollars and a loss of
job because they didn't have a
license would would you comment
on that a little bit Mr chair
and sponsor or Monica or any of
the experts.
Let me yield to Monica and then
I do have some thoughts after
she goes.
Senator Baca.
So the purpose of the bill it's
not to take away any
appropriation requirements
fines or fees on somebody who is
convicted of any crime or
traffic offense in New Mexico
track expenses are crying
there with a gated in criminal
court and that has a range the
purpose is to not also then
suspend their licences you
brought up to you why when you
have a D. Y. your licenses
revoked.
Clearly separate this bill has
not being to do with a driving
while license revoked that's
entirely separate this is just
dealing with driver's license
suspensions for people's
inability to pay fines and fees
and it's just the driver's
license suspension people still
have to be still have all of the
other consequences that they
have to deal with I'm thank you
I hope right we answer.
I think.
Your needed Senator Baca thank
you all you did answer that
question hello however I guess
what I'm getting at is you could
come along and you can fulfill
all those not pay the fine.
And you're still driving around
or as otherwise if this statue
was intact you could be
suspended for non payment of
that fine which is I would think
that we would want
to to be in place.
So if I if I could Senator Baca
You know we spent a lot of time
on this.
Plan on sept on the on the money
bail.
Non dangerous defendants you
know who are given a five
hundred dollar or a thousand
dollar bail and there's simply
no way they can thank you the
end up justice center Ivy Soto
reference the end up you know
churning away in New.
The propane jail waiting for
their first because they simply
can't pay you create a system
where you basically that the the
I don't charge that's being
brought has nothing to do with
the underlying issues come down
to who can pay and who can't and
I just thank all you're doing is
exactly what Senator doing I
think she she defined this bill
it's you're punishing people for
being poor simply because you
can write the check you get
treated one way and someone else
because they can't come up with
a five hundred box is treated I
just think the key thing is you
know the the revocation versus
suspension is really important
because that's that's critical
we're not taking that away what
you're talking about though is
do you really want to take away
someone's license if they've
done everything else they need
to do and I just simply can't
come up with the five hundred
Bucks is that's what's left.
You know and I think that's the
policy decision it's here sell
just some additional additional
thank you Mr chairman I guess I
guess so along that same line of
logic that you're using them
that are also so restitution
Marty would be included in there
sometimes well becomes are
awarded restitution I I would
think that would be considered a
of finer for years well and so
do we want to the do we want to
take take their license away for
failure to pay a victim
restitution or something of that
nature I guess we would have a
different opinion in that sense
I would say absolutely you know
that we need to we need to
impose that sanction.
It if I could I think it's
important because I I I see
Monica shaking her head
you know a restitution award and
and can you just addressed that
issue.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and senator Wirth and Senator
Baca restitution in this state
is not touched by fines and fees
it's considered it's defined
completely separate restitution
as part of the sentence but it
does is not included in fines
and fees I don't know of any
states that suspend licenses for
non payment of restitution in
fact usually if if
usually what ends up happening
is often times criminal
defendants will will pay their
state findings he's first before
any payment prostitution so say
on taxes or you know work it
administrative fees are criminal
cases actually inhibit the
payment of victim restitution
because what you do is you put
that first because you might go
to jail if you can't pay your
state fees where is restitution
it's not always the same
and then I'll I wanted to just
address one other thing the the
hard part is that even with that
ten thousand dollar fine that
you mentioned if somebody can't
do that what's going to happen
is a bench warrants gonna be
issued for their for their
arrest they're gonna be taken
and and if they tell the judge
there's really no way I can pay
and the judge finds that that
was consummation is they will
then be taken into custody and
we will all pay for them to sit
in jail at a rate and I. believe
average right here in in New
Mexico is ninety five dollars a
day for that person to work off.
The six dollars a day that ten
thousand dollar fine so we
actually doubled down and we
lose money when people can't
pay.
Thank you thank you for that I I
appreciate that we're getting
into the a little bit of a
opinion yes and what you know
some of our differences there
you know to that I would say Mr
chair some people are absolutely
willing to pay that cost a
thousand in order to have that
OPEC penalty assessment and you
know that would be my thought
there it's just a difference on
what how you look at criminal
justice I guess in the penalty
box leave it at that I I I
really would like to see this
bill women involved to traffic
citations and things of that
nature are rather than including
you know the whole gamut of a of
fines and fees within the within
the criminal justice system of
the other the other thing is a
bench warrant issued your rest
issue almost all speaking about
that Mr chair and that.
You know you you you get these
notices are you're suspended and
then you finally get the bench
warrant and then you're taking
over jail it almost seems like
the notices the you get the
suspension of kind of help you
because at least you're getting
noticed in a you need to pay
this bill otherwise no there's
just you know it kind of alerts
the person so that they can go
in and pay the fine and we know
it's a pain you know that was
illustrated earlier you know
through the store and we heard
about you know eight and getting
his license suspended and you
have to make two trips for of in
some sense it's kind of supposed
to be a pain in the you know
that's that's kind of what part
of it in this like you know you
you you stay within the lines so
to speak Mr chair and you have a
less issue last council are you
straight rebels lines and you
got to go through some trouble
the get yourself straight now
but those are just some of my
thoughts and concerns about I I
I I see what you're trying to do
appreciate during the board and
I appreciate the discussion
debate without today.
Thank you Senator Baca I see
Senator Moores torrez hands and
looking at me senator Morris to
do you have something to say on
this I I did and you know
Senator Wirth Mr chair senator
Wirth
On the issue of the fines and
fees and Senator was kind enough
to start showing some of those
and I think you brought up the
to the base that we have and
they're sure going back for a
long time about these fees that
are are out there in you
mentioned in your opening that
you're trapped in the heart of
the problem and I don't believe
this is taxed our problem the
problem is us click do we as a
legislature in these fees in
these crimes that were were
implementing would you happen to
know says a song Services Lucy's
flexion what what what what is
the fine for states accident
driving.
Mr chair at the wall.
Senator Moores a I know that one
well it's it's a huge kind of
punitive fine of twenty five
box.
And let me say that took you got
took me.
Three sessions
and multiple efforts to get
their.
So well I was gonna throw you on
that bus.
The sale was your a wonderful
idea and I remember there was a
session where it's at number one
on the floor calendar for about
forty five to sixty days for
from the house but I think you
know my point that was this the
conversation with that education
for you have a twenty five
dollar fine what is the actual
cost to the perpetrator of this
have to find twenty five dollars
once they get through the court
system.
After there were things that
about all the different seasons
everything we we chargin pylons
to that twenty five dollar fee
it's I I think it was a couple
hundred boxes yeah I can't thank
you the exact number but I know
exactly where you're going and
that's why I mentioned right up
front there are former chair you
know would repeatedly raise this
issue and it's and it is this is
kind of one of those.
And I and I really appreciate
the agency also kind of bringing
this bill to me I also in full
disclosure my sister in law
works for the city San Francisco
doing nothing but this slowly
but surely they are undoing kind
of this whole system that's been
created where you know we
thought we were getting one
result by imposing you know this
graduated.
Find system and what we've done
is just created a system that
just creates a a death spiral
and once folks get into it I you
know we're not accomplishing
what we're we're trying to do so
I mean I'm agreeing with you I
think that it's something we
really need to look at but it's
going to mean I mean I think the
L. one if so then this bill
moves forward we're gonna go to
Senate finance and you know this
is one of those when if you look
at it from a dynamic scoring
perspective kind of the overall
impact.
I think we probably end up
saving money look at the City of
Albuquerque I mean a dollar
seventeen for each dollar
collected they'll save money by
passing this bill so no that's a
tougher sell in the Senate
finance committee so and this is
this is what this is if we go in
this direction and start doing
things in this way we're gonna
need to find the revenues to
support.
You know these entities that
have been living off of fees
because we haven't gone
appropriated the money as I
think we should definitely and
that's my point I don't think
this cuts the Gordian knots I
think we really do have to
unwind accordion not nobody just
gets it done on you and I agree
that if we're if it's such a
priority that we fund these
activities in the state are we
need to fund the activities of
those a lot of very worthy
projects we decided to fund this
way because it was easy on and
didn't say you're taking your
courage for the legislature
actually fund these things and
just threw it on there you know
we have this problem were a
twenty five dollar taxi
Fine to force into a couple
hundred dollars and you're on
the air were or were not fix the
problem with this bill I don't
believe we're saying we're a fix
for daca actually fix them
those are organizations that
rely on that money are going to
get the money is one of the
political courage actually gives
the brain injury Trust Fund and
everything else the money that
they actually need so I I think
we're actually in a way to make
it worse because we don't have
the collective political will
part actually get done what
needs to get on so I thank you
and I agree on that issue
Senator do appreciate
improvements for isolated
surprise pathway to get where I
think we all need to be going
yes I.
The Mr chair I I do agree that.
Problem but I disagree that this
and this is the bill we
shouldn't pass because I really
think this is going to force us
to have these discussions and
quite frankly it's going to
begin to unravel system that is
just grossly unfair where you
know you get treated one way
because you can write a check
and someone this exact same
position is incarcerated and
goes down that that that that
spiral because they can't and
that just as long so again it's
a good it's a good discussion
and I hope it really is the
start of the discussion because
we do need to look at it from a
much more global standpoint as
well so I just wish that you
know if if if it's a crime to
text and drive we should charge
that probably come with a on the
right amount for not just out
all these other fees and
exposures or is exposed people
to all those listings on top of
that thank you Mr thank you
thank you Santo Sierra thank you
Senator Pirtle I see your hand.
Thank you Mr chairman and since
we're on the topic of texting
while driving I remember we
basically lower the fee because
that would have fallen under
distracted driving which is
something like seventy five road
dollars or a hundred dollars and
so when we went to texting while
driving a maintenance specific
it made it twenty five actually
lowered the C. so that's just a
little interesting tidbit but
I've heard it said multiple
times Mr chair and and Mr floor
leader on on the intent of the
non payment but yet on page
three that the section that Ivy
Soto was Senator Ivey Soto was
wanting to Amanda says or
failure to appear so we're going
further than just those that
can't pay but also resetting the
licenses of of people who may be
you know sometimes it's just
acceded noticed the date and and
hopefully we can
that the judges would work with
people on that but you know they
don't even respect the court
enough to show up to say Hey I I
can't afford to pay this is
there a way that we can work
through that so that we ensure
people will still appear for
these because I think.
Miss all to mention earlier that
somebody.
Had a citation they failed to
appear and then they were some
and again and didn't appear to
that core base is that what
we're going to see is just kind
of this revolving door of people
not showing up to court is that
going to be an unintended
consequence of this Mr chair and
senator.
Work yes so I think this is
similar to a question Senator
doing asked and I think the it
was also asked why would people
come to court you know and I
think that Miss all had a really
good response to that which is
you're gonna get a bench warrant
you're gonna end up with a
hundred dollar fee for the bench
warrants and you restart the six
month rule so again I don't
think you're gonna see a
revolving door because a real
consequences that are there but
I also yield to again it's I'm
not a criminal lawyer so I do
think it's important to get that
perspective some result if you
could.
Mr chair and senator Wirth and
Senator Pirtle
so they're still consequences as
an as stated benchmark will be
issued with a hundred dollar fee
and you can go to jail and a lot
of people do go to jail and
everyone everybody is trying to
avoid to do that
the the little story I told
about failure to it Senator to
appear and failure to pay being
sort of inextricably linked and
a lot of situations is that in
twenty eighteen the Supreme
Court change the rules so that
what a court will do if there
was a missed payment is they'll
send a summons it's not that
there was already in this
hearing is that there's a missed
payment they'll send a summons
for a hearing and then people
won't show up to that potential
hearing because there they they
can't pay in my experience most
people are so afraid to tell the
court that well I'm working two
jobs I have a full family I
really cannot pay fifty dollars
a month or whatever that payment
is and they're afraid they're
gonna be thrown in jail so they
don't come to court I know that
that sometimes that doesn't
quite make sense but people are
so scared so hence the failure
to pay into your tapir is there
most of my clients they did not
come to court because they
didn't respect the court a lot
of the time it was a
transportation issue often leads
to their driver's license or
some other issue relating to
notice I'm so I hope I hope I am
and responsive to your question
thank you senator curling Mr
chair.
Senator Pirtle thank you Mr
chair I I just heard it stated a
couple times that you know this
was a hundred percent about non
payment I just wanted to bring
that that that language is and
their failure to appear so I
just wanted to ensure that there
wasn't an unintended consequence
here that it that was the full
intent you know that we would we
would say that clearly but you
know that that makes sense but
as long as it it as people if
they continue to disrespect the
court and and are not appearing
in front of the judge of that we
still have that ability for them
to ensure compliance and and
that they do show up I think
that's important you know it's
important to point out that you
can have something to for a
speeding ticket that for nothing
still cost you eighty six
dollars so I think that's that's
kind of an interesting part of
all of this so you have
something to for you you're not
found guilty
and you still would have to pay.
A pretty hefty sum of money
thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Pirtle so it seems I
don't see anybody else with
their hand up I think it we got
a good resolution of this we're
gonna roll this bill over until
Friday and then first thing
we're going to look at that
amendment gonna be all neatly
typed up and we can look it over
and deal with that then so thank
you thank you everyone and and
at this point Mr are Senator
Wirth I thank you Senator Ivey
Soto is now okay okay sorry
Senator Ivey Soto thank you Mr
artist I just want to bring
briefly
because the apartment such a big
deal about the the compacts.
Our I just want to take this
opportunity to if nothing else
to say about about how much I
hate this compacts that we have
all of the various different
states and I'm not actually that
the compact that we have a non
resident.
That that that we are number of
which is to provide it at one
dash eight dash one three seven
point one is is actually
constitution of the general.
because it is one is compacts
that hasn't article nine the
compact it says this compact may
be amended from time to time
amendments made the shopping
presented in resolution perform.
Representative contacted
administrative so maybe
initiated I wanna party
jurisdictions and the tops of
the mammoth storm Fund
Grossman's.
More jurisdictions endorsement
does not mean Representative
market so are we send someone
from TRD as the contact
Representative a beautiful.
Representative and this is.
In rural doctors in statute
which is the point next I would
not amending the statute.
There are some constitution.
All the work class what the
amendment should be.
Back to the legislature and as
one of the issues that some
point we need to address with
rock provided a different
compacts including this one
interstate compact and don't
finish provision and what is not
theirs that is unconstitutional
provisions in them so that we
can we can make sure that we
maintain the sovereignty of the
state of New Mexico not going to
leave it away but running
office.
I just I just wanted to
highlight that issue as it was
ancillary to the.
Thank you senator thank you so
okay now we're going to move on
to the next bill thank you
Senator Wirth Monica and
everyone who commented on this
bill so now we're going to move
to Senate bill one oh five law
enforcement assisted diversion
Sanchez by Senator Rodriguez so
if I can we could bring Senator
Rodriguez in to our.
Zoom world.
That would be great I just
heard.
looks like she is connecting to
audio.
The texture to let her know that
we are ready.
Okay.
Are you done.
I am so happy to see you one day
we're gonna get to see again in
real and real people real person
not pictures.
Thank you Mr chairman no no
problem so of the forest is your
bill Senate bill one oh I do you
have any experts or is it just
you so now you're thank you very
very very keen and very
Christian will individual and
one of them yes Lara and right
now she's from New York Rio
Arriba you with the lead program
and also from Albuquerque right
is working with Albuquerque and
Bernalillo and now this program
and then also JD Michael from
down here.
Okay thank you madam then that
would be great they just want to
work there will be quick Mr
chair okay thank you senator.
They are in the meeting.
Okay thank you Mr chairman yes
yes and this is my first time
with witnesses in zone here so
we need yeah.
I just wanted to to tell you
that I have the lead program
Senate bill one of five it's a
lease program that law
enforcement assisted diversion
program requesting funding for
this is I do almost every year
and this is a very viable
alternatives to incarceration in
many of us and you may have been
one of them I know Senator
Vontaze and Senator senator
Wirth myself and Senator Sedillo
Lopez have them kind of banded
together to see if we can get
some funding combined when we
have a junior bill and so on to
see if we can help this program
it is a viable alternative to
incarceration for low level
crime and it is a comprehensive
system that provides wraparound
services for people who have
substance abuse issues
behavioral health and mental
health issues and it gives them
an alternative to this revolving
door that we have in the jail
and if we provide this
wraparound comprehensive
services being provided we see a
very very high success rate with
the recidivism rate less than
one percent.
So it has been a wonderful
program started here in Santa Fe
New Mexico as a pilot program
and then it's expanded now we've
expanded it to the counties that
have the framework already to
continue to do this and we'd
like to see it grow eventually a
statewide it is a harm reduction
approach to drug crimes which
gives police officers already to
divert at persons to services in
lieu of the prosecution in in
jail and you don't have offices
to refer individuals to
community based providers either
at the time of arrest or the
person with high risk for
offending is identified once a
person is referred to a provider
case manager developed the care
plan which may include intensive
case management individual
intervention plans treatment
education job skills training
you know the good part is you're
a chair and I'm gonna.
B. as short as I can hear is
that if you put together the all
stakeholders that really matter
to be able to see a successful
outcome for these individuals
and and that meaning that we
have like the judges the public
defender's the district
attorney's homeless shelters
counselor psychologist any and
of course law enforcement anyone
who can come in into this
comprehensive system to provide
the the holistic services that
are needed for these individuals
has really proven to benefit at
not only the families of these
individuals the individual from
south but but everyone because
now all of these individuals I
know in Santa Fe along they were
proximally two hundred twelve
already in the program that have
benefited in have stopped going
into that revolving door in
Espanola Rio Arriba County there
there are approximately forty
eight people are ready that are
in the program and not back in
jail so the end in Bernalillo
and Dona Ana County it is just
really flourishing and we like
to continue to see if there's
any way we can continue to get
some funding for this program
that's all I have Mr chairman
and if we can allow Lauren and
by other witnesses to say a few
words that's all we need thank
you senator Loren.
And J. ascent.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator rod Regus
so in Rio Arriba county about
fifty percent of our total
operating budget is spent on the
jail and and so.
Of the well that is a
approximately fifty percent or
six million dollars of Rio
rebels operating budget of
twelve million is spent
incarcerating people primarily
for substance abuse related
crime jailing substance abusers
for chronic disease exacerbates
their addiction not only does it
not make the individual better
or the community safer it
further impoverishes and already
under resource community forcing
us to divert funding to
incarceration from services that
build community according to a
study by the national center for
addictions and substance abuse
eighty five percent of jail
inmates suffer from from or have
a history of substance or
alcohol abuse this is true in
Rio Arriba as well the cost of
the county for example of a
brief to in in Maine Rio Rivas
fifty thousand dollars as labor
must be induced in the inmate
life flighted to the hospital
the baby is then taken from the
mother and the mother is return
to jail traumatizing both will
produce in the worst possible
health outcome the cost of one
birds could cover a full time
certified peer support worker
case manager capable of
providing intensive case
management services to fifteen
women.
To combat the problem and re
direct funding Rio Rita has
established a jail jail
diversion at all department of
justice recognized intercept we
recognize lead as among the most
important because clients are
diverted to community care prior
to booking sentencing or other
significant involvement with the
criminal justice system once an
individual is convicted of a
felony many recovery support
such as housing education and
employment are taken away
compounding the cycle of abuse
and because children are often
involved adverse childhood
experiences such as the removal
of parents through incarceration
make it more likely for
substance use disorder to be
spread to the next generation
lead is a harm reduction program
similar to case management for
other chronic illnesses and is a
public health approach the
client is not mandated to
participate in treatment but is
instead supported to maintain
him or herself in the community
well being encouraged and
supported to access treatment in
previous years Rio Arriba county
was able to reduce inappropriate
emergency department use by
twenty one percent through case
management County detention is
analogous to the emergency
department in that people end up
in jail when other care can't be
access by establishing jail
diversion every intercept when
including and especially Lee Rio
Arriba has been able to reduce
overdoses county wide by thirty
percent reduced jail census
seventy percent from one hundred
forty persons to forty two.
Overdoses at Presbyterian
Espanola hospital from twenty
eighteen to twenty nineteen
decreased from sixty two percent
from one hundred sixty six to
one hundred and four only one
overdose death occurred at the
Presbyterian Espanola Haas
hospital Edie in twenty nineteen
down from double digits in
previous years the number of
clients diverted through eight
since January has been eighty
nine the average number of
clients diverted through lead
per year is forty seven of those
served approximately fifty
percent twenty I have received
one or more services.
Facsimile thirty six percent
seventeen clients have
demonstrated forward progression
towards recovery.
Doximity thirty two percent or
fifteen we're taken to either
medication assisted treatment
residential treatment for
intensive outpatient but then
we're lost because we were not
informed when they were
released.
In national studies conducted by
the national lead bureau was
found that lead participants
were thirty nine percent less
likely to be re arrested for a
felony David was a control group
fifty eight percent were less
likely to be rearrested compared
to the system as usual.
Santa Fe County has experienced
similar positive outcomes after
piloting lead two hundred
sixteen people have been
Nibert since its inception in
twenty fourteen we participants
had a statistically significant
decrease in the number of
arrests in the first six months
after diversion into the program
we participants had no violent
charges posted version lead
participants were detained for
significantly fewer days than
the comparison group follow up
participants reported reductions
in the use of heroin improved
quality of life and gains in
obtaining permanent housing the
cost savings to the systems as
usual was four thousand seven
hundred twenty seven percent per
person per year a fifty two
percent savings forty percent
decrease in in EMS calls related
to drugs or alcohol stakeholders
described a cultural shift in
the stereo type of an opioid
user seeing opioid use as a
health concern verses of crime
decrease in heroin related
overdose deaths.
Rio Arriba is the first County
in New Mexico to attempt to
support behavioral health care
and intensive case management
for substance use disorder you
Medicaid the current array of
services and billing methods are
not be ideal for substance use
disorder clients for or four
counties this bill will enable
us to continue eight services
and our history of success while
addressing problems with
Medicaid as we attempt to
achieve long term sustainability
it will also produce a model
replicable Lawrence Lawrence
Lawrence Lawrence thank you can
you cut it certainly no we get
it save it for finance okay
because that's what well
actually I just that I had just
finished so thank you thank you
thank you so much and Jason do
you have anything to add to
this.
Mr chair members of the really
thank you weeks registered
lobbyists from Bernalillo county
I'm not going to get in the the
deep dive on the numbers lead is
a very important program locally
it's one of numerous programs
that we use to try to divert
people away from our jail
diverting folks away from the
jail special low level offenses
is very important in terms of
reducing recidivism in improving
outcomes are behavioral health
department administers the
program we also seek federal
funding and also use a portion
of local funding for the.
Like I said it's an important
program anything from the state
in terms of additional funding
and by and helps us and helps
the other counties that engaging
in or had implemented leak
programs.
Thank you Jason thank I'm so
Senator did you have anything to
add before we go to the audience
no Mr chairman I don't know if
Jamie from left crucis is here
as a witness CENIC just to say
very work and if not we'll
provide.
So do we have anybody to speak
and be heard on behalf of this
bill.
Are we do have a few people in
the waiting room but Cheney and
share with you on that how many
people do we have in the waiting
room.
We have five people want to sell
if you could please just keep it
to one minute that would be
fantastic so please first up.
I think that Senator Rodriguez
is what is Cheney is here so the
pre planned I'll let in the
first year.
Briefly thank you yes Mr chair
briefly thank you Senator
Rodriguez Dona ana county is
very pleased to be included in
this work to different phase
we're just finishing up our
planning we've got a great
community support and really
looking forward to this
primarily because it is an
evidence based program so we
know any investment we make or
the state makes is an investment
in something that has been
proven to work the only thing
that I would add I was listening
to your discussion earlier about
Senate bill eighty one and I
think we can help with the
intent of of of that bill as
well and that intent of keeping
people out.
That was Senate bill seven that
that you're earlier okay sorry
about that but really looking
more upstream and how do we keep
people out of the criminal
justice system because once
you've been arrested once you
have all these penalties or
fines and fees it really makes
it difficult to get your feet
back under you a lot of
communities have used this in
parts of their their city that
have been because of poverty or
racial differences really
impacted more by law enforcement
so it does have a health equity
it has a social justice
component to it and again it's
an evidence based program that
we're just excited to be part of
this and appreciate the funding
we received in the past and the
potential to receive more
funding so thank you thank you
thank you so much so on behalf
of this bill first up cat.
All right we have particularly
Chavez who is from the New
Mexico criminal defense lawyers
association.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
of that committee Rikki Lee
Chavez on behalf of the New
Mexico Carlin Defense lawyers we
stand in strong support of this
initiative we appreciate all the
work by the program as well as
the support of the Sanchez
coming back every year and us
that this keep being promoted I
think you're seeing the success
of a program like this and we
support it and ask you to do the
same thank you.
Next up.
We have a Douglas Carter who is
from the New Mexico sentencing.
Ask you to and you.
Appropriate here if you'd like
him to speak.
Yes.
Can I was to speak on Senate
bill one fourteen is where
wondering.
We don't have a Senate bill one
fourteen Douglas.
The racial impact bill I was
sent away excuse me Sir next
that's next test of I was
waiting for that okay thank you
thank you.
Next.
I apologize I'm next up we have
Karen Garcia Chavez from the
justice advisory board.
I'm actually sorry I apologize
it looks like she is no longer
in the waiting room so we're
going to go to Barron Jones from
the ACLU.
I need and you can go.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
of the committee the ACLU stands
in strong support of this
legislation we see it as efforts
to treat drug addicts as excuse
me substance use disorder as a
public health issue and not a
criminal issue and as as miss
right planned out it has been a
great success and we re looking
out it works people have been
struggling for decades with
substance abuse disorders.
Thank you very.
Can anyone else.
Well if you have Jenny formally.
Mr chair committee members my
name is Jenny family I work for
that behavior health services
division of HSD and I just wait
we we obviously lovely been
funding it for years and we're
pleased to stand in support of
the bill but I do want to just
point out a couple of things
unfortunately we were asked to
submit
Bill analysis I in time to get
it included in your so I just
want to point out if you'll bear
with me that the HSD received a
million dollars last year in FY
twenty one and we have also
included an additional million
dollars in our FY twenty two
proposed proposed budget because
we're committed to continuing
funding this program.
In addition the HSD was recently
awarded a federal.
Federal comprehensive opioid
stimulant and substance abuse or
close out grant for six million
dollars that will allow us to
continue funding to initiate and
expand lead programs throughout
New Mexico.
In this bill the proposed
funding goes to DFA and I on the
other hand the HSD is the single
stated parity for mental health
and substance abuse and has been
the lead sources that the source
for lead funding and previous
support in previous years.
So I'm it seems to us that
maintaining lead funding at the
HSD will better enable us to
coordinate state and federal
funding streams and related our
lead programming we also have
dedicated program managers for
the lead program already on
staff so it just seems to us
that it's a little bit more
efficient to continue to fund
through the HSD rather than
splitting the money between the
HSD in DFA.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you so cat is there anyone
here opposed to this
legislation.
In the waiting room.
You do not have anyone we do not
have any one of those okay then
finally can I go to Senator
Rodriguez before I go to the
committee Senator Rodriguez
especially on that last point
yes very much thank you chairman
and you know while they're last
year we appropriated funding for
the program such as the
throughout the state it is my
understanding that some of that
funding is nonrecurring some of
that can be recurring in line on
that you're not being rolled out
to where the organizations in
the specific counties that I'm
talking about have been fully
funded and so when we get
finance we will look into the
are you know what how much is
actually available how much is
on now.
Into the county but one thing I
have to say that these four
counties that have carried the
ball they are the ones that have
the framework thank you continue
to have the programs working and
that in helping communities
improve their we agree needs to
be hopefully the whole state as
I said earlier but it's a great
program and the county have the
staff to do the work our and
they already have in place so we
will work with HSD and and try
and make more than a more
comprehensive left which but our
goal has thank.
Thank you senator thank you and
so to the committee we go
senator mark more purse you're
up first.
Thank you Mr really appreciate
it I wanted to go over a couple
of questions I have on the FY
are Senator or cry your expert
witnesses since last year we
appropriated six hundred seven.
Thousand for this project with
two hundred thirty seven was
recorded so it shows that we
only spent about three hundred
seventy thousand and yet you're
asking for a million can we go
over those discrepancies yes
thank you hi Senator thank you
for avid C. yes good to see you
too you know the amount of
funding you're talking about is
likely what we put in from the
junior bill when it was
available we were all trying to
that to get as much funding as
we could to see a significant
growth to the program because
they're such a great need and so
that may very well be the
funding that you're talking
about if some was reverted what
happens here and it happened in
this case too is that many times
we appropriate funding as
recurring which is section four
and part of that funding and
stop believe it or not something
that needs to stop ends up as
non recurring and so likely that
is what happened here I know
part of the funding has been
taken to a different section
which is section five or another
section in the budget and it was
not returned so that's why it
probably just remain here or or
out reverted I would think
because that be part of the west
nonrecurring.
Thank you senator Loren do you
have any ideas why looks like
well inspector in seventy last
year we're asking for a million.
Your Mr.
Know that morning go I was in
Saint Mr Senator
and Mr chairman I don't know
exactly why money was sent back
what I can tell you is that we
thought that our funding was
recurring and we're very
surprised with and suddenly we
learned we had no funding to be
HSD to continue the program I
didn't close it I I'm a big
proponent of magic funding worry
shift money around and figure
out how to keep things going but
it was certainly not ideal.
Well that ties into one of my my
third question but a lesson now
it's nice to have someone from
the executive here
asking for this money where we
can have someone from the
executive on previous but bills
when different issues is this in
the governor's executive budget
this is something that she is
actually ask for is or is just
like broadband we're she's
expecting us to pay for in this
Oct are required.
Mr chairman can I answer that Mr
chairman.
Is the person from executive no
longer here all right I don't
know if you're somebody and
your son who lives.
Mr chair senator Morris I I
believe that's basically I'm
with HSD be HSD
I frankly I honestly can't speak
to the governor's perspective
but I can say that the HSD built
an additional million dollars to
continue funding lead for the
coming year into our base budget
so we is it because it's
something that we are dedicated
to continuing to provide so we
have that and we have the six
million in the federal.
So Jenny it was in the budget
request submitted to on behalf
of the executive.
At Mr chair senator Morris yes
it is.
Not all out is not on the line
item it's a it's a priority for
the agency and it is in our
budget as far as we're concerned
but that doesn't mean we would
appreciate an additional million
we can always expanded this
program.
So too so this so we're you're
asking shores of million in the
budget and this is an additional
million for two million dollars
total.
Again Mr chair senator Morris we
didn't ask for this bill I mean
I we we certainly would not turn
it down but we we didn't make
this request because we that's
why we put it in our budget we
didn't know this bill was coming
we didn't know that would be an
offer of our it would be the
option of in addition.
So.
Bill passes and we get the
additional funding we will
absolutely make the best.
So it looks like there's four
counties targeted in the City of
Santa Fe
Santa Fe Rio Arriba Bernalillo
Dona Ana three of those counties
including my home county raise
taxes including Berlin county
substantially recently for
mental health and services why
are they making this a priority
Bernalillo county if this is
such a priority and they raise
taxes due to just this where are
they now asking the state to
four million two million dollars
when they're trapped this money
sitting in your bank account we
know years not too much to
address these issues.
Mr chair US senator Morris this
days weeks again you know we did
take a portion of county money
and use it for eight I think we
got about two hundred thousand
dollars from the state and then
we put another two hundred fifty
thousand in the lead
truly is that some of that other
behavioral health money from the
the local taxes has that you
know fund but it is being
utilized for different programs
working with U. N. NH when a lot
of projects over there I would
say that the money is something
that we're looking to establish
a regular and dependable revenue
source from both the state and
from other local sources
because.
Glee as much money as we can get
a lead from the we're gonna use
we don't get you know all of it
we just get a certain portion of
it but behavioral services
content to be expensive we've
been trying to set up the
relevant infrastructure to
properly deliver relevant
services which has been you know
it's been a learning process and
a challenge we don't want to
just implement programs that
aren't useful.
Well you Jason but the the
Berlin county commission tax my
constituents considerable amount
of money now going on years that
money is secretary my
constituents voted for that and
Bernalillo county has not done
anything with that
and there's a lot of pushback
and why we paying in my district
such a high rate for that in
Berlin county wasn't on the ball
is not being taken care of the
homeless issue of the mental
health issues that my
constituents agreed to be taxed
about so I think it behooves
them to get on that and also
you.
the messenger here Jason
appreciate all you do really
county commissions dropped the
ball on that for years the money
is collected dust wall the
problem Albuquerque has gotten
worse and worse the problem
Bernalillo county has gotten
worse and worse and I put the
blame solely on Bernalillo
county Rio Arriba county warrant
more my ancestry comes from I
get I absolutely get it we don't
have a tax base up there were
more to do Bernalillo Donna and
Santa Fe do they've all raise
taxes on their constituents last
number of years with the hold
harmless and everything else and
they have been providing the
services so this is a priority
for those counties make it a
priority for the county raise
taxes electronics like we're
rebooking and family no other
place that so we search is
desperately need this money and
help and services let's let's
spend that money work long
Bernalillo county county
commissions it offer till Mexico
take care of this issue so in
that money resources to collect
dust well the problem gets worse
and worse so J. simply say that
message back to Birmingham
County.
Not a fan of them coming to us
asking us for million dollars
when they're tired I'm done
their job.
Your
first.
Also try to get you the
breakdown of what we're spending
the money on from the local
level because I do know that we
are you you started to utilize
some of that here hold or what
tax.
Thank you
so I'm thank you senator Senator
Lopez you're on my list.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
appreciate the conversation that
we're having and I wanted to say
thank you to Senator Rodriguez
for bringing this forward and of
course for learning it's so good
to see you thank you for the
work that you are doing in Rio
Arriba county you have long been
at it I know the commission has
been very supportive of you as
you all have continued to move
this initiative forward in your
Bernalillo county is still
making some open to you have a
bigger entity I think to move
but I I'm I'm still very hopeful
that we're still moving forward
with regards to what we're doing
with regards to even mental
health but what the I'd like to
mention Mr chairman is that you
know what I think the state you
know we're we're lacking in
services for.
You know for support for
community
communities should I say it was
busted open you know several
years back.
And we're still trying to pick
up the pieces but what I believe
to is that we need to look at a
plan a statewide plan as to how
we can work on this if it's done
by region or whatever it is I
think that's still something
that I'm hopeful that the
state's going to continue to
work on because we need money we
need to provide the services and
I think this is an opportunity
that we have again thank you
center of Vegas but somehow or
another we we have to really
look at the statewide plan on
this so I'm hopeful that that C.
M. miss family is is shaking her
head we need to work on it and I
just want to mention those
comments and again thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr thank you Senator
so it anyone else of perhaps
Daniel A. Ivey Soto might you
have a motion on this.
anyone does anyone have a.
Are you making Mr chairman
Dan okay and okay.
Daniel we have a second Senator
second.
Thank you all right so at this
point the clerk shall call the
roll.
Zoom.
I'm not sure how that works but
but to do it.
Senator Baca.
Senator do.
Yes.
Thank you yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Morris.
Their personal.
Yes.
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Yes.
We have a new path.
You have a do pass Senator
Rodriguez on this Senate bill
one of five good luck finance
yes thank you I work at a thanks
so much thank you.
Okay so now we can move to the
final bill of the day which
happens to be my bill and I was
wondering if Senator Ivy Soto
would be willing to chair the
meeting well I present the bill.
All as long as it's a care with
the insurance market so we have
to do
and so not hearing in the object
I'm not sure that he's able to
with.
The person.
Budget personal choice.
What.
Okay.
So those are the Judiciary
Committee this process.
Thank you Senator thank you Mr
chair okay so I wanted to to
begin on Senate bill fifteen
eighty one which is a bill that
I am sponsoring along with.
House Majority Leader Cheryl
Stapleton and I know she's been
waiting patiently I don't know
if she's still in the queue as
she laughed our cat.
One minute her waiting for her
okay yeah because we always
connect audio yeah I just I
wanted her to make a statement
to see that she's way overdue
and another meeting and and if
she could make her statement and
then I can pick it up from there
that would be great.
About Senate bill eighty one.
Mr chair.
Yes.
Senator I I lost connection
there for a moment at the end of
that at the end of that last
bill here and I couldn't get
through
at the end of the the wire Act
did you did you guys take a
voted with their and and so yes
we go back to that bill because
your hand vanished and I you
know I didn't see you so.
Portion one missile so what we
did is we had a motion and did
you want to register your vote
it was for a I do pass and
Yes okay so if and only if you
could record that that Senator
Baca voted yes on Senate bill
one oh five that would be great
if there's no objections of land
grants
is that there's no objections.
Okay thank you thank you senator
so back to Senate bill eighty
one hundred is majority leader
Stapleton and on.
Or she can chime in after she
still connecting okay look like
she's in her office okay so why
don't I just go ahead and then
when she's ready she can
interrupt and do her statement
Hey.
So it seems as if you are trying
to the committee okay thank you
thank you Mr speaker okay so
Senate bill eight you know I
have a couple of before I get
into it I have a couple of
expertise I wanted to welcome
Legislative Council Service
drafter Elisabeth Johnson is she
available.
Mr chair and senator o'neill I'm
here and then also I wanted to
bring in Barron Jones we've seen
already from the ACLU are you
available Barron.
There is no longer in the
waiting room okay okay that
sounds fine so we'll just go
ahead okay so just.
Mr chairman members you know
that racial impact statement I
really like I can't help but I
just sometimes like house things
are raised I mean I have my own
description of the bill but I
really like the FY ours
description because I think it
really covers it in a both the
macro and micro way so this
rating from the F. I. R. with
John usually do it minutes
reflect but I just like this
racial impact statements are a
tool for lawmakers to evaluate
potential disparities.
Because legislation prior to
adoption and implementation
analogous to fiscal impact
statements they assist
legislators and detecting
unforeseen policy ramifications
policymakers may then be able to
modify legislation that would
worsen existing racial
disparities practically speaking
it's important to address the
policies on worn it affects
before it's adopted as it is
more difficult to reverse
sensing policies once they have
been implemented Mr chair
members this bill came to me
from a constituent
and basically you know as anyone
on the committee
I'm knows just basically will
you know when you go into a
prison and and and that's been a
kind of a vocational home for me
is to go into juvenile
facilities and adult facilities
the racial imbalance ethnic
imbalances overwhelming I mean
you know I'll never forget my
first time going into the adult.
Entry the main at that time and
it just every you know not that
there aren't Anglo people there
obviously there are but it's
just overwhelmingly minority
Hispanic black native American
and I think the for me this bill
is important because it's a
beginning place to recognize
that there is a huge racial
disparity and and how people are
sentencing and up in prison
but we're basically following
the lead of other states Iowa
Connecticut Florida Oregon and
New Jersey of all implemented.
Bills like this and it's it's a
starting point but I think if
we're gonna do a fiscal impact
statement on a crime bill which
is what we do these days wisely
we should do a racial impact
statement so
That I I will I basically turn
it over to
to Emily I mean to you know what
was with you while she can she
can answer questions we
basically just stand for
questions unfortunately I don't
see our center our rate of
Majority Leader stable
turnaround or so what we're just
ready to take your questions
and.
And go from there go to the
audience and you know so forth.
That's that's part of the job
thanks for being present to
answer any topical operations
that we may have on and
thank you US attorney of the
presentation if Representative
if the if the hospitality for
leader is able to connect we
will hear from Harkins not we
will adjourn twenty minutes
earlier and
but in the meantime cap would
you please let us with the
public comments.
Miss property please leave us to
the public.
Mr chairman.
Yes I was just I was contacted
by Marshall Martinez who's
trying to get in.
So I did send an email to Emily
if you could be get sent the
link the like to participate
also.
Okay well what for that.
Thank you are you well as.
The trial within.
The.
Let's see if we can recommend
Mr.
we are now on.
We're now on Senator eighty one
racial backgrounds for
legislation if you have a
comment please but make it not.
And I'm use this great thank you
Mr chair Center near members of
the committee my name is Douglas
carver I am deputy director of
the New Mexico sentencing
commission the commission hasn't
taken a formal position on this
bill yet our legislative
committee that meets and votes
on the bills has and got to this
bill yet but as the commission
impacts the sensing Commission
rather directly I thought I'd
make a quick comment we very
much
the sentencing commission is
very interested and collecting
race and ethnicity data in our
criminal justice system and
that's a focus it's going to be
a large focus of the work of our
ascend Committee in this coming
year we're working on possible
statute to mandate better
collection of racial and ethnic
data throughout the criminal
justice system possibly from
point of first contact with
law enforcement all the way
through someone being cleared to
any probation or parole this
bill will be a tremendous effort
and spur
to helping us in collecting that
data and being able to use that
data once the state has
collected improperly at present
we don't have good enough data
in the state to do for racial
impact statements we have very
good data from the corrections
system but we have missing data
or data that does exist at all
and the points of the criminal
justice system in the state at
present the like I said the
sentencing commission is looking
to fix that in the coming years
and we're working with our
criminal justice partners.
And advocates to try to have
better racial and data and
ethnicity data in our criminal
justice system and this will be
of the important part of the
puzzle once we have that data in
place.
Thank you Mr chairman to
committees.
Thank you very much for your I'm
not.
We now move to Rikki Lee Chavez.
for her to come in and make a
comment on this service please
well that and proceed.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
again on behalf of the New
Mexico colonel defense lawyers
association thank you to the
sponsor of this legislation we
stand in full support we support
this legislation because we are
dedicated to improving the
criminal justice system and part
of that dedication is coming
before you all in this party and
informing you about collateral
consequences of criminal justice
proposals.
By including impact statements
as a genocide in eight in how
I'm sorry Senate bill eighty one
elected officials like
yourselves will have at your
fingertips information that
signals to those officials how
certain communities will be
impacted so that your decisions
can be even more informed we
encourage you to support and
again thank the sponsor for his
initiative on this.
Thank you very much this job as
per your comments are we not
ready and how we are level.
If you could activate your
account please and go ahead and
make your comments with regard
to bill.
We are all Mr chair I believe
that Mr although only signed up
for single seven he just never
left the waiting room after it's
all okay Senator Mr Jones is
back so.
And is Mister Jones I'm.
Yes.
I just that.
Okay okay.
Mr Jones our.
Mr go ahead and make your
appointment right about.
News.
That is off the chain of date
I'm good afternoon Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is parents also came with a
still you Mexico we support this
the Celeste provided and want to
both thanks and and and
apologize to the sponsor of the
same time at internet trolls but
I'm we know it is no secret that
black brown and native
communities other folks of color
on aren't present prosecuted and
rest of higher rates than their
white counterparts parks and we
see this piece of legislation as
the first step sort of as a
first step to sort of unpacking
the distortron mom over
incarceration as cost of
communities of color throughout
the state and I'm we urge you to
support this legislation thank
you much.
Mr Jones.
We now move to Margaret.
Thank you to go ahead and give a
comment with regard to this.
Legislation issuance and she
finishes.
Connecting.
I'm waiting for her connect
we're going to see an.
On Spence which occurs when
action comes through.
Spence.
Well as front operator Sierra if
you can hear me would you please
activate your.
On camera and going to make a
comment.
Seven five five one if you would
it's going to make your comments
also your thank you thank you Mr
chairman this is Representative
Sheryl Williams Stapleton and I
am a co sponsor Senator o'neill
Senate bill eighty one and I
would like to say that I am in
strong support of this bill
because it would create a mess
then that would show and in
summation a policy decision that
disproportionately affect.
Any individual the state of New
Mexico in regards to racial
impact on individuals that may
have committed a crime in all
its coal in the prison system Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I only believe that
policy makers that we should be
able to access and seven up
creation of establishment that
show them access and and the
modification of legislation that
would work with the existing
racial disparities that exist
currently in our power in them
and be able to Mr chair review
and adopt a new policy that
would reverse.
Policies that it is currently.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
I thank you madam majority floor
leader and you beat the over
under by about sixteen minutes
I'm let us know to
Spence pressure call I think you
have to.
M. and gotten them.
Are you still presents.
Thank you.
If you look at thank you.
Are you waiting the of comments.
Yes I am.
In New Jersey president of which
account is used well okay.
I'm having a little bit of.
Wait.
What's going on with my with my
camera.
No person.
Okay.
Okay there it.
There it there I am I'm.
Good afternoon.
Chair and committee members you
know I am in support of this
bill you know I.
Awesome all time high of.
We are formally incarcerated
person and
I started you know when
When.
I when I got put in the system.
You know through the years I
have I have seen that
Racial disparities have been put
in place in the system and this
is what this bill right here
what helped the system out so
much like because we.
You know Hispanics and and
African Americans and native you
know indigenous indigenous
people are are impacted by the
systems and the this what this
bill right here where just take
the work of the race races out
of it so right please support
this bill thank you.
I thank you for joining us and
for making a comment.
I'm trying to say our I have to
have anybody else who has joined
us to make public comment at
this time.
Now right well in that case
questions or comments from
committee center office.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and I just wanted to say thank
you to both Senator o'neill and
house majority floor leader
Sheryl Williams Stapleton I
think this is a long time coming
we need to really have a true
picture as to how are
legislation affects those that
to we are supposedly doing this
for and I think Mr chairman and
members of the committee Sliq
goes a long long long ways to
start for racial equity
as as you know I've introduced
many of time our bill with
regards to the anti
institutionalized racism and I
believe this is the way for us
to begin to see and look at and
have concerned with in front of
us as to what the possible
impact can be within our our
different diverse communities
you know I'll be bringing my
bill up soon with the
institutionalized racism but
there's numbers data that we
need to have in order to make
the proper decisions that we
need and this is long time
coming and I just want to say
thank you I do support the bill.
I think it's about program
which.
And Senator do it.
Thank you Mr chairman and I I
echo what Senator Lopez just
sent I just have
Some I think very small
amendments to offer and and one
thing I just.
I was a little confused reading
on page two.
We'll be there at lines three to
five.
I'm not sure if the intent what
is the impact of the proposed
legislation on correctional
facilities and services.
Does that mean correctional
services or any service I'm not
sure what.
What is modified services there
And then and and then also
adding on the word identity
after gender are each time that
appears which are thanks to our
multi tasking chair are you able
to he gave me all the that the
pages my numbers for that
which which I'm having to go
through but I I don't know if
you want to address the question
about our service what what do
you remember the first.
Senator that's okay
So should be a screenshot of
that is is is is that your
amendments are not.
I it is yes okay Senator so we
have in amendments.
In five different places to
after we were gender to insert
the word identity.
Page two one twenty page July
twenty four page three line one
is three line five the page
three line seven.
Yes in in each of those
locations Senator Nero is a
prime yes it is yeah we've been
really working on this I'm
trying to and with the right
phraseology and and
for this particular amendment
that's a that's a what is it
favorable it's so welcome
Amendment house.
And so indigenous places for
those who may not have the roads
underground however currently
rates is gender or sexual
orientation what would we the
staff is gender identity or
sexual orientation yes thank you
yes okay well are there so we're
on Senator Woods amendment is
there any questions from
committee on the amendments.
Saying no questions from
committee on the amendments this
is a family member is there any
objection to adopting the
amendments.
I'm only seeing no objections
with the opt in the amendment if
you'd be so kind as to indicate
all members were logged in right
now is voting in the
affirmative.
Senator if you have any
additional questions are why
don't we go to that one and ask
and and see if our.
If well one of the Sanchez is
able to respond yes and then you
know I think.
Elizabeth if you could if you
Senator doing could you restate
your concern sure so looking on
page three subsection D. there
at lines three to five it refers
to to the impact on correctional
facilities and services it's not
I'm wondering if if that is
limited if that means
correctional services or any
services.
What did you want.
We.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
Duhigg I don't think implement
to correctional services
I obviously in the writer of
those words and I thought that
it meant you know behavioral
health services and other types
of services that that might come
into play.
We had Senator behavioral health
services instead of just
services.
Mr chair Senator I almost wonder
if it should be a separate its
own subsection for services that
I don't I don't know if your
intent is to limit it to
behavioral health services.
You're not yeah it's services in
general it almost seems that
there should be a section that
just deals with the impact on
services makes sense to me can
you suggest an amendment just
another.
Another a letter there.
Sure maybe added and subsection
G..
After starting probably online
thirteen.
Which would say the impact of
the proposed legislation on
services for any race our common
gender identity or sexual
orientation of persons in the
state.
Here at and that.
We are print that up really
quick magically or I mean I I
understand it but are.
Is there anyway to see that we
did with the last one.
I give me just a second no
activity that.
My not not along with a copy.
This happened M. so basically
and actually just.
They can be easier are Sir
director.
We're not just recommend an
uncertain and and and this
record and survey a semicolon.
Our if we if it's actually on
page our.
Page three line for our.
October first so these.
And a cycle in.
Instruct the word and the.
And then
Beginning with our our in in in
in front of the what services.
On page three line for inserts
rather eat.
The impact of the proposed
legislation on.
And then we letter.
the succeeding two paragraphs.
So that would be I think Senator
Stewart our consider doing
because I understand your
commitment as what it would be
up Mr want to write that I do
see your hand up to do want to
comment on this issue the
information of the committee Mr
Johnson appeared here from the
Legislative Council shares are
nonpartisan staff and oh sorry I
missed that part and neither
advocates are poses a
legislation Mr chairman thank
you he has no current.
Personal yes thank you thank you
for in the state have always
thought that the intention also
say more more I'm about two
minutes a good idea.
Our.
So this one just in general but
yes indeed thank you Mr
responded with a four point that
are so doing is with that the
amendment that's going to make
it yes Mr chair thank you thank
you okay well and and really did
you catch that amendment I've
been sending the other
amendments to to miss Johnson
I'm afraid she's going to be
out of the mouth of the
committee report
internally or this Johnson did
you catch that amendment
structure.
I I could not get it but I will
get it for you okay.
Scrubber General correct.
Which is on page.
Neil Mr chair if if you can
allow me to share my screen I
think I I think I've typed it
up.
Okay let's let's see a cat will
do the honors of leading
insurers we have.
You should
availability.
Make sure you get just shy of
the one went up.
So that green button at the
bottom and you should have some
options to come up.
And you know I'm getting a weird
error message so what is that
are rather than making you all
wait on me
I thank you all this to you so
basically page three.
Page three line for
so it is answer a semi colon.
Thanks for this weird and.
And included are in service.
S. as hi
Representative ET location.
The impact of the proposed
legislation on.
Number of the rest of that
sentence later as and then re
letter the subsequent
governments.
And as the amendments are.
Have any questions on the
monitor this I don't have any of
the screen.
Well are there any questions
about the
and as this is a program yes
this is yes okay well are there
any are there any questions from
the committee on the amendments.
Well is there any objection to
adopting the amendments.
You have no objection to adopt
an amendment family if you play
shall all the committee members
present logged and as voting in
favor of the amendments.
Representative center during the
summer for.
Thank you Mr chair that's all.
Thank you very much Senator
costs.
Your hand additional up did you
still want to speak or is it
okay well we will orient our is
there anybody else that would
like to speak at this time.
On this particular matter.
Seeing nobody else seeking
recognition at this time what is
the pleasure of the committee
etcetera any of your motion you
make a motion to adopt this
Senate Bill.
Eighty one.
What was the the chair of the
you are moving a due process
recommendations on on we need to
on this General Hospital bill
eighty one answer Lopez
seconding that motion yes Sir.
Is there anything else on the
committee.
Would you show me a no if you're
taking the ball.
If that's what you're asking
so.
Following up on what to do
recall Senator Baca.
Yes.
What does your self as amended
do you want to yes or not.
No.
Senator okay yes.
Yes.
Yes.
More more.
I just I was just you have to
protect wishes you just came
back and said part of this is
on.
Not.
Brought back up again.
The question is is there any
objection to adding has has
broke once he's able to connect.
What the president of the for we
adjourn.
The less restructuring how today
well okay okay finally got
Senator Stewart yes.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Thank you.
Congratulations on the new
parents and mothers we now know
what you will serve like when
you want when you're eighty five
years old.
We're
really.
All right so I guess I mean as
gavel that's if there's not
anything else that's our
business for the day and thank
you very much committee.
And thank you at great job on
the zooming.
Okay so all right bye everybody
CSN.
Thank.
