I, uh, sponsors, I know cause uh
you and I have talked about it
before. We have some folks from
the house, at least one anyway,
um, so we're gonna recognize you
for advocacy up to 15 minutes,
you can read reserve any part of
it.
And otherwise, I'm gonna leave
it up to you to manage the 15
minutes, so it's up to you to
cut off any speaker if you want
one speaker to go for 12 minutes
and the others a few seconds,
that's fine. Whatever you wanna
do, but be watching your clock
and at the end of 150 minutes,
your time will have expired,
whether you get through the list
or not, I've got at least maybe
it looks like 10 or more people.
core part of your presentation,
I assume you have the same list,
so we'll start your time now and
your.
Good to go on at 279, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chair and committee members,
Senator Bergman's
representative, Andrea Romero,
and I thank you for the
opportunity to present.
SB 279.
uh SB 279 regulates a
semi-automatic firearms,
otherwise known as assault
weapons.
With me today.
Our experts who I will defer to
for interpretations and
technical quick questions after
my statement. I chose to sign on
as sponsor of SB 275 for ethical
reasons. I believe I have a
moral responsibility to prevent
harm to those most vulnerable in
our community and was pleased
for the opportunity for
representative Andrea Romoto to
do so. She has worked with gun
safety advocates on crafting
this bill for months. I'm aware
of the arguments from the gun
lobby and others who continue to
oppose any gun regulations,
citing
the 2nd Amendment and the US
Constitution.
Weapons outlined in SB 279 are
weapons of war. They are
manufactured for the
battlefield, not crafted for
self-protection, hunting, or
sport. These weapons fire so
quickly, dozens of rounds in
seconds that victims are
indiscriminately killed or
maimed before they have a chance
to react, which is why these
weapons of choice, these are the
weapons of choice of mass
shooters.
As a result, I believe we need
to do what we can to curtail the
proliferation of these
high-powered firearms. Gun
violence has a huge human cost,
causing significant human
suffering, and also huge
financial cost that our
community must bear. Meanwhile,
gun companies have made over 10
billion from guns like the AR-15
since the Sandy Hook Elementary
School mass shooting of 2
children.
In 2012 between the ages of 6
and 7. The weapons industry has
not taken any responsibility for
the proliferation of these
weapons because it interferes
with their profit model. So it's
up to us, left up to us to do
what we can to be the voice of
these victims who no longer can
speak.
For themselves. Mr. Chair
committee members, I believe
it's well past time we outlaw
these dangerous weapons.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
I talked a lot about this issue
during my campaign and every
time I brought up the assault
Ops ban at the doors.
Those hundreds of doors I
knocked on. I was met with
gratitude.
My constituents want this. They
have told me that to my face.
They want this protection for
their families and for
themselves.
There are several other states
across the country that have
these bands. And as we all know
from 1994 to 2004, we had a
federal ban.
For 10 years, this country had a
federal assault weapons ban that
was never ruled
unconstitutional. It's simply
expired.
Now as I think about sending my
one year old to pre-K soon. I'll
have to consider the reality
that she's going to be
practicing active shooter drills
in her classrooms.
Her tiny classmates huddled
around their brave teachers.
We do not have to live like
this.
Children who grow up in the 90s
like me had this protection
federally.
Our families that deserve the
protections offered by SB 279,
and I'm honored to be a
co-sponsor.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
we're talking today about mass
shootings. We're talking about
the deadliest weapons on the
planet that are now in our
communities that are being used
to threaten and not only that,
we know about the many, many,
many, uh, mass shootings that
are not only happening today,
but that have been happening for
over decades in our uh
communities. I can say Las
Vegas, I can say Pulse
nightclub, I can say Virgin
Virginia Tech, Sandy Hook, the
list goes on and on.
on and we know exactly what this
means. And we're talking about
hundreds of people's lives and
then the external concentric
circles around those lives.
You're going to hear a lot today
about dangerous and unusual
weapons. That is what we're
talking about today. That's what
we've been studying for years
about what it is that the
Supreme Court will allow and
what it is New Mexico must do to
regulate these weapons. We've
studied these court cases and
what we're doing today is
regulating the deadliest portion
of those weapons within the Go.
Act. I urge you and implore you,
please, for the people sitting
in the crowd today and those
online and those around the
state who have asked us and
hired us, as it were, voted us
into office to um promote their,
their life and their safety.
This is a bill for them.
And Mr. Chair, we'll go to the
People presenting, will you call
on them or do we need to?
I'll tell you the order in which
they registered, um, Janet
Williams, chief Weasler Regina
Griego, Kathleen Mosley.
Cathy Deal, Chris Morvin,
Harrison Tartar.
Wesley Clum um Angel Lee Evi,
and Miranda Viscoli.
All those have registered and
You've got about 10 minutes for
all.
My name is Regina Griego. I'm
from Albuquerque and I speak in
favor of SB 279. I'm an author,
coach, and retired engineer and
the survivor membership lead for
Moms Demand Action. I'm a wife,
mother, and grandmother. My
story was the perfect storm that
took 5 of my family members. A
mass shooting committed by my
troubled nephew. This happened
12 years ago and it changed my
life forever and the lives of
many forever.
I miss my brother's deep barking
laugh, silly grin, and sparkling
eyes. My heart aches when I
think of the loss of him and his
family.
I wish I had been more vigilant
about what was happening in my
brother's.
Household, including the fact
that he kept 8 guns and ample
ammunition, all accessible to
his 4 children.
New Mexico is ranked the 3rd
highest in the nation for guns
deaths at a cost of 6.6 billion
per year. My brother was killed
with an assault weapon, and I
will never be able to celebrate
a holiday or a birthday with him
and his family again. Thank you.
members of the committee.
My name is Miranda Pascoli,
executive director of the
Mexicans to Prevent Gun
Violence. I'm actually changing
everything I was going to say to
thank you, um, because I know
what your family went through.
Um, these are more tools to
design to kill as many people as
quickly as possible, and we hope
he passes legislation.
taste member members of the
committee. My name is Kathleen
Mosley, a retired public health
nurse speaking on behalf of Moms
Demand Action in 1991, uh, my
master's professor in Cleary was
killed in one of our country's
first math school shootings that
left 6 dead and 1 paralyzed.
The shooter used a 38 revolver.
It could have been worse.
20 years later, in Tucson in the
shooting that injured
Representative Gabby Giffords, 6
people were again killed, but 19
injured.
Nine year old Christine Taylor
Green was killed with the 13th
bullet.
The 13th bullet.
She was there to visit Gabby
Giffords because she was excited
about politics.
The shooter used a pistol with a
33 round magazine. He was only
stopped when he reloaded.
SB 279 Limits magazines and
states with similar policies of
half the mass shootings and less
fatalities.
Please support this policy.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman and committee
members. My name is Cathy Deal,
and I'm a resident of Cedar
Crest, New Mexico.
I'm a survivor of gun violence.
It was Halloween and my friends
and I were having fun, making
our way up the final block of
the night.
The footsteps came from behind
fast. He jerked the bag and
swung me around and down the
hill as I watched the
silhouettes of my friends grow
smaller and smaller in the
distance. When our bodies stops
spinning, he leveled up and put
a gun to my head.
Immediately I released the bag
and he disappeared into the
woods with my candy and my
innocence.
I later learned from my friends
that bearing witness to gun
violence can be just as
traumatic as surviving it.
I was 12.
The boy who assaulted me was
only 15. Where had he gotten a
gun? Where had he, when had he
lost his innocence?
Pas Senate Bill 279 Go safe to
protect the next generation of
New Mexicans because they
deserve a life free from gun
violence. Thank you.
This chair members of the
committee, uh, good evening.
Troy is their chief New Mexico
State Police. The state police
are focused on combating violent
crime, especially gun crime,
which has been a serious problem
in this state for many years. We
are supportive of all lawful
efforts to potentially help
combat this problem and keep
officers as well as the general
public safe.
Just as we were supportive of
the earlier legislation in this
session which banned lock
switches, we support the efforts
in this bill to prohibit devices
that increase the rate of fire
from a firearm, making it
potentially a more lethal
weapon.
In addition, state police has
had many encounters with violent
offenders that possessed large
capacity drums style magazines.
These items put officers in
danger and often give offenders
a tactical advantage over the
officers they encounter. When I
began my career 20 plus years
ago, there was a federal law in
place that was somewhat similar
to this one, but I do not think
it is unreasonable to take a
critical look at this topic once
again.
Thank you for your consideration
and thoughtful discussion on
this bill.
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Chris Marvin and I
represent both the Everytown
Veterans Advisory Council and
the Vet Voice Foundation, two
national nonprofits that
leverage the expertise and
experience of veterans to
advocate for better gun laws.
I'm a combat wounded veteran of
the war in Afghanistan and I'm
strong in strong support of SB
2279.
I spend much of my time speaking
with military veterans about
civilian gun laws and culture.
For those of us who serve in
uniform, we understand the
practical use of firearms, how
to respect them, how to store
them safely, and how to keep
them out of the hands of
dangerous people.
The vast majority of veterans I
talked to, including those
who've been to combat and those
who own civilian versions of
military style rifles
consistently tell me that gas
operated semi-automatic firearms
have no place in civilian hands.
What the New Mexico legislature
has created is an innovative
pragmatic approach to the
prohibition of these kinds of
weapons designed primarily to
kill humans by focusing on the
engineering of the firearm, New
Mexico's law will be more
accurate, more effective, and
much more likely to stand up to
judicial scrutiny.
9 other states have existing
assault weapons restrictions.
All have survived challenges
under Heller and continue to
under Bruin. New Mexico's
proposed law is stronger and
more in line with the precedents
that allow for reasonable
limitations to the right to bear
arms.
I'm here to praise the lawmakers
who have found the courage and
intellectual prowess to not only
create a law that will keep
citizens safe from gun violence,
but we'll also be developed as
an example for gun safety for
future state legislatures. Thank
you.
share in members of the
committee. My name is Harrison
Tarter. I'm a former US Army Cav
Scout platoon leader, who served
in the 10th Mountain Division
and deployed to some of the most
volatile regions of Afghanistan.
Today I serve as program
director of Vet Voice
Foundation, advocating for
policies that promote veterans'
well-being and public safety.
I strongly urge this committee
to pass Senate Bill 279 to
prohibit gas operated
semi-automatic rifles in New
Mexico.
I carried an M4, the military
version of an AR-15 as my
primary service weapon.
I know exactly what these
weapons are designed for. Rapid
sustained fire to engage and
neutralize enemy forces. They
were never intended for civilian
use, nor do they have a place in
this state, outside of the
military and law enforcement.
A typical military-style gas
operated semi-auto.
Expels 556 millimeter rounds at
over 2000 MPH at a rate of up to
6 rounds per second in
semi-auto. Upon impacting a
human body is projectile tum
tumbles, ricocheting off bones,
eviscerating organs, and leaving
a gaping exit wound.
Most often these weapons kill.
They do not leave many injured
survivors. That's great in
combat. That's not so good
inside a supermarket, a church,
or an elementary school.
In the military, we only utilize
these weapons under strict
oversight by comprehensive
regulations. The military takes
a lot of steps to ensure that
these weapons are never placed
in the wrong hands, and let me
be clear, civilian hands are the
wrong hands for gas-operated
semi-automatic firearms, please
pass this.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Wesley
Klum. I'm a student, uh, high
school student in Albuquerque.
First of all, I want to thank
all of you for listening to this
bill today.
I should be in class right now,
or I was, I was, should have
been in class earlier today.
Studying and preparing for my
future, but instead, I've been
here.
Because my being a student in
America, being a student in New
Mexico, means means risking my
life every single day.
That needs to change.
The Go Safe Act is a step in the
right direction.
It bans the guns that turn
schools into slaughterhouses,
the magazines that let shooters
fire endless endlessly, and the
devices that make killing even
more efficient.
Guns are part of New Mexican
culture. However, this bill
doesn't take away from any
fundamental rights or guns that
have shaped our history. It's
simply protects our right to
live.
Let's be clear, our right, our
right to life should matter more
than the profits of the gun
industry.
Our safety should come, should
come before a political
timidness.
Every leader who is stalled, who
has looked at the other way.
Who has put the gun gun lobby
over the lives of children?
The time is up.
The Mexicans need this now. New
Mexicans support this bill.
Time for action has been long
overdue. Thank you so much.
Good evening before I said good
day, but it kind of took a
little bit, but it's OK. Good
evening, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Angeli Harville. I
represent the Students Demand
Action chapter at Sandia High
School in Albuquerque, and I'm
here today to ask you to ban
assault weapons in New Mexico
and cast your vote in favor of
Senate Bill 279.
I love going out in public. I
love learning, and joining in
activities at school, but
because of the easy availability
of assault weapons in my
experience of a shooting at my
own school.
And no longer feel safe. Did you
know that in the deadliest mass
shootings committed with an
assault weapon 6 times more
people were shot.
Every day 125 people in the
United States are killed with
guns, twice as many are shot and
wounded, and countless others
are impacted by acts of gun
violence.
As elected senators, it is your
responsibility to make sure that
my fellow students and I are
safe in our schools and
communities.
SB 279 is a common sense
proposal designed to protect
communities from gun violence
while safeguarding Americans'
constitutional right to own a
firearm for legitimate
self-defense hunting and
sporting purposes. Much of gun
violence is committed by
individuals using the very type
of weapon that will be
prohibited in New Mexico as a
result of the historic action of
this body on behalf of a
generation of students who have
grown up in fear for their
safety in schools and
communities. I implore you to
pass.
Senate Bill 279 and established
New Mexico as a haven for
sensible gun reform. Thank you.
That's all, Mr. Chair. Now we're
gonna do some shuffling.
Ms. Williams, you know, you
registered for Santa Fe, now
I'll recognize you for a minute,
ma'am, you were not part of the
organized presentation that's
now gone into 16 minutes, but
I'll recognize you for one
minute, Miss Williams.
Thank you very much, Chairman
and members of the committee.
I'm with the National
Organization for Women and I'm
asking you to please support
this bill. I do believe that
these guns, these semi-automatic
weapons are only meant to kill
masses of people and not needed
for hunting. So please, please
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, thank you, that
completes the organized.
Proponents, we have um
Opponents who've also signed and
registered as their common
spokesperson for the opposition,
the bill.
Yes, no.
Yes.
So you're gonna coordinate all
of the speakers.
Yeah.
What
I hear no, so we're gonna just
do it the way we've got you
signed in. If there's not a,
there's not agreement. The
reason for the again just for
the rule is that you all could
have up to 150 minutes and
really dig into this with one or
two people, but I don't hear
that to be the case, so this is
who I've got, um, signed up.
Uh, Nick, am I getting your name
right, Tucci?
Nick Tuio, Keith Gardner,
Anthony Segura, Eric Ramusson,
Bill Person.
Carl Spencer, Carry Romero and
Zoom, Carlo or Larry Sontag,
David Sanchez, Nick Sanchez, Tom
Turner, John Leback, um, we will
recognize the group in
opposition up to 16 minutes,
which means each one of you all
have about a minute, maybe in 1
minute, 15 seconds, so I'll cut
you off in 1 minute, 15 seconds.
Mister Tucci, you're first up.
Sure Cervantes. My name is Nick
Tucci, state director of the
National Rifle Association. I am
here today to oppose Senate Bill
279 and unconstitutional assault
on the rights of people
responsible New Mexicans. In
short, this bill is an extreme
and unprecedented restriction on
some of the most owned types of
firearms in New Mexico. The
Supreme Court has already ruled
that such bans violate the
Constitution. In Heller, the
Supreme Court explicitly
affirmed that the 2nd Amendment
protects the rights of
individuals to own firearms in
common use.
For lawful purposes such as
self-defense. The AR-15
semi-automatic handguns, and
other firearms targeted by this
bill fall squarely within that
definition. They are the most
popular farms in the country
owned by millions of responsible
citizens.
In Bruin, the Supreme Court
reinforced that any firearm
regulations must align with the
text, history, and traditions of
the Second Amendment.
There's simply no historical
precedent for the kind of broad
and arbitrary de facto ban that
this bill imposes. Thank you,
Mr.
Keith Gardner, up to one minute.
Mr. Chairman lobbies for the
National Shooting Sports
Foundation. One of the first
thing, chair, what you got in
the interim of having
discussions over what the law
really says and how the law
actually applies in these cases,
I think it's important that we
look at the law, what the
Constitution says both the New
Mexico Constitution, the United
States Constitution,
specifically as you look at the
hell in the Bruin and I would
challenger.
To really look at that as a, as,
as you try to make this decision
tonight.
Um, it's important to see that
where there's attempts being
made to try and apply standards
that don't exist actually in the
Supreme Court cases and you
really need to, to pay attention
to that. I think it's also
important to notice as you look
at the states around us,
Colorado is a great example. who
had a less onerous bill than
this introduced in this
legislative session this year
that was pared down
significantly because they knew
there wasn't constitutionality
to that piece of legislation.
And so they've gone through and
trying to do something that they
think can actually pass
constitutional muster. I think
it's also
important to note, this is
absolutely a ban. Don't kid
yourselves. This is a ban, it
takes away the most common
firearms out there today and
replaces them.
something that doesn't actually
exist. They're most.
Unique and non-existing. You
cannot find a weapon with a
fixed magazine, that's
semi-automatic. They don't
exist. So you're gonna fail on
that test. I think it's
important, I'm a father. Thank
you, Mr. Gardner and thank you.
Let's plus Anthony Seguro.
Mr. Chairman of Committee, my
name is Anthony Segura. I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico Shooting Sports
Association, and I'm also a
concealed carry instructor
teaching for the state of New
Mexico for the last 14 years.
Um, I'm gonna go over something
that I teach in my class.
Taking away semi-automatic
firearms will have several
potential public safety
consequences, depending on how
much how such policies
implemented and enforced. Here's
some key concerns. One,
self-defense limitations.
Semi-automatic firearms are
commonly used for personal
protection, restricting them
could leave law-abiding citizens
at a disadvantage against
violent criminals.
Who often obtain these weapons
illegally and unlikely to comply
with laws.
Delayed response threats.
In rural areas, it's law
enforcement response times can
be lengthy, restricting
semi-automatic firearms can
leave individuals and family
members more vulnerable to
criminal threats, home invasions
or attacks.
Number 3, reduction in arms
citizen deterrence. Armed
citizens often deter their.
Crime simply by existing having
a firearm. Criminals are less
likely to target areas where
they know individuals may be
carrying a firearm.
Thank you. I'm sorry I have to
cut you off, sir. We have to get
through everyone. Thank you.
Afternoon chair. Berenson, is
that right?
are you Mr. Fen Ferrison?
Oh, I'm sorry I got behind you,
Mr. Rasmussen, thank you.
Um
Uh, Rasmus and I'm right to bear
arms. I'm also the president of
the Mexico farms Industry
Association.
Um, I also want to say in with
response to a couple of other
people spoke. I've also been to
war.
And I have never once been
issued an AR-15.
There's a big difference between
an AR-15 and an M4.
Uh
Full auto is also in this bill.
There seems to be a lot of
problems with uh just the way
that this bill is written. This
is also being addressed in
another bill that I believe
that's already been, been heard.
High capacity magazines, which
are.
Is deemed anything greater than
10 rounds require.
That you're requiring
serialization for.
Um
The the guidance on how to do
this is kind of nebulous, and it
says that they need to be fixed
and not not removable. One of
the safest things you need to do
if you have a firearm that's
deemed unsafe, is removed the
magazine remove the ammunition
source. If you have a fixed
magazine, then that is.
You can't do that. Now you have
to manipulate the magazine or
the slide 10 times to eject.
All the bullets which make it
more dangerous.
Marking serialization items such
as a magazine required.
Require special licensure is not
common amongst retailers, and
there's special, uh, federal
guidelines in order to be able
to do that.
Now mind you, there's probably
over 100,000 of these firearms
out there with hundreds of
thousands of magazines. Thank
you, Mr. Rasmussen.
Uh, Bill, Bill Furrenson,
Burson.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator O'Malley.
I'm William Fire Eisen, a
retired computer scientist here
in Santa Fe and one of Senator
Wirth's constituents.
This is the 3rd year that we
stand before you defending
ourselves from some version of
this bill.
By we I mean hundreds of
thousands of New Mexicans, not
some faceless gun lobby or some
distant profit making arms
industry, we are normal, law
abiding New Mexicans going about
our daily business.
This bill goes far beyond bans
in other states. It forbids
almost most semi-automatic
firearms, about half of the
firearms in New Mexico, not just
assault weapons. Semi-automatic
firearms are not some exotic
weapons of war. They are the
standard firearms owned by about
45% of New Mexicans and used
every day for lawful purposes,
self-defense, hunting,
competition, ranching and
agriculture, etc.
I ask you to please devote the
precious remaining 19 days of
our legislative session to the
true anti-crime bills targeting
those who use these firearms.
Please stop this pill. It's
damaging to us and to our state
to chair, thank you.
Thank you, Charles Spencer.
Uh, thank you, Chair Cervantes
uh committee, um, I'll try and
make two points and most of my
time over one, the way this bill
is written, it goes after gas
operation. It's far beyond
previous bills that other states
passed that have looked to ban,
you know, quote unquote black
rifles, assault rifles, some of
the some of the guns this
The band will probably be
Guns that were invented in the
late 1800s when gas operation
was invented.
Um, some may
ban traditional hunting rifles
like the Browning hunting rifle
with a Woodstock, which
In recent editions says all used
externally fed magazines. So if
you have an external magazine,
you can obviously go over 10
rounds.
And we won't know what
which of these guns will even be
banned or regulated until the AG
uh determines that, so um I
would say pare this bill down
and look at the Colorado
example, which at least trusts
some people to own these weapons
without a ban. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Spencer
Romero, are you on Zoom? right?
Terry Romero.
K E R I E, Merrill.
Nope.
Uh, Carla or Larry Sontag, are
you here? Yes.
All right, Ms. Romero.
Can you hear me?
All right, Ms. Romero.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'm here. Can
you hear me? Yes, up to a minute
and a half. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, Carry Romero,
executive Director registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Council of Outfitters and
Guides. We agree with a lot of
the statements that have already
been made and a lot of the
constitutional questions, um, we
are in primary opposition to
this bill for the uh gas
operated firearm definition. I
direct your attention to page 3,
line 11.
Number 5, that particular
Section of the definition of gas
operated firearm would encompass
a substantial amount of
semi-automatic firearms,
including many hunting firearms
and we respectfully disagree
with the sponsors. These are not
weapons of war. They are hunting
rifles, and for that reason, we
stand opposed. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you Larry
Sontag.
No
It
What's that?
Zoom?
Muntag?
Good evening, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. It's
Larry Sontag. I'm a United
States Air Force veteran. I was
a nuclear weapons security
specialist, so I was trained
with gas operated weapons that
were for a particular war
mission. And then I left that
and went to the Albuquerque
Police Department, where I was
also trained and carried gas
operated semioticmatic firearms
for a self-defense mission. It's
completely different mission,
different capabilities of the
weapons. Most civilians.
unless they have a specific
license, do not have access to
weapons of war. They have
different capabilities. Beyond
that, the Supreme Court briefing
you heard earlier has made it
clear that just because
something, somebody wants to
call a weapon an assault weapon.
If it is commonly held, it can,
it is protected as a
self-defense right under the
Second Amendment. I encourage
you to vote against this
legislation because uh it will
generate.
Numerous challenges which you
have already heard all the way
up to the Supreme Court will be
overturned.
Thank you. Thank you, David
Sanchez.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, David.
That is uh represent northern
Mexico, stocks Association.
Board of Directors
Mexico stop is the waste for
16,000 ranchers and farmers.
Yeah
We stand opposed to this
measure, we find the bill on
constitutional and the
provisions averse to our
ranching families and our
ability to protect
operations.
Family, thank you. Please vote
note on.
Thank you, Nick Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
members Nick Sanchez, uh, I
wanna do something a little
different here. Um, I just want
to bring to light Article 18 USC
Section 242 of the United States
with regards to anybody that
supports.
This gross violation of our 2nd
Amendment rights is subject to
the DOJ fines and prosecution.
So anyone moving forward with
that, um, that is a full
reminder that this is a gross
violation of our 2nd Amendment
rights and cannot proceed
forward with that. Furthermore,
we've heard testimony that this
has impacted people's lives in
such ways. Why aren't we talking
about DUIs and cars and hammers
and everything else that should
be on the chopping block for
lives that are taken.
every year. If you pull up any
of these senses that show how
many deaths are killed in
homicide vehicular or other
matters. This is just a blip in
comparison to it. Thank you. Tom
Turner.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my
name is Tom Turner. I'm the
president of the Sportsman's
Club at the Los Alamos.
Let's see, Los Alamos County has
say less than 20,000 people. We
have 1000 members, 5% of our
county willingly pays dues to do
the shooting sports in a free
manner.
It seems to me that this uh bill
is more about emotion versus
facts and logic.
The FBI has done studies where,
um,
Long guns and we're targeting
ARs with this bill. Long guns
are used only in a few percent
of crimes.
Uh, John Lott, who's an
academic, he's estimated that
guns are used, um, lawfully
about up to a million times per
year.
Now I'm gonna have to pick on
one topic and I'll pick on the
topic of uh limited magazine,
uh.
Limits, and I, I would like to
be afforded the same luxuries
that law enforcement uses to
defend themselves, so what
happens if I have multiple
assailants.
Is 10 rounds gonna do it? What
happens if my assailants were
high on drugs. Can I do it on 10
rounds? What happens under
stress that not all my bullets
make it to.
mitigate the threat.
So I'll leave it with that.
Let's, uh, target the criminals
and not the guns. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Turner. We have
last John Lebeck.
Good evening, Senator and
committee. My name is John
Liebeck. I'm from Santa Fe. I've
been an engineer for over 30
years, and first and foremost,
I apologize to you guys that
experienced tragedy.
Um
The thing that we talk about
tonight is part of being an
engineer for 30 years is
conducting root cause analysis.
And
Nowhere in my 35, excuse me, 30
years of
and deploying root cause
analysis has an object.
Become the root cause.
So I agree with what Tom Turner
just mentioned that there's a
lot of emotion in this
particular bill, and I won't
cover some of the technical
inaccuracies that were stated by
Ms. O'Malley. However, when
we're talking about root cause
analysis, folks, we don't wanna
have individuals harmed by guns
either.
And I know that may surprise
you, but we're focusing on
something that's not the root
cause. And when we do that,
nothing's going to change. We'll
reintroduce bills like this
again and again and again, and
we'll wonder why people are
still getting hurt.
What I ask you is to take the
remaining time of this session,
and please focus on things that
actually address the criminal.
You've got a room full of people
here that are law-abiding
citizens that are voluntary,
voluntarily taking.
Part in this legislative
process, we buy our guns
legally, we go through
background checks, and we store
them in safes and use them
responsibly. Please guys focus
on criminals. Thank you, sir.
All right, that completes
everyone who had registered to
speak.
This note, uh, for some
illustration of fairness, we
began the presentation today at
7:10 with the proponents, they
went 16 minutes, concluded at
7:26. I've allowed 60 minutes
for opposition uh 726 beginning
to now a little bit more than
742, so it's right at 6 60
minutes. So I appreciate
everybody being succinct and uh
keeping to the time limit so we
can get our work done here. And
there's been equal amounts of
time both support or opposition.
So we'll go to members of the
committee. I'll, I'll note a
couple of things just real
quick.
before we do, I appreciate many
of you all talking on both sides
of the issue, um,
somewhat curious to me, nobody
really spoke about the specifics
of the legislation of the bill,
um, and it's important, I think
because we may be seeing various
versions of the bill. So Senator
Dewey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I have
a committee sub.
And what this sub does is we
heard in the presentation
earlier about, uh, a little bit
about the Illinois law that had
gone up to the 7th Circuit, um,
and the Supreme Court had
said, no, we're not going to
grant cert on that.
Um
That's when they talk about the,
the shadow docket, um, what this
does is this adopts the, the
Illinois approach.
Ah, so there is a features test
rather than uh being based on,
on gas power.
And now
I can talk a little bit more
about my, my reasons for, for
offering this sub, but I don't
know if you wanted to go to the
sponsors first, Mr. Cha.
motion
I will, so I will move a, a do
not pass on Senate Bill 279, and
they do pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute Senate Bill
279 for the purposes of purposes
of discussion for purposes of
discussion and so, uh, sponsors
you've seen, I guess the most
committee sub for those that are
not here frequently with us. The
proposal is to take the bill 279
that many of you all have
probably been studying at some
length for committee today and
replacing it with what's called
the committee substitute, which
we
to bill for that. It's being
proposed by one of the members
of the committee by way of a
motion. The committee will
either accept or reject the
substitute for that bill, but
our practice is to go to the
sponsors first to allow them to
either accept or reject the
proposed substitute.
Mr. Chair, thank you. We accept
the floors I mean the committee
substitutes.
Right. So the proponents have
said they would accept this as a
substitute, Senator dude, you
have the floor. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, and so, and, and I
believe that the sponsors
experts, uh, are prepared to, to
talk about the, the substance of
the, the Illinois approach. Um,
but the reason that I am
offering this is.
So yes, the, the Supreme Court
has not yet taken up.
Um, uh, an assault weapons ban.
I don't think that's because
they're not going to. I think
they are.
Waiting for the best test case,
and that's what they're gonna
take up.
Um, I think that by taking this
approach, which has already gone
through some litigation, um, we
and has already been upheld, uh,
to, to some degree. We are in a
better position.
As a state, I think.
That you know, there is a novel
approach taken by the GoSafe,
uh, act, um, and while that is a
an interesting and novel
approach. It also makes it even
more possible that we could be
that test case. Uh, and then the
state will be exposed to uh
lengthy and expensive
litigation, um, that, that, to
be honest with our Supreme
Court, I don't, I don't trust we
would win.
Uh, so I would much rather take
An approach that
I think has the same effect
overall as what was trying to be
achieved by the Go Safe Act, um,
but at least has
Some precedent.
That we can.
And I think at least
provisionally rely on for being
upheld, and frankly, if that is
what ends up getting and, and
the, you know, when cert was
rejected, uh, on that Seventh
Circuit case, that
It's, it's pretty short and
it's, it's worth reading, um.
I read this to say, we're
probably gonna take this up.
We're probably gonna take it
out, uh, at some point. We're
gonna let the, let the cork
below, go through everything,
um, but I think it's probably
getting there and frankly, I'd
rather Illinois.
Be that test case. Let them go
through the expense of
litigating that, uh, and, and if
it gets overturned, then we know
what we've adopted here isn't
gonna work, and then we can, we
can perhaps look to other
approaches, but I think this is.
This is a more legally cautious
approach that still achieves the
same impact and effect that the
spy believe the sponsors are are
attempting to achieve with their
legislation.
That's why, that's why I'm
offering this up for sure.
All right, we're on discussion
of the committee substitute,
committee members.
You wanna, you wanna wait in?
Stewart. And can I just see your
hands, others who are gonna be
on many substitute.
Right now? OK, Senator Stewart,
you've got almost unlimited
time.
No, I don't.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I just, I
would like to have a little bit
of a comparison.
No. Somebody in here that's red
both, if we could see a little
comparison, you know, maybe
baker, maybe sinner do it
somebody.
To have a comparison of the two.
Mr. Chair, Senator Stewart, uh,
let me introduce my experts for
today, um, and, um, we have, uh,
Ben Baker. He's with the office
of, of the governor, the public
safety advisor. We have Kyle
Duffy. He's with the office of
of the governor's deputy general
counsel.
And then we also have a Greg uh
Lincoln Brock. I hope I
pronounced that correctly. He's,
uh, he's the every town for gun
safety director of investigation
and needs the firearm expert and
he is online.
Um, Senator Stewart, I'm gonna
go ahead and
Your question to Mr. Duffy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator,
um, yes, so,
At bottom, the bills differ most
in their definition of uh the
regulated weapons. The original
bill that Go Safe Act, uh,
defines the regulated weapons
based on their internal
components, the, the ability to
use this high pressure gas, to
cycle rounds combined with the
ability to accept a detachable
magazine so you can cycle
through many rounds in quick
succession.
Uh, the committee substitute,
which is very similar to a bill
that we ran back in 2023 HB 101,
which is modeled after the
Illinois Act, um, regulates
virtually the exact same world
of of weapons. However, it goes
about defining those weapons,
uh, a little bit differently
instead of referring to the
internal mechanism, how these
weapons use this high pressure
gas. It
Um, it targets weapons based on
external characteristics that
make them uh more
Likely to be used in a sort of a
mass shooting combative uh sort
of scenario for, for instance,
having a barrel shroud or pistol
grip so you can hold a weapon
longer uh without your arm,
without your hands getting
burned. Uh, so that at its core
is the primary difference
between uh these, these laws.
Other than that, there are some
other smaller um details on in
terms of mechanics on who's
exempted.
very minor specific exemptions,
um, both regulate uh high
capacity magazines.
Um, which are capped at 10
rounds.
I believe, and I haven't um been
able to look at the committee
sub in too much detail, uh,
since we did receive it today,
um.
I believe the original bill
regulates rapid fire devices and
machine guns, in addition, but
I'm not sure if the committee
substitute reaches those uh
those items, I could be wrong.
Um, additionally, the committee
sub does regulate 50 caliber
rifles and 50 caliber
ammunition, whereas the original
bill does not.
Um, so that's in general
overview some of the primary
differences,
thank you for that.
Uh, could you talk a little bit
about the exceptions you said
there were that that was
slightly different. Can you talk
about those differences.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Senator, um, so
I'm more familiar with the
exceptions in the original bill.
So that's what I was more
prepared to testify about, um,
generally, I know for both of
the bills, there are exceptions
for law enforcement, government
agencies, uh, there are
exceptions.
For uh possession, both bills
have grandfathering clauses, so
that way those with the
regulated items will have the
ability to keep and maintain
those items.
Um, so that is one large
exception.
Uh
Uh, federally licensed firearm
dealers are accepted.
Under both versions.
I know under the committee
substitute version, uh, there is
a, um, oh thank you, under, on
page 12.
There is a list of accepted
individuals and entities.
Um
Or sorry, beginning on page 11
and going into page 12, there's
peace officers.
Qualified law enforcement
officers and retired law
enforcement officers.
You have federal, state, and
local law enforcement agencies.
Wardens, superintendents, uh,
keepers of prisons.
You have members of the armed
service or the reserve while
they're um performing their
official duties.
You have those companies that
are um defending nuclear sites.
And private security contractors
who are licensed to carry
firearms. So those are some of
the exceptions I believe are
common to both uh bills.
However, the second bill or the
committee substitute, uh, is a
little bit more explicit and
expansive in those exceptions.
So thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. So just one
more question.
Do either bills have buyback
provisions.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senator. Uh, so neither bill has
a buyback provision and that's
because neither bill requires
anyone to dispossess themselves
of any of the regulated items,
since they're all grandfathered
in. Uh, so those who have a
regulated item, at least, uh,
well, yes, under both bills,
they will going forward as long
as they comply with any of the
statutory prerequisites in the
act, they'll be able to keep
those uh regulated.
items, they'll even be able to
pass those on through
inheritance or sell those to uh
licensed firearm dealers who can
then sell those to people out of
state, so they'll be able to
continue to use them, just maybe
in a, in a slightly more
regulated fashion.
Thank you for that. Um, so, Mr.
Chairman, I
Um, I don't know if sinner Duig
has an expert on the sub, but I
would certainly be interested in
that. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, if I could just add
our expert on Zoom might have.
More also, but if not
by the staff that this stuff is
online now, so please refer to
that if there's any questions
about specifics, thanks.
There, is there anything else,
my last question was actually an
ask, Mr. Chairman, to see if we
could hear from Senator Dohek if
she has an expert that could
also explain the sub.
Mr. Chair, I do, uh, Olivia Lee.
If you don't mind coming up?
So yes, ah, if you would just
any and and and Mr. Duffy went
went over a lot, but if there's
there's anything else we should
know about the sub, you would.
Go over that.
Sure, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
and, uh, senators in committee,
uh, thank you for having me. My
name is Olivia Lee. I'm senior
counsel, I'm a policy attorney
at every town for gun safety.
I've been working in legislative
advocacy in the state for 3
years, and this is the 3rd year
that we've been trying to find
the right approach for an
assault weapons regulation for
this state.
Um, this is modeled closely
after uh 2023's HB 101, which
itself was modeled after
Illinois's Protect Illinois
Communities Act that was passed
in 2023 in the wake of Highland
Park.
Um
Earlier, I believe that there
was a question about the
different treatment of firearms
between the go safe approach
that was originally filed in SB
279, and in this committee sub.
Um, so,
Generally speaking, and I would
also like to offer uh the
expertise of my colleague Greg
Lickenbrock, who's on Zoom after
I'm done, but um, generally
speaking, the same universe of
weapons, uh, is covered by both
bills, and this is also the case
with all, um, nearly all assault
weapons, uh, restrictions in
states across the country, of
which there are 9, so all of the
bills, um, SB 279 and this
committee subco rifles,
shotguns, and pistols. The main
difference
between the committee sub and SB
279 is originally filed is that
um there will be some
featureless, uh, models of
firearms like the AR or on the
AR platform, um, it will be
permitted in the state of New
Mexico, and these are guns that
have been uh kind of designed
and produced to be compliant or
purchase and ownership in states
with assault weapons
restrictions like New York and.
California was important to us,
uh, that those uh weapons be
able to be legally purchased and
owned here. Um, so with that, if
I may, uh, maybe turn it over to
Greg.
But I, I hope you all can
understand we can't have
everybody who comes in with a
sub getting a whole new round of
experts and presentations and
starting all over, unless we're
gonna go back to the whole
audience and hear all of them on
the uh.
That's the only way that can
really be fair.
And, and Mr. Chair, I, I, I
think this the expert who was
online was the sponsor's expert,
uh, but perhaps we can wait to
go to him if, if there's a
question
you should address.
I'm, I'm good, Mr. Chair.
committee members with other
questions. It's a little
complicated. Hope you can
understand. We're trying to make
sure that we, everybody on the
same page. Anyone else on the
proposed amendment, Senator, uh,
there were, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Just can you walk us
through the affidavit process
specifically, I think that's
what's required for the ones
that are grandfathered in and
then what's the process for
transferring a grandfather, I
just wanna make sure I
understand.
Uh
Yes, Mr. Chair, Senator Wirth,
um, so in the committee sub
under the grandfathering
provision in order to uh be able
to keep your regulated item, you
have to file an endorsement
affidavit, either with the
Department of Public Safety or
with a um pursuant to their
rules with a federally licensed
firearm dealer, uh, so that,
that latter aspect was added um
in order to protect uh the
privacy of
Those who were a little bit wary
of of filing such an affidavit
with directly with the
Department of Public Safety.
However, through their
rulemaking process, they will be
able to uh set up a procedure to
be able to verify, um,
That those
Weapons are grandfathered, um,
in general, when you receive,
uh, there is a
When you receive an inherited
item, uh, you must file this
endorsement affidavit with the
Department of Public Safety
within 60 days. Let me, uh, turn
to the page where
I believe we cover this.
Um, I believe it's beginning on
page 7 going into 8.
Um, so this is discussing about
what must be in the affidavit,
um, and you must affirm that you
possess the the assault weapon
or the 50 caliber rifle, uh
before the effective day the act
or that you inherited that item,
uh, pursuant to this section.
Um, and then you must include
the make, model, caliber, serial
number of the the weapon with
that.
Um, so, so that's generally in a
nutshell, um,
And those affidavits are filed
with a uh perjury warning to
make sure that nobody um is
lying when they're filing those,
um, and so that's, that's
generally the process.
No, I appreciate that, Mr.
Chair, and I noticed we spent a
lot of time today on the floor
of the Senate talking about
IPRA.
Infection of public Records Act,
uh,
note on the bottom of page 10.
This is.
An exemption, there was a lot of
concern about the exemption that
I was proposing today for IPRA.
Um, again, I can understand why.
This needs to be exempt, and I
just wanted to flag that so, Mr.
Chair, I'm gonna continue to go
through this. It's a little
confusing on my bill because
page 9 got printed before page
8. So it just it took me a
minute to figure that out. Um,
so I will keep listening and.
See where we are.
Senator Brantley, Senator
Thornton, do you want to get in
there, you got, we're gonna get,
you got to elbow her out of the
way.
She can be a little aggressive.
Senator Thornton and Senator
Bradley and Senator first.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, guys. This, this subs a
little concerning. It looks like
our experts don't even know the
difference between the sub and
the bill that we had before.
With all due respect, I don't
believe that Senator Stewart's
answer question was ever really
even answered. It'd be nice to
know the difference between what
is in the substitute before us.
And what is in the bill that
we've become familiar with
because the only difference
seems to be that we've changed
the definition from gas operated
now to identifying these weapons
by
Characteristics.
So I'll ask you this because I
became really familiar with the
bill that everyone's seen for
quite a while.
In the opening statements, it
was said that we were addressing
assault weapons, assault weapons
that often.
used in mass shootings.
Including in that, included in
that definition of the bill
before us.
And it's my understanding from
what I'm reading here would
still be included. So, so as we
go down this list of weapons.
Does this committee sub.
They prohibit the use of, let's
say the Browning shotgun
developed in 1900 patent number
659507 in which your first bill
does, and according to the
characteristics would still meet
that standard.
Mr. Chair,
Senator Bentley, I'd like to go
to um Greg Brock, who's on, on
Zoom.
Answer that question. Uh, hello
there. I'm Greg Lickenbrock.
Thank you so much for that
question. Uh, the Browning
model, uh, 1900, I believe
that's the uh rifle you're
talking about, that would be
exempt under both of these,
because uh it uses a fixed
magazine that is, that's how
both of these systems work.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and to
your expert that's not enough
that that particular model
actually was was included at
least under 279.
Every detail of it, including
cult 1911 pistol used in World
War One would have still clearly
met the definitions I'd like to
know if that is included in the
subs, including the MI grand
rifle used in World War 2, that
would have clearly been covered
in the first one is that
included in the sub, and then I
would like to know from the
expert when the last time any of
those weapons were used.
And events of mass.
destructions are mass.
Mr. Chair,
Senator Brentley.
Uh, I would go to my expert
again.
like a book, I, yeah.
Thank you.
Uh, yeah, so, uh, once again,
the Colt 1911 is a recoil
operated pistol, that would be
exempt under the original SB
279, it would also be exempt
under the sub as long as it does
not have a threaded barrel, uh,
and also the second gun you
mentioned, the M1 Grand, the
rifle that most soldiers carried
in World War II that uses a
fixed magazine, so that would be
exempt under both bills in front
of you.
Mr. Chairman and to the senator,
but they're all gas operated, so
the definition that was before
us, it would have fallen in
there without any exemptions,
including there's no exemptions
in here based on those
characteristics is the concern.
The, the concern is the intent,
your intent.
is not matching up with the
multitude of weapons.
That by definition would still
fall under 279 and the sub.
And, and I say that because
clearly in this bill and, and
now the stuff that we haven't
had time to review.
You have
Missed a mark completely.
By including such an umbrella of
legislation that it's not
matching the intent, which I
think I understand what you're
doing is to go back to identify
weap weapons of these mass
destructions.
This is
still, even in this substitute,
it may even be more confusing,
confusing when you start
defining weapons by
characteristics.
I, I, I would, I would say this
looking through this list of
this, these bills, you have
Missed the mark with us.
I, I would say that if a, a, uh,
Gun owner uh uh firearms.
User missed their mark by this
margin, they have no business.
Having a gun. I would say that
if a legislator has missed their
mark by this margin, you have no
business carrying a gun bill.
This substitute is still
overreaching and if we could
have a clear list of the weapons
that you intend to outlaw.
Compared to the ones that your
intention is not to outlaw. That
is, that is what we need to see
and to throw a substitute in
front of us that actually
confuses the definition even
more, is even more dangerous.
I'll let Senator Thornton weigh
in on the substitute. Thank you,
Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you Mr. Chair. I, I'm
going to go through the
substitute bill here because you
threw it in front of us here
with uh we had no time to look
at it, but I want to start with
11 thing I noticed that you, you
defined assault weapon.
Could you, could you maybe
define that in layman's terms
what you mean by the term
assault weapon.
Cause you have several, several
different things you have like
56.
Oh, you have.
7 different descriptions, like
now 9 now going through it.
At least 9 descriptions of what
composes an assault weapon. I
just want to know in layman's
terms, what is that to you?
Uh, Mr. Chair and committee
Senator, thank you for the
question. So, assault weapons
are, you know, a legal
definition and the way that
assault weapons are defined in
this bill matches the way that
assault weapons are defined in
all 9 state assault weapons
laws. It's comprised of mainly
three categories, um, is the
firearms semi-automatic, can it
take a detachable magazine, and
does it have one or more
prohibited militarized features.
These features were first
identified
ified by the ATF, I believe in
the late 80s or early 90s for
the purposes of import
regulation to control um the
import and export of of military
style firearms. Um, so all of
the features that are listed
here would be components of,
say, an M16. Um, also, in
addition, this bill prohibits
semi-automatic firearms that
come with a fixed magazine that
holds more than a certain number
of rounds, the committee
substitute, that number is 15
rounds for a handgun.
Um, and then more than 10 for,
I, I believe a, a shotgun and a
rifle.
Thank you for that.
Because I don't have any assault
weapons and my arsenal that I
have at home, all of my weapons
are defensive.
That's what I would call them.
But I think they meet all the
descriptions.
These top 9.
So I obviously can't support a
bill that would make me, uh.
Someone who would be considered.
An outlaw, illegal, whatever you
wanna call it.
Cause I just these descriptions
are so generic.
I, I thought we were.
It's laughable, what's brought
before us in terms of what, what
you are describing, because I
know probably.
Every gun owner here has weapon
systems.
That meet this criteria.
I can almost guarantee that.
Does this, uh,
Substitute also include a gun
registry.
Mr. Chair
Uh, Mr. Chair, senators and
committee.
It does not
It does not include a gun
registry. Um, I, I believe you
might be referring to the
affidavit endorsement system,
which is a system that's been
put in place to help gun owners
prove that they have had these
regulated weapons prior to the
enactment of the bill should
that ever become the case, um,
but there's no centralized
record of, of gun murders.
Uh, Mr. Chair,
Senators, uh, can you name a
firearm that has a fixed
magazine?
Um
And
It still allows ammunition
feeding it.
Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton, uh,
for to expert.
Greg
See there?
Yep, I'm still here. Uh,
actually, those three examples I
answered earlier, all have fixed
magazines like the M1 Grand that
soldiers carried in World War II
that held 8 rounds and an end
block clip. It was a fixed
magazine, and uh that was good
enough for soldiers back then.
Just one example, but I can
offer more. I'll also add that
uh states like California and
New York that regulate these
weapons, they also still sell
AR-15s and AK-47s. They just
come with fixed magazines that
are slower to reload, meaning an
attacker in a mass shooting has
uh
Less opportunity to wound as
many people as they can with
detachable magazines.
Thank you for that uh
description.
I'm on page 6 of your committee
substitute, and you have a whole
new section there, so
prohibiting the manufacture,
possession, delivery, sale,
importation and purchase of.
Assault weapons.
So
My question is,
Who is that intended for?
Mr. Chair
Is that intended for the owners,
or is that intended for
manufacturers?
Chair Senator Thornton.
Thor Kyle, answer the question.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
that is intended for everyone.
However, as you can see, it says
accept as provided in sections 4
and 5, which is then when you
get into the exceptions that
deal with uh manufacturers and
um law enforcement and the like.
Thank you for that. I'm, I'm not
sure I understand.
extent you're saying it's, it's,
it is for manufacturers then?
They would not be allowed that
this would be essentially stop
all all manufacturing of
firearms.
Mr. Chair, Senator, no, that's
incorrect. So the way the law
works is this is the general
prohibition, but then in a
separate section we're providing
an exception for them. So that,
so the way the law works in
total, that they would not be
prohibited from manufacturing
these uh these weapons for
certain persons like, um, law
enforcement.
Understood.
Um, Mr. Chair, I'm, I'm, uh,
still going through this, uh,
but I
I, I think because we're, we've
been given this in the last
minute.
Um
I don't think any of us would
feel comfortable supporting
this.
Me up.
However, I just to make a
comment.
I think if the committee sub
went through, it's actually
probably worse than the 279
bill.
And if that's the intent, then,
then I'm all for it because I I
know whatever gets through this
committee is going to be
gonna be a
Refused by Supreme Court.
And that's where you want to
take it, that's OK with us.
Uh, this bill is, is so poorly
written that if, if presented in
front of the Supreme Court, it
will be thrown out. I'm almost
guarantee that. So, so with
that, I, that's, that's my
comment on this.
So Mister Chair.
Looking at this, and this is my
bad.
I let something in here that is
anathema to what we do in Senate
Judiciary Committee.
So I'm gonna move to strike
section 9, which starts on the
bottom of page 17 continues on
to page 18.
From the sub.
This is saying that uh this is
essentially saying that, that
Actions taken under this act
would be, uh, the, the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act would
not apply.
That is
That is not the kind of policy
we do here, so I apologize for
that being in here.
Yeah, in the Senator, you had
mentioned that to me. I
appreciate you alerting me to
that. I guess the question is,
where did that come from? We're
just out of curiosity, who,
whose idea was that?
Who's writing this stuff? I
mean, that's really what I'm
trying to get out. I mean, I
know, I know you're proposing
the sub and we'll talk about how
we're gonna handle that. Like
again, I'm always curious to
know who the cooks in the
kitchen are, Mr. Chair, I worked
with Ms. Lee, uh, on this, this
uh.
The decision to put in a civil
rights community in the bill,
so this again is based off of
the, uh, I believe the HPAC
committee substitute that got
out of that committee in 2023.
Um, so I, uh, I thought it was
kind of following conventions in
New Mexico law, but that, that
is, I wanted to follow that
draft given that other lawmakers
have seen it.
In the past.
Oh, good. So we've got a
representative over here from
the other chamber. So, so I
understand what you're telling
me that, that's in here because
that, that's what the house
passed.
Before you all just decided to
carry that forward, so, but I'm
understanding.
Thank you. Yeah, we're gonna try
to avoid going back to the
other, but I just out of
curiosity, that's what no, no, I
understand. I, I know who she is
and for sure but I just we we
have to avoid getting.
Everybody in the audience
weighing in on things. I do
appreciate the answer to the
question, but yeah, it's um, I'm
just curious. So, OK, so the
question for strike section 9.
Is there any objection to that?
That's all.
and that's struck from the
proposed committee, so.
That's.
Anyone else?
So I'll weigh in a little bit.
Let me, uh, let me suggest the
committee, um, I've conferred
with the majority leader, I want
to confer with the ranking
member, I think in fairness to
everyone here given the
importance of this bill to so
many people, I think, um, given
the, I would say, um, more than
probability, I'd say almost
certainty there'll be a court
challenge, I'll just tell
everyone here that um last
session, I was the sponsor of a
seven-day waiting period in in
this room and on the floor, I
was told we'd be challenged in
court, unconstitutional grounds.
and we were, and it's been
upheld. I've been doing this for
25 years, I've almost every
session been told I'm going to
be challenged on constitutional
grounds and have yet to be
successfully challenged on
anything, uh, that I've been
part of on constitutional
grounds, and that's very frankly
because we take our time to do
this well and and avoid years of
litigation cause I just don't
think anyone's well served by
that. So uh my, my suggestion to
the committee is that we not
move with a vote on
the acceptance of the committee
sub until everyone has had a
chance to really evaluate and
assess it, and I see the sponsor
of the amendment suggesting the
same. I'm looking to the ranking
member. I'm hoping she'll
support the same.
Yeah, I think, I think that's
the first way to do it, and, and
again, I, I, I do see there's
enough work still to be done
with this, that I think some
additional time would probably
be best for all concerned. Um,
given that, I'd just like to
offer some thoughts when you're
doing so. First of all, I wanna
Yeah, I think, I think that's
the first way to do it, and, and
again, I, I, I do see there's
enough work still to be done
with this, that I think some
additional time would probably
be best for all concerned. Um,
given that, I'd just like to
offer some thoughts when you're
doing so. First of all, I want
to thank uh the state uh police
chief.
Weasel for being here. I, I've,
um, many of you all know I'm a,
a lifetime gun owner and
concealed carry permit holder
for those of you that are, that
are gun enthusiasts and
sportsmen here, none of none of
this is much a stranger to me,
at least to the extent of the.
Uh, firearms that I own and none
of them are remotely captured by
any of this, the guy who has a
12 gauge that, you know, likes
to go.
Uh, shooting or whatever it may
be, um,
And, and a few other uh weapons
as well, but I appreciate the
the chief here because one of
the reasons I've always felt
that that gun as gun owners, we
should be leading the effort for
reasonable gun safety laws is in
part because I, it's, it's
deplorable to me to think that
our law enforcement out on the
streets and outgunned.
Uh, by their adversaries. I
mean, I think that that, that
notion to me is like expecting
that our, our military army is
going to war with um a better
armed adversary that I don't
think we would ever accept that
as Americans, and I, I don't, I,
I don't ever think that our law
enforcement should be on the
streets and outgunned and out
armed by their adversaries, and
so to the extent that I, that we
have the New Mexico State Police
here, I think for the first time
law enforcement supporting um
then uh control legislation.
and something like an assault
weapon and I've never had that
before and so I think that
that's noteworthy and I want to
recognize the state police are
supporting this legislation to
ban assault weapons or so-called
assault weapons.
I, um, I think it's important
to, uh, at least my very quick
read on this is, I think the,
the bill before the committee
subprime has a greater chance of
standing constitutional.
Challenge, but I do appreciate
the fact that the proposed sub
is introduced in part at least
because it has seen some
constitutional challenges and at
least, uh, so far his has
withstood some of those.
The difficulty that we've always
had for years is defining what
is an assault weapon and many of
us, I think in the room even
probably reject.
The word or the term assault
weapon because that has such
different annotations and
meanings and has oftentimes very
negative connotations.
But I, I look at them, the, if
you look at page 2.
So the page 2 through probably
Looks like page 5 of the
proposed sub is where there's an
effort to define what is an
assault weapon, and that's
really where the challenge
comes. How do you define what is
an assault weapon? I'll tell you
that one of the problems with
doing so is pretty evident when
you look at this. So, when you
look on page 2, you know, line
17, it said assault weapon means
one of the following firearms,
then it begins to list the 1
through 9.
If you look on the 9th 1 on page
5, an assault weapon would be a
part or combination of parts
designed or intended to convert
a firearm into an assault
weapon.
So we're saying an assault
weapon is whatever is used to
convert a firearm into an
assault weapon. It's a circular
definition, in other words, it
makes no sense to me to say when
we have this complexity of
trying to define what is an
assault weapon we're saying an
assault weapon is whatever you
do to convert a gun into an
assault weapon, um, that again,
I think probably the
self-evident that that's not a
very good way to define anything
when you say an assault weapon
is whatever is an assault
weapon, um, and, and they're in,
I think it's gonna be the
challenge.
I'll note also that
The uh the weapons that would be
captured by
This definition include on page
3, a semi-automatic pistol that
has certain characteristics.
So I owned a semi-automatic
pistols and semiotic pistols and
this, this would say an assault
weapon would be any
semi-automatic pistol that has
the capacity to accept a
detachable magazine.
Um, that's just about every
semiotic, uh, semiautomatic
pistol, you're shaking your head
no, sir, but uh I, I, I'll,
I'll, I'll let you in the, in
the proponent uh try and
persuade me otherwise, but a
semi-automatic pistol with a
detachable magazine. Now it has
to have some other
characteristics. I understand
that's would be why you're
nodding your head. So it's gotta
have more than just a detachable
magazine, but at least that to
that point of the definition,
you're essentially defining
every semi-automatic pistol,
every semi-automatic pistol that
I'm aware of or in common use
has a detachable magazine, and
then it goes on to
say, um, any that would have a
threaded barrel would be an
assault weapon.
Um, some of these don't make
sense to me. I don't understand
why a semi-automatic pistol that
I own that has a detachable
magazine, if it has a threaded
barrel, that makes it some type
of an assault type weapon.
Um, my, my understanding of what
you're trying to capture here,
what we're trying to to really
debate is a weapon that can fire
a great number of rounds in very
quick succession and do maximum
damage to a lot of
potential targets individuals,
and I don't understand how
semiotic pistol that I own that
has a threaded barrel somehow
has the capacity to do more or
any of that.
Uh, by, just by virtue of having
a threaded barrel, can somebody
explain that to me? Why is
having a threaded barrel on my
semi-automatic pistol, somehow
then more capable of of greater
carnage by firing more rounds in
a shorter period of time.
Mr. Chair, Senator Cervantes,
uh, for your question to our
expert on Zoom. Thank you.
Uh, thank you for that question
again. I'll uh add that some of
the military style features that
are listed in this sub are not
necessarily about the speed or
rate of fire of the weapon, a
threaded barrel allows you to
attach a silencer to a handgun
that's most commonly what it's
used for. Other muzzle devices
are muzzle breaks, uh, things
like that. They're designed to
make the gun easier to conceal
with a silencer attached to a
handgun, it's very difficult for
someone to figure out where the
shot originated. Uh, that's
why you, you saw the uh recent
assassination of the United
Healthcare CEO that Shooter was
using a handgun equipped with a
silencer that silencer was
attached to the gun using a
threaded barrel. The other
semi-automatic pistol features
are generally features found on
larger handguns like Uzi, Mac
10s, these are assault pistols
that were used in a number of
crimes, especially in the late
80s and early 90s. Um these are
guns that accept magazines
outside of the pistol grip, etc.
and thank you, but I
stay with my question, and you,
you answered it and I, I knew as
much that the only reason I can
think of for a threaded barrel
would really be to attach a
suppressor, which again seems to
be maybe uh we can talk about
the assassination in New York of
the CEO and so forth, something
we can all deplore, but the, um,
but the use of a suppressor
doesn't seem to uh coincide with
my thinking of what is an
assault weapon, the the mere
fact that you can suppress the
location, the sound, or maybe
even the flash from the firearm
doesn't.
necessarily suggest a uh an
assault weapon and if you're
using that one example of the
CEO in New York, I don't know
how many rounds were fired, but,
but it it it did not, it did not
strike me as an assault weapon
type of, of, of assault or an
attack. So I, I, my point is
only that I think some of the
characteristics that are used
here to define what is an
assault weapon in the case of a
semi-automatic pistol. Don't
make any sense to me. Uh, again,
but you have a suppressor, don't
have a suppressor on a
semi-automatic pistol doesn't
seem to suggest to me that
you're gonna be
be able to do more carnage,
which I think is the, the point
of the bill, so that's just one
example. I think the uh um
The, um,
Other problematic definitions
are those that relate to
shotguns. So on page 4 by the
sub, a semi-automatic shotgun
would be an assault weapon, as
long as it had one of the
following characteristics again,
semi-automatic shotgun is pretty
common, uh, in, in use, and if a
semi-automatic shotgun had a
pistol group, it would be an
assault weapon.
I'll be perfectly honest, I have
a semi-automatic shotgun with a
pistol grip. Um, I don't regard
that as an assault weapon or a
weapon for for carnage or to.
Um
essentially to a salt masses of
people. Uh, I don't consider
that to be a military weapon.
It's a, but it, it is a semiotic
shotgun with a pistol group.
Um, that by this would be an
assault weapon.
So with a shotgun with a folding
stock.
Uh, again, folding stock pretty
common, I think among shotgun
owners and users. And so that
would be an assault weapon as
well by the deputy saying no. So
help me. I'm, I'm, I'm looking
at
Page 4, line 6 is the 6th of the
9 listed devices, weapons that
would be a a an assault weapon
and it reads a semiotic shotgun
that has one or more of the
following.
And so one of the following is.
A uh subparagraph C6C, a folding
stock.
So if it's a semi-automatic
shotgun. It has a folding
sockets and assault weapon, by
your definition, you're saying
that's not the case, why am I
misreading that? Uh.
Mr. Chair and committee, so I, I
think with the shock with all of
these, it's critical that they
also be able to accept a
detachable magazine, so it's,
it's semi-automatic, it can
accept a detachable magazine and
then it has.
Um, a prohibited feature where
it reads that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, if, if I may.
Um, so the shotguns,
semi-automatic shotguns, it,
they do not require a detachable
magazine, but, uh, as I said
earlier with the pistols, all of
the features you mentioned were
carried over from military
weapons.
My question was pretty
straightforward, which is the
definition of an assault weapon
here would be a semi-automatic
shotgun with a folding stock.
One of the experts in the room
said that that's not true. And I
asked her to point to me where
the language in the bill would
be inconsistent with that, she
was looking, and you've turned
the question in discussion to a
discussion of pistols. It's not
my question.
My question is shotguns,
semi-automatic shotgun.
And so I want, I want to give
the expert the opportunity.
To justify her interpretation or
at least what she's telling me,
the definition of an assault
weapon would be.
From the bill itself, and I'll
give her the time she needs.
Um, I'm sorry, uh, Mr. Chair, I
was incorrect. So in, in the
shotgun section, the ability to
accept a detachable magazine is
itself one of the features. So
if it had one, you are correct.
If it had just one.
Uh, folding stock or, you know,
threaded barrel, etc. or or
ability to accept detachable
magazine, it would be uh
considered an assault weapon
under this. So, so back to my
question, you're nodding your
head now, so you agree with me
like that I have a
semi-automatic shotgun and as a
folding stock, it's an assault
weapon under the definition of
this bill, is that right?
Uh, Mr. Chair and committee,
that's correct, and it's
something that could be kept,
ah, pursuant to this law.
I don't know what it means, it
could be capped. Uh, I guess
you're right by this law, you
can keep a semi-automatic weapon
if you do an affidavit and you
own it before the bill becomes
effective, and a number of
things which I'll come to a
moment, but I just want to make
sure that I, I hope there's an
appreciation. I I see you nod
your head, so we're finally in
agreement, I think, right? I, if
I've got a semi-automatic
shotgun, and I've got a pistol
grip on it, it's defined as an
assault weapon. Agreed?
Uh, Mr. Chair and committee,
yes. I've got I've got an
assault weapon at home just.
Anybody wants to know because I
do have a, a shotgun with a
pistol grip.
Um, and if somebody puts a
folding stock on it, they've got
an assault weapon too. So some
of these things don't seem
consistent with what I think
we're trying to attack here, um,
and, um, so I'll, I'll wrap it
up a little bit, but you made an
important point, which is,
you're saying that even if I, if
I had a shotgun with a pistol
grip on it, it would be an
assault weapon, and I could
still keep it because I own it
before this law becomes
effective, so long as I sign an
affidavit and register myself
and so forth.
The one concern I have is that.
When we look at a law like this
and we say, well,
When this law becomes effective,
you will not be able to purchase
an assault weapon in the city of
New Mexico. I think we all know
what's going to happen.
Um, there will be a run on
assault weapons, I would think,
because after the date of the
effectiveness of the law, you
won't be able to purchase one.
Um, and if you purchased one
before, the law becomes
effective, you can own one, but
you'd have to then sign an
affidavit that you bought it
before the law became effective,
and human nature being what it
is, I would imagine that there
will probably be a very healthy
market for assault weapons in
New Mexico. I realized this law
is maybe not novel and maybe we
could look at other states to
see what happened if they passed
a law like this to see if that's
in fact what happened. But that,
that's one of my concerns is, I
don't think any of us want to
see.
Um
proliferation of these weapons
in in the hands of of people who
don't really belong with them.
Um, I, um, I will have some
continuing questions, Senator,
do I, if you proceed with those,
um on in um IPRA exceptions, I
really don't know why we would
accept the IPRA if an
individual's gonna be required
to register this gun. Um, I
don't know why that would be
confidential to, um, any other
records that the government
keeps, I can understand why the
individuals who do, um, an
affidavit and register the gun
wouldn't want that in public,
but I don't know that entitles
it to some kind of additional
secrecy.
So those are just some of my
first thoughts, but again, I, I
expect that I'll probably have
some time to digest this and to
get it at it with some more
time. But I, I do hope that
you'll.
Give some thought, it seems to
me that the, the existing
version of the bill before the
uh um attacks the function of
the gun.
Whereas this committee sub
attacks the features of a gun,
and that may not be a, that may
be a blurry line, but it seems
to be the the original version
of the bill is the, the gas
operated uh features. This one
seems to be a lot.
Targeted toward uh the, the
actual features of the gun
itself.
Those are my
Thoughts on the bill to give you
some guidance.
Senator O'Malley, a lot in there
I know.
The.
Might we just ask if the
There are this many concerns
with the committee if we need to
hear the committee's subsidy or
if we.
back to the
It's a good question. I suggest
that you all sleep on it a
little bit, um, and, and give it
some more thought. We're, we
still have lots of time, I
think, and I appreciate, I think
the house is probably gonna be
expecting us to if the bill
proceeds to the floor and out of
the Senate, I expect the House
will have wanted to know that we
gave it our very best effort and
that they can rely upon our work
here. I'd like to do that. I'd
like to take that time, so
we'll, we'll have you ready to
go at our very next meeting on
Wednesday.
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
So, can we hear this on
Wednesday
that's my intention, OK. And,
and in the meantime, I suspect
that you'll spend a lot of time
with Senator Doig and others
looking at the committee sub,
and you all will decide to your
question is, are you better off
with the bill you've got? Uh, I
don't know the answer to that,
but, but I think you all
probably need some more time to
think about that.
Thank you. All right. OK. Thank
you. We'll roll over
consideration of the committee
sub. That'll be the next a when
we take it back up the matter
before us will be action on the
committee sub, right?
Thank you for a good discussion.
We have one last matter, Senator
Brantley.
Thank you, ma'am.
Oh.
need.
Sure
830.
Mr. Chair committees, the bill
before you updates acts over
what the New Mexico Department
of Agriculture has
administrative and um
enforcement powers and duties
over. It provides a
standardization of penalty
systems, updates to some
regulation, it defines terms and
it increases some fees, uh,
specifically this bill addresses
the need, uh, needed updates in
the pesticide control, plant
protection, B, fertilizer, pecan
buyer's licensure, commercial
fee.
Egg grating, weights and
measures, weigh measure, um, all
by which come under the
authority of the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture, uh,
there was some explaining to do.
I, uh, if, if you are not
familiar New Mexico Department
of Agricultural agriculture
culture.
Falls under it just like falls
under New Mexico State
University, so their direct
authority is actually from the
New Mexico State University
Board of Regents, and that was
established in statute in 1912,
uh, here to further explain the
bill in detail is Secretary of
Agriculture Jeff Whitty.
Good evening, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. This
bill is a long time coming, um,
we have been hearing from the
Legislative Finance Committee
for several years that we needed
to update and take a look at our
fee structure and probably
provide some updates. Most of
the fees have been, had been
capped in the 1970s. So many of
them have been over 50 years
since they have been adjusted.
Uh, what the original bill, what
the bill does is it raises those
fee caps and it provides a
method for us to hold hearings
and work with uh do do hearings
across the state and then take a
recommendation to the board of
Regents and New Mexico State
University for final review.
The other thing the bill does in
a nutshell is it creates a
uniform penalty matrix system
that can be adopted uniformly
across the department instead of
having a piecemeal system for
this statute or that statute,
uh, many of them did not work,
um, and, and one thing I want to
highlight that in the penalty
fee structure,
The fees would go, the penalties
would go to the state school
fund. They would not go to the
Department of Agriculture.
Um
The bill also repealed some old,
uh, statutes that probably
should have been repealed a very
long time ago, case in point,
the codlin moth statute created,
it created the ability for
counties to have their own
codling moth control districts,
that's a moth that impacts
apples.
And that bill was, that law was
passed in 1898, and uh when we
passed the Pest Control Act many
years ago when the legislature
passed that, um, that bill
should have been repealed at
that point in time. So, Mr.
Chairman, the because of the
late hour, I'm happy to to go
through it in more detail or
answer questions.
put me on the wrong,
we'd like you to do a field
sobriety test for us, uh, a
chief, um, uh, no, uh, Chief, we
do have you signed up as uh an
advocate for the ag bill and
enforcement is is is that an
error?
that one.
Oh, OK, you so no opinion on
pesticides and
he wants her.
Well, that cuts back the hearing
just a little bit. Uh, we have
nobody's registered in support
or opposition, so we can go
right to members of the
committee questions. Yeah, they
do.
Mr. Chair, so.
So right in in the first section
of this giving regents, the
authority.
To to set.
Penalties for the Department of
Agriculture.
That that is a that.
Yeah
The powers and duties of regents
of
The uh New Mexico State
University that are in statues.
It's a 2185. Uh, the Board of
Regents.
Child direct the disposition of
any monies belonging to or
appropriated to the agricultural
college, an experiment station
and shall make rules and
regulations necessary for the
government management of the
same and not plans and
specifications, uh, for, uh,
necessary buildings and
superintend the construction of
the buildings, fix the salaries
of professors and teachers and
other employees, the tuition and
fees to be charged at said
university, which said college
slash university.
They do regions do not have the
authority.
To to set.
The administrative fines that
the New Mexico Department of
Agriculture.
Users.
Ah, so I, I think.
Off the bat there, there's an
issue there. Um,
This also creates a bunch of
felonies.
more for violations.
Of
Um, uh, a lot of, of what you're
setting up here.
There are otherwise, um, civil
and administrative penalties
and, and they are.
Becoming penalties, or I'm
sorry, felonies.
Throughout, um.
There
Let's see.
And, and I will admit I do not
know this area.
I do not know what a lot of the
stuff in this bill is saying or
doing, so I am just looking at
it kind of with the conventions
that we apply to bills in
general and, in this committee.
Um, but there's a lot of
So where it's, it's saying
things that that are already
true. So it's saying that.
That the Department of A can.
Can apply for an injunction.
And a court can grant it, which
is true whether we say it or
not. It is listing out when it's
creating criminal criminal
penalties.
It is instead of our, our usual
conventions of
We would say, you know, this is
a misdemeanor, this is a felony,
um, and then we would
Sometimes we don't refer to it
at all, but usually we would
just refer to the, the
sentencing statute for those,
instead it is listing out.
Specific sentences, um.
It's, it's just, this doesn't
follow a lot of the convention,
apart from from the substance of
it, which I really can't speak
to, um, it doesn't follow a lot
of the, the conventions that are
we apply to legislation here.
In general
Um
I also went right throughout the
bill, it is.
Eliminating the definition of
person throughout statutes,
which
We, we use person and we, we
define it as not only an
individual partnerships,
associations, corporations, and
so it is striking that
throughout, but then, but then
in the rest of the definitions,
we still use person.
So what does person mean now
because the reason it needed to
be defined is because it's not
just our colloquial
understanding of a person is me
or Senator Thornton, a person
can be a corporation. A person
can be an LLC under this.
But that has been eliminated
from this bill. So now when we
say person, it does not
necessarily cover all of those
things. Um,
see if there's anything else.
A lot of my other notes here
were just me asking why, and
that is probably more because
this is not a subject matter
that that I'm familiar with and
than anything else.
But
Uh,
uh, and then on, on page 80.
I'm a little confused because
the title talks about
administrative and criminal
penalties there, where there are
no criminal penalties.
And they are only
administrative.
So I think there's there's just
I can't speak to the substance,
but I think there are, there are
multiple drafting.
Issues with the bill and it's
starting out with a an
assumption that.
On the first page that Regents
can do something that they do
not have the statutory authority
to do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Others
the bill, Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, uh, I haven't seen you in a
while.
Mr. Secretary.
I'm still on that same part of
the bill that I was years ago,
and that is the pesticide
Control Act.
So how much of this bill is
redoing the pesticide control
Act, which starts on page 3. I'm
now on page 25, I seem to still
be in pesticide Control Act.
And, and I think you mentioned
that the fees would be going to
the school phone but on page 24,
the fees collected.
are going to New Mexico State
University.
It's not the school fun.
into the penalty system,
all of the, any of the fines
would go to the school system.
The fees go to support the
program of which they're being
collected.
Uh, so, uh, so is it just that,
Mr. Chairman, uh Secretary
Whitty is just just from page 3
through page 24 is the pesticide
Control Act.
Mr.
Chairman, Senator Stewart, yes.
And I've tried to amend this uh
act several times. Every time I
get into it, I think this is
written so poorly you can't even
understand it. And it's kind of
convoluted.
You wrong on the what's wrong on
the pages Mr. Chairman, Senator
Stewart, it goes to page 15.
H 15 to the nursery
Act.
Protection Act.
Right.
So, you do have a
You have a BA in here, which I
didn't know you had.
I've lost right now.
It's just
Section 21.
OK.
So have you changed the
pesticide Control Act in any way
to
Give more credence to
The
Neonicotinoid issue we have with
the impacting bees and
butterflies and.
Um, what do we call those little
animals that live on the top of
water, um, that's been a problem
forever.
ask you to do things for years.
Anything in here about looking
at pesticides that may be
impacting our wildlife
population. Mr. Chairman Senator
Stewart, no, the, the primary
changes in the pest control
pesticide Control Act are
related to the EPA training
requirements for uh operators
and pesticide applicators.
So, Mr. Chairman, those are
changes cause you, of course,
had that in there, had in there,
those in there all along, are
you upgrading them? Can you
point me in the place of the
bill where you're changing that.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Stewart,
yes, um, let me turn around and
ask Brad right quick.
Save the beans.
If you bear with me just a
minute.
OK, madam chair, they're
pointing me to Mr. Chairman,
Senator Stewart, to appoint me
to page 6 and 7, and I'm looking
for the new language here.
Say 676 and 7.
private applicators.
Um
Oh, it's on page, uh.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Stewart, page 8. Examination
material shall address all
elements stated in category
specific standards of competence
in sections, uh.
And those are federal codes, the
EPA has changed.
Mr. Chairman, secretary, Mr.
Secretary, that's current
language.
The um.
That's the new stuff.
Yeah, Madam Chair, or Mr.
Chairman, on page 8.
Um, I don't have the line
numbers on my draft, but it's in
that top paragraph, the
underlying material.
Is the is the new requirement.
from the EPA.
All right.
OK, so it is page 7.
On your
begins with the
So.
OK.
So you want to try this
Wednesday?
we can
see all of Wednesday. Thank you.
