It's nor ordinarily I think I
would walk the halls in met with
everybody who works sentencing
commission I'm not but the job
what they like about it would be
built and how they could
improve.
What we could do to improve
their work given COVID the
there's no time and I might not
find the sentencing commission
anyway.
The sentencing commission is
working with about fifty percent
of the staff the ones that.
Is it's a commission that is the
twenty seven member commission
that has representation from
cabinet secretaries.
Judges public defenders
prosecutors we have a health
specialist.
Members in the statutory duties
of this sentencing commission
we're starting with specific
statutory duties from my
perspective the the bottom line
it comes to the sentencing
commission is that when it's.
Related to criminal or juvenile
justice systems the commission
is charged with the
responsibility of helping all
three branches of government and
I'm looking forward to
strengthening the relationship
between the sentencing
commissions fragile government.
And what I'm about to important
functions then I'll turn it over
and Linda.
I would like to.
See more work done in terms of
improving the efficiency
effectiveness and economy where
criminal justice systems I think
we do that by.
Really focusing on what house
bill two sixty seven Congress a
couple years ago and that's
required evidence based best
practices it's not that the
sentencing commission will
develop the best practices
there's lots of resources out
there available that can help
those.
Help you the legislature to see
what those evidence based best
practices are whether it deals
with reentry programs
rehabilitation programs
president systems the number of
police that should be available
for the safety of the public.
And then insisting on a real
time performance measures then
again those of performance
measures are available it's not
the sentencing commission has to
create them when my vision for
the sentencing commission the
the let's say that the courts
have performance measures in
your pre trial services programs
the sentencing commission we
have all of the data take a look
at in the look at all thirteen
districts and see if they are
comparably if they are
performing up to par and some
are not we would explore wide.
And how they might be able to
improve.
The to do all that you have to
collect data is it stated
objectively I think conforms
Policy.
And whether or not to the
stakeholders actually measuring
up to explore expected
performance levels the other
thing that's really important is
sharing data between
stakeholders I think it makes a
tremendous difference in the
positions of our system these
various silos are connected.
I remember one instance while
interviewing people at the
prison system what problem they
had is one day they get bands of
people who were supposed to be
impressive.
They didn't have any warning the
individuals would be there to
handle budget for available for
them.
Disciples did not school.
To solve the problem.
Communication between sentences
or any other aspect of the
sentencing commission really
would like to see improved this
one legislators have an idea for
improving the criminal justice
system.
We're safety in our community
they can reach out to the
sentencing commission and with
all the various stakeholders we
would be able to determine what
kind of data is available that
would inform your proposed
legislation how the proposed
legislation might affect
different stakeholders in their
budgets how legislation might
affect public safety.
Yeah well it might be compatible
with existing or other.
In system loss and then we will
research for you what other
states are doing and you could
take a look at that sort of
information so I think we're
working to strengthen those
relationships and make a big
difference to our criminal and
juvenile justice systems it's
not to say that the sentencing
commission isn't going to happen
I think that the legislature's
not taking advantage.
The work that the sentencing
commission can do is I would
encourage Senate Judiciary all
legislators to reach out to the
sentencing commission and give
us the opportunity to help you
understand the legislation you
want maybe improve it will be
explain why the data which is in
support.
you moving forward.
With that in.
Limited time only turn it over
to Linda then she can comments
about the perhaps provided
staffing so the programs and we
have in place.
Questions.
Thank you.
Senator savant as members of the
committee it's pleasure to join
you today I mean they give you a
little bit more background about
the structure of the sentencing
commission first so we're
structured into a number of
committees and our membership
gets to choose committees based
on their interests we have a
juvenile committee a reform
committee a legislative
committee and a grants committee
the grant committee is our
newest committee that committee
was formed after the passage of
the crime reduction grant
accessible to sixty seven two
sessions ago we received a
modest amount of money that we
are funding through the criminal
justice judgment I am in the
criminal justice coordinating
councils they submit
applications and this last year
with the one hundred seventy
eight thousand dollars that we
received for requests we funded
I projects that actually are
pretty supportive projects of
other treatment was this point
so I districts receive
relatively small grants to work
on improving aspects of existing
programs.
To
One of the challenges that we
saw was giving COVID we had
spent a lot of last year
building relationships with the
criminal justice coordinating
councils and many of those
councils we're not just act post
March so we're continuing to
reach out to those councils on
make sure that they're getting
everything they need if they
have a grant from the proposal
but at this late in the next few
weeks for going to be reaching
out to pro criminal justice
according councils are presently
not act on we're going to be
starting an educational series
that will provide some free
resources and better prepare
some of the see JCC's not yet
asked all or part are applied
for a grant so those will be
starting on March third and we
have an informational flyer the
I'll get out to to your staff if
if any of these topics may be of
interest to you you you of
course could register also gonna
be a I the gonna be a five
session series and our topic
Jerry from diversion programs
and alternatives to detention
the data collection and data
design which would likely we
were able to get Dr John
Courtney to be our expert on
that particular session we also
have a session entirely devoted
out how how see JCC's fill out
the grant application to answer
questions things like that
additionally we have a member
who's appointed by the by the
Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court Dr Brady Porter who is an
expert on the cost effectiveness
of gel based methadone
maintenance treatment and he's
going to be doing the
educational start a session
about about his research and
finally we're gonna be looking
at some work that the
commission's done on competency
about.
ation here in New Mexico.
And
The flavor of of the educational
things that we're trying to
engage the C. JCC's within
really provide the support of
structure encouraged the C. DAC
seeks to apply for funding and
fully utilize the commission
on everybody who receives a
crime reduction requests have
houses a data sharing agreement
and I'll find information for us
about clients who benefited from
those requests and that will lay
the foundation for us to
evaluate the use of that money
in that particular project.
I want to also highlight some
current market commissions
working on right now we are
working on it update of
recidivism work that we've done
every couple of years but this
year we're really utilizing our
resources to provide to really
dig into that recidivism work
we're looking at we're hoping to
be able to calculate recidivism
from the department of
corrections those who were
released from corrections to
better understand other
differences by type of release
why are the reasons of the
return to prison.
And also looking at prior
criminal history and looking at
how how much of a predictor
criminal history is an
recidivism and finally to break
that information down by
demographic groups.
We are in the beginning stages
of conducting a sentencing
outcome study which I I'm pretty
confident a statewide basis is
not been performed in New Mexico
up to this point were church
looking at at broad outcome so
cases just messed versus
convictions that may result in
probation outcomes president
outcomes gel outcomes and
And
additionally we're looking at
the structure of the sentence
what were the lengths of
suspended sentence and we also
plan to use the study to assess
collection of race and ethnicity
data which I was hoping that
Senator Sedillo Lopez was would
be on this presentation today
because I know that that's a
project that is of special
interest her so we're using this
opportunity to make an
assessment of of the collection
of it in court the that.
Right now we do you use
ethnicity and race information
is provided by the department of
corrections but others decision
point in the criminal justice
system we do not consistently
receive that information.
As far as future goals as a
couple of things I'd like to
discuss with you first of all in
the future we will probably be
pursuing a legislation to create
a fund for the crime reduction
grant act right now all of that
money is mixed in with our
general fund appropriation so we
would feel more comfortable if
that money was in the special
fund and of course our
preference would be that that is
non reverting fund because we
find that many times these
requests
they have together delays that
prevent them from starting on
time and we want to work with
the the the C. J. C. sees that
we find to get those requests
out to the people even if it it
doesn't neatly fall into one
fiscal year.
Additionally as as our chairman
gent
data integration work and
availability of data for a
valuation is our primary focus
going into the future
we are working right now on the
implementation and the sharing
of something that's called a
state identification number
across the criminal justice
system which will really
strengthen our ability to follow
individuals through the criminal
justice system one of the
primary tasks of my staff spent
hours and hours doing right now
is just going to the leakages is
this person this person we don't
have any definitive
identification number we use
probabilistic matching.
And that presents a particular
challenge.
Additionally as of justice as
are chair just establishment and
we are we are very eager to work
with you guys and Ford
a partnership with any
legislators who are interested
in any of the information that
we might have available that
might help it any of your on
proposed legislation.
In terms of the the legislation
that the commission endorsed
this legislative session I'd
like to go through that with you
quickly if we if we can
Senate bill one eighty one which
I believe you guys
acted on on on this past Friday
which is sponsored by your chair
Senators serve on tests that's
that what we call the adult
fines and fees bill.
And as I mentioned it was heard
by Senator you share on Friday
and it has it did have a couple
of amendments and the next step
that bills that finance.
On Senate bill one fourteen that
is sponsored by Senator o'neal
and I believe is currently being
heard over and Health in public
and.
And in the S. H. P. A. C. I
think I can't remember the name
of that new committee and sorry
it's health and public affairs I
believe
that bill is being heard right
now that's a bill that is about
medical and geriatric pool.
House bill one eighty three
which is sponsored by
Representative.
Roger monthly.
That is a bill about juvenile
fines and fees and it was
introduced in that scheduled to
be heard at house public affairs
on Saturday February thirteenth.
Additionally we were asked by
the in terms courts corrections
and justice committee to created
just of what the potential cost
of re writing the criminal code
with the commission working as a
lead on that would cost and it's
my understanding that
Representative Chasey will be
introducing a bill soon to cover
that expense on one other bill
it did not actually we don't
currently have a sponsor for was
a repeal of our sex offender
management board in New Mexico
it's it's kind of
administratively attached the
commission but for the last year
and a half we've been unable to
there haven't been enough
members appointees for us to
have a meeting have a quorum and
the reason why the commission
supports the repeal of that is a
lot of the language is redundant
well some of our other statutory
language and I believe that we
could absorb those duties within
our current statutory framework.
We those are all the bills that
we that the commission indoors
and if with that all stand for
questions
So we are thank you Mr president
Committee members with questions
thank you for the presentation.
Always interesting topics
committee members of the show me
by hand wishing to be recognized
please.
All right let me do let me wait
a little bit about some
questions for.
We're probably just as Travis
you mean your to the commission
always ensure with people joint
commission
what you find when you get there
and so a few things come to mind
madam the size of the sentencing
commission as a twenty three
twenty seven members
this isn't a commission and any
any commission that size always
cause me pause to see how
effectively the commission is
about really.
Reaching decisions and and
making progress as a group set
something that large.
Tell me a little bit about how
the commission establishes
priorities and how you assure as
and in your role that that
things get done with some kind
of a the methodology will.
Thank you Mr chairman you know
I've always been reluctant to
have large committees because
the funding to be unwieldy but
interestingly enough to this
commission because of the way
it's structured with its
committees I think it is it's
pretty effective because they
have not some will focus on
juvenile justice other on
criminal justice reform systems
etcetera there is one thing that
I've already talked to Linda and
members of the commission in
that hi I would like to really
focus on the strategic plan
moving forward that really sets
for some priorities set forth
deadlines for retaining the
priority so that we can measure.
If we are getting to those
priorities.
I think that this is this
committee works very well for
its intended purpose because you
get the perspective from jailers
the respective for public
defenders prosecutors judges of
the cabinet secretaries of
correction CYFD department
public safety etcetera and so
while I don't like large
commissions this one seems to be
working pretty efficiently but I
do think we need to really hone
in on the strategic plan moving
forward we need to figure out a
way to to reach out to all three
branches of government to make
sure that they are fully
utilizing our our capabilities.
Well I'm I'm like you are just a
guy I'll always have an aversion
to very large mansions in groups
best it seems that too often
times they the additional so
much out of the process what is
working you also mentioned that
some of the roll Senator region
balls comparison other states
and I know how to how we do that
statements are we we look at how
our sentencing laws were diverse
and others.
What I was thinking that Bobby
is proposed legislation.
The legislature might be low
juvenile justice for me is a
really big issue right now
primarily because of the last
you are able to stream court.
But you can take a look at what
other states are doing with our
juvenile justice programs and
how they are.
reducing recidivism as a result
of those programs even for the
most invited to juvenile
offenders you could sentencing
commission could bring a
consortium to New Mexico.
And to organizations to share
with us your perspective on how
our programs operate what it
takes a fund and its central
that's information we could give
to the legislature the other
thing we can do for you is is we
could take a look at your
proposed legislation do the
research what are what
legislation appears in other
states the difficulty I I think
we have is New Mexico's you know
it's a multicultural multi
lingual State you're not a
hundred twenty two thousand
square miles that only two
million.
Population and you know we
struggle with poverty in our
state's.
Looking at other states it might
be comparable.
It is difficult for us but it's
something that I think the
sentencing commission can focus
on to provide you with updated
information so that you can make
data driven policy decisions.
Thank you so this is not just
last question how does the
sentencing commission
communicate its findings and
recommendations in its data to
the guys on the ground guys guys
and women of the judges that you
are proud to support judge of
the information communicated to
what you're going to the people
that are actually sentenced.
The way I would say they
communicated as we have members
from all those organizations in
the criminal the criminal court
in justice committees.
Have all these key players from
the stakeholders and local
districts you get that
information to the CCJ scenes
and they are going to be able to
communicated directly we do rely
on.
Information going to the
commission to the various
stakeholders whether or not they
are doing that effectively I
don't know I I guess this
something I should try to
monitor.
No you put in so much work and
effort into it just as in the
yeah we're gonna we commend you
all for it but of course we want
that.
Should be taken advantage of by
people as we possibly can.
Committee members of questions
before we students sentencing
commission president.
No one else.
Okay
that includes some of the
committee questions.
So thank you again miss Raymond
and Justice troubles.
Would you do with your
statements are thank you Sir the
K..
Margin to Senate bill seventy
five on sponsored by Senator
Sedillo Lopez I am looking
however and won't see her.
Hello there you are hi I'm here
Senator are there you go I see a
very good all right Senator
Lopez
the for the committee members
just saying oh we're doing some
of it's new to me on this call
which is we're trying to allow
the number of individuals
participate who are relying on
English Spanish translation so I
think it's going towards the
most likely also travelers
speaking the picture you'll see
a number of people who were
drawn to the all workers are the
way for us to do this with the
translation so what all those
individuals on the call will
they will not all the words
speaker or making the party
presentation but don't be
surprised by a large number of.
Names you might not recognize
this committee and that's going
to like take advantage of our
Spanish translation which would
be nice so Senator are serves no
purpose on set goals so far.
Thank you Mr chair and I wanted
to thank you for this
intelligence it with it with
regard to the interpretation and
I also want to thank so most for
providing the interpreters I
thought that that was really
great that they were able to
provide interpreters and it was
great that the state allowed
this to happen.
Or that this committee allowed
this to happen.
So Senate bill seventy five
nondisclosure personal sensitive
information well then the
state's governmental conduct act
in order to create a clear
standard across state
governments across state
agencies for all state employees
must handle New Mexicans
personal sense of sensitive
information.
Specifically the bill states a
state employee shall not
disclose certain sensitive
personal information that was
obtained through their job to
anyone outside their agency
except under certain
circumstances one of those
circumstances it brought another
is what is required by a federal
statute or to comply with a
court order.
While some state agencies have
clear standards for handling
sensitive personal information
others don't they have none and
by not having a clear standard
across the board with additional
protections some New Mexicans
are fearful of sharing this
information when accessing
crucial public safety services
and government programs
including comment prevention
measures such as testing and
vaccines.
We know there is a possibility
that sensitive information might
be disclosed pursuant to an if
we're request but we crafted
this exception in response to
concerns with allies and good
government organization such as
the ACLU in common cause who
want to maintain the
governmental transparency with
it bro but they also want to
support the projections within
this bill.
As many of you know I was the
director of a loss of COVID
value a center focused on the
system victims of domestic
violence through their legal
battles.
Our clients particularly those
who were you spoke only Spanish
were stigmatized because they
were victims of sexual assault
and domestic violence and they
wanted to be assured that their
information was not going to be
share or made public public our
clients sometimes did not access
programs that they were
available to them because of
this fear with every insurance
we could make about their
sensitive information not being
devolved that builds trust and
encourages cooperation with
government agencies the
protections offered in this bill
are especially important for
members of vulnerable
communities for hesitant to
interact with government
agencies.
And in order for state agencies
to function effectively they
need to obtain New Mexicans
sensitive personal information
New Mexicans do expect the state
government to keep our sensitive
personal information safe and
confidential indeed I was
surprised when the governor had
to deal kind of like with
walkable stopping information
from being disclosed by M. B. D.
stopping another another agency
from disclosing information
why amending the governmental
conduct act New Mexicans will
feel more secure about accessing
accessing health and public
safety service services
including law enforcement
emergency or disaster relief
services this is very important
especially now during the
pandemic and has a state begins
a massive vaccination effort the
legislation as a result of more
than two years work this bill
was introduced by the help was
approved by the house and one
Senate committee back in two
thousand nineteen all the
changes that we've made in this
bill are the result of many
conversations with stakeholders
I also have two expert witnesses
MUSTELLO DPS with the executive
director of the statewide
immigrant and civil rights
organization so most of whether
we need all and so much staff
attorney governor let you
finance schools money I will
also share my lot of time with
me a record from the ACLU New
Mexico and Maria Collett
Coronado also from ACLU New
Mexico.
Also I should mention we do have
some amendments after further
can conversation specifically
with the department of health.
Other individuals
with you so we've we've allowed
the that the prep presentation
time line so I'm about five
minutes left for that so is this
Mrs mon you said miss rocker and
who was the fourth one place
Senator Maria Coronado.
All right so the four of you all
have for five minutes to divvy
up well recognized that order
you take it as you wish or so it
is.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is much that the US was almost
with no needs all and our staff
attorney got in that you buy new
schools then we'll talk a little
bit more about the
technicalities of this bill and
why it's in the G. C. why we're
seeking to amend to the
governmental conduct act I would
only add that several cities and
counties throughout the country
and certainly in New Mexico have
very similar nondisclosure
policies if not identical
through ordinances and
resolutions including Los crucis
Santa Fe and Taos Albuquerque
Bernalillo county San Miguel and
these city councils and
commissions and local
governments to this precisely
because they were worried that
vulnerable communities would
fear sharing their sensitive
personal information in the
course of their everyday
interactions with their local
government employees and
agencies I would only add that
we have also along with many
community partners worked hand
in hand with this administration
to find really good and accurate
information in Spanish to
immigrant communities about all
things COVID we've done a
testing events Facebook lives we
do the translations and
interpretations for the
governor's.
Updates on on Facebook as well
as the public health orders
precisely so that we can get
this information out to our
communities and despite our best
efforts to mitigate some of the
misinformation and
disinformation in the community
we continue to hear from
community members that they are
afraid that their sensitive
personal information in this
case regression status but other
information as well could be
shared outside I'm in could lead
to adverse consequences so
that's why we are bringing this
bill forward once again and we
think it's very timely and with
that I'm gonna be a lot you
might just lose money or staff
attorney I can speak to the G.
C. part.
Thank you.
Thank you chair members of the
committee so to best understand
this bill perhaps it is to
understand what this bill is not
this bill is not a sweeping
privacy protection bill this
instead this bill is rather
narrow in scope one of the
principal goals of this bill is
to halt the informal and
sometimes formal disclosure of
New Mexicans sensitive personal
information that currently is
not officially prohibited.
So we are amending the
governmental conduct that
because it is one of the
statutes state employees look to
for guidance on the
responsibilities.
Obligations when they work for
the state of New Mexico in two
thousand nineteen the GCA under
one number of changes which
Senator Stewart carried that
bill in one such change of for
the newly created ethics
commission was to handle
unintentional violations of the
act by providing education to
all persons required to perform
duties under that act and to
avoid intentional violations of
the act encourages voluntary
compliance by creating an
internal process to correct
those unintentional violations
administratively
in a similar effort the ethics
commission adopted and that
analogous language of that we
are proposing today to be
included within their model echo
code for state agencies
following a regulatory process
that commenced this summer and
ended with the promulgation of
these proposed rules within the
New Mexico register in December.
However the ethical code is a
suggestion the state agencies
and by including this language
into the G. CA we would ensure
uniformity across the state in
terms of the state agencies
policies and procedure and with
that chair members of the
committee thank you and I yield
back to Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you Mr chair now I'd like
to open open now
the record from the ACLU.
Thank you my name is mia record
I'm the policy council and
regional manager of the ACLU of
New Mexico in Los crucis and I'm
here today to represent my
organizational membership
support of that of SB seventy
five the ACLU of New Mexico
strong it is a strong interest
in protecting the privacy of all
New Mexicans and while the
number of local jurisdictions
throughout New Mexico have cut
privacy confidentiality policies
that prohibit the disclosure of
personal sensitive person
sensitive information obtained
by a public employees outside of
agencies are individuals we had
the ACLU see a need for a
statewide policy ensuring the
privacy protection of all New
Mexico's New Mexicans especially
important right now as the state
in its response to COVID
nineteen continues to provide
essential health related
services and economic relief
programs requiring New Mexicans
sensitive personal information
including contact tracing and
vaccinations so for the above
reasons are we requested this
Committee support this bill
thank you.
Mr chair now Maria Coronado also
from the ACLU.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair and
representative my name is not
going on I don't and I'm going
to be reading on behalf of the
July Judy and I and then this
who is unable to be I'm here due
to scheduling I'm.
She works at the black us being
in Las Cruces New Mexico I'm.
They are the largest domestic
violence programs in the state
of New Mexico
that service is not only about
whatever level population in the
seventy five will help to
protect the confidentiality we
she's in turn could ensure their
safety as well as the safety of
their children.
The
community show and many times
they are multiple state agency
who can come who can become
involved with a client that.
Has a strict confidential policy
however the spite our policy
that their policies are there
times when state agencies reach
out to them to inquire on the
details of their clients cases
without the consent of the
client
the service to clients and say
practices in the domestic
violence world.
B. seventy I would call a state
agencies to a higher level or
confidentiality and
accountability thank you for
your consideration and support
in this meeting sure Giuliana
numbers.
Thank you very much all right Jr
will take over for small.
When we first solicited input
we've not seen no we've we've
heard.
Request for.
Speakers in opposition.
to the legislation so are you
will hear from the public.
For one minute each I
individuals we have some public
input in addition to that by the
sponsor.
On the list of individuals
wishing to speak.
I have
are laying on her already
of who was identified with the
sisters of mercy she on the
Konkan should be admitted.
Mr chair everyone has been
admitted so if last Friday is
not on the call now and she is
now all she's not what are the
next on the list is Melanie
majors.
Your noon Mr chairman and
members of the committee majors
alright you for well recognized
for one minute thanks Melanie
measures I'm consecutive rector
of the New Mexico foundation for
open government originally we
had some issues with this bill
we understand that the intent is
to protect people in certain
situations we also understand
that if we're provides that
providing public records is a
function of public bodies and we
want to make sure that SB
seventy nine will not create
ambiguity on the
responsibilities of state
agencies and records custodians
thank you for your time today
thank you we have a roll
rose more of this.
Miss Morales you're recognized
for one anymore.
As well as I see it there but
that we're not hearing you.
You are looks like you're on
mute ma'am.
Your house.
Can you hear me now yes okay
okay thank you
what is the number of the tire
social workers I'm here on
behalf of that ACLU in in
support of Senate bill seventy
five
for the past forty four years I
can't believe and working every
single state in the southern
border
I think are important are there
it it is understandable that
many state agencies need go
obtain sensitive personal
information from New Mexicans to
function properly what is also
important to understand that
privacy violations often affect
those who can least afford it
thank you the most difficult
times three gaming socio
economic instability I'm talking
about individuals and families
living in the small towns and
remote correct communities where
almost everybody knows each
other I'm in because of the
stigma attached to some of that
information they have difficulty
finding housing finding a job or
receiving needed and social and
health services.
Doing the social economic and
stable times we need to strive
to do everything we can to
secure the safety of individuals
challenge by health issues
poverty and physical and mental
disabilities exchanging
sensitive client information
online with state agencies
creates expenses maybe we could
potentially increase family
stress on government
institutional someone you
Mexican residents the just the
seventy five year old addresses
FARDC should ask those who are
going to making sure in a
justice issue I thank you very
much for the opportunity to
share my opinion.
Thank you we have just Clark.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee yes.
My name's Jeff Clark and the
prevention manager for solace
crisis treatment center as the
Santa Fe area sexual assault
service center we are proud to
be a partner in the deep
collaboration that went into
creating a protective resolution
here in Santa Fe making it safer
for all community members to
report crimes in access to
support it's needed here he'll
from violence.
We work with rape crisis center
statewide unfortunately not all
of their clients can feel
confident that their immigration
status will not be used against
them when reporting outside of
locally protected jurisdictions
with UV said specifically
victims must be able to access
the agencies for certification
without fear especially for
communities that are targeted
for violence at disproportionate
rates.
No victim survivor should have
to hesitate accessing support
for fear their status being
disclosed outside parties
hearing from violence can be a
long and painful journey and
your support for SB seventy five
will help ensure that the
jurisdiction in which a crime
takes place doesn't make that
journey more painful thank you
you Bill Jordan for one minute.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee Bill Jordan
Representative New Mexico voices
for children I am also the
convener of the state's New
Mexico Medicaid coalition and
I'd like to say that one of the
challenges that we face in
getting eligible children
enrolled in Medicaid is that
their parents are often afraid
that their immigration status or
other sensitive information will
be revealed even though their
children are eligible for health
care through the Medicaid
program.
If we want to open up our
schools if we want to get this
pandemic under control if we
want all of our kids and
families to be healthy passing
this legislation is an absolute
essential part of this public
health effort thank you thank
you very much
and last is of your work to
Lopez.
Mister Lopez are you on this
call.
Yes you heard me yes.
Okay yes we appreciate the need
for this to come.
The numbers the referral there's
remember it's almost going to
hear it I just want to direct
the committee members to check
English if they would like to
hear the English translation.
So down at the bottom where it
says interpretation.
They can check English if they
are if they would prefer to hear
the English translation of
Mister Lopez is a presentation.
Thank you.
One of one.
Senator Lopez.
Yes go ahead Sir okay.
Sure all.
What what.
Okay okay.
When was yes in your proceeded
thank you member of their staff
on the K. the number you were
hello actually members with us
your.
Reporting to you then you're yes
you'll on my part a review to
increase your number of critical
it'll be procurement listed on
it all right yeah I.
Okay we have a lot of we all
want to special noted on your.
Only because of the holidays I
mean if you look hello but I you
get your mother in the system
Koppel.
But we all we all of a what is
your point again when we well
and that's a look at the
equipment that we are not asking
for more me and technical but
the need for more still of
creates Mr I just I'll look at
more houses in the the total
your thankful when the musical
is one of our most Committee
kennels in the epic angels
unless someone in Medicaid your
US one or US yes yes I think
really we just don't is that
what the more that people must
vote opinion etcetera but we
need.
You're not then yes it is I
think it will make it has to be
us that in the end they were not
in the Moscow is yes our equity
funding public she's the one
line must be on.
I mean we're not gonna and yeah
it also know there is a local
park and with people most of the
staff is yes if you set the
value I believe we.
The act yes hello will the
federal I don't a total then
we'll meet with activists
that's an issue but once I would
do well label but you think
maybe that's how it can request
your personal line it is also
just tell us that we're in
ninety five but people are that
is just if you organize you
whether they just a recipe thank
you that's.
All right that'll complete are
are the time allocated for
public input participation I
listen to the last comments in
Spanish I trust with the English
translation work thank the
bridge is better here that so
seeing some folks not in their
head so I learned something
today for the first time we're
pretty well so thank you that
are committee members on Senate
seventy five why can.
Have the poster coordinating our
zoom call you there's a way to
do it.
trying to isolate the committee
members in the screens I does I
don't want to be missing anyone
but can I just say I committee
members show has which we
recognize on the bill.
Members.
Senator Ivey Soto.
That's all I have for not
Senator Ivy Soto we have lots of
time.
Especially with this German I
have on so I know they have some
proposed amendments that would
like to suggest are they
actually have a proposed
amendment but I would like to
suggest as well I don't want to
step on top of the members that
they're planning to our
residents but it may also.
Clarify some of the issues.
That they were
they were trying to find a deal
with our it if R. Zamora
stricken give me permission to
share my screen I'll be happy
to.
Show what is on.
Right as I'm and what it is I'm
thinking about well in center
this so let me we do what I
should have done which is only
go back to the sponsor first of
all let's uh Senator Sedillo
Lopez she did she did revert
earlier to plans to propose
amendments so perhaps we should
get an understanding of what you
propose to do before we have you
propose your money as well to
just so we think this is some
kind of logical
logical sequence so if we we
would be able to bill Senator
Ivy Soto let me go back to
center city office all right
Senator Sedillo Lopez do you
have specific amendments to
propose the committee thank you
Mr chair
We on page one line twenty after
not we would like to insert
intentionally because we don't
want to penalize state workers
for inadvertent disclosure this
is a concern raised by the
department of health and we
agreed with that we thought that
was a very good point on page
two for clarification you strike
or because on page two between
nine fifteen and sixteen you
insert the following new
paragraph expressly and
affirmatively permitted by the
federal health insurance
portability and accountability
act of nineteen ninety six and
associated regulations or into
the or go there the department
of health made a very strong
case that about that we should
make the relationship between
the bar and this bill clear the
department of health has good
public policy Risi reasons for
them to disclose informal
information that is permitted by
the doctor and not required by
HIPAA so we're making an
exception to the required by
federal law to permitted by
federal law only in hip up and
that addresses the issues that
the department of health raised
with this bill I believe they're
in I'm not sure if there and if
they updated their for but we
had some very good discussions
with the department of health
who was very they're very
supportive of this bill for
policy reasons because they want
people to come in and
participate in vaccinations and
and everything else but and we
work with them to make sure that
it this bill doesn't make their
job harder.
Senator Sedillo was is this one
of several other equipment or is
this a single woman with very
subparts this is when the
amended with various subparts
it's the piece of paper that
says yeah it's this it's a piece
of paper that is point two one
seven nine one oh point one.
Okay the Legislature rephrase my
question is why are you do you
have other equipment proposed
besides this one I have one
amendments.
that has that has to do with
the.
But as of suggestion by the
Attorney General to clarify
instead of the two strike crime
after victim insert as defined
in the victims of crime act.
Okay point two one nine five
three seven point one those are
the only two amendments that I
offer at this time okay let's
start with the first one.
Which is the one one point zero.
What right.
Committee members on the
proposed amendment a question
Senator Ivy Soto.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
think with the words especially
in front of me I think simply
permitted by the hi I have up it
was actually pretty
Restrictive statutory what
information can be the
squelched.
And so
I would I would.
Thank you is our is our is our
value added having the words
expressing permanently.
Yes there is Mr chairman I'd
like to I'd like to turn it over
to my experts my expert W. let
goose mon miscues mon has worked
very much with the department of
health on this language.
Mrs month.
Thank you senator thank you
chair members of the committee
and Senator Sedillo Lopez said
we had extensive conversations
with the O. H. and it is true
Senator Ivey Soto that there is
a lot of language that says
required with and have a but
there's also a lot of language
permissive language within half
of that says may disclose and so
we just want to make absolutely
sure that it is clear that it is
the disclosure is allowed when
it is expressly in New
affirmatively provided for
within Hebbe so there's no
question.
So I guess I mean I'm sorry your
perspectives limit I'm not sure
what the differences between if
it says may disclose is that not
Expressen from minimally
permitted.
We are chair Senator Ivey Soto
we will also want to cover the
instances where it may not be
expressly prohibited but if
there's no language for example.
Mr Evans.
Sponsor and and we're not.
My understanding of how to work
with those that have been
basically says don't disclose
anything except.
It also.
Right so so what information we
talking about that but hip of
silence.
We're thank at chair Senator
Ivey Soto we're not sure if
there is a specific instance
where there's a pro you know.
There's lacking of a prohibition
but we just wanted to crosser
teas and dot our I's an instance
in case we avoid it we didn't
weren't aware of one and there
is a lot of language with and
have fun we went over that
language with the D. O. H.
general counsel and their
supporting attorneys that have
but there is a lot of may
disclose with and help us so we
want to make sure that we are
including
instances where disclosure is
allowed to be a language that
says may disclose.
Right now Mr chairman those the
sponsor and go to the the then
he would certainly be included
by the minute.
And and so it it seems to me
that the I mean I've I've yet to
hear anything that says that
expressly affirmatively actually
provides value added as as to.
So that Juan looked more.
Sorry we're running into a
technical issue on my end is
anyone else having audio it will
have we've we've made in the
process of doing that I'm gonna
be open rocked internally on
your end and and and otherwise
I'm about to make a motion.
Well let's let's take it this
way Senator Ivey Soto personal
we need to have somebody on the
committee move the amendment.
and you can move the moment as
it is and then do surgery on it
or you can this right Senator
Ivey Soto on the proposed
amendment.
discussion on the amendment
right now as it stands and then
we'll take your what I
understand you're gonna do it
center of the Soto amendment to
the amendment yes yes so so is
there any other discussion on
this proposed amendment.
This present form Sir Moores
thank you Mr azar doing this I
would like to it was a very
comprehensive law and I agree
with center I'm so I work with
of all time I would like an
example of what they're trying
to excludes were the process may
what data are they trying to
exclude your because I think we
need to know that us committee
the legislature because very
sloppy the answer we received
was what
but yeah we need to know what
they're doing to service very
very comprehensive I am for it
for for instance Mr chair
Representative isn't even
applying right now so is our
bill same with it but if it
doesn't apply to Rivendell marks
like right right now so are we
saying this doesn't apply right
now may replied not applied
your this is a very sloppy
member right now to address this
issue so we need a lot of
verifications before thank you
Sir I'm so twenty one most.
Mr chair.
Etcetera etcetera let me do this
when we let me hear all
committee members and then I'll
come back to you to respond to
everyone together okay okay that
is the other committee members
on the proposed amendment now.
All right very good thank you
Senator Sedillo was those quick
response.
Mr chair we have extensive
discussion with the department
of health and this is how I
understood it and
they provide all of the
department of health has people
who do nothing but respond to
requests for information from
insurance companies from it
brought to all kinds of all
kinds of things and what they
were concerned if they wanted
intentionally in there because
they don't want to put person
first to.
To have a consequence for
somebody who inadvertently
disclosed something so as an
example
The transgender status would be
one of the things that is
protected by this bill if you
look at it that is listed as one
of that sensitive information
but that status might be might
be of permitted
by if drug I mean by what I'm
sorry there's a plan in April
that might be per of permitted
by HIPAA under certain
circumstances for a certain
purpose for example medical
purposes that information might
be might need to be transferred
by the department of health and
so they wanted to be clear and
what I understood is that from
them because I am not a hit by
expert but what I understood
from them is they felt that we
should make sure for that it was
identified is something that is.
The school is is specifically
affirmatively this is their
language expressly
affirmatively permitted.
By the federal insurance
portability and accountability
act because it's in conflict
with some of the things that we
said we're sensitive.
And then the other piece of the
statute says that the
information we have to be
required by other federal
legislation now this was
provided to all of the relevant
agencies and the department with
of health was the only one who
stepped forward with concerns
about it and this was language
that they proposed and since
they are an expert on hip up I
deferred to them on the language
expressly and affirmatively I
understand Senator Ivey Soto is
is excellent he's an excellent
editor and probably because we
talked we learned about large in
law school about why use the
word it's not necessary and so
but I I think that.
If the department of health once
this language it's important to
include it.
To Senator Ivy Soto the floor is
yours on the I mean you can make
amendment has a stance or
modified actuation thank you
madam like move this point
to modify by removing stress and
permanently.
This is the most emotion as the
document as it stands with the
modifications that correct.
I mean I'm I'm assuming we're
gonna trust on where this
president from Italy and then on
the amendment yes yes so we'll
we'll take it and that will take
about order the first motion for
the bodies to strike from the
proposed amendment of the
language express
Many members is there any
objection to adoption of that
amendment of the committee.
So judicial center Lopez Senator
doing.
Seeing the weather members that
Modification the amendment is
adopted.
The enrollment center Ivy Soto
on the amendment as Amanda.
move to pass on the amended as
much on the amendment as Amanda
mmhm further discussion.
Is there any objection adoption
of that amendment.
Sure see none all members sure
we recorded as voting for the
amendment as Amanda
Senator Sedillo what you have a
second amendment.
We are back up on the screen
please.
I ask you to briefly explain the
amendment we'll go to the
committee.
Thank thank you Mr chair this
came has a a suggestion from the
attorney general's office and we
felt I thought it it was
clarifying to strike prime and
after victim insert has defined
in the victims of crime act so
that we those we have a
specificity a definition and
victims of crime act very very
specific.
And we thought the cross
reference with a good idea of
that was suggested by the
attorney general's office.
Again just for more specificity.
Committee members with questions
on the proposed second
amendment.
Mr Chairman where is that
what's the reference to the the
definition they're talking
about.
The victim's Act is.
I apologize I forgot to lives
which is crime act thirty one to
twenty six dash one at staff
definitions that we.
So affect on means an individual
after means an individual
against whom criminal offenses
committed.
It also means a family member
or a veterans representative
when the individual guests from
the federal funds was committed
as a minor is incompetent was a
homicide victim.
and then criminal offense though
there are just twenty one
specified criminal offenses.
And let me just suggest that.
That what you're doing then as
you're limiting.
You're limiting the restriction
on disclosure to these twenty
one criminal offenses and they
would not apply to any other
criminal offense.
Our.
And our.
And but but then you're also.
St providing that that they
would have to keep track of not
only the actual alleged victim
but then a family member that
alleged victim Representative
about alleged victim in terms of
not disclosing that other
information as well which I
think needs to some significant
complexities.
Yes I understood what they were
saying is that
We handle these all the time and
they understand the definition
has it has presented in the
victims of crime act and so that
they rather than have Quarles
about who's a victim who's
really a victim of when you have
crimes to just stick with what
they already work with every
day.
And and that's why they prefer
the specificity again this came
from the attorney general's
office and we felt it important
to accommodate them I don't know
if my expert has anything else
to say.
There are members of the
committee nothing further aside
from this was a of conversations
that we had with another
stakeholder in this was their
suggestion.
Thank you Sir regional regional
court.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm
actually trying to find real
quick another.
Our definition that may affect
the what more are relevance
But it's it's I mean I I just
like I said it's I mean I
understand I understand this is
what they they put forth.
I don't know that this is
actually really helpful.
On in terms of of the granted
where you're trying to get to
because my understanding what
you're trying to get to if you
want someone regardless of the
of the police R. O. of the of
the record that we're talking
about the law enforcement
record.
You know that it's only certain
times.
And so I I do not that in the in
this special public records
acts.
Are we we find that
We do we do provide for the for
for for certain exemptions
within the inspection programs
act.
Are in.
You know I I would I think I
think I think.
You know you certainly you could
have I I I I I think this has
been a little more specific than
what's helpful to you
you know and I'll I'll defer to
that is a mess but I really I'm
I'm I think this actually helps.
Where you're headed on this.
questions or comments on the
proposed amendment I guess first
of all directing assessment on
proposed the amendment
there's no openings for the
committee's consideration and
president of this nation so it's
before the committee now than
any other and all now recognize
any other questions or comments
on the proposed amendment.
So I'm all will offer my comment
I do too I think I think that
the language proposing Senator
Sedillo was actually limits on
your bill less
are they would be without the
proposed number I think you are
without it.
Hi my that's my reading of the
proposed amendment any other
Canadian questions or comments.
On the proposed amendment user
objection to adoptions Amanda.
Sure we Senator rockers Senator
Stewart.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Moores.
Mr we have user I mean Soto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Baca.
That proposed amendment is not
adopted by the committee.
Senator Ivey Soto you had
another amendment to consider.
Thank you let me see if I have
permission I do have permission
to share my screen.
I think it is we just make sure
I've got the rights.
section here that work yes okay.
Okay so
in the bill.
Are
in trouble in.
You have are in subsection B. of
the bill a definition of
sensitive personal information
and included in that our numbers
right so scary number or
individual tax identification
number now you actually did in
the bell I think a pretty good
job.
I'm making this compatible with
the special public records act.
When I look at at your
subsection any and you you you
specifically provide that that
you don't just go to it is that
you're not going to school part
by it's okay and what's well
yeah I actually looked at
structure part of that
but the problem is that
in response to public records
acts you have that we already
have in the definitions under
improper we already provide for
our
In our well I'm cert fourteen
dash to dash six the a different
term protected personal
identifier information.
And protected personal
identifying information
Williams.
Prodigious of a taxpayer ID
number.
Financial account number or
driver's license number all the
honest with you persisted birth
and social security number.
So so that actually do your the
your you're creating a conflict
where we're just in in the
previous subsection you
unanimously concluded with a pro
your article that brought up by
eight are eight having a
definition.
And your bill with regard to
sensitive personal information
press is the definition and
Efron a person protected
identifier information.
And and so my my suggestion is
is.
You don't want to things one is
just taking part out altogether
because then it would be all the
pop the last four digits of a
tax identification number that
would include an individual
taxpayer identification number
or if you wanted to text
notification number the same as
a social security number.
Then what what you would want to
do is precisely what I have in
in the the rest of this
amendment right so this part of
the moment right here we're just
simply strike that and if we all
we did was the highlighted part
of the amendments were that
would succeed in doing is we
would default to the front
definition where we don't
disclose in a pharmacist
Environment and you can dispose
of the last four digits of a
text notification.
And and then to resolve the
conflict I'm over the I think
more I will give me to do it
though is to participants are in
subsection two women's section
two of the amendments to section
twelve dash to a dash three
chapter twelve article two way
is that you don't have statute
in rural construction packed
with supplies all of the
statutes in New Mexico.
And we have a set of default
definitions in our the in in
protest to invest three and so
what you could actually which I
think would be very organs is to
add a new subsection M. there.
As shown on the screen we're so
Strindberg.
What was used in the statutes of
New Mexico would include an
individual tax identification.
Just
trying to do in the public and I
am willing to and and and any
improper request you to such
number and and and and and I do
I am the same as you would treat
and assess them and try them out
disclosing any part of that.
And then we'll take care of the
disclosure issues pool
throughout the entire statutes
of the state in Mexico.
So so that I think is like I
said I think that's the only way
to do it and more comprehensive
solution to where you're trying
to get to in terms of that
particular part of the issue.
And so Mr Chairman it will be in
order at this time I would I
would move up the amendment that
is share on the screen right
here.
Back up with you on the.
Right Senator Sedillo Lopez on
the proposed amendment.
I actually think that it's a
friendly amendment because I
The issue here is not at all
about it for a this is about
when people voluntarily on their
own decide like maybe their
probation officer and they're
going to call their neighbor and
say Hey did you know so and so
is actually trans gender you
know and or did you know so and
so doesn't really have a so
secure curing it the number they
have an idea and you know what
that means it's that kind of
that kind of disclosures that
we're getting at is these
voluntary disclosures we've been
dealing with and I like the
elegant definition of just
saying that source your number
is a states is going to be
treated the same as an I. ten
that's that is elegant.
So all of that to say yes it's
friendly I'm sorry HM dissidents
from.
Sir I'm so.
Yes I would I would never this
amendment and also just respond
to some of the rest of that one
point four point five to one
twenty four that's for the
cynical and.
During America appear.
Very very good the committee
members wishing to speak to the
proposed amendment.
For the right you.
Committee members.
Anyone.
Not seeing any committee members
asking to be recognized on the
member is there any objection
adoption amendment.
I sing them that amendments
adopted.
Sorry sorry sorry for our
mission is that just one last
thing is
I don't think the bill on but
I'm looking for this morning at
I'm not sure
it should into the governmental
conduct not.
I'm also not sure where it
should go and so I don't
if if center city office of the
the utility witnesses have some
so what's about to happen terms
of the placement within the
statutes and and.
Then when we can we can talk
about where Representative might
find a good home.
Yes it we have spent a lot of
time working on this as you can
imagine and the government
conduct act is the act which
would cover all government
employees because this issue
came up with the MVD office
disclosing information and our
governor took immediate action
to stop that that behavior and
then there have been some issues
with other agencies and other
departments specifically
probation officers we also heard
stories of people selling
personal information selling
emails
Inappropriately in different
agencies so that they can make
some money or selling actresses
because apparently that kind of
personal information is valuable
and so we believe that it
belongs here because it would
cover all agencies and the other
important thing about it is
employees get trained on the the
government conduct act and there
would be training here the other
reason is the and I'm very
excited to have our commission
our ethics commission I recently
got a a an opinion from them and
it's excellent of the at the
ethics commission is also
propose this is a standard for
employees to follow and
government employees to follow
so I absolutely think that it
belongs in the government
conduct act and and should cover
every single employee of state
government.
Call.
Mr Chairman Senator Lopez thank
you for that so things on that
one is.
Arm.
So that does take M. the the
enforcement provisions of the
governmental conduct act
Which is a misdemeanor are
primarily.
the however if you're gonna put
in the middle conduct that I
think you need to use the
language of the governmental
conduct act.
And so
And and the thing is that then
it also extends it to local
governments as well as so that
would be that on
page one hundred twenty instead
of a state agency employee which
is not the terminology used and
mineral content that you would
be a public officer or employee.
That certainly is defined in the
government kind of doctors any
elected or appointed official or
employee of the state agency or
local government agency receives
compensation from salary or is
eligible for per diem and
mileage but schools legislators.
Our and so that well that would.
Our.
Like I said you need to you need
to use the stay with them about.
the the statutory framework.
Of the the government conduct
act so Mr chair to be in order I
would I think my last question
on this vote will be on page one
line twenty would be to strike
state agency employee.
And our.
to answer in lieu thereof.
Officer or employee.
And then our in addition online
twenty two.
would be to answer at the
beginning of the line.
Officers more.
Officer
possessive at the must be just
for.
And then
also online twenty two to
strike.
The HSD actually described.
All.
The state agency to answer.
One government agency.
Because frankly all right we're
people into providing
information just local
governments in particular type
law enforcement officials of
crimes almost exclusively the
victims prime issues are gonna
end up being local police are.
In our local government people
and so right now is the bill
stands none of them are covered
by the provisions of this of
this section.
Mr Mr chair that is not very
friendly man.
The committee on the committee
Committee questions Senator do a
long proposed amendment.
Thank you Mr chair I would I
would just like to ask Senator
Sedillo Lopez and and projects
for its.
The problem that you're trying
to solve is is it solved by
including including folks at
that the municipal and county
level.
What what you're trying to
accomplish with this all.
That is broader than the
problems we're trying to solve I
would be very concerned about
this amendment making this bill
much more difficult to pass the
problems that we have experience
have been with state agencies if
we were to try to go city by
city and try to figure out what
those problems are that's beyond
the scope of this bill this bill
is actually narrow and we
specifically designed it that
way to be narrow and address the
problems that we've been seeing
and that we're very familiar
with I believe that there may be
unintended consequences because
police officers have different
responsibilities with regard to
information and to try to have
police officers trained about
the government conduct act and
sensitive information I think
would be a huge that maybe
something in the future but it
would be a huge undertaking the
FIR would be completely
different and I am not
comfortable after all of the
negotiations we've had with and
and discussions we've had with
the various stakeholders
I think then we would lose the
support of many of our
stakeholders if we if you know
who support this bill at this
time if if we have that
amendment so I respectfully ask
the committee not to support
that amendment it goes way
beyond what this bill is trying
to solve.
Thank you Mr Senator Senator
more.
Nothing more stir thank you.
Committees of the twenty
questions.
Senator.
Well Mister chairman I I guess
I'm now a little confused about
this it it seems as though that
Senator Ivy Soto is amendment is
cross purposes with what the
sponsor wants so if we could
find out from Senator Ivy Soto
of what.
You know what his purposes with
the amendment.
Right yeah Mr Mister chairman
how many my purpose with the
amendments.
Is to make sure that it's.
If we're trying to protect
people.
The disclosure of sensitive
personal information.
That we actually find something
that protects people from the
disclosure of.
of sensitive personal
information it's it is
concerning to me that we were up
to
Well a state police officer
cannot disclose such information
by the county sheriff can't.
It's just it's just it's
concerning to me that the state
health department is limited on
certain information but they had
a hard part is not.
It's concerning to me that that
that that the only places where
you end up having to find
information to local governments
this is this is all I'm not able
as we say in the minutes nominal
especially considering the
extent to which we consistently
make rules and put obligations
on local governments to fulfill
certain duties of the state.
And so and so I'm just I mean if
if if if the principal is
applicables the state government
it seems to me the principles
applicables a local government
as well and and and local
governments subject to the
governmental comic Act they
already received training on the
criminal conduct there are
already included in that there
are already included in the
southern lawns so it doesn't
seem to make any sense to me.
Not include them in in in in
this provision.
Hello Mr chairman and senator
Ivey Soto I mean if you mean hi
so I'm assuming that if if you
make this change here that there
will be multiple other changes
in the bill where you would have
to change that.
Madam our our Mr chairman and
madam president I actually the
The only other place that I can
see.
Actually is on
Page one.
One was a twenty four twenty
five point twenty five would be
the only other place where you'd
actually have to make a change.
To include or local agency.
Mr Chairman Senator Ivey Soto
also probably in the title so
now it it I would like to Mr
Chairman go back and have a
Senator Sedillo Lopez or one of
her experts try to tell us again
why this is not a friendly
amendment.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you senator.
I wish we could do that.
In fact the AG's office said why
don't you just make an exception
to impress.
We got we have worked so hard on
this bill over the last two
years is specially isn't
maintenance goes money and is
the US and many others have been
working with members of fog this
bill has is taken into account
so many suggestions and so many
concerns.
I wish we could do that I wish
we could make this an exception
to it Representative and I wish
that we could make it apply to
everyone not just employees
however.
The problems that we have
identified and have worked with.
With the governor's office have
been the state employees who
have been releasing this
sensitive data.
And right now I can't tell you
examples and and there are
counties and there are cities
with past their own sensitive
data information when they found
problems within their areas some
of them even have codes of
conduct and so because of all of
the work with so many
stakeholders that have agreed
even if they would not even if
they said okay I'm not going to
go to support the bill at least
they've agreed not to come and
testify testify against the bill
and so if you do that I feel
that it will torpedo the chances
of getting it passed.
I will defer to my experts to
see if they have anything else
and and I want to say I really
appreciate really appreciate the
sentiment behind Senator Ivey
Soto is built I wish we could do
it
it's very well intentioned and
and very very important it's
just not additional.
that's all Mr chairman thank
you.
Mr Chairman you are muted.
Thank you thank you very much
any other Canadian questions or
comments on the proposed
amendment.
Senator Lopez.
Mr chairman of.
I I appreciate I think what the
intent of the amendment is but
I'm as you know sometimes we
have to do take small
incremental steps as we move
forward with sometimes different
pieces of legislation and I do
believe that the intent of what
senator Ivey Soto has brought
forward of course is to make
sure that we cover the gamut I
mean we're looking at at the
full context of those who are
state officials.
A government officials but maybe
that's just take this one step
at a time
see how this interacts how it
works you know with regards to
state agencies let's start there
within our own government review
and if this seems to be carrying
out well that we can come back
and do a much broader expansion
of of what we have in front of
us at this time Mr chairman I
just wanted to mention that
thank you.
Mister Rogers community.
Thank you again I'm sorry Emily
we've web recognize all members
on the proposed amendment.
Emily would you get ready and
let's take a roll call vote on
the proposed amendment.
Thank you know where you with
us.
Yes.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
We're we're on a proposed
amendment right now.
Well roll call vote for
development proposed by Senator
Ivy Soto is engine general
called on this proposed
amendment.
Senator Baca yes.
Thank you.
No.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
This now.
Senator Moores.
Yes yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
No.
This yes.
That has.
Whether committee of proposed
amendments to the legislation.
Mr Chairman if you just real
quick if there be no objection
given that would pass that info
just would be the two conforming
issues page one line twelve.
Our and the page one one twenty
five after state agency when
starts
That's our or our local
government agents.
No slow down there
Representative one more time
please public the B. page one.
Winds well maybe one line twenty
five most places where the state
agency when starts.
This just conforming to what we
just at the start more local
government agency.
Questions by committee members
on the proposed amendment and
while you have it.
Yes senator I have it committee
members on the proposed
amendment.
The further discussion centers
that are the City locals on the
proposed amendment.
well Mr chair this is turning it
into a different bill.
So I I don't consider from the.
We don't support this amendment
yeah.
Thank you many many other
questions from the Santo Stewart
still Mr chairman if even though
I don't support this either I
think this is just a conforming
part to the previous amendment
that we adopt it because we had
he had left out to places in the
bill so to me this is not
another amendment I don't know
how you want to handle it but I
think you're gonna get the same
so.
I don't want to presume that
will say but I I do hear your
explanations are stored by
Senator Ivy Soto saying the same
thing I think why not of his
head that he sees this as
conforming
we all think either got comments
or questions by committee
members of the bill sponsor has
asked the there in the
communicate this thought of from
amendment well Mr chair I wasn't
happy with the first amendment
so.
The conforming it to the first
amendment is also not making me
happy but I understand the
point.
And I and I appreciate that
center in the unfortunately you
know I've been better move on
from the last right so we're now
to this this proposed amendment
are there any further discussion
on this proposed amendment.
Is there any objection to the
adoption of this proposed
amendment.
I see no committee members
opposed to the adoption
amendment so this amendment is
adopted.
Thank you sorry so the show
floor I'm done thank you
other committee members we've
done quite a bit of work and we
made some I think significant
changes the legislation other
committee members with questions
or comments to the son.
For a lot of the bill as amended
anyone.
Senator Sedillo is I'm I'm torn
very much by what I'm gonna do
on this bill because I support
Representative what you doing
and the need and all the people
here you're presenting it but I
strongly do not believe this
belongs the government conduct
and I I heard your comments
earlier
to the fact that you all spent a
great deal of time thinking
about where to put this proposed
law and that you can put it that
involves a government contract
act but I would as we've been
meeting I've been looking at the
government conduct acted to
section ten dash sixteen dash
one that sat on the most of most
telling part of the government
conduct that for me is under
subsection three.
We're trying to devise what is
the purpose of the point of the
government conduct act and the
the section ten dashed sixteen
oh three thoughts about.
Ethical principles of public
service certain official acts
are prohibited a legislator
public officer employee shall
treat the legislator officers
are government position as
public trust show use the powers
are resources only to advance
the public interest to obtain
personal benefits to private
interests we'll go on to read
all the the purposes and and
intentions behind the
government's gonna get but of
course we'll take a note will be
in our office that's consistent
with with all of these policies
and objectives of the government
contact back to me has always
been the law that that compels
as as a matter of statute a
legislator or public officer to
ask act in a high ethical way
and and if you look at the with
that same of sexual laws a
program feeds as legislators
public officers employees shall
conduct themselves in a manner
that justifies the confidence
placed in my the people at all
times maintain the integrity
this is charging ethically high
responsibilities of public
service.
Subsection C. provides for the
disclosure of real potential
conflicts of interest to be the
guiding principle for
determining appropriate contact
at all times.
And the requirement we avoid
undue influence abuse of office
of public service I won't go on
but all of these all of the sub
sections of the law have a
recurring theme to me which is
the government conduct
activities always been a law
that says we as legislators and
all public officials have to
conduct ourselves.
In a high ethical way I think
that's what the government
conduct act does what it's
intended to do it has very harsh
penalties for those who
violated.
you know the the bill we have
here I think belongs elsewhere
in the law
in in not in the government
conduct that then I respect the
fact that you all thought about
this the try to find another
place for it but I'm I'm very as
it did to try and just bootstrap
into the government conduct Act
because there may not be a
better place wouldn't even if
there is another existing better
place where it was come up with
just a new area of law.
As opposed to trying to put it
within the government conduct
acts of those might my general
observations
I'll be happy to let you respond
to Senator Sedillo Lopez then
we'll go to the vote of the
committee.
Mr chair the thing that also
reassures me that it belongs to
this act is with the ethics
commission Representative made
this recommendation that this
being of one of the ethical
standards when they made their
recommendations of course the
ethics commission's model COVID
bait they suggested doesn't have
the force of law and so I when
that came out when I saw that
the ethics commission.
Recommended that but that there
be confidentiality confidence
that confidential information
that of government employees
should not be sharing I was very
pleased because that showed me
that this is exactly where it
belongs there is no other place
in state statute that covers all
state employees.
We we looked on and as I told
you the governor by executive
order has stopped this behavior
within various agencies and then
some statutory schemes like in
the tax bill has some penalties
even harsher penalties than the
government and what conduct act
and I did want to respond to the
point about criminal penalties
in fact with the amendments that
that Senator Stewart made to
actually put in an ethics
commission there is actually
another penalty that is now in
the act and I don't have it
right in front of me but if you
look above the above the the
places where they talk about a
misdemeanor there is the
opportunity for the ethics
commission to step in but before
that and I have been an employee
within this within state
government there is progressive
discipline so that if someone
does something that it is
inadvertent or or problematic
first you tell them you give
them a letter and you say no
this is not okay and then second
you might give them a of
reprimand and then third you may
take it higher and so the
government conduct act is the is
the act that regulates
government employees there is no
other place in that I could find
all of the statutes and I have
the that made sense if that
would be as comprehensive as we
need this to be even though I
share with you that it's it
would have been now it's super
comprehensive but there is no
other place.
Thank you senator right
remembers Rhonda do pass motion.
Senator seventy five as amended
employee would you call the
roll.
No.
Yes.
Hello.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez yes.
No.
Senator Pirtle.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes.
This.
The vote no.
Research shows a tie vote.
Senator bill remaining
committee.
We'll take it back up again as
of may be appropriate thank you.
What is the committee.
Thank you thank you center city
office there were no other
business where the committee
today please be on watch for
Wednesday right now the the
leadership meeting of the
Democrat leadership the
participate in most recently
indicated that we will be on the
floor one state and likely be
conducting business on a number
of bills so it may be difficult
to schedule a Judiciary
Committee meeting for Wednesday
afternoon but I I will work to
put together an agenda item on
the chance that we have some
down time on the floor between
bills you may try to get
ourselves up and and the conduct
some business so please be
flexible for Wednesday and then
of course we'll see all of you
Friday afternoon all right.
Thank you very much.
