In the committee before some of
them not yet.
The procedure that we've adopted
for Judiciary this session with
zoom conferencing of being the
principal reason is to give the
proponents of every bill fifteen
minutes of effectively unimpeded
time to advocate for their bill
as they choose to do so.
At the beginning all ask you
whether you wish to reserve any
part of that fifteen minutes for
rebuttal.
This is a pretty common for
those of us to practice law it's
kind of a common procedure.
In that fifteen minutes I rely
upon the Sanchez to call upon
experts as they choose allow the
experts as much of that time as
they wish and also to call upon
any proponents that they wish to
recognize that fifteen minutes
and to use that time as as again
they want proponents to do if if
if a proponent speaker experts
speaking of relying upon the
sponsor to manage the time if
you got an expert who's going on
too long realize that's called
County against the fifteen
minutes you may find yourself in
the in with with an adequate
time to have everyone speak that
you wanted to do so so again
relying upon you the Sanchez to
manage that time as you see fit.
After the fifteen minutes
allotted for advocacy for the
bill will go to opposition to
bill and there will be ten
minutes allowed for opposition
to the bill my understanding
although I'll confirm this in a
moment is that there is a
spokesperson organized on behalf
of the opponents if that's true
all rely upon the opponents to
manage their own time and once
again to allow one person to
speak in opposition or multiple
people as they choose to do if
they do not have a spokesperson
an agreement to propose or or
speak in opposition then also
please take.
As much time as we can in ten
minutes and probably allow each
person a very brief period of
time to speak in opposition my
experiences that sometimes is
not very effective and and
really limits the full
discussion of a particular bill
we're buddies just speaking for
thirty seconds or a minute which
I don't find very helpful so the
the hopefully all of this is for
a perfectly clear to everyone
and with that said
Representative Chandler you have
your fifty minutes and it's now
ten twenty six
thank you very much Mr chair and
committee it's good to see you
this morning I have a very brief
presentation I'm frankly most
interested in hearing from you
and receiving your input Mr
chair and committee members so
I am very pleased to be here
with my co sponsor and helical
Rubio percent healthy workers
act that will insure all workers
have the right to earned paid
sick leave all right I hope we
can all agree is basic and
essential with the passage of
this legislation New Mexico will
join approximately fifteen other
states and a hundred and fifty
countries that recognize that
mandatory sick leave time off
promotes a healthy workplace
increases productivity protects
co workers and the public well
the pandemic has highlighted the
need for rate earned sick leave
an act meant of this public
policy is long overdue and it is
what seventy five percent of New
Mexicans support.
A brief description if I may
Mister chair requirements apply
to all private employers it
allows a worker to accrue one
hour for every thirty hours
worked up to sixty four hours a
year it allows the sick leave
usage for the employees own
illness or that a family
members.
Appointments and other health
related needs it accommodates
employers with existing paid
time off policies when those
policies offer time off equal to
and sick leave the act includes
anti retaliation provisions as
well as enforcement mechanisms.
And the bill also contains a
delayed effective date of July
one twenty twenty two and with
that Mr chair if I could just
defer to my co sponsor
Representative Rubio.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr chair I will not say more
than what Representative
Chandler has mentioned other
than there have been a number of
changes to this legislation to
get us to where we're at
this is the one bill that
addresses workers who have been
impacted by a COVID nineteen and
and the process moving forward
and so I would respectfully ask
that we try our best to really
understand what the changes have
been what we're trying to get
that and know that
so many communities are
depending on this on on this on
on this legislation to really
address
what we're trying to accomplish
so with that I will I will leave
it to the committee.
Mr chair and committee we do
have an expert his name is Shane
you and he is available to
answer technical questions I
mean if you would like to
supplement usually would be fine
I'm sure with the chair.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Shane use I'm an attorney in
Albuquerque New Mexico and into
my thirty S. years practice in
this practice area practice on
employment and labor law in New
Mexico in California and
throughout the western United
States and that I want to give
any of your time but sedam
billable professionals.
Mr chair with.
Representative Chandler yes read
my mic limited are you still
have abundant amount of time to
advocate for your bill if you
wish to recognize any proponents
are other speakers that we would
admit into the conference if not
then we'll turn to opposition
but it's entirely so your time
thank you very much chairman I
will I'm going to go through the
list of people as I recognize
there is us an individual from a
a RP her name is Jean if she
could be amended yes individuals
of their cameras on could raise
their hands if they're in favor
of this bill I'd appreciate it
if that's okay Mister chair.
Of course.
Mr chair representative I'm also
still leading in the proponents
of the be more
thank you so much.
I'll just advise you
representative that we have a
list of the proponents to
registered with us this freedom
to this order order you can
recognize any or all of them if
you choose to thankfully shows
only shows signs with L. central
Lucille look those yeah and
central wonder Garcia Smith's
food and drug Marian Montoya
UFCW local fifteen sixty four
Jan Hamrick A. A. R. P. near the
lows Connell James spoke of your
you are what Senator servicer
Policy Carissa owned cafe the
Indian Arciniega with cafe Paul
Gibson retake our democracy.
I'm on Andrade and doctor best
bargains with primary primary
care advocates of Martell.
Maria doll working families
party Stephanie Stroh New Mexico
Public Health Association and
last I and my cash goes on
people that registered yes
Representative you're not
limited to calling on those but
you can call in the those that
you wish and or present Mr chair
if we could just go down the
list until our time has expired
if that's okay with you and I
much appreciate it thank you
very very good so the expert
witnesses you identify it Mr use
so we also had Stephanie Welch
identified as an expert you wish
to recognize Stephanie Welch.
Definite wealth will not be
participating as an expert a
Mister chair all right the next
proponent on the list was Alicia
signs.
For the web host is Alicia signs
of on the conference sorry I was
muted Mr chair we do not have
releases signed we do have L.
Sanchez.
from who works.
The first two speakers are for I
don't know if they're gonna
speaker there just in the
meeting I would move on if they
don't speak.
You're right we don't have a
leisure funds we don't have
Lucille's lawyer.
All right what do we have want
to Garcia.
Mr chair now.
We have Merion Montoya.
It will recognize Grumman Andrea
next on our list.
Good morning can you hear me.
Yes hello.
I
sherry Committee my name is very
important and I work for UFCW
local fifteen sixty four I also
worked in the grocery store for
almost twenty five years I race
street children after my divorce
and any time my children were
sick or I was sick I had to miss
work without pay as an employee
advocate for grocery store
workers I witnessed what workers
go through today they either
must miss work and do out
without rate costing them a
financial burden or the reports
work sick because they can't
afford to lose wages in order to
pay your rent or put food on
their table for their children.
The state employees at work not
only creates an unhealthy
workplace but for up for other
employees but it compromises the
customer's health as well the
essential workers in New Mexico
have sacrificed their health in
order to keep New Mexico
families that I respectfully
urge you to please vote yes on
H. B. twenty six page is long
overdue thank you for allowing
me to speak.
Mr chair if I could just
interrupt for one second could I
reserve two minutes of whatever
time is left in case I need to
rebut the opposition.
Representative Chandler yes
we'll reserve that and admit
whatever you'd like at this
point.
You begin at ten twenty six will
hold back two minutes for you.
Mr chair here.
Sight Mr chair representative
next on the list we have Jean
Hamrick.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm Shane Hamrick
allowing tier with a a RP New
Mexico paid sick leave is a
priority this year too many
workers in New Mexico do not
have paid sick leave this causes
them to choose between working
sector losing wages or perhaps
their job because they choose to
care for themselves or their
family members according to an a
a RP study from twenty sixteen
the average care giver Spence
eight thousand six hundred
sixteen dollars of income on
caregiving losing wages
compounds their hardship I have
the maps and I'm a million
compromised I have no family to
care for me if I contract COVID
nineteen I've been stuck at home
for a year because workers are
working while sick over two
hundred forty eight thousand
other a a RP New Mexico members
and I ask you to join us in
supporting New Mexico's working
family caregivers with a do pass
but thank you.
Mr chair next on the list we
have near not lost on all.
Is this gonna you're you're
recognized to speak thank you.
One of the S. thank you
president thank you
Representative comic this is not
a scandal Monday need and that
they see fast member that simply
don't have a lasting nexus so
I'd be just fine I was put in.
What caused me Madam school
system so it's been pretty easy
but in a separate meeting at one
the musical supplements almost
don't seem to mind the COVID
issue and they you may be at the
mentality quite input at all.
Seeing them but it would that on
C. stop undergarments and
federal it gets and then family
style at using Rundle getting
accurate at the other hi you may
get them in this place Missy has
the Yoakum it's almost almost
I've seen some of the quality is
this is that you look at the
list of opponents Center medical
thing in that state so I yes I
just spoke impairments that
dentist me does it by hosting
this is the most they take as
taking this is going to most
internet service but missed a
single by the police so do we
yeah you meant that unless
that's from you guessed what
they see it activity thank the
but I could've follows in a lot
more sense with the enormity
Mexico think that listening of
the S. by that yes yes.
Mr chair next we have James
COVID you are.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is James Kobe
one and I am the policy director
for the center for civic policy
very quick so that we may be
able to get to other frontline
workers who are on the call we
stand in support of this bill
and urged the committee to
return it to the floor as
quickly as possible thank you
for all your hard work.
Mr chair next we have the honor.
My name is Sienna senior I am a
leader with cafe axiom today I'm
asking the vote in favor of paid
sick leave paid sick leave is
important to me because it is a
way to take care of ourselves
our families as well as the
communities that we live in it
helps us to not get behind in
basic necessities such as paying
and electric bill our guests
when we cannot go to work it
also allows us to not choose
between paying this bill and
buying food.
When we have missed a day of
work right now a lot of us
cannot afford to miss a day of
work much less a week.
Even if we are sick paid sick
leave should help everyone no
matter where they work that's
why I urge you to vote in favor
of HB twenty thank you.
Thank you all right that
concludes about thirteen minutes
of advocacy reserving judgment
for you Representative Chandler
to request all come back you for
that one extra ten minutes of
opposition and.
I have first of all this Terry
coal followed by iron deficiency
Baca bill Lee and rob black
there are others falling behind
that of.
I will first of all ask whether
there is anyone who registered
in opposition who is the
spokesperson or will who will
coordinate the speakers if not I
will simply take the time and
divide it by everyone who's
registered to is very short
amount of time so let me start
first of all with the agency
called miss.
A new nose there's spokesperson
or organizer for the opposition.
Do we have do we have it's
called.
Mr chair she's Mr chair I was
muted excuse me so good morning
we do have a total of four
people to speak this morning I
will speak first and then Ernie
C. to Baca bill Lee and rob back
black each of us for two minutes
will that be okay Mister chair.
Early within your judgments and
then also we name the other
individuals to register in
opposition and presume that they
have your support to utilize the
tenant so
You're recognized for as long as
you wish to speak and I'll leave
it to you and the others in your
group to coordinate they have
the time and make sure that you
don't see the ten minutes it's
now ten forty one go ahead as
well thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee I'm
Terry Cole president and CEO of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce as a business
organization we have been very
clear we support the adoption of
a statewide policy of mandatory
late we just needed to be
reasonable consistent across the
state and accommodating to small
employers in its current form
this bill is none of those
things my reasonable we need
that back hours of leave
provided in this bill should be
on par with other states require
most other states require
businesses to provide up to
forty or forty eight hours of
leave per year to each employee
including Arizona Colorado and
California why would we pass
legislation requiring up to
sixty four hours of leave per
year over thirty percent more
than most states why do we think
our businesses can bear a burden
like that when businesses across
the country are being asked to
do so my consistent across the
state we mean that a mandatory
Lee policy should preempt more
onerous local ordinances from
being adopted by cities and
counties we need a truly
statewide policy not a patchwork
coverage elect regulations from
place to place and by
accommodating to small employers
we ask that you exempt small
businesses say fifteen employees
are less or legislative tax
credit to offset leap costs
other states exam very small
businesses from their mandatory
eight policy Nevada exempt
employers that have fifty or
fewer employees.
Colorado exempt employers that
have fifteen one five fifteen or
fewer like we're asking for sh
were seeking reasonable changes
that are consistent with we
policies nationwide we want to
be part of the solution we do
though please do the right thing
and work with our business
community as opposed to simply
imposing a long term costly
mandate on our state's
struggling job creators I'd like
now to introduce Ernie C. to
Baca from the Hispano chamber
Ernie.
Thank you Terry and
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
My name is receiving Baca the
president CEO of the Albuquerque
Hispano chamber of commerce we
too are in support of a
thoughtful approach to a
statewide paid time off bill we
don't believe that the entire
financial burden should be put
on small businesses shoulders we
believe that everybody should
have skin in the game and it
should not be punitive to small
businesses that require
flexibility to operate.
This bill is bad for small
businesses but it will have a
desperate a disparate impact on
minority owned small businesses
those are most of the new
businesses over the last five
ten years are minority owned.
A lot of people that have been
of advocating for this it's
saying it's needed for a healthy
New Mexico why then are local
governments exempt why our
substitute teachers not included
of lifeguards at pools heck
maybe even some of the people
that are working seasonal there
at the legislature are they
exempt from this bill so do we
not care for them as we care for
others that small businesses
have to deal with we have three
or four employees I think we
should really think about that
this bill in its current form
is.
There is no worse bill for to
discourage on to encourage
entrepreneurship it.
Maybe if I was going to start a
new business and having to deal
with this among some of the
other things I would think twice
about.
So with that I I would advocate
preemption is needed similar
what Terry said we need to have
small businesses exempt from
this and the you know it needs
to be carefully written of the
public health emergency so you
can the the government can shut
down your business or they could
go down to twenty five percent
but you still have to give
eighty hours of part of paid
time off for that for your
employees maybe that is just
needs to be written in a fair
way with that Mr chairman I will
introduce bill Lee from the
Gallup chamber of commerce.
Thank you Mr chairman survive
this and members of the
committee my name is bill we I
represent the Gallup McKinley
county chamber of commerce and
my aunt and I'm also a small
business owner my small tourism
based business as seen year over
year losses of over ninety
percent I think the legislative
bodies with their work during
the session find the relief
packages that have been passed
but I will tell you this that
those really packages are short
term while devastating effects
of bills like H. B. twenty will
go on in perpetuity with that
said we do recognize that with
the current public health crisis
there is a need for paid time
off that would be fair for
employers and employees alike
unfortunately HB twenty in its
current form is not the way
forward HB twenty would be the
only state paid time off program
in the country that would not
providing sections or
examinations for small employers
easing the financial burden on
those businesses that need our
help age twenty has exempted
state and federal employees
because according to the
slaughter of these employees
usually benefits equal to or
greater than what the bill
provides if this is true then
the state and federal employer
should also have to provide
evidence that all employees
receive the benefits mandated
the bill just as our businesses
would have to prove it's clear
that by exhibiting public
employees which account for
almost one quarter of the
workforce in the state this
exemption was given in order to
protect state local governments
from the extraordinary high cost
of additional Mr chairman
members of the committee we
asked would simple ring removal
of some of the mandates of the
exemptions that would be
afforded to small businesses to
make this bill fair for all
businesses in New Mexico thank
you Mr chairman with that I'll
yield my time to Mr Robb lack
from the New Mexico chamber Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is rob black
from New Mexico chamber of
commerce I.
Agree with the previous
statements but would urge the
committee to look at the
following specific areas under
PTO programs the first sentence
in chapter six should be
clarified to say an employer
with the paid time off policy
that makes available amount of
paid time off sufficient to meet
the earned sick leave accrual
requirements would be
appropriate it's just clarifying
language that the PTO light of
the PTOs existing PTO programs
are are qualified will qualify
as well we do ask that you look
to correct the overly broad
definition of employer currently
employers should be employer
should be those individuals and
companies are required to file
with the secretary state county
or clarify or county clarifying
who falls under the scope as it
mentioned earlier other states
like Maryland limit its employer
definition to those at higher
fifteen or more employees as
well the overly broad
definitions of employee.
Could be corrected in California
law it requires someone to work
at least thirty days annually
for an employer to qualify as an
employee would like to see the
enforcement improved right now
it is very punitive at a minimum
provide for individuals who may
make a and clear clerical error
would be a thousand dollars
there should be a process
administrative complaint process
that should be exhausted prior
to the ability to fire file a
class action lawsuit.
As well the supplement Lee was
mentioned we are concerned that
it would revert immediately vast
for for an eighty hour period
that is far exceeds any other
benefit program in the country
with that I'll turn back my time
to the committee.
Mr chair thank you.
Thank you miss you begin at ten
forty one you would have to
minutes recognize anyone else
about I will simply go down to
the next person on the list sh
thank you Mr chair were finished
on our end with our team and we
just want to thank you for
allowing us an opportunity to
share our comments with you
thank you very much very much
the next person on the list of
Carlos contact is Carlos Santana
row.
Mr chair Carla just joined.
We recognize with two minutes
and will be the last speaker in
opposition misconduct two
minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman Carlos on
tech president of the New Mexico
business coalition.
I'm on.
I am speaking against of house
bill twenty and I appreciate
your time and your
consideration.
We've got a problem with this
bill
then at that's why you brought
it back into Judiciary and I
really appreciate your expertise
and looking at this New Mexico
has the fourth highest
unemployment in the nation at
eight point seven percent that
is we have lost eighty six
thousand seven hundred jobs.
Some businesses simply cannot
afford this we support getting a
paid sick leave policy but this
is not the answer we will end up
losing more jobs in New Mexico
which goes against the very
thing that we need to be doing
right now is creating employment
an opportunity for people to
provide for their families thank
you very much for your
consideration.
And I ask you to please consider
how you can make this work for
all employers in New Mexico
thanks.
Thank you that concludes so ten
minutes or more of opposition
our procedure will next take us
to members of the committee for
questions or comments and so.
Mr chair
right before we do that I'm
sorry if I may just members of
the I did read the names of the
proponents say failed to read
the names of the opponents who
time did not permit us to
recognized so let me just read
those Charlie markets Mexico
health care association Tiffany
Rivera New Mexico farm livestock
bureau Nate banks Americans for
prosperity Allison Smith New
Mexico restaurant association
Carroll right New Mexico
restaurant association down so
and exit so for AC and M. all
right and that's the registered
opposition now we'll go back to
where I was at to committee
members but I I did you right
Representative Chandler I did up
reserve two minutes for you you
have those two minutes now.
Mr chair may I just that Mr
Secretary mccamley speak I
understand he is here the
governor and his the parchment
is supportive of this bill may I
see him my two minutes of
course.
Mr chair mccamley just trying to
may not of heard.
Mr Cantlie you've been
recognized for two minutes I
don't know if you have your Mike
open or not Mr chair thank you
very much I I won't take that
long just wanted to let
everybody know that the
secretary The New Mexico
workforce solutions department
and representative governor
Lujan Grisham's administration
in this regard and the governor
supports this version of HB
twenty with the year
administrative delay we believe
that that will give not only
businesses enough time to adjust
to the new policy but allow our
mechanisms within the department
to be updated and when we get
more training folks involved to
enforce and with those the
governor would plan on signing
this bill if it makes it through
in its current form Mr thank you
for your time.
Thank you good to see you again
Representative secretary.
Stricken with.
all right that can completes the
advocacy in opposition well
let's go to members of the
committee I see by hands right
now a request on behalf of
Senator Duhigg and then not
seeing any other hands right now
but will continue to look for
committee questions and comments
Senator Duhigg you're
recognized.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representatives for bringing
this bill I know that I believe
as of this bill was working its
way through the house there
there was an effort there some
language in here that that uses
good faith rather than reason
bility standard and and I know
that there are some efforts to
to make that correction is it
was going to the house and it
looks like there is one spot
that got missed in those efforts
that page seventeen line
fourteen
we're says are has in good faith
alleged violations of the
healthy workplaces Act
and Mister chair I would just
move to to make an amendment to
strike on page seventeen line
fourteen in good faith and and
and certainly there of.
The word reasonably.
Representative for calling you
for each proposed amendment of
I'll try to remember to do so if
not someone will remind me your
position on the proposed
amendment do you support or
oppose the proposed amendment Mr
chair and committee we support
the amendment.
The committee discussion or
debate on the proposed
amendment.
Any opposition the adoption of
that amendment.
Seeing them that amendment will
be shown as.
Moores well over you I'm sorry
I'm stuck in the traffic at this
morning to try to get back to
them so so why try to get back
to I just wanted to ask what is
the legal difference between
those.
Do definitions that Senator
Duhigg is proposing.
So.
Mr chair Senator Moores but so
so generally that there's a
defined reason bility standard
in the law but the words good
faith are are not generally at
defined term and so we're just
making sure that if one and one
quarter is looking at this that
they have they have a defined
term to to go to and the case
law.
Senator could you tell us what
that defined term is what is
this what burdens us put our our
on.
I guess is prosecution persist
also matters.
Mr chair Senator members at this
is going to generally be in the
civil matter and it's the
reasonable person standard
which is it is what we're
reasonable person would do under
the circumstances and that is
that's a pretty general standard
used in our law.
Thank you Mr thank you senator.
Thank you we've put up to that
amendment by.
Prior actually committees
etcetera do you still have the
floor amendment thank you Mr
chair and and I have a question
for the representatives there we
heard some public comment about
I I desire to have application
of this bill be be limited to
businesses that have you know
more than fifteen employees or
fifteen or more
what what my question is I I
guess I have two questions
around that the first is how
many businesses do we have in
New Mexico that if if we if we
did exempt businesses with with
fifteen US employees would be
exempt under this and and my
second question is what why not
exempt those businesses from the
spell.
Mr chair and Senator I don't
have an exact answer for you on
the how many employers have
fifteen or fewer employers I
think it's quite a long large
number I did have some data on
twenty or fewer on another bill
that I was working I wish I
won't I won't refer to really
but and I understood that for
twenty and and
lower it was like eighty percent
of the of the businesses in the
state so it would affect an
extremely large number of
workers
Mr chair and senator.
Thank you Mr chair I think I
answer your question Mister
chairman Senator in in full.
Mr chair so Representative at I
guess I guess so so is the
reason for for not having that
exclusion in here is that it
would.
It would then not not cover of
it all that many employees in
New Mexico is that correct.
Miss Mr chair and Senator that's
part of it but the other part of
it is if you would even say you
are an employee in a business
where there are let's say ten
employees you still need to take
sickly and you still pose the
same risks to the public and
your co workers and others as
you would if you were working
for a business with twenty five
employees so
Mr chair and senator we feel
that kind of artificial
delineation doesn't recognize
that this is intended to promote
a healthy work based and by
eliminating some fairly
significant part of the working
population we're undermining the
basic purpose and underlying you
know our public policy that is
embedded in this bill thank you
Mr chairman Senator.
Thank you Mr chair that that's
all I have right now if you
really members of the committee.
Sessions are discussion Senator
Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee did you
receive some of the proposed
amendments through email this
morning that I had.
Thank you for to to have more
than one.
I believe we received three
Center portals that right that
should be correct Mr chairman if
we can start with point two two
zero eight two six point one.
That is the amendment that deals
with the portion of the bill
that exempts the state.
I'm.
It's point two two zero eight
two six point one.
Mr chairman we have a point to
version.
And sorry about that Mr chair
and and Madam protean you're
actually correct that because
there is no point one was for
the floor and so now the point
to is for the Judiciary
Committee so I apologize about
that that's I just had my
original number Mr chairman and
madam program I I apologize
about that.
So Mr chair this this ammendment
simply strikes the the portion
of the bill that exempts the
state you guys made the that Mr
chair members of the committee
you may remember Senate bill
four thirty nine which was the
bill that again three hundred
dollar bonus to all of our part
time employees at the that's
been working the legislature and
the thought process was.
That we were going to model the
behavior that the state
legislature was going to model
the behavior for the rest of the
state that we wanted to see and
so I find it interesting that
for part time and seasonal
employees for input this
requirements on small businesses
but yet the part time and
seasonal employees that work in
state government are not going
to be included in this
legislation so this would simply
make it apply to all employees
within the state of New Mexico
regardless of whether they work
in public or private sector.
And that's that's all I have on
the amendment Mr chair.
In the center just so I'm clear
I'm trying to track this with
the team of members in context
so does this strike this the the
language of the state or any
political subdivision of the
state or just the state.
That's right folks Mr Chairman
yes.
I'm sorry what was that its
parts both okay.
So this would this would make
the provisions applicables to
local governments.
And and Mr chair members of the
committee that is correct that
if we're going to put this on
it's all government employees.
Public and private sector
employees.
Retaining the exemption for the
federal government.
Well Mister chair just as you
know I I don't know that we have
the authority to tell the the
federal government that they
should the shell find
sick leave.
This one make sure that it is
still retains that yes Mr chair
all right members of the
committee.
Senator Stewart on the proposed
amendment.
Mr Chairman can we please go to
the sponsor or her expert after
each of these amendments yes
what I intend to do so if I
forget please thank you for
reminding the sponsor please
Representative Chandler on the
proposed amendment.
Mr chair and Committee that is
it is an unfriendly amendment
and the reason for it is is for
the reasons stated before we
believe the state provides very
adequate if not superior
benefits packages to its
employees and if
But that was that Mr chair I
will I will stand for questions.
The committee members of
questions.
Yeah Mr Chairman star carries my
hand at this chapter chair.
Moores restore.
That Senator so I before I'm
sorry.
No we recognized you center
Moores enough centers thank you
Mr are chair of Representative
Chandler
I am concerned about the
message this sends to the public
and small businesses there are
about the it's not good for the
goose is not good for the Gander
kind of messaging you said it
many of the state employees sure
I believe was the word you used
to have a copy covered under
more robust sick leave.
But that doesn't necessarily
mean that's true
other instance worst in state
employees are seasonal workers
and for instance I know the
workers in our capitol building
for seasonals probably would be
covered that's what we have to
give up three hundred dollars
also held.
Mr given three dollars more
folks to invest so other
examples besides the workers who
work for us every year they
start would not be covered if we
do not accept all out this
exception.
Sir Moores.
Sh.
Course was at question one
question.
Yes that was a question to our
Representative Chandler what
what other besides the obvious
ones that we're well aware of
their the capitol building all
of our employees would be exempt
from this what other examples
because you said well that
should but if you instead does
all of the other state
employees.
Mr chair and Senator I I
understand your committee here
ask if your question you're
asking me if I could give a list
of employees who do not have
eight earned sick leave is that
the essence of your question Mr
chair Senator.
Mr Chairman yes I your answer to
Senator polls are amendment was
that you feel.
That current law should cover
most state employees are very
this separate section of what
you just said was our own
employees legislature I want to
know what other employees would
not be covered seasonal workers
at the state fair for instance I
would think about however.
Extract this exception what are
other examples out there are
there.
Mr chair and Senator I'd have no
other examples I haven't done an
inventory.
So we don't know how many state
employees without be covered by
this is what you're saying.
Mr chair representative.
Mr chair and senator I do not
have an inventory I have that
number for you.
Well since that is our tension
is to have a healthy workforce
we should not been exempt.
The state government employees
are to take a couple this
legislators are legislative
staff to just talk about thank
you state fair return
Albuquerque all right other
might be another example process
we don't have the research we
don't know so the fact that
we're accepting all state
government employees act the
US Department culture service
you district's many others for
you so if we're gonna force us
small businesses to do this it's
always sends the right message
that we're also requires state
agencies to do this because but
in the burden on small
businesses not state government
so there are examples like the
drop top I said without a
research that a point would not
be covered by that so your
stated goal of having.
A healthy work environments is
true as long as it's our on the
purpose of small business state
government was reached a
doctor's appointment so I spent
support student portals Mr
chair.
I would like to comment on that
Representative why state
government workers are worthy of
the State Opera texture that
will require small this.
Senator Moores I was a question
directed to sponsor.
I was thank you Mr chair
representative.
I am I'm sorry Mr chair and
senator it question was why the
difference and I think the
answer is what I have previously
said the as we offer the state
and local governments offer very
good benefits packages and we
feel that they are adequately
protect thank you Mr chairman
Senator so.
There.
Senator Moores your audio is
broken up you're at a place
where the reception is not good.
Center more spare.
Senator the budgets gave you
some examples provided us to
stay with legislative records
all just.
Are you sure.
You're more you're you're ideas
for you gonna be very shortly at
a place that has better audio in
which case we may go to Senator
Stewart go back to you.
Thank is that better Mr chair to
get past simply that there are
you're you're you're good now if
you can do to break up all all
ask you to.
You are here district are your
discretion Mr chair so I just
Senator or Senator and start
Representative why not include
staffers at the legislature in
this that's the most obvious
example they don't receive these
benefits why are we telling
people that we work with the
legislature they don't qualify
for these benefits.
Mr chair and senator I think the
individuals who
and are employed by us during
this short period of time
recognize the terms under which
they are employed and and are
doing so with that understanding
I would point out that during
this people in our office has
been very flexible in terms of
people taking leave and when
their been any issues in terms
of sickly people have been
getting time off without and
without any impact in terms of
what they've been able to
earned.
So with that justification Mr
chair representative they're
they're taking this with they're
doing this for two and a half
months masamoto just for the
legislative session how is that
fundamentally different than
someone working in an
agricultural position where they
for two and a half months more
outside and they go back going
it's with house that fundamental
difference as far as the
benefits.
And what is happening between
those two examples.
Mr chair and senator in our
example we we are very cognizant
of the need to four
the latitude here in the
legislature and in terms of how
things are done in the private
sector we do not have that
control and this allows us that
control Mr chair and senator.
Well Mister chair representative
on yes Sir jobs that I'm looking
for but because what we're
saying staff were required small
businesses seasonal workers of
those so working and seasonal
jobs this summer or ski areas
understand what's happening
Mexico for snows Business do
this when the legislature itself
is going to take care of it so
employees so does send a message
to small businesses in New
Mexico that we're gonna mandate
you what you have to do we're
not willing to take your world
so that is the crux of what
we're doing this Mr chair
representative.
What's good for all it's not
good for us but everyone else
Stewart.
Chair Mister Mister chair thank
you Representative thank you for
your.
Yes thank you Mr.
For.
We're on the amendment center
store then Senator Ivey Soto.
Mr chairman I I think the the
sponsor has said why it's not in
here when I certainly was
working as a teacher I had these
benefits I think state employees
already have these benefits so I
I don't agree with the amendment
I think we should keep it as a
debts.
Thank you thank you Senator Ivey
Soto.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee and
Sanchez I have to say that I I
tend to agree with the
amendments if if these are
protections already exist.
It won't cost a penny for state
and local government.
because
bills they could just.
this opt out if if if the
incentives for private
businesses happen Kirby expense
on the liability on it is I
think really hypocritical now we
not make make it make it apple
Google results.
Are you know my and I as I read
this act.
All right every This act you
know in the office what what
what we have is that.
One of the have the right to
have the.
Thank you employees are are not
entitled to use more than sixty
four hours of on sick leave for
for twelve month period unless
the employer selects a higher
limit so if there's a better
benefit pursuant to state out of
a public plea bargaining
contract or or or some other
situation then then then this
would be subsumed within that.
and and and so I don't.
I I don't really understand what
the what the resistance is up
for this building
Applicables to state and local
governments
you know like I said the the
Our our as I understand the bill
and and please please educate me
on this if if an employer
already provide sick leave
that's a private employer
already provide sick leave what
if we pass this bill that's just
not mandate additional sick
leave it simply sets the floor
for the sick leave that need to
be provided Mr Chairman
representative is that not
correct.
Mr chair Senator that's correct.
Okay so so if if as a
representative as Senator
Stewart commented which was a
teacher she already have these
benefits.
Them this would not impose any
burden whatsoever on the school
district Senator Mr Chairman
Representative Chandler is that
not correct.
If the entity RT provides
benefits that are equal to
what's provided in this act it
should not add any additional
benefits any additional burden
and if I could ask Mr used away
and he represents a number of
public
employees and he might have some
additional information find
Mister chairman Senator that's
okay.
Thank you Representative
Chandler at Mr chair Senator Ivy
Soto generally I would agree
with you that that didn't think
you know what is good for the
goose is good for the Gander and
that we should have labor laws
which.
Are applicable to public sector
workers in private sector
workers there are a couple of
problems in this situation which
which we would create by making
this bill applicable to public
sector workers the first is this
public sector workers as you
well know I have the
fundamentally different type of
sick leave programs those sickly
programs allow employees to
accumulate on the minute our
still limited in some places but
it generally speaking unlimited
hours in contrast to this bill
the public sector employees are
allowed to sell back their
stateLee time so it is treated
as I I guess Mahdi is maybe a
better word but it is in the
public sector sick leave is
treated differently than it
would be treated in this bill
and we would risk creating
problems in terms of imprinting
a private sector notion on the
public sector this is a private
sector it's designed to give
employees up to sixty four hours
per year it cannot be
accumulated beyond sixty four
hours employees cannot be more
than sixty four hours and
employers cannot be required to
at by back to time or pay
employees for unused time and so
that the bill was primarily
designed as a private sector
remedy I think by and large as
you know I represent tens of
thousands of teachers in the
state of New Mexico thousands of
public sector employees and
those systems that are in place
for sick leave are designed on a
fundamentally different
basically that there is a right
to sick leave and it is a right
that can be bought and sold by
employees in this system put in
place by HB twenty is of a
fundamentally different teacher.
Also up so.
So Mr Chairman representative
and and distributes.
Act you the of the comments you
just made.
So.
help me find me here in the
bill.
Where there is a prohibition
against
hang out.
The R. the sick leave because as
far as I can tell.
Are there is it is not required
to be paid at.
The last are out start with that
and would you please put in by
the bill where that is a
requirement.
Mr chair Senator Ivy Soto you're
absolutely correct there is no
requirement as such our fear is
that if we imprint this system
onto the public system public
sector system of benefits it
would initiate modifications
that that maybe have negative
consequence for for public
sector workers because it
creates a system by law where
there is no requirement
basically be paid out on on
retirement for example but but
it just your question you're
absolutely correct.
Mr Chairman representative
general fund misuse that's
that's exactly my point the
right so your statement was you
the statement that you made was
was this is a completely
different situation because it
because it gets paid out in the
public sector and it's not paid
out under this act but it's
actually just simply not
required to be paid and that's a
very different position of that
I also noted in section four.
because because at it from what
I heard your concern that people
might but accumulates a greater
amount of sick leave are in the
in the public sector but but but
as I see that
It's such a point of actually
eight employees shall accrue a
minimum of one hour of earned
sick leave for every thirty
hours worked provided that
employers make sure the higher
approval rate so talk to higher
rate if it already exists
pursuing a contract pursuant to
policy and and the state local
government that would not affect
this what it Mr Chairman
Representative Chandler and the
streets.
Mr chair Senator eighty seven
million that particular element
would but it creates what we do
is a fundamentally different
system and and we we we we
believe that there's going to be
legislation on this area.
With the public sector we would
need to write it differently
these provisions are written as
a minimum standard for the
private sector.
But Mr chairman and
Representative Chandler issues
you know when when Congress
passed FMLA.
On the Congress did not exempt
state local governments from
FMLA those provisions were made
equally applicables to the
to the to the private sector
workforce and workforce Mr
Chairman representative general
issues correct.
Mr chair representative I
Senator that is correct it the
legislature Astros in on
occasion to exempt the state
government and at with regard to
the minimum wage act for example
the state government is exempt
from the overtime provisions of
the act so so there are I I
think we can both identify
instances where the state of New
Mexico has exempted itself in
certain circumstances in it I
think it's appropriate in the
circumstances at given the wide
wide grant of rights most local
governments get but at
alternately I agree with you
that that maybe there should be
public sector at legislation
with regard to sick leave but
this bill is an improper fit for
that for that at mechanism this
bill is a private sector
provision and it it sets out a
minimum set of rights I think if
we were to do a public sector
bill we should right the bill
which would require public
sector employers to allow
employees to sell their time
back because that is the
dominant paradigm in the public
sector in New Mexico so I I
think a public sector bill would
look much different and I think
that.
This this bill isn't just would
not be a good fit for the public
sector Mr Chairman
representative Gellar mysteries
you said that that that it's
it's based upon a different
system.
All of sick leave is what this
bill is.
which lasts and I guess my
question is.
My question is I'm a I'm not
aware that every single private
employer has the same systems
sickly.
Is there is there is there
mandated same set the same
method of strictly for all
private employers Mr Chairman
representative child receives.
Mr chairman Senator Ivy Soto you
are correct but after this bill
passes in need to it's a becomes
law there will be a minimum
standard for every private
employer and that is the primary
purpose of staff I'm still that
Mr Chairman representative Tyler
and and mystery is that is that
precisely your that's a that's a
trying to impose all employers
the exact same slander for CENIC
onsite not all players on all
private sector employers the
same standard of sick leave.
Weighing the same standard of
strictly for public sector
employers and effect Mr chairman
Representative Chandler and and
Mr yes I I think I think I just
found something when you set if
this were written the public
sector in your mind it would
probably mandate public sector
by back of sick leave that
suggests to me that not every
public sector leader provides
mandatory by back safely Mr
Chairman representative Chandler
mysteries is that not correct.
Mister chairman Senator Ivy Soto
that is absolutely correct and I
I do public sector bill that
makes sense but I think we would
have to add a myriad of
provisions into the current
legislation to essentially more
what we have in the public
sector in New Mexico right now
in those provisions are not in
this.
And and and and I get that Mr
Chairman Representative Chandler
and his units but the thing is
is that is that we're mandating
a uniform system for private
sector.
We don't even have a uniform
system involved in the public
sector.
And so it just seems to me if
you don't mind my getting but
for a moment it seems to me that
we're trying to point out of
**** in somebody else's I when
there's a log in our own at that
point and and it and it just
seems it seems on a particularly
and we're coming out of a
pandemic with as as as we got
businesses that are struggling
to survive even though the
effective date is until July one
twenty twenty two what we're
basically saying as a lesson if
you if you can make it through
this pandemic.
You know if you can survive
through this pandemic don't
worry that day has come and
we're going to increase your
liabilities in a uniform manner
across the board for all private
sector employees we're not gonna
make it is that available or
mandated on the public sector
employees and and I just I will
just tell you I find that
extremely problematic
particularly since the
provisions of this bill set the
ceiling they don't suck the I
was at the floor they don't set
the ceiling.
They impact would not interrupt
any any additional benefits that
would be provided to public
sector employees it would not
preclude any additional benefits
that are already received by
public sector employees and
instead what what we're doing is
we're saying you people out
there the government is telling
you you need to do something
that we're not going to make
sure that we do ourselves.
That's just a really problematic
and bad messaging on this and so
for that reason I I find myself
quite favorable to the to the
amendment thank you very much Mr
chairman.
Thank you I see Senator Stewart
for a second time is that
correct.
Yes Mr chairman I just wanted to
mention that it's the P. R. A.
system that allows employees to
buy backs sickly not the ERP
system.
Never the less I do think that
This ammendment just sort of
coming from people that aren't
going to vote for the bill
anyway and to me this really
affects significantly a what the
bills trying to do it's the
private employers that are
having difficulty with getting
any sickly even in the middle of
the pandemic this is one hour
for every thirty hours worked
thank you for where are
front line workers that have
gotten sick that have gotten
other people sick that of help
spread the COVID because they
were not able to take sickly we
it's the private employee
employers that need some help in
telling them they will give
sickly we've delayed it for a
year to make sure they can do
this but I I hope that we can
reject this because this is not
the idea behind this bill thank
you.
The members the committee
questions or comments on worse
from the proposed amendment.
Cheryl go last I we we keep
talking about the one hour for
thirty hours nobody talks about
that section five and section
six of the bill let's do that
this house is this is not just
of the thirty six hours but
there is additional eighty hours
of that are in this bill and
it's hard for me to believe that
that wouldn't be much more
generous than any state local
government contracts that exist
now I I don't know and we've
heard in the discussion that the
state local government contracts
are already very generous but I
have really no way of knowing
that in and I don't know whether
the contract in the city of
Hobbs is the same as of contract
in the city of Los crucis I I
would want to know that.
but but I I know that I I think
I agree with the argument that
if you look at section for the
very beginning of section four
says employee showing the
creating a minimum of one hour
earn sick leave for every thirty
hours worked provided that
employers may choose a higher
approval rates so so certainly
cities counties the state can do
better than that this just
creates a floor and I think
that's a good a good floor.
I'm not persuaded by the
arguments that have been made in
opposition to the amendment
which is that the state and
local government provisions
already superior to this even if
that was true this bill wouldn't
do any harm to those and this
would potentially do far better
in fact I believe this bill to
state and local government
employees would be far better
than their existing
relationships and contracts
because of the eighty hours that
this bill adds on top of the
thirty six hours
and and so you know I I.
I've got to say that the
argument that the that the bill
that we should exclude local
government state government city
county that we should exclude
them because they have already
have a superior program that
argument rings very hollow with
me.
because the bill already
contemplates in many places that
have there's a superior program
this bill is only the minimum
and that others can have a
better program that's good and
and I think state and county
governments should have of the
best we should be we should
discover which we setting the
example so since the bill seems
to not exclude that.
It leads me to really want it
will conclusion there's really
no other conclusion you can
reach which is that governments
are exempted here because of the
cost
and and that's a good argument
we've got plenty of money this
year we were.
Awash in money let's face it
we've got a Washington incoming
monies and so the idea of not
being willing to give city
county employees the same
benefits to me based on cost is
not a good are you and and and
that's the only conclusion I can
reach is that it has to be cost
based on some folks do there was
an argument it's hypocritical
I'm I'm I don't I wouldn't use
that word I think it's I don't
think it's hypocrisy that that
we impose this on private sector
and not the on thing given the
same benefits to to our city
county and state employees I
just I I just without knowing
what every city county contract
would be every state contract
would be.
This is a good floor this is a
minimum to assure that city
county employees have at least
these same benefits and and this
is a good thing.
But but I'll note that we seem
to be ignoring throughout this
the section five and section six
of the bill which allows for the
eighty additional hours in times
of a pandemic and I realized
this has a proactive State and
and and won't apply immediately
now but it would on the future
it would give the additional
eighty hours on top of the
thirty six hours so that's
that's a very generous benefit I
think and the and I'll and I'll
just have the committee note
also section six.
I think addresses this issue
exactly to which says if an
employer has a paid off policy
paid off time policy that made
the sufficient to meet this act
of then it's it's deemed in
compliance with the act what it
says if if they're on the date
of this act the sick leave
required I shall be in addition
to the time under a collective
bargaining agreement so there's
a black collective bargaining
agreement with the if we if we
don't exam government employees
they're gonna get the additional
eighty hours of on top of their
collective bargaining agreement
in and nobody can make the
argument to me that that that's
not better than what they have
now they would they would get
their existing contract plus the
additional eighty hours that's a
good thing and we think the
eighty hours are good policy to
keep up employees from coming to
work sick or from being able to
care for their their illness or
their family members so again I
I I can't see any logical reason
why we wouldn't want a city
county employees state employees
to have the same good benefits
This bill with with the.
Find for everyone else so those
are my thoughts Senator Stewart
I see you again is that right.
Senator is your hand up a yes Mr
chairman I see I think it's
important to always go back to
either the Representative or her
expert because her expert
mentioned numerous reasons why
this is not a bill designed for
public employees and I just hope
that we can continue to see
whether or not what we're
suggesting is friendly or not
and if not why even though we
tend to ignore experts in this
committee I'm hoping we will
attempt to hear from them at
least.
Senator you have the floor I
believe that we did ask the
experts earlier and called I
think one of the earlier
committee members asked the
Sanchez about the amendment
their positional amendments I
believe that we did that but I
appreciate you always remind me
to do so but in this case I'm
I'm very confident we've already
done that if you have a you do
have a four Senators sort of
you'd like to ask questions you
certainly have the floor to do
that.
Thank you so Mr chairman I would
like to hear from distributes
again about why this bill does
not work for public employees.
Mr chair Senator Stewart Mr I
fundamentally agree that setting
a floor for the public sector is
a good idea the floor we would
set for the public sector in
legislation would look
dramatically different than this
bill and this is in ill fitting
and October fifth for the public
sector because the public says
sector has a different system of
sick leave accrual sick leave
use and that we should design
that legislation to respond to
the current system of public
sector six eight this is an ill
fitting device for that purpose
but I do agree with you that
public sector workers should
have all of these benefits
written in a different way I do
also agree with you that there
are certainly public sector
sector entities around the state
that may not give benefits which
are as generous just continue
the act you you are right and I
agree with you on both accounts
the only problem is that
slapping the public sector
amendment into this bill would
create problems for the public
sector the public sector has as
I mentioned many different
approaches to safely and those
approaches which the majority of
employees have in the public
sector for example the right to
sell back there safely those
approaches should be included in
the statute and that stat that
dispatch it has none of those
protections this is designed for
the private sector to states for
for this private sector any
system where there is
predominantly PTO and not a PTO
and sick leave system which is
in contrast to the public sector
so while I agree with you I
don't think this is the place
and the time to do it.
Thank you my other question to
you yes on five and six when I
understanding that the eighty
hours is what cares Act the
federal government cares Act has
put in place and that all we're
doing and five and six is
ensuring that if we have when
when we have another public
health emergency we have this in
place so this is following the
federal act and can you talk
more about that Mr give.
Mr chair Senator Stewart you're
exactly correct the provisions
identified in section five are
designed to provide its with the
parachute in the event that we
have another public health
emergency I just so that we
don't have to wait to rely on
the the kindness of the federal
government and then we also know
that section six is in no way
tied to section five section six
is a stand alone provision and
doesn't relate to section five
but provides private sector
employers who already have a
paid time off plan in place
which is more generous to be
deemed in compliance where
they're paid time off system
matches that benefits both of
the terms and conditions and the
use of the healthy workplace Act
the last section relating to
collective bargaining agreements
triggers effectively triggers
the the obligation to bargain on
behalf of private sector
employers that is another
example of the provision that
was written with private sector
employers in mind exclusively
the public employees bargaining
Act would probably require
different language because
collective bargaining agreements
in the public sector would be
triggered by this law but this
simply triggers a duty to
bargain in the private sector
and in the private sector as we
all know there's it just
completely separate set of
rights for organized employees
including the right to strike
the right to lock out which
don't exist in the public sector
and and and so I would suggest
that if we were going to write
this for the public sector that
is one of the many other
sections that we would need to
provide to to make sure we don't
run into problems in the public
sector thank you Mr you so it
seems as though we need to deal
with the public sector a very
differently and not try to
amended into this bill at the
eleventh hour thank you thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir Stuart they won
also the committee center every
Soto.
Follow up on that those are
questions that were asked and
thank you very much for that
those answers Mr yes in fact
under the federal cares Act The
additional sick leave expired on
December thirty one twenty
twenty the temporary rule that
was them that was issued
pursuant to federal cares Act is
not is that not correct.
Yes Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto
hundred percent correct.
And in addition rule when it
came out was applicables to our
public sector employees as well
as private sector is that
correct.
Mr chair Senator Ivy Soto
correct all of this it's
probable to private sector
employees thank you so very much
and we are putting a permanent
law a temporary rule that is
already expired thank you very
much appreciate that.
That's actually.
You saw the forces we're we're
you doubt.
I couldn't tell all right for
any other discussed the world
the proposed amendment.
We've been through it adequately
family are you with us.
All right let's take a roll call
on the amendment please.
Yes.
No.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez.
Senator Morris yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart for no.
No.
Senator service.
Yes the amendment is adopted.
Thank you Mr chair up next I
have a point two two zero eight
two five point two I'll get it
correct this time Mr chair and
Madam protein thanks for
pointing that out earlier.
this amendments Mr chair members
of the committee goes ahead and
puts a definition of independent
contractor the term independent
contractor I believe whenever I
was going through it I saw that
Representative least three times
And we don't ever defined what
an independent contractors is
and so I think it just leaves it
up to interpretation by the
courts as to what the intent of
the legislature would be just to
an independent contractor Sliq
goes ahead and puts it in black
and white so that it cannot be
misinterpreted thank you Mr
chair.
Right to five point two for
members of the committee.
First of all for the sponsor.
Sponsor how do you regard the
proposed amendment has favorable
or unfavorable please Mr chair I
think it's acceptable it does
appear to comport with common
law in the state.
All right.
others on the committee then of
I can see.
By hands anyone on the proposed
amendment.
Rick seeing none and no
discussion is there any
objection to the adoption of
that amendment.
That amendment is adopted
Senator Pirtle this is a twenty
five point two.
Senator Lisa of the floor thank
you Mr chair and then finally we
have point two two zero eight
two eight point two.
this language this amendment
would strike the the language
regarding a public health
emergency
you know I do understand the
concern with this but.
We were able to Mr chair members
of the committee as we all know
we're gonna already have the the
late the hours accrued.
because of the statute and then
there's also the ability that we
saw with unemployment insurance
and the federal government
setting out money to help
with these types of situations
that we don't need to put this
in statute especially in this
act that we have the flexibility
and ability to do this through
workers compensation and other
avenues and so this this is just
language that's unnecessary and
by the time this statute goes in
the place
hopefully in fourteen months we
should be out of the pandemic
but if we're not again the
unemployment
the department workforce
solutions sorry Mr chair members
of the committee already has the
flexibility to to to do things
that that will help our
employees are with sick leave
and additional benefits.
Thank you.
All right the sponsor please on
the proposed amendment of
favorable or unfavorable
Mr chair if I may ask a couple
questions I'm a little confused
in terms of the public health
emergency and maybe I'm just
misunderstanding.
It's it I believe it's on page
Once in the back of the bill.
And I'm wondering why we're
referencing page five and
various points on this
ammendment.
Representative I think that the
references to page five are to
the definition of a public
health emergency which.
Sure including including the
bill I believe the sponsor is
saying that if he was to strike
the section which I think is
section five that's alright it
section five which you choose
him proposing to do on paragraph
five of the amendment if each
to strike section five that he
struck in the definition of a
public health emergency I think
that's what that answers your
question Representative
Mr chair I believe it does and I
I see pages ten through thirteen
which are the provisions related
to public health emergency
Our are okay very good we can
agree to this ammendment excuse
me Mr chair.
Members of the committee any
discussion on the proposed
amendment.
Thanks seeing none is there any
objection to adoption of this
amendment.
Seeing that amendment is
adopted.
Senator used on the floor.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
Mr Chairman.
Yes.
I was just bumped off
I don't know what you've just
adopted but I would like to hear
what amendment you've just to
the office.
colonel.
Mr chairman I know about that to
to adopt the whole thing and
you've let other people vote
when they've had technical
difficulties and I would like to
vote on it of course
and and I will always do that
just let me know if you got a
technical problem so the
amendment as I understood it was
two two zero eight two eight
point two I know what it is okay
very good we can do a roll call
of your preferred let's do that
I'm going to so we're abundantly
clear.
Local police.
Just throughout remind of the
opera time that this is a
friendly man.
All I didn't hear that that
makes it all the better.
Sponsored indicated the members
from our local we'll probably.
The role as.
Sorry I'm sorry.
Do a roll call just show me is a
yes.
All right very good thank you
very much Jim there being no
objection by anybody present for
the committee that amendment is
adopted Senator you saw the
floor.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
you know I do have.
A bit of issue Representative
Chandler with you know.
The language with seasonal
employees and and how that works
there's a there's a huge
concern especially with our
chili producers down in the
hatch area with with that
portion was has there been or
Has there been any
conversations with the act
community with regard to some of
this language record regarding
seasonal employees especially in
our
Chile capital of hatch.
Excuse me Mr chair and senator
we had many conversations with
many employers across the state
including associations at
significantly the ones that the
fight here today we had many
many inputs and as you notice
many amendments throughout the
process of the bill that were
largely based on input we
receive and public hearings and
direct conversations with
advocates and employer
Representative stand in none of
those gosh and other than a
general comment about concerns
in terms of the broadness of the
definition of employee did we
have any specific input from the
ad community about their
concerns about seasonal and and
and the like Mr chair and
senator.
In in Mister chair and and
Representative Chandler I do
have a question for for all the
sponsors of this bill how many
people do each of you currently
employ.
Mr chair is is an appropriate
question Mr chair and lower it
it it's absolutely appropriate
we all have extremities let me
interject as separately I don't
think that's appropriate in one
sense which is you're asking the
number of people who they they
with the employee I think your
question re directed to one
individual and one organization
if any cerebral that.
I apologize about that.
How many sponsors Mr chair my
Aston do we have in the room
today how Sanchez.
Mr Mr chair and Senator ice I
believe there are three of us.
I always excuse me four of us
with senator
us miss Stewart is a is a
sponsor as well so Mr chair
representative Janet may I ask
how many people you currently
employ Mr chair and senator I'm
retired I did work for a very
large organization and
supervised numerous people
during my career as an attorney.
And and Mr chair and and
Representative Rubio how many
people do you currently
employee.
Mr chair Senator I don't employ
anyone but I have a lot of
people who work in a very farms
that are surrounding the forms
that you work at thank you so
that you that you
representative.
And Mr chair and Representative
Roybal Caballero how many
employees do you currently
employ these.
Well Mister chair I'll just get
to the point we all know the
point is an argument that I'm
going to make here.
Of this legislature is made up
of people with specific
expertise to bring legislation
and they use their expertise and
they make their arguments with
their expertise and I feel that
Mr chairman and members of the
committee that what we're seeing
here is is people bringing a
bill that don't know the
struggle of employing people and
what it takes to make a business
operate and that concerns me
that we're gonna put
We're gonna put regulations on
people and and there's a lot in
this body that don't understand
what it takes to at the end of
the day make a profit pay off
your mortgage and and a
employees and so it's it's
really Mr chair and members of
the committee a slap in the face
that small businesses don't take
care of their people I don't
know of one small business that
doesn't give paid vacation time
off all types of other benefits
harvest bonuses Mr chair members
of the committee my family with
our Ag employees at the end of
the the harvest we give a very
big harvest bonus for putting in
that extra work the hard hours
and this is just disrespectful
to to our small businesses and
and what they already do and
it's laws like this that that
really send the message that
government knows best and we're
not gonna let the the small
businesses take care of the
employees who they consider as
family and so I I'm just very
concerned about that as we see
legislation come up like this
and and and have it past that
you know small businesses and
business owners care and you
know when I see stuff like this
it's sending a message that that
we think that the business
people are all about profits
they don't care about their
employees when in all actuality
I go to my employees a kids
birthday parties and family
gatherings because we are part
of the family and this just
sends a bad message Mr chair
thank you.
Mr chairman I respond.
Of.
Representative I'll do it this
time because I haven't given you
any instruction previously but
I'm gonna discourage this
alleged is one time I I try to
avoid the committee becoming a
debate back and forth it's not a
ping pong.
Came if if if you would hold
back your response so certainly
give you an opportunity for
closing and you can address as
many things as you wish to do so
in that but but I hope you can
understand the question was not
asked by the Senator and the I
don't want to have everybody
feel like they've got to get the
last word but in but in this
case it with the with that
instruction go ahead
Representative Mr chair I'd be
very brief all of the sponsors
erected recognize that there are
many many caring employers and
businesses in the state and we
really appreciate I'm as we've
noted earlier there are also
employers that do not offer this
benefit and it is critical at
sickly provided to all employees
were and and and this is
intended to support those
employees thank you very much Mr
chair.
Thank you thank you
Representative.
All right other members of the
committee after Sir pirtle
members of the committee on any
issues at all I see Senator Baca
Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you Mr chairman.
You know general like to chime
in that as well
I have been employing people
myself since I was twenty five
years old actually out of the
military I've had up to twenty
employees at a time and you know
when you place these kinds of
mandates upon and upon the
employer in this way at the end
of the day a business comes down
to dollars and sense of what you
can afford and what you can
afford so you know where where
you're authorizing a sickly but
this store with the implication
really that that businesses out
there not not not really working
with you play I I think you know
there's a lot of ways to pay an
employee let's let's remember
back all the way back to the
early nineteen hundreds Mr chair
with the introduction of of a
health care through the employer
this was given as a benefit and
it was a seen as as a method
where it was part of a
compensation and so you know I
look at this the very same way
you know putting these mandates
on employers just takes away
flexibility for in order some
employees don't really want that
kind of sickly really don't
they're rather get paid a dollar
or two more on their paycheck
can take that home with that and
what it does is it restricts the
employer for giving that that
dollar to because let's face it
we're coming down to is hours
and hours right productivity for
your business which generates
the revenue at the end and I'm
not hard to see if you know if
you have been or he really your
entire life but when you work
full sense of that you can see
that you can see the Mr chair
that you get a benefit for work
you do now what that benefit is
as of echo she hated process
because the person is the
commodity there.
Offering and selling themselves
to businesses to do work and the
businesses been compensating
them for that and so it's in
understanding and assessing the
relationship between an employee
and employer so you know I I
think what the legislature comes
in Mr chair and the chance to
get in the middle of these
negotiations say they not only
trample on the rights of of the
employer as as I think this is a
the trump walking employee as
well because you know who are we
to sit here and say what they
want maybe they'd rather have a
raise maybe that have rather
have upward mobility of these
are a these are all
considerations that must be
taken to a cap and vest worked
out one one on one of business
to business to employee and you
know that that's the issue I
have with these types of of of
of bills that come through here
and you know I I've heard I
heard to you know earlier very
early on that this is seventy
five percent supported I would
have to disagree with that this
this measure measure similar to
it was soundly defeated by the
voters Bernalillo county it
wasn't even close and and so you
know when I hear something like
that it it tends to make me
think will who are we asking the
question too because when it was
put to the voter the voter
clearly answer the charge and
they rejected the idea and so
you know that I'll just I'll
just stand with that I do
appreciate the work that was put
in and you know I I do believe
there's genuine concern of there
and I appreciate that as well
but I think I've expressed my
issues with the current chair in
front of us thank you.
Senator Ivey Soto you're next
what are much Mr chairman I
think I do want to go over some
things in the bill and I
You know I I will tell you that
at the beginning of the session
before the session began.
Several of my constituents who
subscribe to an organization
called retake asked to have a
meeting with me.
R. and and as we went down a
number of different issues.
that's about how to feel about
this how to feel about that.
And and and this is one of the
issues that I was asked about my
answer actually was relatively
consistent which is I'm
sympathetic to the issue but I
need to see the specific
proposal.
And and and and sympathetic to
the issue.
I'm now looking at the specific
proposal.
And I'll just tell you that that
if if if what this bill sought
to do.
Work to work within the
framework of FMLA.
To ensure that there was a a
level of state based paid sick
leave.
R. that was consistent with the
provisions of FMLA.
R. then then I would I would I
think I would find myself much
more much more
this post point four one is in
front of us.
The problem is is that is that
while well employers have have
geared themselves for compliance
with that family which of course
and on paid leave benefit from
the federal government it allows
paid leave as part of it but it
doesn't mandate paid leave.
And the of the twelve weeks
provided by FMLA certainly is is
a much greater benefit than the
than the hours that would be
provided here but it would at
least them work with them that
existing framework to ensure
that all employees when taking
FMLA what have a a level of of
a minimum level of paid sick
leave that they could use at
least at the inception of their
FMLA.
regardless of of of of of of
where they're working doing
something like that would
actually then what within an
existing regulatory framework
that that that employers are
already familiar with.
The regular regulatory
rulemaking that employers
already have to comply with.
What is that what this is doing
is this is that a an entire
different set of definitions
entire different set of
standards now what is provided
for by FMLA which increases the
regulatory burden.
Upon employers because now you
have a hot if it were to pass as
you would have one set of
definitions of what constitutes
a family or medical leave under
FMLA had a different set of
definitions of what constitutes
family medical leave under under
the healthy workplaces Act.
And and and that and that quite
honestly what that does is that
that leads them to enter in our
thanks application.
Of a state based benefit.
Where we're seeking to provide a
minimum level of of assistance
to employees.
The FMLA system is relatively
clear.
In terms of retaliation
relatively clear in terms of
documentation relatively clear
and terms of of what the
standards are and who is cover.
How would have done that and
simply added in.
In New Mexico if you're working
in New Mexico for any purpose
for what you're getting at from
LA.
You you have the rights to use
the current accrue and use a
certain level of paid leave.
What what well that would be a
much shorter bell but second of
all.
That would be a bill that I I
think I would likely support.
So I I don't want to go to the
bill real quick on on a few
things and and I'll I'll make
some notes about some motions
that I may want to make at the
end but but but but we'll see
the first is
so so this bill starts off with
a purpose lost that is not one
that is normally favored by the
Senate Judiciary Committee we
normally removes a purpose
clauses up we're we're gonna get
get back emotions a little bit I
just want to give a little bit
of a heads up as to where we may
Maybe had it are they are the
second thing is when we get to
the definitions.
I appreciate the fact that the
that the definition of the so
this is section three of the
bill.
a definition be domestic partner
I appreciate that were including
domestic partners however most
qualified benefit plans and
saluted former spouse from being
invested partner.
You don't have that solution
here.
And so then you create a
situation where you find a
benefit in terms of former
spouse that is not available
under most private sector of
benefit plans and and and and
and and that is actually a very
important decision.
R. and and so so that's so that
is something that that is also.
Missing on this I do note in
your definition do.
Employee that that that that you
you provided definition and then
after legislative definition you
find language about a burden of
proof.
That is that's not definitional
that substantive.
That should not be in the
definition section of this bill
that should be under the
substantive law areas of this
bill.
And and so and so again that I
think is somewhat problematic I
I do before I go on with other
things and and and we come back
if I have a conversation about
about some of the stuff but but
I've been getting I candidly
some some text messages from
people work for railroads lose
and you folks were programs
we're wondering why other
railroads not included in this
in the definition of employee
a page for a web page for the
equipment and context of this
definition eat and and I'm I'm
I'm quite sure that's perfectly
rational reason why they're not
included in it but but I will
tell you that there are people
on the railroad that are are
fairly concerned both of a union
and nonunion that they're fairly
concern that they're being left
out of this bill and and
actually get back to that
question.
A little later I'm gonna put a
note here asked Jane.
Well although when I ask it I
will I will ask distribute.
they are I do think under
employer we should align of the
applicability of this to the
same applicability of FMLA in
terms of the number of employees
that somebody has and and
certainly in terms of enforcing
an unpaid benefit the federal
government has found it to be
to upon it necessary to have a
minimum number of of the
employees I will not
interestingly.
Under the FMLA there is a
different standard of what kind
of of of of what it and then
pull your is in the private
sector verses in the public
sector under FMLA there is no
minimum size requirement for a
public sector employer to be
covered by FMLA where there is a
minimum employee requirement for
a private sector employee to be
covered by FMLA and and and I'm
a little rusty on on on on some
of the threshold but but I just
dismissed you guys now as I'm as
I'm looking through this I mean
I I I've I've done HR work in
the past at one point I was only
one of I think you will
attorneys in the state who who
had been up would earn his
senior professional in human
resources credential which has
since allowed lapse from the
from the
of from from the a national
certification institute of
of the term the of the society
for human resource management
and and so I think.
So that's that's something well
that that again it's it's it's
concerning to me that that that
we're not departing from that
standard and that's a concern
that I think that we should
That we should address I do also
note that indicates that the
definition of family member
again this is this is this
departs up from the FMLA
standard so again it creates a
regulatory challenge for
employers but the our
definition of of
family member which is
definition G. number seven well
I don't necessarily disagree.
What the public policy of
including an individual with a
close association with the
employee or the employee's
spouse or domestic partner that
is the equivalent of a family
relationship when I I
problematic though is that is
that we're we're providing a
budget that was able to be used
as a result of their issues not
the employees issues that
without without any standard
whatsoever of of having to to
inform the employer in advance
of this of the nature of this
relationship.
Are you know this is this is for
me kind of I came to of Bill the
person who has the extra key to
your house sort of a thing right
except that that's not done on
the fly.
There's a there's a person that
the that that all of us a
thought about should have the
extra few to our houses and we
decided this in advance and and
so on but the fact that that
That this are a somewhat
amorphous silicon sympathetic.
The provision is in here but but
in a manner that we're one does
not need to have have
established that that you have
this sort of a relationship with
somebody should something come
up
for me is is very problematic
the.
I do note also your your
definition of of a health care
professional and and it would
be.
It would be interesting for me
to see as we go through the the
bill.
The applicability of the and and
the usage of the term health
care professional in New Mexico
we license a wide variety of
health care P. of a people as
health care professionals
are including not only
I mean it we have we have
license dental assistants out we
have licensed.
Napper paths we have we have
licensed oriental medicine we
have we have a license and and
and some of these may be
appropriate for the uses in this
in this act some of them may not
be appropriate for the uses in
this act I think that's
something that we would need to
to take a look at if we're gonna
be saying if we're gonna be
expanding at that so that that
includes what is as a person
that really means any person
licensed as a health care
professional and and that would
also include a frankly
Activation consultants are and
in New Mexico are able to be
licensed as health care
professionals as well as others
also so the scope of the of the
responsibility of the health
care professionals as one that I
think we would want to look at
in terms with uses throughout
the rest of the act.
on the on the definition and of
course this was taken out
already Senator Pirtle but I
didn't know if that of the
public health emergency you have
for local law so that we would
have local laws to provide a
public health emergency fund on
the last.
Every as we go through our some
of the act here we have.
We have here under under section
for earned sick leave use are
cruel.
Hello so you are able to approve
but but but but it's not amended
Hey out.
but we do have them that that up
in.
Our section for the three that
are gonna crude underuse sick
leave Chuck Berry over from year
to year but employers not
required to permit an employee.
You more than sixty four hours
in a twelve month period.
So right so right
We have people occurrence sixty
four hours someone does it use
that they they and they end up
with with with a greater amount.
R. and and and and it's at it's
interesting and all of the state
system
Mr chairman and and and and
representatives and and some pro
sponsor was misused you know
it's it's it is interesting the
the on the panel also at in the
state system we cap accrued sick
leave I believe this job when I
was a in the state's inspector
hundred forty hours because at
some point of that even though
it's an accrued benefit you're
just not gonna be able to use it
all at one time and and and it's
interesting then that if we
limit it to a twelve month
period of time that you didn't
say that you can that you can
accrue up to the point of about
two hundred twenty eight hours
or or something of that nature
we're we're by the time you
would be able to exhaust that
and the and the twelve month
period regardless of the
definition of the twelve month
period would be exhausted you
would have already accrued
another sixty four hours of of
sickly and and and so that
creates the
a a a real problem with
employees who will look at their
at their budget statement or or
or look at their paycheck stub
that may have this reflected in
terms of the number of hours
that they have but those are
ours that well they have it or
not available to them if you get
it fully who Is was approved you
know over
I'd like to see the map to map
it out but it seems to me that
if you have someone who's
accrued over a hundred twenty at
twenty eight hours those are
ours are not available to be
used under any circumstance
under this under this act
because by the time they would
be able to use under this act
this sixty four hours of home
here in another six four hours
the next moment parent they
would have already earned back
another sixty four hours so
So that's a that's I mean and
and and so then that becomes an
administrative and regulatory
burden and not just in terms of
reporting but in terms of
relationships that employers
have with their employees who
may seek to utilize what they
believe they've approved what
they believe they are able to
utilize under the law but which
in fact the what does not apply
for of the unlawful under the
circumstances.
Now I I am I do find under under
up I think this is still under.
Yes section for V..
Where you.
You've got four different
definitions of apartments.
You know certainly I do
understand I do understand
Hey the calendar year and and
and be they're a for extra
month.
Leave here such as the school
year or or you're required by
other law or you're starting on
the employee's anniversary date
I I certainly understand that
one
Then we're going to see and do a
twelve month period measured
forward from the date and
employees first use up aren't
sick leave occurs so basically
you have a benefit to utilize
but that what you're you're
earning about of the but the
parked as a start speaking at
any point and and until the
first of the two years that.
And then and then it starts and
that and that would that be a
rolling twelve month period
measured backward from the date
an employee uses any aren't sick
leave and for the life of me I
have not understood I'm not been
able to figure out I've been
trying to map out.
How it is that that that that
your problem
the use of sick leave works if
you go backward from here for us
to use that that seems to be
rather illogical to me that that
I'm using it for the first time
and I've already exhausted a
twelve month period up and and
so so what it is I mean that's
that's just.
I'm I'm I'm just I'm just really
struggling with how that works
in terms of benefits that is
perspective but applied records
but applied to a go backward
calendar.
Again in in subsection C..
I think we're still on.
I go stay on yes Representative
on on section four B..
Subsections three are you know
this is a fairly broad.
Our definition which which
departs again from from the
provisions of FMLA
I don't necessarily object in
certain places to departing from
the provisions of FMLA but but
the thing is the for benefit
should align with the core
benefit that is already been
forced upon employers and that
from a regulatory perspective
they have a they already have of
an understanding of what it
applies and then if we wanted to
depart from that.
By an additional a definition of
or or additional benefit I'm
then that certainly such as the
domestic violence certainly that
is something that I think is is
valid for us to consider as a
state policy but the problem
with the way we have it is is
that as far as I can tell were
off by it at different places.
paragraph one paragraph to
paragraph three paragraphs for.
We're off for a couple of the
places from FMLA and then we
depart action program for
entirely for my family and so
the problem is is that you've
got this regulatory scheme where
we could go in out in out in out
and then all the way out the all
the way out is actually more
implementable then the them out
in.
Close but not quite with the
optimally.
And and so on.
Well I'm I'm also trying to
figure out on on subsection B..
Where we have that are sick
leave shall be provided upon
oral or written request of an
employee or an individual acting
on the employee's behalf I'm not
sure why we need to someone
actually on the employee's
behalf if we allow the employee
to find an oral or written
request R. and so and so I'm not
really that doesn't.
Our.
I'm I'm trying to figure out who
that employee acting on the
employee's behalf is and why it
is that that is a necessary
provision in terms of being able
to get from sickly.
Right the R. R..
On.
Subsection G..
We have our exactly being use of
the smaller of hourly increments
or the smallest increment that
the employer's payroll system
uses to account for absences or
use some other time again if we
would have just aligned to the
FMLA standard people already
have to account for time under
FMLA in terms of leave taken for
family and medical purposes I
have we've been able to just
simply align with that then then
then there's there's no
regulatory hurdles.
In terms of implementing this
act at that point.
And then and then we have the up
Well again we we go into we
return to the to the issue of of
whether employee as a as an
employee or independent
contractor and and there's
there's a wide body of law on
this issue and and actually on
some of that it would have been
it would have been I think
better to simply provide for
that in a in a in a separate
place I'm gonna figure it it's
fine there.
I just subsection I are are
section five is no longer in the
bill.
but
Act them with that section six
of the bill which I think is
interesting.
Because because here we're not
only trying to manage what an
employer does with regard to the
workforce we're trying to manage
what an employer with the
collective bargaining agreement
us and we're actually mandating
as I read the US.
Probably in addition to any paid
time off provided by an employer
pursuant to a collective
bargaining agreement I don't
know I don't I'm not I'm not
sure I don't understand the
public policy behind us.
Making a Senator to.
You are impact of collective
bargaining agreements instead of
working in concert with
collective bargaining agreements
with we very easily could have
done in this bill and yet and
yet we've got we've got you know
that that the that the employer
has has negotiated.
With the with the without labor
union
for an amount of paid time off
and now the state is going to
say and that's not sufficient
whatever it is that you guys
agreed to we're going to add to
it on top of whatever it is that
you agreed to I I that's that's
something that.
That again I find I find
somewhat troubling.
We're we're looking here on page
On section seven of the bills.
Subsection B. M. and so we're
talking about what the
documentation is required in
this go specifically to the
issues of domestic abuse sexual
assault or stalking which again
is a public policy I don't have
a problem with what the
documentation.
Please report okay you could
report issued document.
Or sign statement from
purchasers organization clergy
member attorney advocate.
Or simply the employee what what
if if the employees can can give
a statement why would we require
or look like we might require
any of these other documents if
we have the employee just simply
telling the employer what's
going on especially since we say
that you're not a lot of
questions.
What is in that document and and
so and so it doesn't I don't
understand why it is them that
we have these other forms
if we're mandating and employee
to be able to be one of the
options at the and and the but
then but then we seem to be also
stating that we want something
from from a from a third party
source except we really don't
need anything from a third party
source.
From the the R. I do also quite
interesting and and again this
goes to to try to find something
compatible with other laws so
that you're reducing the
regulatory burdens.
upon employers in subsection for
the all of section seven and
that is.
That you have that been deployed
here to the required
documentation for the purpose of
earned sick leave that the
employer shall pay the cost of
any verification any any
verification.
By healthcare professional that
is not covered by insurance or
other benefits plan.
So we have actually already with
the workers comp system.
We have the ability of employee
to bring in their own medical
report their own medic at their
at their discretion.
And then if the employer needs
additional documentation the
employer pays for the additional
documentation after that or
alternatively if the employer if
the employee goes to the
employers.
Our doctor medical professional
first the employee always has
the opportunity to go to their
own medical professional
afterwards thank you have a
separate better documentation
and we have this is already
provided for the regulatory
framework for employers in New
Mexico employers in New Mexico
already have to comport with the
provisions of of this document
the medical documentation that
that that is provided for the
workers comp now this is a much
lesser standards and workers top
but the thing is we know how to
implement that state in terms of
verification and so if you're
not gonna follow FMLA at least
and follow workers comp and
don't invent yes a third process
or procedure for employers to
have to follow because what
you're doing is you're creating
a regulatory nightmare for for
employers as they try to proceed
with this and then we have
subsection D. of section seven.
Which which which one has an
employee shall provide
documentation upon request to
the employer in a timely matter
we have no idea what time.
But then the employer some not
delay the commencement of earned
sick leave on the basis that the
employer has not received yet
documentation again we could
have done this within the
framework of a family after
Malaysia already has an entire
body of law behind it already
has forms behind it already has
procedures behind it or how it
is you you and you inform the
employer.
And what documentation and the
timing of that documentation and
if for some reason we've chosen
to ignore all of that.
And provide a standard where the
employer shall not delay but the
employee does it and what's
called a timely manner and and
and I don't know that anybody
knows on a timely manner.
That certainly is not defined
term and there's no case law
behind it it hasn't been
litigated on life all of the
terminologies used M. FMLA.
we've been with them have the
subsection II that seems to be
approximating yep but it's not
it's really consistent with the
federal Americans with
disabilities act of nineteen
ninety I do I certainly but but
that's that's actually for the
release of the information but
address the confidentiality of
information again we could
simply fall to families instead
of inventing a standard wanted
here that that that that that
employers don't necessarily know
how it is that they should be in
implementing that standard
offhand it's not a status
optimistic and so we're creating
a different standard we're
creating a burden with creating
a liability upon upon employers
trying to figure out how to do
the right thing.
I'm.
I find it somewhat problematic
in in section eight which is
noticed in posting requirements.
Thank you.
This this this is the right
entire.
New notice that needs to be
added to the standard notice
most of which is getting fairly
complex already
Representative within the
framework of something else then
that we can just simply added to
the framework of of the of
something already has to be
posted.
But in doing so we say that we
have to Townsend not only means
of enforcing violations of
helping workforce is a
workplaces Act.
Well I'm not sure if that means
that we need to make sure that
they have the the phone number
of units involved as in order to
be able to enforce the healthy
workplaces Act public because
that is certainly one means of
enforcing the healthy workplaces
Act but but but we're requiring
all means of enforcing the
healthy workplaces.
What.
Bill to comply with.
We.
We have a we have a new
documentation requirements the
end and we don't have a delayed
implementation or or perspective
application of the of the
documentation requirement that
goes back for for thirty years
and the
You know and then and then we've
got
and and and fortune provisions
and again on the division we we
provide
of occupation
our confidentiality requirements
are on on that on that of part
of that again is is distinct
from the other our standards
that
That are applicables and and and
so it it creates a real I think
regulatory issues.
On some of those are and and so
Mr chairman I I think I think
those are that's all my my
observations I'll wait to see
what the what the committee is
interested in doing on this bill
if we do move our for the vote
on to pass I I do have a a
series of amendments and
consistent with with what I
braced here to suggest thank
you.
Senator Ivey Soto there was a
lot in there Representative
Chandler I'll come back to you
and let's see if there's anybody
else in the committee with any
other discussion at this time
any other questions or debate.
Anyone else in the committee so
Senator you said you have some
amendments
are you ready to go with those
what it all means of what
direction we're gonna be going
in terms of motions on this bill
Mr chairman.
Well I'd like to speak to the
bill to but I'd like to go to
members the committee First at
and I'm I'm I'm happy to yield
to you for your observations of
the bill before I I perceive in.
Well make some observations but
I'd like to start with the
motion on amendment like to
strike section to the bill this
is the purposes close I can't
recall that we've ever not
struck that for many bill and
I'd like to just take care of
that as a housekeeping matter we
do it every time so so my motion
is to strike section to purpose
portion of the bill which
frankly a principal reason why
the bill I thought needed to
come back to Judiciary.
That's my motion discussion on
that proposed amendment.
Second.
The second Sir Moores any
discussion is there any
objections the adoption of that
amendment.
Family will you show section two
from the bill struck.
my next motion is to strike
section thirteen of the bill
this is a severability clause
there's no reason for that to be
in statute
that all goes without saying I
don't know I was in this in a
lot of bills but it doesn't
belong in the in the law I move
that we strike section I'm sorry
section fifteen sub
separability.
Second from Santo Ivey Soto is
there any discussion on that
amendment.
And I should be reminded of.
Chandler I should have asked in
the last amendment but on
section fifteen separability
striking that is that acceptable
or unacceptable amendment Mr
chair to acceptable.
Get so on there being no other
discussion seeing hands for
recognition because any
objection to striking section
fifteen of the bill the
separability costs
I think seeing non that
amendment is adopted.
I
think there's been some good
work done here I just would like
to echo a couple of things first
of all the penalties provision
bills are very very strong
and and could be very very
costly to businesses and we have
a strong penalties already in
our law for other wage
violations which I think is a
good thing the difference is
this I think.
An employer should have an easy
time of paying their employees
the minimum wage or or other
prevailing wage and and that's a
relatively simple matter the
employer as employee clock in
clock out turned into time she
pays in the wage takes the
property deductions pays the
taxes and then pays are employed
that's a relatively simple thing
for me to do as an employer.
This bill would subject me in
all of their employees to very
significant financial penalties
attorneys fees treble damages
and soda for for things that
will be very hard for me to do
as an employer to keep track of
Senator Ivey Soto talked about
the how you keep track of what
is a calendar year how do how do
you keep track of how many hours
get computed in any given year
and we as as it is the bill with
the amendments.
If for different ways to compute
a twelve month period of time
one of based on a calendar year
one of them based on a fiscal
year one of the year right by
law one of them based on the
employee's anniversary date one
of them from the first use that
sick leave workers and one of
them from a twelve month rolling
period measured backwards in
time from the date the employee
uses earned sick leave those are
complicated and you got to do
that for every one of your
employees and keep all that
straight there's a lot of
opportunity in rural there for
error even for a well
intentioned employer I I hope
that would be true of me at all
I don't have an employee my law
firm was in there with me at
least ten years and and one's
pretty close to twenty years so
hopefully that the and of course
all these these benefits are
things that that I find and
happy to do very happy to do.
I think striking section five is
an important change to the bill
of by striking that we've saved
ourselves yes Representative is
probably two hours of questions
I had on that section of the
bill this is the public health
emergency section and and that's
merciful I I hope I'll have your
commitment to retaining that
amendment I know that you know
they'll they'll be suggestions
that you strip that off on the
floor you strip it off of the
house in on concurrence restrict
often conference committee
I would strongly suggest and and
really ask for your commitment
to retain that amendment because
if you if you try and reinstate
section five I assure you
they'll probably need yet many
many hours of questions that I
would have about that section
because they just and there are
so many questions about it.
Principally you know we we talk
about in that in that section
bill imposing this on a specific
geographic area that becomes
pretty complicated number one
number two section five is right
so that it can be imposed by
local government so that that a
additional eighty hours for
public health emergency there's
been a lot of discussion over
the last year about the
governor's authority to impose
restrictions and requirements as
an executive at the state level
section five as it's written in
the other definition bill gives
every sitting county the
authority to do this as well to
impose a public health emergency
and impose these requirements on
employers that would be pretty
intercompany I think of to let
every sitting County come up
with these so requirements on
their own could really I think
create a lot of disruption in
the state in terms of job for
women so so I really urge you to
resist trying to get section
five back into the bill or else
I really do think we could have
questions will take us through
the end of the session very
candidly
there was a suggestion that
section five and section six are
are distinct and unrelated I
just disagree with that section
I was the one that adds
additional eighty hours for a
public health emergency in
section six the last sentence
says that the sick leave require
this activist is in addition to
any paid time off for collective
bargaining agreement so that
this would add to the existing
collective bargaining agreement
terms and so I I think there is
a relationship between section
five and section six.
I share some of the concerns
that the Senator Ivey Soto have
with regard to documentation
it's kind of strange if you look
at.
Section seven.
Of the bill the first and the
first words out of section seven
so program facing documentation
shall not be required for sick
leave.
But then it says accepted
employer may require reasonable
documentation that sick leave is
been used recovered purpose if
the employee uses two or more
consecutive workdays so.
I'm not sure why we wouldn't
even have.
The first part of that section
because we're thanks
documentation not required but
then we want to say
documentation can be required by
the employer if the employee
takes more than two days so
there seems to be some
inconsistency there and then
there's a lot of discussion
thank you go to subsection
ceases of the employer chooses
required documentation of the
employer shall pay the cost of
that but anyway all all of that
section there talk a great deal
about documentation it's all
about it but it but it's seem to
be very inconsistent and it says
in the employer can't require
equity but says their employer
can requirement.
I I I think that in terms of
health issues there were there
probably in the number ways that
that employer could verify this
and I again I would trust the
employer and employee to have a
good relation to doing that.
Section eight deals with posting
of signage and so forth
ultimately one of my concerns
with this bill is
what unintended consequences.
So we have a number of
provisions that provide for what
happens when an employees
furloughed there are a lot of
furloughs during the then that
during the during the pandemic
early days.
with my partners in el Paso we
have.
Probably together collectively
maybe fifty employees.
We we struggle a lot with PPE
and and
other opportunities that were
available to try to keep us with
our employees but that at the
same time
Trying to figure out whether we
could afford to keep them on
for extended period of time and
these are employees we wanted
for a very long time and you
want to keep whole so I I'm just
concerned because because
there's provisions the bill that
would suggest to me that that
some employers would simply
furlough their employees to not
have to pay.
for sensually employees who are
not present at work and and not
not able to be on operating the
business.
So those are my I think maybe
just general observations
In terms of specifics we we we
get to the place where we have
time for amendments I would I
would have you look at section
twelve.
Subsection Hey this is the what
we would normally call a statue
limitations section that says
you have three years to file an
action within it goes on to say
that three year shall be told
during investigation that means
you get three years plus however
long there's an investigation
going on by the division.
I don't know I I know I have all
the confidence and secretary
mccamley has to be so with us
but you know sometimes state
agencies take awhile sometimes
take months sometimes take years
in in I don't know a lot of
civil rights were but in in in
federal civil rights law you
have the right to eventually
request a right to sue letter
essentially that tell the the
government even had enough time
to investigate we we rescued or
released us to allow us to go
ahead proceed this to
not withstanding the fact you're
still investigating this claim
and and my expectation is the
lawyers on those are probably
familiar with that and and
probably see that pre routinely.
So my concern here is with this
languages says you get three
years plus however long it takes
the division to investigate that
could be a long time that could
be four years five years or or
or so I would I would strike
that language.
In subsection AOC duplication
you'll see it reads an
investigation by the division
shall not be required to file
civil action and it goes on from
there the same thing is that in
subsection CSS a civil action to
enforce maybe I without first
filing a an administrative
complaint said the same thing
they just said with different
words but they really do affect
the same purpose
and.
As I pointed out the the
penalties are significant now
the penalties on employers who
fails to get this right
sometimes I I I I imagine there
there will be employers who
purposefully try to cheat their
employees I'm not naive of the
idea that all employers are good
to all their employees is is I
think probably unrealistic but I
think most employers do and and
so the fact that if an employer
gets this wrong computes the
dates wrong computer twelve
months from computes the amount
do wrong.
Fails to comply with all of
these things they're liable for
the damages three three times
NMSA up to which we sometimes
but a lot and say up to three
times it's just three times so
if the employee is shorted a
certain amount of money multiply
that by the number of employees
multiply that by three times and
it could add up
in in the very crippling to some
businesses.
And and then add to that the the
provision here that allows for
recovery of attorney's fees
which is not uncommon in some of
our some of our labor law so
that does not strike me to be
extraordinary but it's a big
burden and can be very very
expensive so those are my
general thoughts I'm not.
Taking care of a couple of
amendments that I think were
important but all of all leave
you with those thoughts for now
and go back to the committee
members Senator Stewart I see
your hand up in the center of
the Soto you had asked to come
back to you again too so we're
with Senator Stewart right now.
Mr Chairman can we please hear
from the expert on Daniel A.
Ivey Soto is comments and yours
we can just yield please back to
the Mr you.
For answers to all the questions
that have been rates.
Certainly Mr use.
Mr chair at Senator thank you
I'm not sure if I could go
through and answer all of the
questions that they have been
raised that don't know if you
would appreciate you spending an
hour answering all the questions
I'll ask some of the questions
at the top and you can stand for
at specific questions let me
just tell you generally want
just one of my you can ignore
everybody else in.
Okay we'll do
hopefully to provide some
comfort to add this committee to
me just say this the bill is
mirrored in is at and the
conglomeration of fifteen other
state statutes around the United
States and for many of the
problems for example that
Senator Ivy Soto rates at those
problems exist in the already if
there are problems exist in in
the other fifteen statutes for
example the question of
definitions at every stage
statute has its own set of
definitions for employees and
employers and they are not
consistent with the definitions
of employees and employers in
the other states which is
consistent with New Mexico for
example the definition of
employee is different for the
minimum wage act and it is for
the public works minimum wage
which is different than it is in
the Human Rights Act which is
different than it is in the
whistleblowers Act each state
statute in the state of New
Mexico determines through its
definitional sections who will
be subject to the law and who
will be exempt from the law and
and by necessity those
definitions are different in
each one of that labor acts that
are at you know that are
associated with employee
protections in the state of New
Mexico I think it is a necessity
we have where possible near
definitions from other state
acts so that we don't have
situations where they're
crossovers but that is a
necessity in the context of
legislating in the area of
employment law I in my
experience there are several
issues raised kind of it
associated with who is eligible
and how the time is taken off
and then we just tell you in
terms of the drafting of the
statute what the drafters do
they took a look at all of the
fifteen other states statutes
and and some of the local
ordinances around country and
generally.
The most effective statutes are
those which provide expansive
definitions so that there isn't
a lot of litigation around
whether or not this is an
appropriate excuse for employees
but airs on the side of the
employee in those instances so
that employees can take up to
eight days per year and and so
that is how it has been drafted
in a way that essentially says
look if you're sick go ahead and
take the time off and if you're
gonna take more than one day we
need some verification but if
you don't feel well and you have
the flu that primary education
is gonna be better rest and so
take a day off and that's how
we're gonna operate the statute
that's how it's operated in most
most of the state hi and so the
way it was drafted was to more
those states we have borrowed
from federal statutes with
regard to the FMLA for example
the.
Provision which relates to the
manner in which the twelve month
provisions are calculating is
lifted directly from the FMLA
and so that language at Senator
about this Mr chair I I agree
with you is somewhat confusing
and I don't love it but it is
contained in the FMLA and so we
have put it into our statutes so
that the cruel system would be
the same so that employers would
be familiar with it and frankly
at the request of employers so
that they can choose and manner
in which they wanted to conduct
the twelve month measuring.
So so we had in many respects
attempted to comply income
before the legislation with
other state and federal laws
and and I think it is a it is a
system which will serve both the
employees and the employers of
the state of New Mexico well
because it provides a basic
system and minimum standard for
health care the final point I
think that that Senator Ivy Soto
raise which HBs important then
mention is the exemption under
the railway labor act the
railway labor act is a law
passed by the United States in
nineteen twenty six amended in
nineteen thirty four and it
preempts employment law with
regard to this particular area I
will give you an example when an
employee is injured and is a
railroad employee they're not
subject to New Mexico's workers
compensation loss instead of
they're subject to the federal
employees labour axilla in in so
the particular provisions of
this act would be examined under
the federal let at railway Act
in we were asked to rate this
exemption into the lot to make
it clear we were asked by the
rail roads and so that's why
it's in there there is what if
there is a difference whether or
not it would be complete or
ordinary preemption we didn't
want to get into all that
litigation and it seemed most
appropriate in the interests of
the state of New Mexico to exact
what is already exempt under
federal law finally I will say
this Mr chair the penalty
provisions I think are
appropriate under the
circumstances the New Mexico
legislature over the last
fifteen years has adopted
penalties as associated with
labor allies for one specific
purpose penalties provide
employers with the incentive to
comply with state labor laws
involving employees it
encourages employers to air on
the.
Side of providing those rights
and those counties provide and
guarantee a much higher level of
compliance which is as you noted
at your survive this are
contained in the minimum wage at
the public works minimum wage
act hi there contained in at the
Human Rights Act and that
penalty system was borrowed and
incorporated into this law and I
think it is appropriate under
the circumstances.
Employers are going to comply
with this it's not difficult
what to comply with but we want
employees to understand it if
they are cavalier in their
approach about providing sick
leave to their employees there
will be consequences and this
encourages employers not to be
cavalier ultimately I think this
law representative at the best
of fifteen other state laws in
in sort of concert with the
system us and placed in the
state of New Mexico and at I
think it's absolutely important
the pandemic brought into stark
relief the importance of having
sick leave in the increase in
employment contracts and if you
look at the academic literature
on paid sick leave it that
demonstrated very clearly that
it produces and net benefits for
employers employers who have
employees to stay home when
they're sick operate more
efficiently they make more money
and while employers don't like
it necessarily just like they
don't like the minimum wage and
Human Rights Act it results in a
better safer workplaces and more
productive business environment
in the state of New Mexico and I
I think we should join fifteen
other states and hundred and
forty other countries in docked
in the system.
Senator Ortiz for.
I'm moving to pass as amended.
Motion is to pass.
Mr Chairman is amended Senator
Ivey Soto so I'm gonna ask a
question of the Sanchez.
And I'd like them to think very
carefully before they answer.
Would you be willing to accept a
rewrite of this bill that we can
get them by Judiciary tomorrow.
That would make this a state out
on to FMLA.
That would make it that we would
that we would reference the
definitions and FMLA without
restating them.
That we would have a is that
this would cover any employee
covered by FMLA.
That they would have a minimum
amount of the
sick leave paid sick leave
available to them.
And that could be used for any
purpose allowed under FMLA.
R. that is that is a bill that
could be re written up between
today and tomorrow we could
voted out of the Senate
Judiciary Committee by tomorrow.
If if the R. Sanchez were
willing to work within that
framework.
so my my question is is that is
that something that you would be
willing
are you on with that.
Mr chair is it appropriate to
answer at this point it's a
question directed to you yes
okay
Mr chair and senator FMLA it's
my understanding FLA MLA applies
to employers with employees of
fifty and over am I not correct
in that fact Mister chairman
Senator.
Mr chairman and Representative
Chandler and applies of that is
the private sector definition
there's a separate public sector
definition that does not have a
limitation on employees and we
could lower of the number of
employers on that it would've
been so there's a to pass us.
Mr Mr chair and and Senator at
what what I heard you just say
is I believe you would be
willing to lower would you be
willing to eliminate the fifty
percent to zero employees.
Mr Chairman representative shall
I do want go to fifteen which is
the standard for most of the
federal programs.
regulating employment in the
press.
Mr chair and and the Senator if
you could give me one second if
you don't mind.
Your.
Mr chair and senator we can't
agree to modeling are sick leave
hell on the FMLA.
I'm sorry Representative
general's mind mildly distracted
there from your response to
Center Ivy Soto question please
Mr Mr chairman and senator we
can not agree to that we don't
think it's a workable solution
for the employees of the state
of New Mexico thank you.
And certainly this is your bill
your right to make decisions on
your bill.
Respectfully then I'm with.
We have a tabling motion which.
supersedes the.
Two passed motion.
We'll take a roll call vote
maybe give me just a moment
please.
No.
Mr chair.
What
do we have a chair.
He asked for a few moments he
asked us to wait a few moments.
We work.
Right now all our.
Senator o'neill.
Yes.
We're waiting on our chairman.
I'm sure he's very got into this
moment and I'll be back shortly.
There is yes yes.
Thank you.
Right now there's a table in
motion Mr Chairman.
Very subtle.
I'm I'm not gonna be able to
support a do pass motion on this
bill however before proceeding
with the tabling motion.
if I may withdraw that and make
a motion for no recommendation.
Well the motion did you pass
motion the take the precedence
as the first filed motions so
we'll take a vote on that first
that's the motion before the
committee to do passes amended
in that.
Hold on a second and that should
fail center I was sort of an all
recognize you for the motion on
wrecked Senator Baca on the do
passed motion debater decisions.
Senator Baca we could hear you.
So to motion to table.
Right that the emotions non
debatable.
We'll take a vote on the tabling
motion.
Only please.
Local.
Yes.
Now.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Lopez.
No.
Course work yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
No.
Senator.
Senator focus.
I'm sorry to read about from
Senator Ivey Soto no I did not.
My vote for this motion that at
this time is no.
So that tabling motion fails.
Subjectivity and renewed.
we had a due pass with no rec
motion and we had to do passed
motion so do passed motion still
has the president's Ebeling
motion
with the the president motion I
also want to do passed motion we
can still have debate or
discussion on that motion I'll
look to members the committee
and I'd like to debate that do
best motion of members the
committee anyone else.
Also representatives
My my vote on the do passed
motion my vote on the tabling
motion that we just went through
my Goshen on a no rec motion are
all dependent on one
understanding which is that the
bill that leaves this committee
will be the bill.
That would be considered law in
final form I'd like to have a
commitment from the sponsors
that you'll retain the work of
this committee and the
amendments put on the bill in
this committee your in your
commitment to doing so
if if I have that commitment
that I and my vote will be one
way if if I don't have that
commitment my book maybe a
different way so Representative
Chandler
Representative Rubio
Representative Ohio when I
brought this bill would like to
know what I'm ultimately voting
on it and I believe that's the
bill that we have with the
amendment of this committee
representative check any can you
commit to retaining these
amendments through the final
passage of this bill.
Mr chair I can commit that we
will not try to amend the bill I
mean I I can't I can't speak
what could happen elsewhere and
I will commit to not encourage
other people's to amend help
that at this point that's all I
I think that's a fair commitment
would you not agree Mr chair.
I think that's what is fair is
is so I can expect from you but
I would but I would ask you to
you know the commitment to honor
the work of this committee and
our vote by not voting to remove
the amendments of the committee
of that that would be troubling
for me just because as I said
there are a number of provisions
the bill that I did not attempt
to amend today or to discuss
with the understanding that they
are are amended by the action of
this committee if if the actions
of this committee were on done
then I would feel compelled to
spend the time necessary to
fully examine all those other
sections of the bill that I'm
for going today I hope that
makes some sense to you.
Mr chair and does it is just
that I can only account for my
own behavior I can't account for
an entire body Mr Chairman and
of course of course and you have
the same commitment from
representative to buy it and
Representative Rubio.
Mr chair Senators I think we
came in to this situation
knowing that things would be
check this legislation we I
believe anyway and that there
are a lot of workers will
benefit moving forward and I
think it is in the best interest
of myself and the folks that I'm
representing that we proceed and
and I ate I fully respect was
happened today and I I would
just like to move on at this
point.
Representative Herrera any
thoughts.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I I fully respect the
amount of time that this
committee put in the discussion
and the debate
I.
Agree with Representative
Chandler and what we have
control over what we don't have
control over and I respect that
as well.
And I do also agree with
Representative Rubio that we
have a tremendous obligation and
responsibility to the vast
majority of our constituents
around the state to have on
articulated
they they are support and the
need more than anything for this
bill so those are our
commitments I think that's the
best we can do we have very
little control over anything
else but I do respect that the
the amount of hours that were
put into this on committee
discussion and
and would like to also just sure
everyone that there is respect
for that and we need to just
move on in the name of all of
the hard working populations of
our state and also the small
businesses that were taken into
consideration all of us
in in this dialogue in this
debate so I appreciate what is
happened thank you and would
like to respectfully move on
thank you.
Answers to the question maybe
not as direct as I would have
liked
Yeah again I'm trying to avoid
spending the time to amend the
bill into
to go through the bill in some
detail I'm going to all right
I'm gonna vote accordingly
with the expectation that we
don't have to have the hours of
debate discussion on the floor
to go through things that this
committee would have eliminated
or or already resolved here
today so we're gonna do passed
motion.
We go ahead and take growing to
do past motion please.
Senator.
Yes.
No it's my my vote
Senator Lopez.
Yes yes.
Wars were no.
Share Pirtle.
Senator Stewart
yes.
So.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes.
There's a do pass motion five to
four center Ivey Soto
explainable.
I would avoid a personal
recommendation I cannot given
the issues of race in this bill
up vote on
the past.
Please understand and and and
this is not those struggle with
is.
Wanted to headline in
implementing details into public
seven things.
And
and and I am just
the primary concern about the
details of this bill it was it's
it's it's been improved over
what was it is it is still
amazingly problematic and.
I just I just right you know.
We really need to think these
things out much much more before
we bring them.
Are you trying to make some
lost.
Thank you.
Offline are very different than
regulatory details that will
have to be.
And point.
Thank you Sir every Soto I look
forward to an interesting for
debate on this bill that
completes the work of the
committee today we're in recess
you would do passed motion as
amended in this committee thank
you.
Thank you you all.
