This committee will.
Let us to just maybe the four
star families we find ourselves
in the community a little bit
more time models the other goes
I'm just putting in a plug for
you now.
Maybe maybe maybe not in the
we're going to be here the
number of bills afternoon we're
going to do a hard stop time at
six thirty a of want to make
sure that we recognize that
there is an event for staff that
deserve to be appreciated in a
lot of lot of our staff are
we're just I want to go so we'll
go to six thirty that it begins
at six a little chip a little
late but will work hard for the
next hour and a half.
The agenda I'm gonna hear built
in the little different order on
of finance and feel more clear
about to order which will here
bills from the front end so
announce that to and we've got a
couple of very short
presentations on the issue of
CYFD of this issue is still
worthy I think of the
committee's time with a short
presentations about just for ten
minutes we have Representative
for the governor's office which
I appreciate them accepting an
invitation and then also from
LFC the reason in part is
because we have quite a few
built in this committee in
coming to this committee from
the house relating to so what I
guess I would call of of
attempts to reform CYFD and
that's been a continuing topic
that has been coming up quite a
bit so it seems like a good a
time to discuss where we would
go with
Of the.
Big picture where those are at
so center you have to forgive me
we're gonna hear those
presentations for so so we'll
hear first of all from
parishioner with the LFC and
then.
Of governors got one more
presented here I guess I don't
know if it's going to be are you
with one to one percent okay.
And so we would do is as each of
them to give us a five or ten
minutes at most is discussed the
governor's executive order where
things are at twelve with the
LFC and then we'll get to the
bills the bills we heard this
order will here Senate bill two
sixty.
Senate bill three eighty eight
and and that in this order
Senate bill one seventeen those
are consistent with the agenda
you're saying.
Well then here's Senate bill one
forty three.
Two sixteen one forty six three
seventy three.
I've been asked would see them
looking at this real quick.
I I would just I'm sorry three
seventy three which an L. seven
S. by the Sanchez Griego
sometime in to not hear that
bill until Monday so the the
that will be heard on Monday all
right.
Okay on the.
CYFD please thank you.
Hi Mr chairman.
Members of the committee my name
is Eric should be able to LFC
analyst I work on issues kind of
surrounding the children youth
and families department.
I'm not here to speak
specifically on the executive
order no that's on the agenda
but that's more of the executive
branch kind of seeing this stick
more to what LFC does kind of
our bread basket kind of thing
our bread and butter kind of
thing.
Yeah and.
What I wanted to do first before
I get into the presentation into
the handouts that you guys have
in front of you wanted to talk
through just kind of set the
stage for you
some of the history behind us
CYFD when my colleagues at CYFD
are at the LFC
Mason act Berg actually worked
on a short history of CYFD going
back to some of you might know
this but for those of you that
don't.
and during that during that you
hearing back in the summer
my colleague Mason found that
CYFD may have strayed away from
the original intent of its
founding.
By removing preventive services
as a division and the service
area.
In nineteen ninety one the
governor convene a task force
and children youth and families.
Led by First Lady Alice king
that led to the creation of
CYFD.
The system prior to the creation
of CYFD was described as crisis
oriented.
Failing to support families in
meeting basic needs and only
responsive to families after
they were in trouble.
The six CYFD came into being in
nineteen ninety two the six
divisions.
I'm not gonna read those out but
prevention and early
intervention were prominent in
the nineteen ninety one task
force report which is evident in
the fact that the preventive
services was one of the original
CYFD divisions.
In two thousand five legislation
transferred adult protective
services to the aging a long
term Services Department and
consolidated the seven divisions
and for purpose.
Upping preventive services as a
focus area.
Today we have the four divisions
that they are now going to those
a little bit more in this
presentation but right now I'm
going to go over this
presentation this slide hound
out.
And I'm just gonna jump to slide
three.
And included in here a data
point a twelve month repeat
maltreatment.
This is one of the most
important measures of our child
welfare system.
That is the most support for any
child welfare agency it tells us
whether our intention for
whether interventions are
working.
New Mexico is consistently among
the poorest performing states
when it comes to repeat child
maltreatment.
High poverty rates complex
family needs such as substance
use domestic violence on mental
health needs an unstable housing
lack of services for recruitment
and retention of all been cited
by the children youth and
families department as obstacles
to reducing outreach to right
closer to the national average
you'll notice this goes to
twenty nineteen.
ACF the administration for
children families they literally
just came out with their next
year's data like a few weeks ago
I haven't been able to update
this presentation but it's in
the most part I did go through
that and most of the state
hasn't really changed this is
still kind of the big picture of
what what the what what the
The child welfare world looks
like in New Mexico and and
nationally.
So child maltreatment in New
Mexico on slide four I just
wanted to point out the one
thing that did change
and this is this is some good
news in the data for twenty
twenty one was that child
fatality rate right there on the
left hand side we actually
dropped to two point one per
hundred thousand so we're
actually a below the national
average of child fatalities
right now so that's that was
good news.
They don't want to talk on the
table to the right hand side
there one point slide for child
victims with care giver risk
factors.
And you can see there the two
biggest by far care giver risk
factors for maltreatment or
alcohol abuse and drug abuse.
In twenty nineteen New Mexico
enacted legislation to coincide
with the federal comprehensive
addiction and recovery act plans
of safe care
requiring health care providers
that insert new board drug
exposure fetal alcohol spectrum
disorder to develop a plan of
safe care before discharging to
the to the care of a caregivers.
Starting prevention services of
families with alcohol and drug
use is likely to have the
greatest effect that's that's
kind of you know I mean that's
that's low hanging fruit there.
this next slide slide I I just
included this in their to kind
of give everybody an idea of you
know where to CYFD fit within
the bigger picture of child
maltreatment prevention
and they kind of fit in that
bottom mostly in that but you
know it's it's.
They can fit in other places too
but mostly in that bottom rung
there that tertiary services
that includes differential
response family support services
foster care other services like
that.
moving on to slide six.
So what can be done
On this table here on the side
of the total benefit to cost
ratio by program LFC has been
talking about this for years now
that there's.
Cost benefit to a lot of these
programs
you know the one of the biggest
ones though if you look at that
one all the way on the left it's
almost sixteen dollars that
you'll get out of this program
for every dollar that you put
into it.
Also the next one over safe care
less and that's another big one
rate differential response
diverts families from child
welfare systems into services
rather than putting children and
families to dramatic removals
when appropriate.
I can also help the department
use current manpower better.
and then if you look at that
table there on the right hand
side you'll see that a lot of
states report alternative
response the state of New Mexico
we passed a law that I believe
is in twenty twenty one.
Data differential response and
we're a little bit behind the
curve on that
are differential response
program right now is just a
pilot it hasn't been set in
statute to become kind of a
statewide practice that's a big
thing that could help us how to
use our our
our staff a little bit better.
moving on to slide seven what
can be done.
Nationally recognized evidence
based best practices and
prevention and intervention a
few examples so we just talked
about differential responses
called a lot of different things
alternative response multi level
response in our statutes we call
it multi level response.
But we already talked about care
a there's also the safe
home safe care home visiting
program
safe cares an in home program to
promote positive parent child
interactions is for families at
risk of or who have a history of
abuse and neglect and HSE
version of house bill to the
appropriations bill includes
funding for that safe care of
program in there.
Another thing we could probably
do is look at requiring CYFD to
report on frontline worker
credentialing status you know
maybe kind of figure out of
percentage and required that
percentage to be
licensed and credentialed by a
certain period of time getting
or workforce within fifty a
little more professional last.
Slide eight CYFD is roll again
there's those the four divisions
protective services behavioral
health in juvenile facilities
and programs support like to go
to those a lot of detail.
so to get move on to slide nine.
this is the children in care by
placement type this is kind of
important I data piece here this
gives us an idea of how many
kids are in foster care versus
non relative foster care and
other placement types
you can see the over time you're
looking at the purple line there
that goes across
big picture.
we've had less children in
placement it's yes the case load
has been reducing over time.
national trends and best
practices have been towards
offering more prevention and
reducing the number of children
in foster care moving children
is traumatic for the child and
family and outcomes are better
if we removals can be prevented
we can't always prevent them but
when we can we we should just
strive to do that.
Now for getting in to yes go
ahead for this four nine.
The numbers over here and if I
was numbers over here I
understand this right yep Mr
chair members of the committee
the the access on the left hand
side that would be of.
Pointing to the bars.
Right so and then the access on
the right hand side that's your
purple line.
That's referring to that purple
and there.
I apologize for moving through
this a little fast I know that
we've got a full schedule ahead
of you so try to be respectful
of your time we're gonna slide
ten.
so I just wanted to give some
history and background on to a
fifties spending patterns.
I would look if on that table on
the left or the chart on the
left I CYFD protective services
spending categories.
you'll see that spending on
prevention within the protective
services program was about six
percent of total expenditures.
In FY twenty two.
But the amount has grown
significantly since FY eighteen
and that kind of goes back to
that whole entire thing of you
know the history of
Preventive services were kind of
a big thing when CYFD was
created and and that kind of
went away now we're kind of
building it back again.
in FY twenty two in FY twenty
three the legislature reinvested
savings from smaller foster care
caseloads to prevention services
totaling five point seven
million.
The federal government enacted
the families first prevention
services act in twenty eighteen
allowing the state to use title
forty of federal funds for
prevention services.
In that middle chart there I
just wanted to point out
The behavioral health spending.
Hi you know the the the blue at
the bottom there there's a big
increase in twenty twenty one FY
twenty one that was for domestic
violence programs the move that
into the program.
Then on the right hand side
there so the to the two charts
on the left that is actual
spending from the department the
chart all the way there on the
right the CYFD general fund
history by program that's what
you all this body has
appropriated to the department
so you'll see enough between FY
twenty one FY twenty to the
Department actually spent a
little bit less money but
This body actually appropriated
more money and you can see
you know on the right access to
their that appropriations have
been increasing over the past
few years especially in
protective services in
behavioral health.
Now one of the big things with
CYFD how do we how do we kind of
approve some of these issues
that we've been talking about
CYFD workforce is a huge is a
huge piece of it
at national caseloads of
investigators into alternative
response workers in twenty
twenty I looked at the more
recent data for twenty twenty
one this hasn't changed too much
but New Mexico has a average
caseload it's double the
national average and so are our
front line workers to working
hard
it's got a huge caseload and we
do things that can kind of
improve those caseloads.
chronic workforce senator played
just about every area of the New
Mexico child welfare system
including social workers case
workers investigators and other
workers in the provider network.
The chart on the right.
Protective services personnel
appropriations and filled FTE
you can see that again the
legislature has been increasing
appropriations over the years to
see why FTE but that filled FTE
count that field bodies actually
in positions has been decreasing
at the same time and so that's
that's kind of something we need
to kind of take a closer look
at.
So going on to the house adopted
budget for.
FY twenty four this year the
best a fiscal year that we're
working on right now.
Our budget items targeted at
prevention workforce include be
included twelve million for
Medicaid behavioral health which
is going to be matched with
about forty two point three
million in Medicaid revenue so
that's going to leverage a lot
of money for that.
we could included seven point
six million for prevention
programming.
for well supported or supported
programming.
but million for that safe care
home visiting program that I
referenced earlier.
eight million for appropriate
placement salary adjustments
that's a big thing with
recruitment and retention when
you have your salaries within
the the pay structure kind of
out of whack then it it makes it
hard to recruit and retain.
Ways and so fixing that is is a
big thing in the budget this
year.
three Canadian behavioral health
clinician teams.
And then a nonrecurring
appropriation for to implement
the department's workforce
development plan for three
million dollars and that
includes training and
professional development local
recruitment incentives for in
state and out of state
recruitment efforts.
and then also other other things
are in there too and then just
to point out I just want to
point out a last page here the
LFC documents you can always go
on our website the websites
listed on the next page
you can see our policy documents
or performance documents
You know that the budget
recommendation and supplemental
tables and then on the very very
last page page fourteen you'll
see it looks like this and
that's just to more detail on
what's in the budget for CYFD
for FY twenty four
and I hope.
That'll leave you with that
thank you Mr ridiculousness this
is so great thank you very much
and thank you Mr chair for that
information some of that is
helpful for us as we move
forward but good afternoon and
thank you for allowing the
governor's office to come down
and give us an opportunity to
update you on the work that's
being done at CYFD I know that
on February sixteenth the
governor announced executive
orders and made it clear that
the department needs some
transformation in the way that
we serve and protect the state's
most vulnerable children.
So just wanted to give you an
update on the last two weeks and
CEO has been issued so since
then we have assembled a tiger
team of policy advisers cabinet
secretaries and other
individuals to begin this work
we're still building that team
but we have.
Ten people thus far we've also
entered into a contract with Mr
Pacelle who is an expert with
over thirty years experience in
assessing organizational systems
with a high degree of complexity
and so as Mr Scheer pointed out
this department used to be seven
divisions and then it got merged
into for programs and so we're
really going down to the bare
bones of the department to look
at what needs to be done and
what is important in today's
delivery of services so that we
can then identify those
divisions divisions and then
start to feel that back up so
we're looking at moving models
from other states had gone
through similar restructuring
and are now delivering
excellence for their children
and families it's taking those
ideas you know some from one
state and some from another not
everybody does all perfectly but
we're hoping to really
capitalize on what's going well
in some of the other states and
pulling back in to our structure
as we rebuild that we requested
one time funding in the current
legislative session to enable us
to enter into contracts with
experts to establish priorities
assessed problems remove
unnecessary steps integrate some
of those best practices develop
training programs for current
and new staff I think to his
point is really important that
the staff have the right tools
to be able to do the job that
we're requesting of them we're
also working together dashboards
that often reviewed we viewed
the preliminary design of that
so that we will have information
available to the public in real
time on some of the issues that
they're really interested in
seeing access really working
through that we're moving
forward on developing the office
of innovation which will
identify and provide best
practices from around the
country that will improve
outcomes for the children.
So we've also in the executive
order indicated that we would be
establishing the policy Advisory
Council which will bring a voice
from every area of the child
welfare community the members
there include representation of
service providers foster care
youth advocacy behavioral health
a lawyer as well as family
members with experience with
CYFD
this group our hope is that this
group will provide another layer
of accountability I now for the
policy advisory kick council
will be forthcoming I was hoping
to pass that out to you guys to
date we have not confirmed one
member yet to serve and so
everybody else has confirmed
their willingness to serve on
this task force and if we can
get that pleaded Maddie who's
with me today we'll be sending
out a press release announcing
that it will make sure that all
of you have a copy of those
members with their bios so that
you can see who those
individuals are
This is the work that we've
really been working on and I
wanted to see thank you for your
support in making sure New
Mexico has all the tools
necessary to engages support
these families the communities
and especially those are who are
most vulnerable I want to
especially thank output to the
Stewart house Majority Leader KC
Senate majority whip Michael
Padilla and all of the
legislature you guys come
together with us to really look
at the problems that we're
facing and help us with you know
everything in your power in our
power to make sure that these
kids are safer and I believe
that working together we can
really figure out a path forward
and get those workers who I know
work incredibly hard every day
and up the wants to be
successful they want to provide
the services to those families
and those kids and you know none
of us want to see any more
fatalities or critical incidents
or any of those issues we want
to make sure that we're doing
everything we can to avoid those
situations and giving them what
they need to do that so this
operational work that we're
doing the research of the
assessment it's our commitment
to making real change in real
life delivering real outcomes
it's not going to happen
overnight we're really focusing
on doing it right and building
it back together and having of
division in the department that
we can all be proud of and that
the workers could be proud of
the work that they do and that
they're proud of the training
that they received to do that
work and so we look forward to
your continued support in
building not Department and look
forward to working with you you
know as we move forward in the
next on the weeks and months and
you know over the next year to
make sure that together we're
getting what we need to get them
the results that they need so
thank you very much for having
us today if you think it was
because of the the original idea
behind schedule today's hearing
was in conjunction with Senate
bill three seventy three office
of child advocate at.
by Senator Diamond is here with
us today than Center guy goes
with your earlier noted speaking
with them we've decided to
appear that bill on Monday not
today but I never once never
less because we've made
arrangements with the
presentation I want to proceed
with a presentation so I
appreciate Senator Diamond being
here today and hopefully we'll
see us up for your bill's next
week I think you're much all
right thank you both very much.
Should the meeting without
logging into the log through the
end of the session I know we
have a numbers I said we're
house bill's coming our way.
All all the notes again the
first three bills we're gonna
here to get started I've
addressed them in this sort of
because I think they're gonna be
very quick and open committee
members will see it the same way
first one is Senate bill two
sixty please look closely
quickly developing a find it
very simple.
Senator sure expecting very
quick presentation.
And no opposition.
Okay.
The building.
Move to pass.
Sure thank you Mr chair so
central to sixty really deals
with antiquated language of few
years ago we took the word idiot
out of which was a a medical
term time is put in today we're
removing the words mentally
retarded and inserting
individuals with developmental
or intellectual discipline
intellectual disabilities that's
all it does.
Removing adequately.
Thank you Sir.
We've got nobody the opposition
registered nobody proponents
registered pleasure the
committee Senator.
For the past any further
discussion on the subject.
All the work for the.
Really I would just ask you for
that because of this bill.
Yes that's that's all it does is
remove antiquated language just
a budget.
After two.
The legislative provisions state
it was a little
Removing the words mentally
retarded yes.
Transportation is there any
objections to do best motion.
Thing north show in the
affirmative center we service
Senator the ceremonial Center
to access our office and are
Wirth the passenger.
Thank you.
Senator bill Senate bill three
thirty eight.
We'll go to Center souls in
Senate bill one seventeen after
that.
Senate Bill see how you do it.
The defense missions.
That didn't work.
I thank you Mr chairman.
And I'll just let you know
Senator.
we get a reminder.
We have some procedures that are
designed to help me keep the
committee on schedule we have
nobody registered in opposition
to this bill only one proponent
of joyous person from New Mexico
counties Senate Bill thank you
Mr Miller expert today's
statement Lara who's the
assessors and really County
as most of you know I spent my
career last thirty seven years
as a real estate appraiser and
that's what this is about is
trying for assessors do credible
real estate appraisals right now
the current statute allows them
to get data on sales of homes
but because of the.
Conflicts in getting the law
passed in the past in the past
efforts it does not allow for
them to get sailed out of on
commercial properties that's the
essence of what it does change
just a few words in Mohawk
current statutes and if you want
to have credible valuations
assessors will set your taxes
your taxes are set by the county
commission on the bonds and
whatever else is out there the
assessors sets the values that
your property is taxed on and if
you and the if you know Senator
Cervantes and senator Wirth have
identical buildings and once by
as much as the other one then
somebody's getting messed around
on their taxes so this is about
fairness and I'll turn it over
to my experts Mr large the talk
a little more about the position
of the assessors and what they
are hoping to achieve this.
Mr chair members of the
committee the thirty three
county assessors are all in
support of this bill as well
then we stand for questions very
much.
This everybody have this you
know what.
We're we don't have this bill
and I know what that is.
It's that short.
It is actually just strikes
residential includes real
property.
It is.
Last.
The last.
There is out of order really
there in the notebook and just
not numerical order.
It's a last bill in your.
Since it's out of.
This does exclude but where
culture is not included as
agriculture valued by special
formula that has nothing to do
the service by the actual sale
prices.
just one second is that we got
the bill yet so should fund it
with one of our but we will get
the and I apologize we're gonna
get on operation of our our
service I thank you very much
civil I saw service or with
questions can be fast one right
service or not just a quick
comment the resistance areas to
Mexico's a nondisclosure State
correct as a nondisclosure state
that the affidavit has helped us
are but is not a public drive
that's correct.
You any other questions comments
committee members.
there's a motion for to pass
further discussion junction
shows that are Stuart Neal do
extra boxes worth would be
passed thank.
Their souls will once.
Thank you Mr chair.
The what this bill does is
prescribing psychologists New
Mexico was the first state to
have prescribing psychologists
but it requested to be under the
medical board there's been
substantial time The Medical
board wants to prescribe a
psychologist there everybody is
happy about this it is been
worked out there are no issues
with it I do believe we have an
amendment that from licensing
bureau but again everybody is
pleased with the amendment
there's no controversy about
that at all and so Senator Ivey
Soto if you'd like to present
the amendment I do have with me
the doctor John Courtney who is
a prescribing psychologist if
there any questions about the
scope of what this does but in
general everybody involved is on
board with this also online we
have Dr Steve Caskey from the
Medical Board who will also
testified that every they're all
in line with this.
Well that's being handed out.
My with this can give a very
brief introductions to who he is
senators about this and members
of the committee my name is Dr
John Courtney a prescribing
psychologist and the associate
director psychiatry for
presbytery medical services to
them here is the chair of the
legislative committee for the
association of prescribes a
colleges who have been safely
prescribing in New Mexico for
the last twenty years
Senate bill one one seven is
supported by the New Mexico
border Medicine the New Mexico
Medical Society New Mexico
psychological association so
today I'm here to request your
support for this bill thank you
very much.
First of all with with.
Mr chair I just wanted to make a
disclaimer that the the other
experts whose online is not
drive because he is my brother
in law.
On Friday I have no I don't no
interest in this bill.
I hope you have a positive in
December.
Representative on the menu
thanks very much Mr chairman
fisherman has the the bill was
initially drafted it would have
moved all licensure for
prescribes acknowledges the
medical board this we would have
ended up with some psychologists
being licensed by the state
board of psychologist examiners
and some psychologists being
licensed by the medical board
what this does
is it keeps all psychologists
licensed by the medical board if
someone chooses to be a
prescribing psychologist then
they would they would get a
prescribing psychologist lessons
from the Medical Board.
and and so they would action up
then so prescribes psychologist
would end up with two license
for this house board over the
Medical Board the psychologist
board is a requirement to get
the prescribing psychologists
licensed so all psychologists
would remain interest psychology
under the under the psychology.
This is a friendly amendment
everything is worked out of
everybody's combined.
The questions.
I believe.
that only women right no Sir Sir
will go back to the main thing
there's no objections the
option.
Senator no we want
see no objections the amendment.
Will show again for those
listening so Stuart o'neill do
X. are both is worth on the
amendment right on the bill as
amended.
We.
We're just let's see so experts
Dr Robert Frost officers.
Proponents we have registered Dr
Robert may feel Kerry for under
then you can talk with the Board
medicine job losses Dr Jon
Stewart station Thompson with
the psychiatric association New
Mexico Robert Rinaldi and Tyree
dealer there being no opponents
I'm not going to go to
proponents on the bill just
write that logistical social
your.
The state of right members of
the committee.
The committee questions coming
session.
Seeing none.
Best of.
Representative risotto steward
the fund is worth about.
Thank you very much thank.
Senator will officially go back
to you I know you're asked to
try and have years heard earlier
Jack I know you to read over
your of don't you better sit
Stacey
I I know you want to hear years
back to back I can understand
appreciate why and I would like
to be able to respect that I'm
trying to you may notice here
bills that are put we need to
quickly
of bankruptcy exceptions Senator
o'neill are you ready talk about
Senate to sixty and do so
quickly.
Exemptions and I think that
we've we've heard this issue
before my correct.
We passed this before.
Two minutes at.
Thank you.
I
It is.
There are only once again of us
the those in opposition or
support to register in advance
so I can gauge time there are no
registered opponents to the
legislation.
I've got two individuals
identified proponents imagine
they're sitting with you or
maybe not so anyway Center
o'neill quick presentation
please as I thank you Mr
chairman members Senator to
sixteen introduces adjustments
to the current state law
bankruptcy exemptions including
a significant increase and all
of the exemptions six specially
of the homestead in personal
property exemptions Furthermore
SB two sixteen introduces new
material section forty two ten
fourteen and I'm just say for
cost of living adjustments
proposing that at each two year
interval relevant sections of
NMSA including exemptions should
be adjusted to reflect the
change in the computer in the
consumer price index so Mister
Chairman death of my three two
experts can introduce themselves
fully and speak on behalf of
this bill then we can go to
questions.
Mr chair what I are from New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
we're supporting this bill
because yeah well so we can
Mexicans forty percent of New
Mexicans have that that's
collections right now with that
I'll turn it over to bill every.
Yeah my name's my name's William
ivory doing.
My name is William ivory on the
Attorney is Santa Fe I've had my
own practice for thirty five
years specializing
Representative chatters and
collection cases bankruptcy and
foreclosure cases has you know
the New Mexico exemptions I'll
be put up keep a certain amount
of property of a judgement
etcetera you get some or if they
file bankruptcy they have not
been the the exemptions statue
is a and acted in nineteen sixty
eight I believe has not been.
And the sense other than a few
minor increases in the homestead
exemption this bill basically
does three things it increases
the monetary limits potential
personal property such as cars
jewelry
to service trading cash.
just to keep up with the current
time since
Bill was enacted fifty years ago
and this the price prices of
increase allows people to keep
more value in the these assets
the second thing it does is.
It specifies what a household
good is the current bill is
extremely date is been a lot of
litigation unless a household
good event magistrates judges
tell me that computers are held
so close that T. these are
household goods that.
Take those assets before I had
to yield so this would allow me
a lot of litigation because it
really specifies what exactly is
the house of the.
Such as certain about our work
certain amenities which read
certain amount of guns.
So you Mr out with great yeah I
would like to go to a
constituent excidio.
Their story.
Sorry sorry I was just getting
carried away my my apologies Sir
thing the most important part of
the bill is increasing the
homestead exemption which is
currently at sixty thousand
dollars for single person one
twenty four married couple and
this will increase to two
hundred fifty thousand for
single person three hundred
thousand for a obviously the
price real estate increased
significantly this bill will get
us some money with Colorado and
Colorado and Arizona recently
increased their exceptional
situated fifty thousand so we're
still less than that but I think
a hundred fifty three hundred be
a huge benefits of the state I
can't tell you how many
bankruptcy client supposed bank
because people of copy of the
file bankruptcy with if no money
they've that they've developed
they've times it that live in a
fixed income but they have too
much value in their house the
house is worth more the sixty
thousand dollars the news at the
top activity so they won't they
won't they can file and I think
it's.
At least three.
We actually proposed increases
to two hundred the amendment you
have lower to one fifty which
I've made a compromise with the
New Mexico bankers association
with the community bankers
association and they are on
board with the proposed
extension of one fifty three
hundred okay thank you thank you
thank you and with that we'll go
to questions.
Thank you Sir.
Additional.
Unitary we have noticed this
issue with your opposition.
Members of committee.
We're doing.
that I know that the folks
working on this bill have.
Work Hey collaboration thanks
for calling off work hard to
get compromises.
For for everyone I wanted not to
appreciate that work
I would love to see those.
The exemptions that higher but I
understand that that that is the
with a concession that thank you
all maybe I.
More for that than those that
work for everyone including the
fact.
That's something that all help a
lot of people in the.
Through the committee members
questions at two sixteen.
There were judges really quick
again I really appreciate.
Increased by not just bankruptcy
and maintenance of this probate
work I just.
Six thousand.
I appreciate.
You're right the language a
little bit and.
It works and so.
Bill.
The committee questions or
comments.
There being no registered
opposition.
The motion to pass shares their
Buck yeah I want to this is the
primary focus.
Myself on the screen.
You'll be shown to be excuse any
further committee question.
Right let's to roll call vote
Emily please thank you the.
Thank you for our.
Federal you yes Senator Pirtle
that.
Senator Stewart yes Senator
Wirth yes.
Energetic yeah.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator yes six to eight hours.
colleague says of.
Additional update for those
committee members thank you all
very much thank you.
Thank you thank you for sure you
members of the contraction.
The committee members in
recognition of our staff in the
event schedule for them this
evening we have our to stop time
at six thirty is about forty
five minutes we have already
heard and while.
It upon Senate bill two sixty.
Three thirty.
One seventeen.
And now to sixty.
Yeah we did that was a senator
Neville on the of a commercial
property.
Senator.
You know so on one forty three.
And then my plan is after one
forty three to take.
One forty six.
One then one thirty eight the at
the request of the Sanchez we
roll over three seventy three
that will largely complete our
work centered avail again my
apologies to not be able to keep
you I think your bill's going
involve some discussion so we'll
we'll hear Center Yost I also
expect to be short.
And senator Munoz just so you
know.
We had nobody registered in
opposition to build nobody.
Register in support of your bill
evidently your bill is not of
any interest to anyone
So.
Senator.
Mr chairman members.
Sen bill one forty three
currently in the nonprofit
Gainey secretary Elks eagles
others the current slot machines
are set at four thousand dollars
the new technologies come along
an old technology just fade away
and so as we move to new
technology can't really program
machine for four thousand
dollars a pound anymore so as as
we move up we need to move the
machines to ten thousand some of
those issues are still
mechanical not electronically
from the program will anymore so
we're just gonna be a
representative and senator.
Of.
What DO you can find the bill
into the notebook again.
Really hard.
The public.
Thank god it was.
We'll make sure everybody's got
it from the rails have.
I.
Right right got it certainly
also sort of interrupting one
make sure we have to really
raise the cap from four thousand
ten thousand machines are
offered on operation of four
thousand more so just fixes the
timeline of history where they
can have prices at ten thousand
with me have Kodi joiner is my
expert witness thirty.
Mr chair members of the board.
My name's Cody joiner but New
Mexico gaming LLC and I'm here
to support this bill.
Questions for you Sir.
Right no region opposition
center Moores.
Certainly.
one was four thousand dollars a
year.
How long.
Service masters in your life.
C. R..
Mr chair Senator guesser this
bill was passed the law was
passed in nineteen ninety seven.
And that was four thousand get
then today's rate is around just
under seventy five hundred
dollars.
Question.
Yes Sir.
Mr chair Senator.
That.
As a further twenty questions.
Session.
Thirty.
Yes.
Wirth was to roll call please
thank you Senator what yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores yes Senator only
you.
Senator Pirtle yes Senator
Stewart.
There were.
Senator Duhigg.
Senator Ivey Soto.
There are several yes.
Seven two would you pass.
Chairman of vita Center were
thing Senator Stewart.
Senator Shendo here.
For Shendo.
And Representative Harper thank
you for being here it started
with you Sir the committee would
see if you look at your agenda
also for those of you that are
joining us we're going to be
tomorrow nine thirty Senators
all right nine thirty tomorrow
morning.
I
would like a new dad who hasn't
had a lot of the.
You seem to be holding up pretty
well there's and more time.
That we're dealing.
We'll hear a again with your
Senate bill one forty six will
be put our day with Senate one
thirty eight that will conclude
the agenda for today we can get
it done will be done by six
thirty as planned.
Representative Harper was stolen
from the we get passionate
arguments here.
Give me just a second one.
I believe left okay Mr chair he
does as a committee that are
this committee election charge
of we just a little bit
different than the house perhaps
I have proponents and opponents
register to speak and and
advance we have nobody register
to speak in opposition we have a
Chris Romero as a redshirt
proponent.
Representative what's gonna
present the bill with whatever
advocacy one do so less than ten
minutes all right.
The gentleman I think we can do
that by quite a bit so all just
first say
chairman committee members
I appreciate this creating
mystery shin and the secretary
every year we try to do changes
to our tax codes to update it
because there are changes to
help people like to.
defraud
there are issues that come up
and there are patterns that the
department sees one of these
issues come up and so they come
to us every year with suggested
changes in these that you have
before you all I have the
secretary explained them very
quickly but these are changes
that the secretary brought to us
and with that I'll hand it over
to the secretary.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and Stephanie
Schardin Clarke the secretary of
the taxation and revenue
department of keeping it really
quick I'll go section by section
and this little detail as
possible but please let me know
if you want more sections wanted
to increase the minimum amount
of delinquent tax that taxed Rev
can and assessed and that's just
keeping up with inflation the
last minimum was set in two
thousand seven so right now we
have a minimum of assessment
amount of twenty five dollars
the bill is proposing to
increase that to fifty dollars
and then because these two
things go together the
department would not look
assessed less than fifty dollars
and taxpayers protest less than
fifty dollars that sections one
into section three changes
language to better define the
application process to request a
tax credit from the department
it doesn't major things
it basically specifies that the
department's time to approve or
deny a tax credit starts ticking
when we have complete
application not an incomplete
application which happens a lot
now we have a hundred and eighty
days currently to approve or
deny but we often spend.
The whole hundred eighty days
just trying to attempt to get a
complete application and in
exchange for that our time will
all be when we have a complete
application we propose to take
down the number of days from one
hundred and eighty to one
hundred twenty days I think
that's a nice give and take to
the taxpayer Committee.
let's see section for has to do
with criminal tax fraud and tax
evasion we're just adding in a
new technology that exists since
the last time the section was
updated on the technology can
either be software or device
they're called phantom where if
it's a software or sales numbers
if it's a if it's a device but
basically these are things that
keep two sets of books at a cash
register of one that you used to
know what your receipts really
are and the second one to create
a fraudulent stream for tax
reporting purposes yeah we're we
we we do have indication that
this is going on to a small
extent to New Mexico but it's
probably going to grow over time
so we want to make it completely
clear in that statute that that
would be tax fraud if you did
that.
The remainder of the bill
sections five through nine all
have to do the property tax code
and we're really just clarifying
taxpayer protest rates and
remedies if there taxable asset
is assessed by the property tax
division of property tax and
rather rather than there county
assessor the property tax code
is really built around the
assumption that property is
assessed by Prof county
assessors but that's not always
the case there are large
properties that crossed county
lines that we centrally assessed
like railroads utilities things
of that nature and we need to
make sure that the protest in
remedy pieces are clear for when
it's just that assessed that's
it.
L. close the chairman by saying
this bill is present during the
intro to the revenue
stabilization Tax Policy
Committee and we've added if
there with that was never
questions.
Right As indicated there was no
registered opposition the bill
go right to the committee
committee questions.
Yes.
We do have some of the other
Senator Representative.
Thank you of the seven up.
Gentleman and Representative
Harper.
Secretary
What is the what is the
Current time line for a.
A hearing to take place.
contact.
Mr chair and since we're talking
about
About the hearing process.
Mr.
Okay
I do have a question.
What was that
Secretary rather.
what is the current time line
for five process.
Your.
Twenty eight these.
I wanted to.
The
property the.
Session wasn't talking about
from.
Okay.
Senator and Mr chair that I
reach that ascension because our
bill only deals with the
property tax code but I believe
it's a hundred and twenty days
in the tax administration act.
Yeah so this.
All of this is just as property
that included sexual.
Mr chair and senator Ivey Soto
section no sections five through
nine or in the property tax code
one three for our elsewhere in
the tax administration act that
they don't touch anything about
protests.
assessment amount I understand
yeah so so but my question was
what's the time line right now
for people to actually get a
hearing and Mr chair and senator
I believe the statutory limit is
a hundred and twenty days if if
anyone no interest from parents
here too from the H. shown here
come before them if you want to
add in.
Hi Mr chairman.
Mister chairman Senator
the time for requesting the
protest
begins the timeline for a Senate
hearing that deadline of ninety
days of nine instead of earns
all thank you.
Right Mr chairman and secretary
of Representative secretary
record information.
We are we've had timelines but
but but those timelines at least
a few as a few years ago were
routinely nothing in here to
address the timeline to actually
get the hearing.
Yeah so my question is where are
we in terms of actually getting
your yes so as a German and
Senator that's a great question
and you're right the time was
used to be atrocious and we
actually four years ago work
together with
former senator Candelaria and it
actually did a pretty
significant overhaul to that
statute and put in new timelines
time wise and and will under the
direction of to chief hearing
officer Brandon Bryant intends
and Dave made huge improvements
and I've seen the data.
And so Mr Chairman
representative secretary Romero
age of I will wear that because
that was a saliva yeah that's
right thank you chairman
Representative so thank you all
right and so therefore I repeat
my question is where are we in
terms of the actual timeline for
when you actually get there.
We move the timeline to give
again there is it Madam there's
not a coaches
positive or tracks in order to
encourage.
And then someone actually has to
get and
how close are we to those
statutory I thank you for
clarifying Mr chair and Senator
Ivy Soto I think that was Senate
bill one twenty nine four years
ago to my knowledge were meeting
all the statutory timelines I I
haven't heard of instances that
we're not and I I know of
alright Phil was also for the
department to file an answer
that is become part of our
normal process and if it's
routine.
Okay so so we're actually we're
within the we've always.
We actually do this effort I
want.
Mr chairman center yes.
In the affirmative effort okay.
and
The gentleman Representative.
one of the issues.
That be able to those are those
protections in Santa.
What's the issue of this office.
And and so I think I don't
understand why there's.
Part of.
Well there's a variety of our
budget.
The space access to rely on a
presumption right.
What it does is that it says
what information act doesn't
have the reason.
And so
has a production practices right
in section one of this is the.
yes.
Why.
Mr chair and senator Ivey Soto
certainly reasonable folks could
disagree about the presumption
of correctness as the department
I would be very concerned about
resourcing if the statute were
suddenly amend to switch the
presumption of correctness or do
away with the presumption of
correctness that is something
that we would need to study in
depth and reassess
The resources we would need
throughout the department
whether be the audit and
compliance division or legal or
protests but throughout that's
not something that we could
consider on the fly has the
department.
And I think there might be
potentially significant fiscal
impact assessed associated with
the change like that.
Of the server.
The fact what was that.
Mr chair and senator with you
know without having studied this
and I I'm not really sure how we
would go about setting it I have
to assume that if the
presumption were not there or if
it were shifted
that some of the borderline
cases with and differently which
would result in refunds or
abatements taxpayers meaning
that money would not end up in
the General Fund in local
government funds and other state
funds.
Tribal funds.
Yes so what I'm hearing this
gentleman is our fear is that
you did not is yes
Representative correctness
borderline cases taxpayer money
actually went.
Mr chair Senator yes that's what
the presumption that yes right.
That's issue separate actually.
So
do it that this gentleman I
moved to and section one strike
subsection C..
of
seven seven dash one dash
seventeen.
Because of that stress of
Representative.
That.
Very one of the Representative
you want to weigh in on the
proposed amendment.
The
gentleman and
Senator
All say this is a great
discussion.
I would actually love to have a
great discussion on this I think
I think.
I'll just say I don't think.
Intent of this legislation was
to deal with that at all
good so I would.
That would be my Madam chairman
hello to demi bills floating
around there Senator Ivey Soto.
The the service so you're on
that motion and if they're doing
on the motion thank subsection
C. page three from states that.
Mr chair so I was on the
Bernalillo county and have
property tax for.
File and.
We could almost I don't remember
maybe one time the one with all
and it was a really long weird
crazy cases and they have built
up their case by for it I mean
they have hired they have like
three attorneys they have put a
ton of resources into it and
that was the only reason we were
ever able to find in favor of
the tax.
Because our hands were
completely top.
otherwise I this presumption of
correctness
so to that extent I I I agree
with Senator Ivy Soto that we
should not have it that said to
remove it here on the fly I
think it's not a great idea that
is will have profound.
Support for our state it is not
something to be done and
On the fly that's something that
should be done thoughtfully in
coordination with the secretary
to make sure that that is done
in a way that is that they can
be done right thank you for the
committee members questions
comments.
were on that motion.
The other discussion was to roll
call please.
Senator Baca yes.
Senator accepted.
Senator Moores.
Senator Stewart now there were
no.
Senator Duhigg that.
Senator about this.
I'm gonna recuse myself from
this issue for reasons I'll
explain in a moment on this
particular issue so that motion
fails on a type of service so I
need to explain the reason for
my recusing myself from that
particular issue that one issue
as opposed the bill as a whole
with that motion fails of other
committee discussion and then
I'll come to the explanation of
the market.
Anyone else.
I'm involved in the current
litigated the case involving
taxation revenue
I'm adverse I've filed the tax
protests on an income tax issues
was a property taxation I
prevailed with the hearing
officer hired by the department
despite the departments
presumption well your sheet here
have a I I didn't think the
hearing officer and I didn't pay
for the hearing officer and the
hearing officer found for me in
the department is appealing it
in the lose I.
I guarantee of to all of you
that the department will lose.
Well I'm I'm being very
forthright and I'm trying to be
in a very very serious I've had
more than a few lawyers who've
come and express the general
adversarial relationship to the
Department of feeling that the
department is not very good with
taxpayers and I think that's
consistent with center Ivey Soto
is motion prep Senator do X.
experience as well to the the
deck is stacked against the
taxpayers for the department and
the notion that we have to have
a presumption there because it
may affect the general fund by
not collecting taxes that a
taxpayer may not hello it's not
a very good argument in my mind
but no that's the reason I felt
it was necessary refuse myself
for any of you have a period of
interest you can read my case
it's online I think it's
published decision I look for
the court of appeals ruling on
that issue as well too very much
so I love winning cases etcetera
etcetera.
Seven
The state constitution
the past affects the not right
of the living as an ongoing
litigation.
And also I don't think you
actually have a conflict and
what the budget.
Revisit your.
I appreciate the legal ruling I
am trying to err on the side of
not even.
Creating an appearance of
impropriety Center Ivy Soto some
media Greer disagree with that
but I think it's best that I ask
unanimous consent to recuse I
don't know that we have to we're
the judges hi I don't believe
that if you'd like me to take a
walk over.
And you can let Senator do it
again sure the meeting but I
think you know it in in good
humor but there's a very serious
issue here that the I don't know
I can't think of any more in the
law we say the state is presumed
to be right in the taxpayers
presume to be wrong and it does
ship burden and that seems to be
very counter intuitive to the
way we do the practice of law.
Your your motion resonated well
with me and I would love to
voted for but I think it was
important that I despite your
legal analysis center I know it
wouldn't affect my case probably
but I think you still probably
best that I the knowledge of the
circumstance and and not both
yeah Representative chairman
thank you I just want to make
sure everyone here understands
to one of the hallmarks of this
legislation passed the other was
to make it an independent
hearing officer now does not
report to the tax department at
all it is it is a complete stand
standalone entity yeah and I
think that's fair that's a good
point to make but nobody really
believes that you know maybe I
mean we do that all the time we
say we've got all kinds of
independent hearing officers but
the reality is that they deal
with the department every day
right they do case after case
they get assigned by the
department the it's a small list
of hearing officers in the
relationship it's important I
mean I don't I don't know the
hearing officer never met the
hearing officer never having to
hearing officer my sis but I
suspect hearing officer we're so
the department all the time so
you're right technically they
don't work for the department
technically they're independent
the realities of life are what
they are so.
Senator.
Mr chairman that this is such a
big deal how come we're just not
dealing with that it's just sort
of by accident that we liked
the.
The name no I.
Hearing from people who want to
do this I I voted no because I
heard from the secretary that
it's not the time to do it now
needs more study or work or
something so how come nobody has
brought this forward.
Two weeks left in the session
center.
I mean just now I mean in
general if you all been dealing
with this Senator Duhigg also
how come nobody's tried to
change it before this is an
accidental hearing here where we
find this out business question
nobody yes answer rhetorical I
assume Senator Senator Ivey Soto
and yet I'm gonna have to.
So first of all I mean yes we
have to put it here officers but
the infinite here offices of
them the the charity directs the
independent hearing officer to a
statute that says were presumed
to be correct as a matter of
law.
you know it's so but but as a
matter of fact
medical time the the Senate
voted been Senate bill one
twenty nine that if the
department did not maintain the
time frame that they were
supposed to maintain the
presumption of correctness
looked to the taxpayer.
As an incentive for the
department to maintain the time
frames.
And something was the department
agreed to.
As it went through the Senate.
And so that was the department
change their mind on when I got
to the house and I got stripped
out of the bill.
And we were informed that if if
the Senate do not prefer the
entire bill would be vetoed so
in fact this is not the first
time this issues come up in fact
this is not the first time that
the Senate has voted on the
presumption of correctness and
modifying the perception
correctness and and in that
regard so I would suggest that
given that this issue's been
around for a few years is been
discussed that the well it may
be an accidental
issue in this hearing up it is
still a thoughtful of amendment
and it is an educated amendment
even though I have not had to go
through them.
So sorry **** thank.
Was very very to me Center
walking if I may Mister chair
yeah I I'd like to check in on
this as well as you know section
see with that that perception is
which is highly irregular the
law you have someone that's
establishing a new standard
which would be the agency in
this regard coming in and
they've made a supposition and
now that's a position is
regarding this fact.
And you have to come in and the
the perception being against
proved that their supposition
which wasn't true before this is
that was value now the values
changes have to come in and
prove that somehow
and they're not right and I just
I I that is completely to me a
ballots do regular and fair to
the taxpayer and I would think
that you kind of touched on it
it affects the jet the general
fund and so the state has a
distinct interest in maintaining
that perception and so I I just
and and I I disagree I think.
I at least were delegate I I
think that the fix is very
simple it is a title and it is
one sentence it doesn't get much
simpler than that on the fly
we've done things that to build
slide I don't have to Mr chair
reminds Committee what we've
seen in here slicing and dicing
an attorney that Turkey into a
Turkey sandwich but this is one
of more simpler amendments and I
think one of the most fair
equipment that I've seen come
through this committee.
Mr chair thank you others.
I see a floor amendment on the
Senate floor is potentially a
good way to do that you know
like what I appreciate about
that idea is that the department
has to make a choice between Pat
passing the legislation or
having a veto they don't like
the presumptive language
etcetera every serve kind of did
the same thing interesting is
pretty clever idea I got a hand
to the idea that if they don't
meet the deadlines the the
burden shifts that's very
creative I didn't remember
saying that but I.
The committee for that
creativity because it it flies
in the face of what I've been
saying for the session and if
you prove me wrong I keeps
telling people we can't pass a
bill to get people off their
**** and then it sounds like
maybe you did it sounds like you
passed a bill were to put some
deadlines and timelines enacted
to credit sounds like the
departments meet those deadlines
and timelines and that's good
that's a good thing and
maybe the fact that we need to
put some more deadlines the time
lines into the state government
will be a good thing the trick
is how do you put some kind of a
consequence to the state when it
doesn't meet those deadlines the
time once it sounds like you're
building had a consequence bill
I'm sorry it was a new I guess a
gun was put to your head right
so you know we don't we don't we
want to time was so we don't
want to have any consequences we
don't meet the timelines and so
I think it's good to bring it up
again too so Sir Moores this
charges of silent or Verilog has
to do with raw emotion.
There are two of the department
of.
Works on.
Draw I.
What throw someone out here
because again this is a
discussion needs to happen what
an amendment on of what's the.
Exactly I mean we could end up
without a bill Mexico to the
I just wonder what the sponsor
would think about just removing
section one from this bill.
I just raised the only issue
right twenty five fox we have
this debate about someone
running numbers even though we
can do the whole debate from
what we have fans that are at
the title as well but it just
feels to me like you know what I
mean we've got a limited amount
of time in floor there's a whole
bunch of really for bills I get
this is this is I mean it's so
I'm not saying that I don't see
this as a real issue I do but I
just think that there is a whole
lot of really important stuff in
this bill and just getting into
this again that that can happen
for well as I was sitting here
thinking I was waiting whether
are we bring this up but if
we're gonna have the floor
discussion on this and it and we
go ahead and take that section
adults and we're right back
centre I still do the work for
you just described we're gonna
replay it all over again so we
can do that it is important to
discuss I don't I don't I want
to discuss but it just feels to
me like there's too many things
in this bill for a twenty five
dollar increase is basically
turn this bill and the debate
over the department's policy so
I'm just.
I see Representative and madam
secretary what you thank you.
I made a motion to just move
section on changes the title the
to and it was.
Mr chair and senator Wirth
section one sets the minimum
assessment the department can
make up from twenty five to
fifty but section two goes along
with that and limiting protests
under fifty dollars so if you
took out section when you would
also take up to.
Well assuming we did this fear
is whether.
What's our secretary thank that.
Make sense session because it
would help end up with a bill on
the floor that.
That you may not like cell line.
Out Mr chair and and later worth
of course the department brought
this legislation for it because
we think it makes sense to do
what we're doing in sections one
into those very small
assessments and protests hundred
fifty dollars have a negative
return on investment for the
state because it costs us more
to respond to those protests and
potentially litigate them and
collect the revenue that we
bring in that's why we brought
it forward but I understand what
you're saying and I would hate
for for example
You know sales APRS and phantom
where to go and checked in New
Mexico because of what we're
talking about here and I would
hate for the useful
clarification so the property
tax code not to be made.
Very clear nothing would prevent
any member from we districts the
Judiciary Committee Committee
amendment although we kind of
have a policy of sticking to the
judiciary committee's actions
when they act and not going out
on the floor stripping a bunch
of amendments pending over the
committee did so I just had full
disclosure nothing would prevent
someone from making that motion
as well so we even if we did
this and you agree to do this
and this committee there's a
will to do it it doesn't mean
we're not gonna have the debate
I just throw that out there and.
And.
The fast lane discussions are
worth I think you're right if I
may you know the the bottom line
is no the executive is ever
going to agree to stripping that
presumption of the law right in
governor Democrat Republican no
secretary will ever support.
Having the deck stacked in their
favor why would they and so you
know we were ever gonna crisp
restore any fairness to the
taxpayer news by having some
leverage and the leverage is
this bill or any bill taxation
revenue once and so we are we
out of the include this effort
and anything the department
needs of the have to decide
whether they want to change
badly enough to take away with
this clearly an unfair
and for a long and I've got to
believe that what the department
number support that so so you
give you run a stand alone bill
you're always in good
opposition.
And so Mister chair the one
difference though is that that
again in fairness to them they
could and I do think there is a
fiscal impact and I that's a
tough argument is the reason not
to do it maybe I'll like it but
what is it what is it and how
many more years of the what's
going to happen trying to figure
out what that his civil I mean
it's it is your right as it is
of we we got ourselves enough in
a fascinating spot and I want to
be real clear because even if we
strip those two sections you
know we've got lots of this
alright folks here and so very
easily they could do that
although I will say we have
tried to respect the will of the
committees and wanna Committee
takes an action we don't go on
the floor necessarily strip on
it does happen sometimes so that
can happen and.
Just on a day to but but I am
looking at my may I mean I love
the logic of the argument rates
that are worth if there's a
fiscal impact we change this
because there may be some
lowering about when we change
the presumption of innocence in
the criminal law because of we
do we presume guilt that we're
gonna need a lot less the
district attorneys and of you
know we can we can we can so we
can make all kinds of fiscal
efficiencies by shifting the
burdens to the favor of the
state and against the public
anymore there I think we've had
that discussion rebuttable
presumption recession we have
that's right that's right so
what we staff everything in
favor of the government against
the taxpayer and will save lots
of money.
With the right decision on that
one understanding what that
would mean if we if we made that
policy decision you end up with
the tens of thousands of people
being stuck in a system and you
literally implode the whole
system because of the
consequences of doing that maybe
Mr I'm not gonna make this
motion just because again I
think you're gonna get this no
matter what happens and I and I
and I we we need to.
What we're gonna go I'm gonna
have the debate and you're gonna
need to talk to the members and
explain this
and we'll see what happens and
then we'll be right back to we
were with what was the Senate
what was that bill one.
Four years ago.
Do you remember the subparagraph
of the bills and.
Actually.
I I will.
We work
with a lot of effort and the
time is working with the
department of those timelines.
Once we got to the new timelines
and I asked him can you do this
yes that that what I said okay
great.
The leave of the Pacific rectus
you don't and the it was that
council no longer of the two.
this year the.
Eight.
It response was off in that case
we're going to be that seventy
four years.
I would like you to be the time
limit ago but there's
consequences that any that's of
two more years.
Now to the sector's credit just
focused on the those type ones
and I've.
Thank you for a lot of credit
for that to those deadlines the
most of the roof by here is.
but it doesn't just affect the
presumption is.
Wrong to have that presumption.
And then there's the cost of the
state it's a cost because
the deck is stacked against the
taxpayer was questioning whether
or not department probably
isn't.
That's the.
I'm not sure we should rely not
sure we should consider it to be
a negative fiscal impact.
I'm gonna save us then they get
up.
Representative Morris was way.
Then it is in every case.
But I'm not sure which is
considered a negative fiscal
impact we stop stealing money
from.
Because we have a presumption
that says the department's
number will.
and and that for me.
That's not the fiscal impact.
That is tweeting our taxpayers
the respect they deserve to have
their.
We're on a few past motion Mr
chair I will I'm just going to
be where we're at we have a due
pass motion by Senator doing.
They're worth Mr job here and at
this that is a friendly
amendment is right sections
wanted to change the title so
I'm gonna go ahead can I just
confirm that's a friendly
amendment.
Yes senator Wirth enter so I'm
gonna go ahead and make that
motion see what happened need to
fix the title I believe it's
just the.
Amending.
The amount of tax liability
regarding assessment gets
dropped out of the title and it
would be from frontier Mr chair
and senator on the line eleven
with starting with the word
amending he would strike through
line thirteen taxpayers.
It's all right so there's a
there's supposed member will to
will take action on the
settlement of the Sanchez said
it's friendly discussion on the
amendment.
Center walk.
Thank you Mr chair
Strike it from like to discuss
it a little bit the the twenty
five versus fifty dollars can
you tell me Mr chair and
secretary and sponsor what what
the savings might be
with that twenty five to fifty
dollar
differential
Mr chair and senator Baca.
We did sort of a rough estimate
and let me go to our FIR worry
free from that
it's.
By increasing the minimum
assessment.
in the most recent year we had
a.
Based on data from the most
recent years we think that would
eliminate about ninety three
hundred assessments per year
between twenty five and fifty
dollars if you just take the
middle of that thirty seven
fifty which you know it might be
a little off of that but if you
just multiply thirty seven
dollars and fifty cents times
ninety three hundred it's
somewhere in the range of three
hundred thousand dollars three
hundred forty eight thousand
dollars that we may not assess
and then some of that we
wouldn't have collected so the
amount that ends up in state
local funds to be some fraction
of that number.
That's about as good as we can
do to estimate.
This thank you for that Mr chair
and secretary so let me ask you
the flip side of that question I
guess we talked about the
assessment on.
For the assessment
have you converted to dollars
and time
reduced amount.
How much that might save the
state we have ours Ortiz because
really the assessment is what
you're trying to work with.
So Kate can you tell us a little
bit about that Mr chair and
senator Baca I don't have a
number of like a savings for
protest or anything like that
but it every protest is going to
be acknowledged have a certain
amount of manual correspondence
sent out a certain amount of
time reading through the records
obtaining the data from Jen
taxes into the protest office
and then there's you know some
of them get resolved quickly
some don't
you know some protest even for
twenty five dollars go to
hearing the so.
But even if for staff spent one
hour you know which they're
going to spend more than that it
would it would be even for the
state we we could spend fifty
dollars in one hour of you know
working on these protests up I
am confident that it's a
negative return on investment
but we haven't
looked at the savings that the
opportunity cost is that that
time could be spent preparing
for more substantive and more
important things before the
state.
thank you Mr chair secretary so
when you when you we have these
hearings what what what
typically is involved with one
of these hearings what what it
what is the state present
whatever we typically see from
people coming in the that are.
Requesting the sort.
Mister chairman Senator Baca I
would say that they're all
across the board you know it we
have about thirty six tax
programs and so we still get a
lot of them are of things like
your dependent deduction was
denied but now you've
legislative records and we can
approve it or a lot of it is is
that the tax payer comes forward
with more records than they had
at the time they file their
return or they applied for
credit or something like that
it's really all over the place
that there's we probably close
about sixteen hundred protest
per year most of them are G. R.
T. in pit but then.
If there's all different tax
programs too so they're all
different.
I guess I'll ask you this as
well Mr chair and secretary so
are the people conducting these
hearings and involved on the in
these hearings are they hourly
employees are the salaried
employees whoa how are they
getting paid I guess you have
Mister chair and senator Baca we
have about twenty five staff if
we were fully staffed in our
legal services bureau about a
third of them are protest
auditors so those are the
auditors and highly trained
auditors than we have probably
any at any given point time
about six to eight attorneys
that work on tax litigation
at any given point time we have
maybe over four hundred million
dollars under protest so when I
talk about the fiscal impact and
I don't think I'm saying
anything earth shattering about
that yes of presumption weren't
there there would be a fiscal
impact because that's just
statistically some things would
fall to the other side of that
line extension
but it's it's a resource
question anyway these are
classified state employees there
is a chief legal counsel who
would be appointed but that's
vacant right now so just
classified state employees are
doing the work.
So I I assume Mr chair and
secretary that we're getting the
job done right now so if we're
getting the job done right now
with the current workload we
have would there be people that
would essentially positions be
eliminated at that point four I
mean because it sounds like if
you have a certain amount of
people attending to a certain
amount of protests and these
hearings and and we're meeting
those goals right now that we
would have sort of access of
labor I guess with with respect
to it if if this if this it does
in fact stay in.
no Mister chairman Senator Baca
with the current level of
staffing we have.
We have contract support to the
protest auditors that
potentially could be reduced and
they work overtime so that over
time could be reduced but they
are I would say heavily they're
they have a very heavy workload
so to the extent we can remove
any this low hanging fruit by
Representative you know
assessing nothing between twenty
five and fifty dollars it would
from I I think there's an
opportunity cost they could
invest the time we do have and
figure matters.
I thank you Mr chair and so.
So I guess you to summarize
we're looking at
Really yeah we're just after
cost savings with section two
that that's what you're trying
to achieve a little bit more
efficiency correct Mr chairman
Senator Baca a cost savings and
more efficiency for the
department but also potentially
for taxpayers so on this
ammendment
which was taken as a friendly
amendment
I I guess you sitting here and
and Sanchez well Mr chair you
have balanced this savings that
you just described to me verses
the verses that presumption that
that's really what the choices
here the presumption is
contained it's it's section see
so essentially if we eliminate
section wanted to we're we're
taking discussion about that
presumption how so that sounds
to me like balancing act that
you're doing here between the
presumption and this perceived
savings save described diss and
my character I see yes Mr chair
and senator Baca it would
certainly help the department
and it would be nice for
taxpayers if we no longer assess
things between twenty five and
fifty dollars but I mentioned a
moment ago that the amount under
protest is over four hundred
million dollars some of that
yeah there's a couple hundred
million more that we're waiting
to and decisions from the court
of appeals in the Supreme Court
but the to not have in depth
review of what it changed for
elimination of the presumption
would do
to that four hundred million
dollars for example I I there's
no way I can balance that risk.
Let's see that.
That's a little bit troubling to
me because we're talking about
and and I I know Mr chair so if
it you know if you to indulge me
here see the the the crux of
this amendment essentially after
this discussion is is not.
It was here it was cured and
towards the savings the
department would go to the and
what you might gain from that
but it's actually changed now
and the and the goals have
shifted now because we have four
hundred million dollars simply
is what I'm hearing and so we're
willing in this committee I
guess to accept an amendment or
consider an amendment that.
Really to me is involved with
fairness and we're balancing
that fairness the with the
dollar amount because and and
that that that's I'll let you
speak please please consider
Baca thank you of that that I
have a slightly different
perspective on this I I do
believe the support discussion
have.
But I'm looking at sections
three through nine of this bill.
Right that we're making sure
that sappers in Fennimore or
legal that we make sure that the
property.
pro to a property tax protest
processes clarity to act that to
that that there's a clear
timeline on when Department
should start reviewing an
application to make sure it's
complete and they're willing to
say.
We're going to bring in that
that time frame from eight one
hundred eighty days to two and
one hundred twenty days to bring
it in right so I'm looking at
the other parts of this bill
that I think are good tax
policy.
And wanting to get those to
actually happen.
I'm looking at that and say
that's what.
One should choose wanting to.
And we talk about that a
different bill so we make sure
yes this happens.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
totally respect that and
you know and and that is a good
perspective and so here's my
guarantee to you Mr chair
sponsored secretary
I support all those changes I
would support all those changes
if this section stays in
because I ate I don't see
when when a bill like this comes
across this committee and we're
examine it in the hole and we
discover some inequity in it
we're considering it as possible
I I don't think that anybody
here has really taken any put
the crosshairs on what you're
trying to achieve here at all
even the twenty five to fifty
of limit that we're that we're
racing there I I think I think
I'm even supportive of that and
to be honest with you Mr
chairman secretary your
testimony as compelling as to
why it does need to go to fifty
dollars it sounds like it's
going to save you a ton of
workload and it's going to save
it's gonna save a lot of effort
on the people that work there
and ease up on your staff point
of Representative Harper just
stated Mr chair is is that the
rest of the policies good I
haven't seen I haven't got too
little but from what I have seen
I don't see any issue with that
so again we are cut we come back
to the crux of the issue section
one and two and and that we have
stumbled across this and I
should say so Mister chair
Senator Ivey Soto articulated
very well with the history of of
this perception has been and and
this is on the amendment because
this is what used just stated
why we're looking at even
striking this it would be
considered but for we have to
get rid of the elephant in the
room
and and I just I just don't
think that's fair and with that
I I really urge the committee to
to reject this amendment it's
unfair to the tech.
Taxpayer we discover something
here where we discovered and and
I think we should pursue that
and I can tell you if that stays
deal with the presumption issue
with.
I'm happy to support this bill.
Anyway that that's all I have
Mister chair thank you the
committee members were on the
proposed amendment anyone else
on them I'm gonna propose the
amendment as well for the
reasons of center block
articulated I think it takes
aware opportunity to look at
that section that we're talking
about but in the room.
That should go away I will roll
call vote on the amendment.
Senator Baca nope.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Morris you know.
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Duhigg
yes.
Senator about this no.
Fails.
We have a due pass motion by
Senator doing any other
amendments or discussion.
We've seen on one of the past
motion.
We'll do this is a roll call
vote Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Their course.
Senator Stewart yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator Duhigg
yes.
Senator with this yes would you
pass I to look to the floor
session this very interesting
Chairman committee thank you for
that unexpended will.
Thank you for all that for I had
asked the committee to plan for
a hard stop at six thirty let's
just take a quick look at one
thirty and so we can get this
acted upon quickly.
Right.
Was just see this may not may
not be quick Senator do is tell
me she's got a number of
questions.
The quick action may be a quick.
But if you think this can take
some work it looks like it might
so this to this list here let's
hear The presentation center.
We have an amendment I think
you're guessing from the Santo
things the committee's going to
get into the weeds with this one
not Senate disparaging way at
all but I I'm guessing will
probably take final action on it
can I get a good start on I
think Senator thirty eight
Senator one thirty eight we have
no registered opponents or
proponents as of tonight that
means that I won't reopen that
if we don't act on it today we
we may act on it tomorrow but we
won't go back to anybody.
In support or opposition so
it'll be your presentation
center and hopefully five
minutes we'll do it for you very
good it should I got to experts
any advertisement and ruby and
possibility go you know RubyAnn
for sure this is a committee
bill this is from LFC this
are we passed in January as a
endorsed bill it is basically to
align New Mexico statutes with
federal statutes relative to the
medication room
What state false claims that and
That's what it does in essence
there was some concern from you
and we may have resolved some of
your concerns with the amendment
of the members strikes out an
entire section of turnover
RubyAnn and and and see what
they can add to what I've just
said they're the experts thank
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
This is not the flashiest of
Bill thank you so much for
squeezing is in tonight but we
do believe it's a good
governance bill and we want to
recognize and appreciate that Mr
chairman you've sponsored
legislation several times the
past to try to address this
issue it just keeps not quite
make it all the way out of
sessions concerning kind of time
but what it does just as a
Centers said is that it it'll
lines to Mexico's false claims
act which I regard Medicaid
fraud recoveries with federal
requirements that allows the
state to increase
To increase percentage that it
retains from these Medicaid
fraud recoveries so since two
thousand eleven New Mexico has
left nearly five million dollars
on the table for simply failing
to kind of qualified for this
federal incentive and including
nearly one million dollars in
fiscal year twenty one alone and
New Mexico's one of only seven
states that had still not
leveraging this federal
incentive for increased
recoveries LFC staff worked
closely with the New Mexico
office of the Attorney General
and the US health and Human
Services department to ensure
that this legislation will pass
formal federal review.
I should this statutory change
pass and both agencies impacted
by this bill HSD and the New
Mexico attorney general's office
are on board with the bill and
with that the idea of coming on
the amendment Mr chairman thank
you only again I appreciate you
bringing this forward in past
years and we so appreciate
senator Neville bringing this
for LFC regarding the amendment
this was brought forward to us
by a UNM health sciences center
and they just wanted to limits
on their potential exposure to
additional ever requested that
kind of thing and so they asked
if we would be amenable to
striking section thirteen and we
did check with the fat on this
because we have to be very
careful to align this with the
fed in order to make sure we can
get that ten percent increase
the recovery than they were okay
with it and the AG was okay as
well so I had the amendment is
friendly thank you so much Mr
chairman.
Proposed amendments to strike
section thirteen we may be able
to get action done on batteries
this evening so right we Soto
makes removes that amendment
strike section thirteen so we
can on that tonight is there any
objection to that amendment
etcetera Moores or discussion.
Sure so we're removing sections
thirteen.
Those is here for all west.
Two hours ago Reuters.
In requests to as four sort of
fisheries
with the appropriate force Mr
chair Senator
Woods there's also some concern
with the.
Nation getting
becoming available of the
general public is a problem that
was the concerns expressed to me
that they didn't want to have
the personal information of some
of their clientele available.
To the public.
You know it with the.
Have a.
So Mr chair Senator averages
have over that was excluded
from.
and I was a lot of side
businesses and other things and
has a this hasn't lost a lot of
cases relatively recently there
from from other.
And.
If those already excluded so I
guess they're claiming that the
need to protect patients from
offline back that we need to
exclude your down or any
government agency ever a just on
face value Mr chair Senator so
I'm going to oppose this to
order directing more videos that
I will provide basic especially
senator.
Mr chairman I mean there's no
question of his statement
Senators Senator.
Mr chair walleye.
I share us under Moore's lack
of.
Actually I I just want a
section.
for others on this given the
Attorney General.
Brought up already started this
beginnings up with no
underlying.
Or or controversy and place them
and I was very uncomfortable
with that.
Well well it's certainly not for
you and then
I I I'm a big fan.
The committee discussion.
K. as.
As one of the.
You raise a family or.
of the
other committee discussion.
I don't know center with this
be for a question for you
I was the regional sponsor for
of what we call the front of its
taxpayers act now which is
really the underlying qui tam
law the state that's being used
to progressively recover I'm
sure now hundreds of millions of
dollars on behalf of the state
is it does this language come
contract directly out of the.
You all know the keep them or
the funniest taxpayers act Mr
chair are you talking
specifically about the section
thirteen year it comes actually
very closely under the federal
false claims act.
Right yeah and I think that's a
concern of mine as well too
because at least the that are I
guess taxpayers act requires
some kind of a basis for
initiating a civil investigative
demand this one seems to be
pretty much a happy hunting
opportunity for Attorney General
cause me some concerns of the
motion is to strike section
thirteen.
The Sanchez thinks that it's.
The friendly.
All right.
Reserve let's see this to roll
call on this one please.
Senator Baca.
Center I'm so.
Senator Wirth no.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Wirth yes.
Senator Duhigg yes.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Are you able to
Yeah.
Senator Ortiz yes the amendment
is adopted we've struck section
thirteen I wanted to get at
least that far this because I've
been there was that we have to
talk about when we reconvene
tomorrow we'll see everybody
here at nine thirty center my
apologies we can get done for
the night we got a little bit
longer on some Senator tax bills
that I thought was going to be
very quick and easy.
From what I saw is a twenty five
dollars or something like that
are up that would be pretty
simple and turned into something
much more we'll put you up early
tomorrow or nine thirty.
But that.
Nine nine thirty will start up
here if you want to get here
earlier
the we some Irish coffee in my
office.
