Spaces and requires too
sensitive information. So this
bill, Mr Chairman, seeks to give
aging and Long term services
Department authority to conduct
background checks on staff.
Potential staff.
And volunteers that have access
to vulnerable, vulnerable adults
and their personal information.
Now, Mr Chairman. This
legislation is modeled after the
authority of C D and E. C D as
each of these agencies, sir,
volume, vulnerable populations
this evening I have with me the
Cabinet secretary of the New
Mexico Aging in Long Term
Services department would like
to say a few words as well.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Thank you so much for
having us today to consider SB
241. This particular bill allows
our agency to do our due
diligence to make sure that we
are doing every effort to keep a
vulnerable population safe. Um,
and with me today I have my
general counsel in a state Asia.
Martin will also be here to
answer specific questions. Thank
you.
Thank you registered in support.
We have, um, an individual whose
name Mike gonna have a very
difficult time with, but
Yamba.
Who me?
Um, bro.
Here at all.
No. Oh, zoom. We have it on
zoom.
Um
You're recognized for two
minutes, But you're on zoom and
you'll have to mute your luck.
What's the difficulty on our end
or her in
Because I'm sorry. What's that?
Nothing.
Correct. We'll go to committee
members. Questions, Senator
Risotto.
I'm sorry, uh, moving
motion to do pass any further
discussion questions from the
committee members.
There being no objection.
Is there any objection to do
past seen that seeing them? It
would do fat center doing really
well in this committee. This
session has been a great
session. Thank you.
Bringing us good bills.
Funny how that works.
Senate 142 Senators â‚¬1 Not here,
though, right?
To film is going to go retrieve
him.
7142 is an issue that we've
heard before.
What we've got? No, nobody
registered.
And support her opposition.
Yeah, prime makes sense in her.
Yep.
This concerns individuals think
ceremony hoses District Navajo
Nation.
Was the impetus for this. We're
individuals were being
Picked up
Transported Women out of state.
Yes, Thank you, Mr Chairman,
Members of the committee. We've
all we We heard about this last
year, and since then there have
been a variety of stories that
have been the newspaper about
the problem of people being
taken to Arizona and these
unmarked vans.
Uh And so this is Bill, uh,
intended to deal with this
issue, And would that be happy
to stand for questions?
Thank you and senator from
Our staff meetings. The
difference this year is, I think
in the past
Senator Munoz had a requirement
that the individual who was
picked up with their family
member would be contacted by the
facility The family member would
be picked contacted. We had
concerns naturally with privacy,
hippo confidentiality and so
forth, which precluded the bill
from making a lot of progress.
This year's version of the bill
simply requires available to the
individual who's picked up.
The opportunity to contact
Family members of making sure
that that availability is there
and then I think, confirming
that are documented that in some
way that that effort was made on
behalf of the individuals, so
that's my understanding of how
this bill differs this year from
years before.
We're not. We're without a
quorum at the moment. So we do
that kind of user. I'm sorry
about that. Alright committee
members and questions.
Everyone.
Motions to do it with the do
pass motion. Need more
discussion. Is there any
objection to do passed Senate
Bill 142 do pass.
190
Thank you very much. Mr
Chairman. Members of the
committee set up Bill 190. We
have a committee sub
Percent of Bill 190, which was
the results of further
discussion with the District
Attorney's Association. Cerebral
190 is is a recompilation of all
of the D wi Bills. Ah, so that
what we end up with is a new
article 14 in chapter 66 where
we end up with a D W I act,
followed by the boating while
intoxicated Wi not
Voting voting. Uh
At then we have
The Applied Consent Act. And
then and then after that, we
have the ignition interlock act.
Uh,
The men of the penalties have
been changed or W eyes. However,
the I do want to point out a few
things just from structural
perspective. First of all,
you'll find two different
definitions of commercial motor
vehicle. What in the front of
the bill, another one that
appears at the beginning of the
Commercial Motor Vehicle Act.
Which is already in the motor
vehicle code. That is as a
result of a need for department
transportation to have a
definition for their federal
purposes and another need for
motor vehicle to have a
definition for their federal
purposes, reconciled that
working together with them, we
also moved responsibility from
one section to another, just to
make some things flow better for
motor vehicles.
Uh, we and then we have two
studies that traffic safety
bureau is conducting both of
those are paid for through
growth funds.
Um and which includes, among
other things.
Trying to reduce the amount of
paperwork that police officers
have to do with regard to
Um with regard to DW eyes
because there's more paperwork
that they have to do than there
is for homicide.
Uh and then we we do allow.
There's a Burchfield fix in this
bill and the Burchfield fix,
which allows for a blood draw in
the case of someone who's who's
not allegedly committed a felony
is that you have to first, uh,
blow at the adult at at or below
the level of presumed non
intoxication, which is 0.04.
Or below.
Uh, if you blow up the level of
presumed non intoxication.
And the police officers written
statement of probable cause
shows that the level of
impairment is inconsistent with
the level of non intoxication.
Then they can get a warrant for
your blood. If the person still
refuses, then they can aggravate
you.
Refusing
Ah, but but they but they can't
aggravate you on the blood.
unless unless they first get the
war.
Uh, the and then we are. Ah, and
Mr Chairman, I believe those are
most Oh, and then also anytime
they take a blood draw, they
will do a split they'll they'll
take a sufficient blood draw to
be able to have a, um
To be able to provide a sample
for the defense that the defense
can always analyze the blood on
the
With that, Mr Chairman, uh, be
happy to stand for questions.
Right. We have
A number of proponents. 2468 10,
perhaps right? Yeah, I was gonna
say or they're not organized.
Otherwise, that's exactly what
we'll do so
Mr Gonzalez, director of Motor
Vehicle division, followed by
Alicia Ortiz.
Acting model.
Division director. If you all
are here, come on forward.
Step up.
Some of them will just a moment.
Mr Chair. Senators. Thank you so
much. My name is Ted Gonzalez.
I'm the motor vehicle division
director, and I'm not here to
officially endorse the bill. But
I would like to speak to
recognize the efforts and
collaboration that has taken
place to ensure that the agency
input in regards to commercial
vehicles, definitions and to
appropriately aligned the
insurance requirements. Um, are
met by an respect it So thank
you so much.
Two.
Ms Ortiz. Now we follow that I
see the chief
His name on the list, but I
don't see him here.
State police. No chief Whistler.
Right. Ms. Ortiz, Mr. Chair.
members of the committee. Alicia
RTs, the acting executive
director of programs at D. O. T,
which includes traffic safety
and like
MBD Director Gonzales. We also
appreciate the opportunity to
have worked collaboratively with
them with GPS and with the
senator on drafting language and
reviewing that the definitions
definitely maintain the federal
funding for D O T and you know
we we stand in support of the
bill from the D O t perspective.
Thank you. Thank you. Both a
chief and deputy
Chief of the state police, or
either one of them here or
somebody for them.
Mr Chair. Thank you. This is
Elizabeth Johnson, Um, assistant
general counsel for DPS. We
worked closely with Senator Ivey
Soto and all the other sponsors
and we think that we've come to
a version that we're all very
happy with. Um and thank you.
Thank you.
Rick Ted Roar you hear?
11th judicial district attorney
registered in support.
Marcus Montoya, Judicial
district attorney registered and
support. Hello, Mr Montoya.
Committee chair.
Committee members. Good
afternoon. Thank you for
allowing us to be here. Marcus
Montoya, a judicial district
attorney, president of New
Mexico District Teresa
Association, joining me here in
person in support of this bill
today, or district attorney
Brendan Martin, a special
counsel from the district
attorney's administrative
office. Marcos Serrano. Uh, we
would like to thank the sponsors
of the spirits. Mr quickly,
Senator Ivey Soto for the
collaboration with the district
attorney's meeting multiple
times and a lot of the rewrites
and drafts, allowing us to voice
our opinions and concerns.
And we do appreciate the
And that's hours of good work
put into this bill. And so the
association um stand support
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Don't see Secretary
Bowie.
DPS. He's also
Is that right?
Secretary Bowie.
Secretary boy, Can you hear us?
And if so, would you amuse
yourself?
Yes. Can you hear me? Uh,
Mr Chair. Yes. And you're
recognized for up to two
minutes, sir.
Thank you so much. Good evening,
Mr Chair, members of the
Committee name's Jason Bellini,
Cabinet secretary for the
department. Public safety and
I'm here to express my support
for Senate Bill 190 throughout
the process and leading up to
today, I engaged in several
discussions with the bill's
sponsor, and, admittedly,
initially I had some
reservations to perhaps even
this skepticism.
Um, the bill is quite extensive,
and it required a thorough
understanding and the grass with
all the nuances and and you
know, when faced with something
unfamiliar when we don't
understand something, maybe
natural for us, and our first
instinct is to question it or to
oppose it.
However, um
I made it clear to Senator Ivey
Soto. From the beginning that
might support really depends on
the endorsement of the experts
directly affected by the
legislation, which would be
ultimately Daddy Wi officers
that people out in the field who
would have to use the tools that
we decide on and without their
backing. I told him that I
wouldn't or couldn't think of
conscience offer my support.
So I'm pleased to say that we
convened comprehensive gathering
that included course center. I'd
be Soto Senator Brands,
Representative Ream, uh, this
season Wi expert which were able
to gather from the city of Rio
Rancho. He had 22 years of law
enforcement experience in 13 of
that with the Wi Unit, along
with our leadership from the
state police and again
prosecuting attorneys that there
there before you today and
together we meticulously
examined every aspect of the
bill and the sponsor
demonstrated that commendable,
commendable openness to
Debate in critique.
And the sponsors graciously
amended parts of the bills that
we felt raises concerns and I
felt it was a very productive
and constructive dialogue. And
so ultimately what I came and
walked away from was really
being convinced by this bill,
And as I said before, um, it was
really the backing of the Wi
Officer and his endorsement.
Would you really solidified my
stance and so thank you for
taking the few minutes allowing
me to speak? Um before you today
I fully support the bill.
Well, I'm really proud of the
collaborative effort that's
behind it. And I think the
sponsors think, Senator, I do so
though stand full support. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Secretary. Uh,
JJ Guerrino.
Really have seen
I'm saying through here's know
that wrong.
Thank you. I'm sorry.
And Miss Senator what you said I
didn't you? Yes.
There was an India
Thank you.
Brazil under chef Farina with
Leo County Sheriff's office.
And I'm hearing supported this
bill.
Um, I've spoken with the senator
about some of the issues that I
had some of the concerns.
He was able to
Explain to me.
Um
And give me a little bit of
peace of mind about some of the
concerns I had. I know that he's
also spoken with.
Other D A s, and with other
it'll be I officers from another
agencies.
Um, I myself I was in the Wi
Unit for 9.5 years before I was
the undersheriff, So I do have a
little bit of experience on it.
Um, I do agree with the senator
in reference to the paperwork or
needle B, I I believe is.
Overwhelmingly.
Um, not necessary to have that
much much paperwork and a lot of
times it leads to having cases
being dismissed. So I believe
that the studies that the
senator is implying on this bill
will actually facilitate some
sort of a study to streamline
the process for deal B. I, um
cases. Thank you. Thank you.
Empower.
Up to two minutes, please, Mr
Bauer. Yes. Thank you. Mr
Chairman of the Committee
embedded Bar and the chief
public defender. Um we were
enthusiastically neutral on the
first version of this bill in
the last committee.
And the sponsor addressed a
number of our concerns, perhaps
addressed a few more of the
concerns from the district
attorney's and so we're a little
less enthusiastic the neutral on
this, but it's a complex bill,
and it is a compromise and so we
appreciate the sponsors talking
to us attorneys that work with
us and trying to take into
account due process.
Thank you, Mr
Mm hmm. The zoom for a
proponent. We have the ball,
Westfall.
Yes.
Well, thank you, Mr Chairman and
Committee. Um, for years. I
think everybody agrees. New
Mexico has really needed to
address drugs driving and the
collaboration that you're
hearing about this afternoon is
impressive, as is the fact that
that that Senate Bill 190 then
address yet it goes into
penalties and repeat violations
and blood screening and ignition
interlock and all of the nuts
and bolts that go with doing
this kind of law, but it also
provides a treatment if it's
approved by the court.
And counseling and treatment to
those people in custody so that
we can try and get people on a
better path, and there's also a
penalty for driving with a team
minor in the vehicle. And so
that helps, you know, keep our
kids safe and set better
example.
D O T says last year 37% of
deadly crashes in our state were
alcohol related, and there is
just no telling how many were
drug related, but we do know
it's a problem. The 190 can help
change that problem. And so we
have the greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce or do to
support it with the do task
vote. Thank you. Thank you very
much.
That's all I have registered in
support.
And there is no opposition.
Members of the committee with
questions
They're worth just a question so
that the Burchfield fix. You
know, I had some issues with
that prior versions. You just
walk us through what you've done
to
Somehow seemed to get almost
everyone on board.
Absolutely either either
enthusiastically or somewhat
tepidly, But yes, sir. So if you
look on pages, 7172 you have the
existing language.
So right now under existing law,
there are five reasons that you
can do blood.
Uh, you can do blood voluntarily
under the implied consent act
you can do blood of somebody is
incapacitated and their their
concern is not withdrawn. Use
protective blood.
Under existing sixties under
existing law that is laid out on
page 71. You can do blood if
there's a particular by warrant
If it's a vehicular homicide,
great bodily harm or a felony.
Uh, that that section first of
all, we made it applicable also
to a motorboat.
Second of all, we removed the
ability of the municipal judge.
We're dealing with felonies, and
so it it really needs to be
there, Magistrate or or district
Judge
Uh then we added subsection B.
And and really you can. You can
read all the text in subsection
B, but to make it easy, we added
a 123 on page 72.
So that it's simple for folks in
the end.
And the 123 is the chemical
breath test, which the person
submitted so they first have to
do a chemical products.
You don't get to the blood
warrant until you eliminate
alcohol.
As part of your investigation.
And and so the chemical breath
test has to result in an alcohol
concentration in which the
person is presumed not to be
under the influence of alcohol.
And so that's a 0.04 or below
under this book, okay?
And, uh then second of all, the
person subsequently refused to
chemical blood test upon the
request of a law enforcement
officer.
And third, the law enforcement
officers written affidavit.
So that will have a record a
record of what they said to the
judge to get the warrant
establishes probable cause to
believe that the impairment
observed by the law enforcement
officer is inconsistent with the
result of the chemical breath
test and indicates the
president's remember That
officer will also have a body
worn camera.
Out of its indeed, Wi officer.
they will likely also have a
camera in their car.
And so so that so that that is
that will be the basis them for
sending an email to the judge.
For the warrant.
And indicating that they've
eliminated the alcohol as as a
cause of the impairment.
But the person has shown a
tremendous amount of impairment
that has to be explained. And
they believe Mr Chair, so if
someone blows up, 0.06 walk me
through what happens? Certainly
Mr Chairman and Senator worth
some 1.6. They can't get the
work. They're not. You're under
the level of presumed
intoxication.
But you're in the realm where
there's no presumption.
The officer does their
investigation.
They have to show them when they
take it to court. They have to
show by either intoxication
compared to the slightest
degree.
In terms of their driving that
they have to show. Uh, based on
based on the totality of the
circumstances, but they and they
can ask for a blood.
They can't get the warrant for
the blood. And if the person
Refuses the blood they cannot
aggravate them for the refusal.
So, basically so the key
threshold here is the 0.04.
And below that triggers this
extra ability to go get the
warrant. Mr Chairman and
senator that is correct and if
they continue to refuse, then
the officer can doesn't have to
force it.
They can just simply then
aggravate the charge.
And but only if they first Mr
Chair just I think it's always
good for the public who's
listening in to understand that
If you blow a 0.06.
You can still get arrested for D
W I
Um, and again, it's this is but
if you blow a 0.04
We've now got this edition is
under 0.04.
Mr Chairman and Senator, whether
it's putting four or below,
okay?
So we're now adding this
additional ability
Deal with the blood in a
situation where clearly the
officers
Has it is met that that standard
you layout and subsection three.
Mr Chairman, that is correct.
and and and and what we've been
increasingly having
And if I may just just very
quickly for the things is that
what we have increasingly having
is been an officer doesn't
investigation There's clear
impaired, driving, clear
impaired fields.
They do the breath, they end up
with a breath of 0.02 0.01.
And what you end up then when
they try to charge them.
Is a defense attorney who admits
the breath card and says, I have
proved that they're not
intoxicated.
And the officer is nothing to
say in return from a chemical
perspective.
This gives that option.
Um the other thing. The other
thing is, um
So just just one final question.
Just the other thing is is for
Metro court.
We allow blood evidence.
Cases to be admitted in Metro or
the other 32 counties, if if
it's blood evidence forced those
cases up to district Court.
As you've got to be dealing with
toxicologist.
There are no presumptive levels.
You're probably gonna have a
battle of the experts.
We need to make sure it's a
clean record. We need to make
sure that you have a prosecutor.
You have a defense attorney.
In the courtroom. We want that
to go straight up to this
required, so that's one of the
other changes that we did in
this as an additional level of
due process, frankly, because
also if you get a jury in just
Versus Magistrate Just Mr Chair.
Just one final question. So
under the current without this
change
If someone blows a 0.02
What? What options is the
officer have Mr Chairman and
Senator worth?
They have no option.
Right now, and that's the case.
That's why this is the first
building that's correct.
I just thought it was important
to absolute kind of walking
through. I appreciate again. I
had did have heartburn with some
of the
One of the earlier Ivey Soto
versions of this, but I think
this is helpful to understand.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Hey, but we just lost our
quarantine.
Stand in place.
Thank you. Be patient with
adverse. Yes, yes, senator.
Awesome questions because dead
cool just drives me insane.
Um, So what really grabbed my
attention is motorboat.
And the fact that we didn't have
that in here before. Is that
correct? Mr Chairman and Senator
so chapter 66 article 13
actually was voting while
intoxicated, and it had a mini
version of the Implied consent
Act, but the Presumptions where
it's slightly different levels,
the procedures weren't quite as
well developed and so by moving
it into chapter 666.
Article 14.
Uh huh. And then having the
implied consent act fully
applied to voting while
intoxicated. We actually make
sure that all of those
protections and all the voting
wild, toxic, aided and
What all boats would be
considered a motorboat. Mr
Chairman and Senator.
Whoever the chairman is while
we're in the, uh, and this
subcommittee, we have a
definition of the front of
motorboat on Page seven.
Uh, which is the definition that
we had under the voting while
intoxicated, But we moved it to
the front, so it applies both to
the body Want to instigated act
as well as in blankets and act,
which is about personal
watercraft, any or other type of
vessel.
Held by machinery, whether or
not machinery is the principal
source of propulsion motor boat
includes vessel propelled or
designed to be propelled by a
sale, but does not include a
sail board or windsurf board.
Motorboat does not include a
houseboat.
Or any other vessel that is
moored on the water, but not
moving on the water.
So with that include a canoe.
Or a kayak.
Mr Chairman, if it is moving
Uh,
If I actually miss German, it
would it would not because the
principal source of
Let's see or other type of
vessel propelled by machinery.
So assuming assuming you don't
have machinery in your arms
Then there are canoe or kayak
would not be included.
So, Mr Chair and senator then
Also have a concern. A lot of
people like to do these river
floats.
On inner tubes, and usually,
that's just an excuse to be
outside and drink beer.
Uh, with these fall under this,
Mr Chairman and Senator Purtle I
actually got because once you
start down the river, uh and, um
and so and and it turns out the
water magnet, but but no, that
would not because again, you
don't have
Okay, Mr Chaired and Senator I
didn't want
Uh, the annual float down in T
or C for a certain person
because of this, so I think
that's important. But I do have
a serious question. Um
The bird electric
Scooters that we're seeing pop
up around. Are those covered
under this, Mr Chairman and
Senator Portal, a sea doo would
be considered a personal
watercraft.
Because it does have a machinery
as the Mr Chair. Sorry, the you
know the little electric
scooters downtown that people
like to get your phone and
Oh, those. Yes. Mr Chairman and
senator heard that that that
would not be considered a
motorboat.
Ah, however, that that as to
whether or not that would be
considered to be a vehicle.
Um, would be a different part of
the motor vehicle code that is
not included in this bill.
So they Mr Chair and Senator,
they would if you're
intoxicated, operating one of
those on the sidewalk.
It's not included Mr Chairman,
That is not an issue that is
included. That's the definition
that is not included in this
bill. However, I believe if we
were to ask
Undersheriff Harry knew he would
tell you that he would probably
arrest somebody.
We got warm procedure.
Okay, So, um, we have a do pass
motion. Um, the clerk will call
the roll. Yes, ma'am.
Yes.
Senator Moore.
Yes.
Set, Senator Do you want to
present 178? Yes, I would love
to. Mr Chairman. I do have a
committee sub for 178.
And so if we could just get that
passed out very quickly, Senator
so unsuitable 178 just a very
quick scenario.
Ah!
Okay?
No, please.
You want me to wait or
Whoever, but
But we don't have a quorum,
right?
We just need to stand in place.
Yes.
Yes. So we'll just stand in
place.
Function as, um
Committee, Ideally,
These are important bills.
Read from my play that I've been
working on. You know, my new
play and stuff. You know, I wish
I had my poetry anyway.
So senator will just stand in
place Just briefly. And then,
you know, they don't reappear
them. We're done.
Okay?
And I apologize to
Right. Okay. Hospital. Eight.
Give it five.
Man or something.
