Um, and I want to make sure that
we're looking at the right
version of that bill.
OK, so it's 92.1. All right. I
just understand Senator we're
hearing a little bit ago there's
another sub, so I'm sure.
OK, that's good.
OK, very good. Thank you. Uh,
Senator Munoz, 226.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
member of the committee, to
Senate Bill 226 just requires
trucks to drive 65 miles an hour
semi truck tractors, and so, uh,
a few years ago, we did semis in
the right-hand lane on that
still can fix the problem, uh,
now this bill just requires some
tractors in the right hand lane
at 65. And so we do have
amendments to limit that to
I-40, the committee chooses to
do that. Uh, we can do that,
otherwise in a building.
To.
Now you got me.
And 226 just requires us to 65
miles an hour.
Do we have Emily on the bill?
Senator, we don't have anybody
who registered in advance in
support or opposition to 226, so
we'll go right to committee
members and
This is you. We have a proposed
amendment. We do have an
amendment we proposed that just
come from committee members made
and they can put it on or not on
on it really doesn't matter to
me.
This is your amendment, and we
put it on amendment, yes sir,
we can put it on or not put it
on.
I'm giving you an option. Do
you, do you want, do you want
the amendment or not?
got to make a decision soon.
Sure, we'll put the amendment
on. All right, uh, describe the
amendment. Fortunately well less
it's what are we adding two
words?
striking two words and adding
two words. Yes.
Arizona, Texas.
All right, we're on the
amendment. Senator Wirth, got a
question, right, that's fine. I
don't have a copy.
What's what
make it relatively easyenosa,
what he's proposing to do is to
require semi trucks to drive at
a maximum speed of 65 miles an
hour, but only on I-40. Is that
right? With the amendment.
Correct.
OK.
Someone knows you want to
explain why we want to do this
only on I-40.
Uh, comments from other uh
members of the Senate said, you
know, they wanted to keep them
at a higher speed and I-10 and
other parts of the state.
Members that are driving semis.
I I'm assuming chili farmers
drive a lot of so much.
Yeah
All right, uh, you didn't get
that from me, but OK.
All right
he's suggesting that I put the
fix on this bill. I've got, once
again, that's, I'm getting
blamed for all kinds of good
stuff these days, so I got
nothing to do with this
amendment game. and questions,
comments on the amendment.
Anyone at all?
Saheeling.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
um
You had said that some of the
members didn't like this bill,
uh, because of the, I guess, of
the, of the highways outside of
I-40, but those are probably
some of the most dangerous
highways, because more dangerous
than even I-40.
Mr. Cha and center I-40 is the
most dangerous highway in New
Mexico. I tend in like 25 do not
have as many crashes as I-4.
that.
Um, Mr. Senator, um, so I, I-40
generally carries approximately
10 times the amount of
commercial motor vehicle traffic
that, that, uh, that I-25 or
I-10 does. Um, I, I-40 is, is
incredibly busy with semi truck
traffic, um, with the increased
volume of some of, of CMV
traffic on I-40, more of the
crashes that we have on I-40
involved the CMBs, and when you
have dynamics of a CMV crash,
particularly at high speeds with
small
smaller passenger vehicles, like
whatever you probably drove here
today, uh, the, the outcomes of
those crash are absolutely
devastating.
Um, so
So.
The issues that we see on I-40,
particularly because of the huge
volume of commercial motor motor
vehicle traffic, um, is, is
just, you don't see this same
kind of motor vehicle, uh,
commercial motor vehicle issues
on i 5 and 10. Does that make
sense?
Uh, I, I, uh, yes, I can sort of
because of course you're looking
at that, you know, the volume of
traffic on 40, I agree, right?
So you have a lot of traffic and
then so you have
Not as much as you say, but um,
There's areas where, you know,
you're just
I mean don't have the
separation, for example, that
you do in I-40, you don't have
the number of lanes that people
can use on on these smaller, um,
like, you know, the smaller
highways, that's, that would be
my concern.
And that, you know, crash would
be very devastating.
No,
this is my comment. Thank you.
Yes,
thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Chairman of the um.
No, I like the amendment I-40,
as you know, goes right through
my district there west side of
Albuquerque, but I-40 is the
It connectss not only Los
Angeles to Kansas City but Asia
to the south, the east, I mean,
it is I-40 is the big, big.
Truck traffic, uh, interstate in
this country, and so you drive
from Gallup to Albuquerque, man.
It's, it's a rough stuff, so, so
I support the amendment and the
bill. Thank you.
So Mr. Chair, I support the bill
but not the amendment.
Again, I think this is a good, I
like the bill. I just don't see
why.
We shouldn't slow.
trucks down.
And the rest of the day, with
all due respect to the chili.
Jelly truck drivers. Mr. Jason,
I give you the committee the
option of adopting the amendment
or non-option adopting
amendment, and I appreciate
that. I just want to make it
clear to me, it seems I like the
bill, but it just
It's an issue, and I, and I
respect other positions on it,
but I just wanted to make that
statement.
Do you remember anyone else Joe
Roll call on the amendment,
please, Ely, on the amendment
alone, game.
Senator Braley.
OK, yes.
And I do have.
Uh, no.
Senator O'Malley.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
No.
Yes.
Cervantes, the amendment fails.
Back on the bill without that
amendment next.
Any
move to pass
for do pass any further
discussion, see none. Turn the
objection,
seeing none give you pass.
Oh no.
Uh, Senator Jaramillo.
Get up there.
right here.
other meals at 159. Yes sir. So
what this bill is, is it's um
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee with this bill as it
looks at getting a liquor
license for beer and wine for um
independent theaters. We have
one in most Salamos, and it
currently serves as the hub in
the community, not only does it
show movies, but when we have
guests who come to Los Alamos
either scientists who want to
speak to the public or anyone
else that comes in, it gives an
event space with this bill would
do.
allow for the selling of beer or
wine and only limited to 212
ounce servings of beer or 2
6-ounce servings of wine per
customer. This would help. We
met with other main streets from
across New Mexico and other
independent theaters who agree
that this would help them in
their towns. And with that, I
have my uh expert witness with
me.
Next to me is Alex Sanni who is
the owner of Sala, which is an
independent theater in Los
Alamos I'd like to make a few
comments.
Hello.
uh, my name is Alan Saz. I own
Salla Los Alamos Event Center
and it is an old movie theater
uh that it closed because of
COVID. It closed and now we
reopen it uh uh do some
renovations and now we have a
place to show new movies, but we
also use the space to host
multiple events, festivals, um,
a live performances, um, one of
the
challenges uh that we encounter,
it is when we try to bring some
vendors to provide alcohol, uh,
beer and wine, and they're
usually busy with their staff
and they cannot attend to these
events because there is more or
they don't have the capacity and
so it's, uh, this will allow
multiple theaters in New Mexico
to provide a, a better
experience. Thank you.
They're doing, Mr. Chairman,
before we go there, we were
asked when we left the tax
committee to work with some
other independent theater owners
who asked that we make some
amendments to the bill, and I
was hoping I could offer you
those which are just a few. I
didn't write them down. We met
together and I have those
written here. Nothing major, but
it strikes a couple of words and
so sentences if you're up to
hearing much striking words and
sentences.
All right, we'll, we'll give you
a couple of minutes and then
we'll roll it over. OK, so if
you look at page 2 lines 3 to 7,
we would strike after line 3.
You'll see that it reads an
independent theater may apply
for a special independent
theater dispensing license, we
would strike the word by all the
way through to line 7.
After the word license, so you
would strike the license and we
would insert the word witch. So
it would now read an independent
theater may apply for a special
independent theater dispensing
license, which shall allow an
owner operator, or employee of
an independent theater who holds
a server permit to dispense only
wine or beer to customers of the
Independent Theater in
conjunction with the movie
screenings or other events on
the premises of an independent
theater. This was after a
meeting with some of the
committee members that.
why the language was in there
for the $100 and the 1 year, and
then took that into
consideration and struck that.
If you also look at line 17 on
the same on page 2, we would
strike on line 17 under D after
the word wine, we would strike
the two words with food, so it
would now reader of beer or wine
to customers of an independent
theater shall be limited to 212
ounce servings of beer or 26
ounce servings of wine per
customer for each, uh, event.
How about going to go work out
an amendment, Senator. We'll,
we'll hear you a little later
tonight. OK, thank you, Senator
Hamlin.
next.
Mhm
I.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee,
I appreciate the uh expeditious
we're running today. I feel your
pain, uh,
today. Oh no, that's true. I, I,
I, I can at least attempt to
feel your pain. Um, we're not
gonna, uh, uh, there's no need
for public testimony. This is
really today to come back to you
after, uh, making changes to the
subcommittee that you had before
you two days ago, uh, with the
help of Senator Doig, uh, and
also having conversations with
other people.
Um, that, uh, I think we're
reaching a very good point. So
I'm gonna turn it over to my
expert, uh, Rachel Biggs, uh,
who is from the, I have it
somewhere here on my notes, uh,
from the chief strategy officer
from the Albuquerque Health Care
for the Homeless. Also, we have
Alison Friedman, just in case
with the New Mexico Center for
Housing Law. Rachel will go over
what the changes were, uh, to
that bill. Senator, all I
understood was last time we
heard you, you, we were just
gonna bring this back as a
committee so because we've made
a number of amendments and
changes. Did you make additional
changes after that committee
meeting?
No, no, Mr. Chair, those were in
conjunction with um Senator Du
Hicks's comments from, uh, from
that.
OK, would you just say I like
those that we didn't actually, I
know we formally adopted a
number of amendments last time
around, right?
Absolutely did not adopt any
that was the agreement that we
came back uh with this, with,
with changes to this, and so
it's an updated committee sub.
OK, well, you have to tell us
then what's different. All
right, that's what Rachel is
going to do. You're, you're
feeling my frustration, but what
happens is we, I, I keep doing
analysis and reading these
bills, and then they keep
getting changed and um so it's
getting old, understood. Go
ahead.
OK.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, thank you very much
for the opportunity to run
through the changes that we made
on the bill. I will be quick on
page 2.
Line 11.
We changed the word and to or.
This is in the definition of an
applicant.
One more time again, please. On
page 2 line 11 and the
definition of applicant, we
changed the word and to or right
after.
Applicant application to rent a
dwelling unit to the owner or
who agrees to act as a guarantee
or or co-signer. Thank you.
Moving along to page.
8
On line 14, we removed a
sentence under uh part of the
sentence on item number 5. It
used to say um aside from a
screening fee, and we changed
that so now just says shall not
charge, and we added any the
word any other fees to process
an application, so cleaned up
the language.
At the end of page 8.
Under the reasons why an owner
shall return the screening fee
within 30 calendar days. We
moved up into the process the
application if the
Um, owner does not process an
application, this would be a
reason for returning the
application fees and this used
to be in the background se
section, um, which we
substantially changed. We moved
a lot of information out of the
background checks section, which
I'll get to next.
On page 9, there was a section D
that was repetitive and we
removed that.
And on page 9 line.
3, we added certified in front
of mail.
Returned by certified mail.
And then on page 9, new material
line 10 background checks. This
is the substantive change that
we made to the bill. We removed
the portion that allowed for a
reusable credit or background
checks. So there's no more
reusable background check or
credit report. This was, um, a
compromise, I think a very good
compromise that we made here.
And now the new language reads
an owner shall not charge more
than one screening fee to the
same applicant if the screening
fee was completed within 90
calendar days of the application
date for any properties under
the same ownership.
So here we're just trying to
solve for the fact that if um
one owner has charged an
application fee, they won't
charge that same applicant over
and over again. But we have
removed all of the reusable
provisions of a background in
credit check.
And then the last piece on page
12 starts all the new language.
we um removed the unfair
practices Act language from Eora
and put it directly into the
unfair Practices Act. And so
following on page 12 on is the,
the new language there.
Happy to answer any questions.
Thank you for the time to
explain the change on page 12,
is that in the
Oh, I see.
That's the
Section 7 is not in the unfair
trade is Act, is that right?
But section 8 is.
Mr. Turk, sorry, can you repeat
the question? Yeah, the language
that you're proposing you on
page 12.
Section 7 for prevailing party
that would still be in the owner
resident relations Act.
Mr. Cha, Section 7 is in the
owner resident relations Act,
yes, and then Section 8 is where
we remove the um unfair
Practices Act language from Eora
and put it directly into the
unfair practice of that.
OK. Um,
He remembers questions. Can I,
can I propose a change for you
it's fresh.
Um, a lot of that language on
page 16 is not necessary.
Um, you could really just say
the same thing by charging an
applicant fee in violation of
the old Resident Relations Act.
That makes sense?
Mr. Cherry, you're referring to
line 19. Yes the fee strike
everything after that until the
word in.
Like 22.
So this would capture any fee
that's charged in violation of
the owner Relations Act. I
suppose it's just a charging
fee.
Yeah.
Great suggestion. Thank you.
It's better it's broader and
it's cleaner. Thank you.
I'll make that proposed
amendment. Is there any
objection to that amendment? Are
we going too fast for anybody?
Let me down. Yes, sir, on page
16, line 20.
They've added a new section of
the unfair Fair Trade Practices
Act, and they're saying that
what would be a violation of
that act would be a fee that is
not a screening fee or deposit
or was not published in the
listing or a charging rent or
fees that are not included in
the rental agreement, we don't
need that. You just say the
charging an applicant fee in
violation of the owner religion.
Relations.
All that other language is just
superfluous.
That's the proposed.
Questions, comments,
suggestions, any objection?
sponsor says it's OK.
That's done. All right. Anything
else?
Uh, let's go back to the other
proposed lines that we went
through committee members with
questions on any of the other
changes.
Pleasure of the committee.
Mr. Chairman, I move a do not
pass on Senate Bill 267 and a do
pass on the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 267, the 0.5 version with
your amendment. So there'll be a
6.6 version, right, so you'll
have to get another committee
said after set up, but we won't
come back to the committee with
it, with that change, right?
Anyone else? Is there any
objection to that do pass
motion. There's none all present
voting in the affirmative. Yeah,
we do pass on the committee
substitute. Thank you, Senator.
Chair and thank you for all your
thoughtful suggestions and
comments. Thank you, Kate.
Senator Woods here. Yes.
OK, so what is here in just one
second, sir. Senator Padilla,
uh, Senator Padilla.
He's right.
All right, Senator Woods will do
your first then, 221.
Thanks, Senator. How are you
today? I'm grand, thank you for
asking. Had a lovely day.
Well, we'll, we'll make this
nice and easy for you
uh, we've got a bill here that
uh
Absolutely
for bit pro.
Prohibited, sorry about that,
prohibited.
Unfair claim practices that will
prevent insurers from improperly
characterizing policyholders
inquiries as claims.
With no coverage applies.
When someone is
keeps coming in and say, well, I
need
I need to know whether this is
covered and where this was
brought up, uh, Mr. Chair.
Where this was brought up.
was in the fire situation when
was trying to get FEMA.
To pay for things, and they was
requiring
People to get a disclaimer from
their insurance company before
FEMA would pay.
So
I'm going to turn the rest of it
over to my co-sponsor, Senator
Romo.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, this bill would uh
strengthen protections for
consumers by defining and
prohibiting additional unfair
claims practices by insurers to
ensure that individuals are
treated fairly during the claims
process. The bill requires
insurers to be more transparent
in their communication with
policyholders, ensuring they
clearly understand their
coverage and the and the reasons
for claim denials or
settlements.
Um, Mr. Chair.
And there was a committee.
Thank
you. Do you have anybody in
mind,
we don't have anyone who
registered to speak in support
of opposition. We'll go then to
members of the committee are
doing.
So Mr. Chair, Senators, thank
you for bringing this.
I really like the the this
concept, uh, but on page 4, line
3, considering.
Uh, I don't think it is clear
what
Considering with me.
Um
And I was just doing a search
and
The statutes to see if
considering as a defined term
anywhere, I'm, I'm not finding
it. So,
I think, I think he needs some
clear language right there.
Mr. Char turned to my expert.
Mr. Chair and Senator, um,
Actually kind of agree with that
as well. It's essentially that
they're treating an inquiry as a
claim when it is in fact not
meeting the qualifiers for a
claim, so I don't know if
treating it as or recognizing it
as or any other synonym is more
preferable. We're open to that.
And, uh, Mr. Chair, I, I, I
think
T
Treating
I think even just treating
instead of considering when
would be clearer that.
Oh
suggest that amendment, page 4,
line 3, strike considering and
replaced with contri.
OK.
s
consider that a friendly. OK.
Any other discussion?
We replace the concerned with
the word treatment.
Any objection?
Madam Emmets adopted.
Others, you know.
Motion for due pass is amended.
Any further discussion? Any
objection to the due passes.
There's none, Senator show do
best.
You know, Senator Woods, you're
always more appreciative than
anybody else in this committee.
Even when, even when we table
your bills, you just keep
bringing Senator Ramos with you.
That worked pretty well.
Padilla.
42.
And.
32.
I.
you see.
Chair, do you have like another,
we have a couple more
legislators who want to make
sure a part of this um.
wonderful.
I just want to make sure we
treat all the legislators fairly
in this committee while we
present our bill.
Energy
OK.
the right sounds good.
you know
You brought another chair.
Mr. Chair, I mean, it's uh
OK
So.
71 page and I will give you the
231-596.2 is the last one we
delivered to your committee 48
$70 Senator Stewart, Mr.
Chairman, I move do not pass on
syneical 42, and for purposes of
discussion, they do pass on
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate loops. Mr.
Turin I move but do not pass on
Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 42
and for purposes of.
discussion with the do pass on
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Rules
Committee substitute for 42.
Hm.
Good.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
um just, just for your
edification, so we did receive
committee analysis from you,
from your committee. So this was
delivered already, you know,
with enough time for the your
committee analysts to actually
analyze it. So on that, um I do
have uh Senators Bergman's, uh,
Trujillo, and we also have
Senator Brantley who has
assisted with this effort as
well as um Representative
Armstrong. I do have Secretary
Casados here and Secretary de
Blasi, and we're here before you
on the bill that you just heard
from uh the protem.
But essentially, um,
Uh, we are focused on child
welfare reform with this
legislation, uh, the bill enacts
the New Mexico Child Safety and
Welfare Act, creating the new
creating new protections for
child welfare workers and
strengthening child safety
measures, uh, the key provision
provisions in the legislation
are that we're coming forward
with criminalizing assault and
battery on welfare child welfare
workers, um, as, as it is in law
already for not abusing a public
school teacher, school teacher
as well, so links up perfectly
there, um, enhancing foster care
prevention services under the
federal.
family's first prevention Act
and fully implementing that, uh,
transferring programs from CYFD
to the Department of Health,
primarily the CARA Act.
Uh, implementing a multi-level
response system for child abuse
cases to improve service
coordination across state
government and requiring
strategic plans for foster care
services to comply with federal
guidelines.
As well as enhancing
confidentiality and data sharing
related to child welfare cases.
Why would we want to do this? I
think we all know that we have a
significant um challenge here in
New Mexico. We've had a couple
of cabinet secretaries in this
current administration, I think
we have a good solid leadership
team here now, um, so we want a
stronger protections for child
welfare workers, as I mentioned,
improved foster care services
that are compliant with the
family's first Prevention
Services Act, uh, efficient use
of all of our services.
And resources, um,
And that's another reason why we
felt like it was important to
move the car uh component over
to the Department of Health.
They're fully equipped with
their uh navigators and they're
able to help us with that in
coordination with the care
coordinators at the MCOs. Um,
let's see here. And then better
data and transparency uh sharing
of information so that, you
know, we meet confidentiality
requirements but also, but also
sharing the data that's
important for us as a community
to ensure that this, this part
of our community is managed the
right way. So I'm going to
my co-sponsors here to say a
couple of words and then I'll,
I'll switch over to the cabinet
secretaries, but I'll ask the
co-sponsors to speak a little.
I think that'll work.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you members of the
committee for hearing this
today, um, as Senator Padilla
has said, we're, we're really um
trying to move the ball forward
and I just want to thank the
secretary for being involved in
these discussions as we've
worked forward on that, actually
both secretaries, um, they've,
they've really been made
themselves available. So for the
care program, we may get a
responsibility. Right now it's
voluntary if a child is born,
um, with
Um, drugs or alcohol in their
system, it's voluntary on their
part as to whether or not they
enter into and follow through on
a on a safe care plan, a plan of
safe care. We're making it
mandatory before they leave the
hospital or birthing facility.
So we've got some definitions um
that are included in this.
We also are um we're also making
it responsibility for CYFD to
enter into and get finalized a
family's first plan as a federal
law that requires the state to
uh if we can get our plan
approved, what it would do is it
would move us in the direction
that I believe the secretary and
the department have already been
working on, which is the best
place for a child is for them to
be be in the.
their family.
The family is where they, they,
they're going to be the most
successful. Aside from being in
your family, then we would move
into foster care, but trying to
provide those preventive
supports in order for a child to
stay with their family is a
critically important option. And
by having the family's first
plan approved by the federal
government, it, it, it will
bring money to New Mexico. And
then the last thing um that we,
that, that I will speak on.
Is having a strategic plan, uh,
developed, uh, to move a sit in
in that direction. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Just quickly on that we are also
amending our confidentiality
clause in this bill, which is
section 11 and most likely our
current confidentiality clause
is unconstitutional based on the
2022 ruling from the 10th
Circuit, and so we are trying to
make it.
That's all for now. Thanks, Mr.
Chairman. I'll ask the
secretaries to also say they've
been very actively involved in,
in, uh, we've had the, the
secretaries involved, the
governor involved, uh, multiple
professionals in this area, and
I want to thank them also for
all of their work on this, Madam
Secretary.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, Teresa
Casales with Children, Youth and
Families Department, um, and as
the senator said, we have been
working actively on these bills.
They were several different
bills that we have rolled into
um Senate Bill 42. Most
importantly for us as we've been
working through this was Kara.
Um, I know that's been an issue
over the last couple of years. I
know it's been highlighted since
I took over in this position. We
want to ensure that we're doing
the work that needs to be done
with families. There is like
language in here that talks
about prenatal. We want to start
early with families as early as
possible to identify issues that
they may need support with and
so moving this to Department of
Health and making this an issue
of public health concern and
safety really makes sense to be
able to get in there and get in
there early with families and
provide them that support that
they may need and not waiting
till a a birth happens and then
a baby is born substance exposed
and trying to step in at that
point. So I think that is.
a huge highlight in this version
of the bill, um, along with the
changes that we've made and
changing the plan of care to a
plan of safe care and separating
out services versus supports to
ensure that families can still
get the support that they need,
but also really highlighting the
services that are needed to deal
with the addiction or um the
issues that they're facing as a
family to ensure that the child
can remain with them and be
safe. Um, so I appreciate the
work that Secretary
De Blasi has done since she's
taken over at Department of
Health to really analyze this
and look at it to move that
forward, um, as they said, there
are other issues in this bill or
other things that were rolled
into it, the multi-level
response, the family's first
Prevention Act, which has been
submitted to the federal
government that was done in
December. We're getting word
that hopefully by April we will
have a decision. Um, I know that
my deputy secretary Phoenix
Doyle has asked the federal
government to work with us
rather than just rendering a
decision of it doesn't pass or
it doesn't.
meet our standards. If there are
concerns or issues that they
have to really work with the
department to try to work
through those issues before they
just deny that plan, um, to see
what we can do to get that
planned. Um, I will assure you
though that some of those
services are happening right now
with other funding streams, and
they will continue and will be
able to enhance and grow that
program as we move forward. Um,
I will turn it over to, um,
Secretary de Blasi for comment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Gina De Blasi,
uh, cabinet secretary designate
for the Department of Health.
Um, I really wanna emphasize why
Department of Health for Kara,
uh, we're looking at, uh, we
will be taking a public health
approach to the issue with our
car navigators will provide
intensive case management, work
very closely with the families
and our um close collaboration
with CYFD early uh ECCD and the
healthcare authority.
Um, at the same time, we will be
working very closely with the
care coordinators, um, that are,
um, put at the hospitals with
the managed care organizations
and providing training to the uh
hospital staff as well as to uh
the primary care providers in
the community and we utilizing
the um what you may have heard
before is Spert, which is um
Oh my God.
Screening brief intervention,
referral to treatment approach
um into assisting individuals
identifying substance abuse then
referrals to treatment. We'll be
following up on those plans of
care, um, if at any time that we
find that that plan of care is
not being followed and that we
felt that the um the newborn is
in uh Jeopardy or at risk.
That's when we will make
referrals over to child
protective services over at
CYFD.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. That's
our opening statement. I think
you heard from all of us on the
key points and whatever
direction you'd like to go.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Padilla, Senator Trujils,
Senator Bergman's Madam
secretary's, before we go to the
audience or, or there's only a
few folks in the audience, but
um, but before we go to the
audience, this is a lot and we
wanna give it a thorough hearing
and we wanna, we want to act on
it.
If I could just ask, um,
Senator Swart to give section 1
and 2 of the onceo Section one,
the ones over, I'll do section
2.
Hip hop, and then if Senator
Stewart can do section 3, which
is definitions to the children's
codes.
And then Senator Dewitt could do
section 4, which is definitions
of voluntary placement and
family Services Act, and then
I'll have you go to section 5 to
explain that big one, but before
we have folks in the audience
that wish to address the
committee and uh so why don't we
do that in support with Mika.
Visy and Miss Terry Cole.
Mika from both futures. Is she
online or is she in the
building.
Oh, I see. So someone in one in
favor, one in opposition, so in
favor of Miss Terry Cole,
welcome.
You wanna hold?
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Terry
Cole. I'm the president CEO for
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce.
Well, this bill, I'm standing in
support of is important because
it begins to take a step in the
right direction to help make our
newborns in New Mexico.
Safer. The child safety issue in
New Mexico, as everyone knows,
has been very, very difficult,
and it has been difficult for us
to contribute to solutions. So
when we saw this bill, I began
following it and talked with the
sponsor, Senator Padilla. It has
changed quite a bit. I
acknowledge that, but one of the
things we like best about it is
that it begins to deal with
newborns with
instance, withdrawal symptoms in
New Mexico and in New Mexico,
they have climbed more than
twice the national average, and
yet only 1 in 7 local families
with substance exposed newborns
accepts referrals to addiction
treatment.
We want to close the gaps on
service delivery and SB 42,
while it does a lot of other
things, which has been an
evolving process. It seeks to do
just that. It's a complicated
problem that we want to try to
solve, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee through treatment
rather than penalization. Yet
this is a very real child abuse
problem, we think, that has to
be dealt with and will improve
our overall public safety in the
state of New Mexico.
So we uh are um excited about
the improvement that this bill
would bring, and we urge you to
vote yes today. Thank you.
Uh, good.
Yeah.
May I go?
Good evening, chair, members of
the committee, Mikeini with both
Futures New Mexico, and we
strongly support the original
bill, SB 42, um, care
legislation which prioritizes
meaningful healthcare focus
lens, ensuring that responses to
substance use during pregnancy
prioritize care, support, and
evidence-based best practices of
punishment. We deeply respect
the sponsors for the dedication
to improving the system for
children and families. Thank
you.
No.
Thank you. All right, we'll go
to committee members.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Senators, I appreciate you
bringing this bill forward. I
was wondering if you could just
kind of help, uh, clarify on the
plate of safe care. So when
talking with uh,
positions in days gone by. I
know that they had some, you
know, issues with when newborns
were born in substance exposed,
addicted, that there was not
necessarily a method to ensure
that that new Gordon was not
just going back home with the
parent that had been using, you
know, whatever substance it was.
And so just quickly reading
through this, it looks like
there's some guardrails and
precautions put in place to help
prevent that.
Because I know that they had had
pressure, you know, hospitals
like, hey, why do we still have
this newborn here in the ward
and, you know, we need to
discharge them. Well, who are
you discharging them to and, you
know, parents, and so it just
puts that newborn, you know,
with great risk of danger
because you don't know what
environment they're going home
to so I wonder if you guys could
just speak to them.
Uh, thank you, Chair and
Senator. So the legislation
makes a huge change, which is
now is is uh required that they
notify uh the individual that
they're the Department of
Health.
Where the Care Act will sit down
in the last secretary de Blessi
to step in on that one, but uh
that's the one of the biggest
things that we're changing here
with this, this section of the
of the bill.
um, Mr. Jeremy and Senator, I
think it's also important to
note that current New Mexico law
makes it very clear that drug
exposure, alcohol exposure in
and of itself is not considered
abuse and neglect.
So there have to be other
factors, and that was a big step
that we took years ago. What
we're changing here is that it's
not voluntary anymore. The plan
of safe care has to be completed
before the child leaves the
birthing facility, and that's a
big flip for us, but it doesn't
change the fact that in and of
itself.
That exposure is not considered
abuse or neglect, and that's a
really important thing to.
Mr. Cherry Senator, thank you. I
appreciate you clarifying for
that. That was one of my
follow-up questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you guys for being here.
I think it's a long time coming,
and I think that everyone
deserves a lot of credit for the
work that they've all done to
come here collectively, um, to,
to put kids first this session.
So thank you specifically,
secretary, um, and, and thank
you to Senator, uh, Stewart and
Senator Doig, who have kind of
really gotten the ball ball
rolling and, and for some good
legislators, they're really
tackling this issue. I think, I
think Kara is um
One of the most important bills
that will pass, and we've heard
it so many times in the interim,
and it just seemed like I don't
know what the delay was. I guess
on that one it's just about
time, right? Um, I, we had, we
had all been familiar with these
bills for many years, we've seen
these bills in different forms
and, and honestly, because this
is a omnibus package of CYFD
bills we've seen many of these
this session. Um, the family's
first, I think is a, is a very
important step of putting those
uh minimum best practices.
In place so that there's some
uniform practices through
throughout. Could you just very
briefly summarize, um, the
difference between that family
first kind of best practices
that we're gonna address and the
differences of what we're going
to see in a strategic plan that
is required in this, this draft.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Brantley, thank you. So I think
there will be very minimal
differences, the
Family's first plan that we put
forward um to the federal
government lays out some of the
work that we'll be doing with
those families in prevention and
intervention, um, that is work
that we're doing right now. A
lot of that work is funded, you
know, through different funding
streams. Some of it is tan, some
of it is, um,
The Sasu ground, we have
different ways to pay for that.
It will just give us an
opportunity to expand that
statewide. We've done it through
kind of pilot projects in
certain communities and haven't
had the opportunity to do that
more broadly. So as we move
forward with that and our
funding increases, um, we will
be expanding that and I believe
in this bill, it is not a pilot
project that expands it
statewide to counties by 2027.
So we're working on
incorporating what those steps
would look.
Like into our strategic plan. So
those should pretty much mirror
each other. Thank you. Thank
you, madam secretary and, and
Chairman that along with the
confidentiality that is
included, um, Senator Padilla,
thank you for instead of
piecemeiling this, this process
and, and Senator Trujillo for
bringing this back. I hope that
this, this rolls through the
legislator fast and furiously,
it's very important, perhaps,
um, you know, it, it is
important to me every bit as is
our crime package that we've
passed.
So we are putting the, the
public safety of our most
vulnerable little ones first in
this package. Thank you guys for
all the work.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senators, Madam Secretary,
the, um, so I'm just gonna focus
on uh
Section 2, which is
Committing a criminal code.
And we, and, and as you know,
uh, you know, simple assault is
a
a misdemeanor batteries of petty
misdemeanor. There's an
aggravated battery misdemeanor.
And then there's an aggravated
battery felony, which is a 3rd
degree felony.
But there are exceptions of Mr.
Chairman uh battery against a
referee.
Uh battery against a healthcare
worker.
I think there may be one other
which, which jumps the battery,
even though it may be
misdemeanor in nature, it jumps
into a 4th degree felony. I
think this is what we're trying
to do here is to emphasize to
police on the ground.
Prosecutors and judges that this
is just unacceptable behavior
someone just trying to do their
job. We got to show.
So that we have their back and
hopefully
enacting something like this
will protect them, um, but it
does other things too on, on
page 6.
You have an aggravated assault,
which is already a felony. It's
a 4th degree felony aggravated
assault.
You have, uh, it's currently
it's aggravated assault a 4th
degree felony, so it's treated
with very with
With the utmost seriousness, you
want to bump it to a 3rd degree
felony.
Um
But then you have on paragraph
D, Mr. Chairman.
Senators, Madam Secretary is on
page 6, line 16
subgraph D.
You have assault with intent to
commit a violent felony.
Which is a part of our criminal
code that's not really used a
lot by by prosecutors, um, but
you have this as a second degree
felony. Keep in mind assault is
where someone is not touched, so
they're not touched, they're
just in fear.
Of an immediate battery.
I'm not sure, um.
OK, cool. And then
Paragraph E
Paragraph E, I think is what we
want.
Uh, paragraphs, uh,
B is what we want.
Uh, but then we go to paragraph
F on page 7, line 4, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, senators, Madam secretaries,
aggravated battery.
There's a misdemeanor aggravated
battery, but there's also a 3rd
degree aggravated battery. And
so if you have aggravated
battery.
Um, painful temporary
disfigurement.
Uh, like a black guy, bloody
nose, that would be a
misdemeanor you're bumping that
to a 4th degree felony.
And then inflicting great bodily
harm, you're making it a 3rd
degree felony which it which it
already is. It already is, um.
And then you have, uh, and then
you have G, which is like a
person who assists.
So there's always the crime of
conspiracy, in other words, two
people.
Working in concert to commit the
same crime.
But I don't know if there's this
concept of a person who assists
or is assisting.
I'm sorry, a person who assists
or is assisted.
By one or more persons, uh, to
commit a battery.
Um, is a felony, a 4th degree
felony. How do you anticipate?
I guess um
How do you anticipate that
That, what, what would be the
elements of that crime? What
would be the scenario that would
That would convict some of that
of that crime
Mr. Chairman Senator, um, you're
asking a question that um I, I
don't know that anybody on this
panel has the answer for, and
I'm just gonna be really honest.
Um, you, uh, you mentioned the
exemptions. I will just add to
that that there is a school
personnel exemption and this
particular language mimics that
section of the of of the assault
and battery and
So we just took the assumption,
um, this is something that uh
CYFD um I believe felt pretty
strongly about, um, in order to
protect their um their
employees, but it does just
mimic it, and so I don't have an
answer for you as to what the
elements are, I, I, I don't
think any one of us know
criminal law that well, but
thank you for asking. Thank you.
That's fair, Mr. Chairman
Senator, so I
So I think uh what you're saying
is that BCD and F mirror those
other passages, but G.
I is that also included in that
teacher example that you gave,
is there a person who assists
that paragraph actually does
mimic it, and I, when I, when I
looked at it and looked at the
comparison, um, I wondered kind
of what the elements of that
would be myself.
Just personally.
Um, but it does mimic what's in
the school personnel Act.
And, and, you know, I guess so
from
This side of the table, a
non-attorney sitting on this
side of the table, the way I
look at it is, you know, shoot,
if there's multiple people
conspiring here and there, you
know, that someone should have
raised their hand and said, we
shouldn't be doing this. And so
that's, I'm assuming that's why
that was set as a 4th film.
Sure.
So I do have a, do have a, I
mean, I also have some concerns
about the section 2.
Language when I went.
The mic's on up there? Oh, OK.
In fact, this mic seems to be
super echoe.
Um, but I think centers went
through some of that. I, I.
Well, let me just ask one
though, um.
Page 6, line 7, it says
unlawfully assaulting. Is there
such thing as a lawful assault.
I don't think we need to work on
lawful, unlawfully there, uh, I
just jumped out at me, um,
unless there's a reason for
that. I mean, I think I
And what that is sort of
something I would flag and think
how we're gonna deal with that
piece. I do, on page 9 on the
definition of guardian.
Uh, we add or a person
authorized to care for a child
by a parental power of attorney
is permitted by law. I'm a
little concerned about that
because guardian is a specific
legal concept that does not
include powers of attorney, and
then I know that later on we
have that definition again.
Uh there and find it where we
did not include.
that external language
like that.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, the
reason that we put that power of
attorney, and we recognize that
that's not a typical uh
language, but we do recognize
that around Mexico, particularly
um in some of our uh uh our
communities in northern New
Mexico. I'll just say because
I've been working through the
grandparents raising
grandchildren, um, uh, along
with a number of other senators
and representatives and that
really was the reason for
putting that in there was to try
to address that issue.
And Mr. Chairman, I think the
data shows us that 49% of
children being fostered are
being fostered by the rampart.
Uh, and I'm all good with that,
and certainly if you have a
power of attorney that's valid,
you don't need a guardianship.
I mean, that's the problem with
guardians specific term, and
then if you look on page 16 line
13, we, we can't have guardian
and we did not add that
additional language. So I, I
was, OK. I, I can be able to
send her do it.
So, Mr. Chair, Senator, so these
are in different areas of law.
So we're, we're looking at on
page 9, that's specifically
about Kara, and we want to make
sure that anyone who is caring
for that child, whether they're
doing it pursuant to a legal
guardianship, a power of
attorney. I right now have the
al power of attorney for a child
who I have put in someone else's
care, using that power of
attorney to do so. These
situations come up all the time.
So, in the carrot context, we
want that to be broad.
It it's not necessarily
appropriate for every definition
of guardian to include that
language, but in the career
context it is.
Mr. I appreciate that. I guess
my only question is, why don't
we just, I mean, maybe that
would get complicated just to
have another section that says,
Power of attorney. In other
words, you can use the power of
attorney. It just, yeah, a
guardian, I mean, if a person
appointed as a guardian by a
court. Well, that's, that's a
whole process, which is very
different than a
So, Mr. Chair, Senator, so, and
in the situation I have going on
right now.
I have this person, so I have
power of attorney over this
child.
It is not a court appointed
guardian, that power of attorney
gave me the authority to place
them with another guardian.
If I can't take care of them,
maybe because I'm in session.
Um, and so,
I, I don't think we, I think.
We just want that included under
the concept of guardian, and not
to limit guardian to just a
court appointed guardian in this
context only.
I appreciate that. I think
again.
Don't want to try and have to
rewrite this to do something
different, but it just, it, it
jumped out at me because again,
we've had a number of bills that
have tried to do exactly this.
The use
Different times and, and legally
a power of attorney.
is just as you said, your power
of attorney is all you need. You
don't need to go get a
guardianship, um, so it just
that that jumped out at me. So
that, that's what I have for
now, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate the second time as
chairman senators secretaries,
if we could just go to page 7.
And just kind of follow me on
the math. Um,
I'm gonna propose that we remove
uh subsection F. So what we did
is on the bottom of page 6, top
of page 7, Mr. Chairman, we took
a good old fashioned misdemeanor
battery of the unlawful touching
of another will make it a 4th
degree felony, boom. We, we
emphasize to police on the
ground, this is serious and
needs to be treated serious, uh,
so that our social workers, uh,
feel
You know, feel the love. The,
um, then we have aggravated
battery.
Uh, paragraphs 1 and 2, so I'm
on page 7 lines 10 through 14.
So if I batter somebody it's a
4th degree felony, but if I give
him a bloody nose, black eye,
or, you know, knock their tooth
out. It's also a 4th degree
felony. So those are extra
things the prosecutor has to
prove.
To, to prove that case instead
of just proving a good old
fashioned battery and then our
lines 15 through 17.
Uh
Great bodily harm is already a
3rd degree felony for every
person in the state. So I think
we should just raise the
misdemeanor battery to a 4th
degree, um, and, uh,
And we're not really taking away
from what we want to do. So with
that on page 7 of
Mr. I move on.
That we strike the lines of
subgraph from line 4 through
line 17.
We've uh huddled over here on
the side of the table and we can
support that.
So moved
Just a question, do we need
section, what's the history of
section 2 in this bill?
I mean, was this a separate
section of where did this, I'm
just trying to figure out how
did this come in, what, what,
what, there's just a whole bunch
of things and creating a whole
bunch of new felonies and it
just
raises a couple. I mean, I have
some concern with the way this
was structured in general. I'm
just curious what, where did
this come from?
there's an escalating.
situation here where these
workers are being abused on a
more regular basis, and that's
where a lot of this came from.
Now the secretary one because
she could speak to the workers,
yeah.
Um, mister Chairman for leader
worth, um, I believe that that
is true. I mean, they're
constantly having to call state
police to come in the offices uh
with abuse from individuals to
our workers. One of the things
that we're doing, we're not just
saying we want to make a law to
make that, you know, so that the
workers are protected. We also
want to make sure kids are
protected and in our new
workforce development plan,
we're really working on ensuring
that our workers are getting
handled with care.
That they're getting
de-escalation so that they're
better able to work with that,
but when it does rise to the
occasion when there is a battery
or an assault or verbal
escalation from these youth. We
want to make sure that the
workers are protected and
oftentimes what happens is law
enforcement is called to the
various offices and basically
they say there's nothing that we
can do about that. So we were
really interested this year in
looking at what we've done for
healthcare workers, what we've
done for teachers and really
bringing that in to ensure that.
We're doing the same for our
child welfare workers.
Just a general question, Mr.
Chair. So are, are these
penalties for this specific type
of battery in a so different.
than the current
I mean, the center is said the
currents.
You know, if you've got a great
bodily harm charge. I mean, is
it?
And or is it just periling and
we're adding a new name, so to
make sure that they understand
that those penalties are there
for this particular crime.
So, Mr. Chairman Floor, um, we,
as I said, we just lifted up
what was already in statute for
educators and
took that same exact language
and put it in for social
workers. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
Senator, and I did do the
comparison, um, just like
regular assault and battery, and
these do elevate it. They match
the school personnel, but they
elevate just regular assault and
battery, just like one level.
Other than I think the one that
Senator Maest just pointed out.
And I guess my question.
Do we think that elevating the
penalty is actually going to be
a deterrent here to someone
who's committing the penalty.
I mean, we did, this is, this is
the fundamental question that we
talk about all the time in here.
I mean we're, we're, we're
changing the felony, so we're
And again, I mean, I get that's
a philosophical issue that
I guess the question is, do we
need to do that? I mean, and did
they do that? Well, here's what
did they do that for in the
teacher statute, or we elevating
above what it is for teachers.
No, Mr. Chairman and and leader,
this was literally lifted up
from what that, how that was
constructed, you know, I'll just
say one little thing here again,
the non-attorney on this side of
the table, I, I, I think this
behavior should be cleared up
and cleaned up and fixed up when
the child's this age, so that
we're not dealing with this
later when they become an adult.
They need to take this seriously
and I think that's it's a good
move. Well, Mr. Chair, to the
extent we've done this for
teachers and we have the same
framework for the teachers in
terms of the penalties that I
get that, that, that's we've
made a policy decision.
it.
Uh, it feels to me like it's
important to be consistent, and
so I'm OK with that, if that's
truly what's in the other
statutes and in parallels with
there. That's it on section 2. I
mean, that's CMS we're still, I
did, I did have, let me just
flag one more thing. I was
handed a note that says on the
parental powers of attorney,
they're limited to 6 months
under NMSA 455104.
So, Mr. Cha, Senator, we're OK
with that. So that basically
means you've got to go back
every 6 months and get a new
POA.
Mr. Cha under, yeah, I mean
that's how it is now if you're
operating under a a parental
POA.
Great. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So I have a question regarding
the uh section 11, the
confidentiality issue.
If that's page 47.
So there was an issue raised in,
in, in, in the, the analysis
that said that this may have a
And it may have some concerns
with the child abuse prevention
and Treatment Act CAPTA.
And that the apparently there's
some discretion between the 1st
and 14th Amendment about the
public interest.
And uh
And the, and the right of
privacy and so, do you guys,
have you talked about this with
folks? I, I got that I want to
understand what your, your
position is on this because it
says here that there seems to be
a conflict between what the
federal government requires and
what we're requiring in this new
bill, can you see, explain the
differences, your chairman and
senator, we did have a couple of
thorough reviews on CAFTA. We
believe it is 100% cap to
compliant with
co-sponsor here is gonna take
the ball on that. Yeah, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, the point of
that section is to make it capA
compliant.
I'm not sure if the analysis.
that.
OK,
OK, we can also elaborate on
that if he needs to.
We have right now before us a
proposed amendment. Am I right?
And I think we've gotten a
little bit off the proposed.
So, uh, the amendment was on
page 7.
subsection F.
That's that's the matter before
us right now. It's a proper
motion for the amendment, so
that's what I'm.
Senator, I think you were off
that a little bit.
Bill.
Yeah, yeah, the floor, but
you're off the amendment. Can I,
can I get you back to the other
questions in a little bit.
Let's focus on the amendment.
That that's me right now back to
that again, page 7 striking the
paragraph F.
Any other discussion on that?
Where
What is the appetite for the
committee to strike all of
Section 2.
section 2.
You know, sponsor says no.
Well, stay with the motion we
have then at this point we'll
take it piece by piece.
Um
Any other question on the
proposed amendment.
Demonstrated subsection after
lettering.
Any other discussions or any
objection?
that amendment adopted.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
then let's look at the assault
and, and the general is correct.
It, it's these are weird
statutes, but they are written
that way.
So you have a good old fashioned
assault and battery and then you
have 3 specialized classes, um.
Uh, our victim, school
personnel, sports officials, and
healthcare personnel, but when
you look at the um assault.
Um, I agree we should bump the
petty misdemeanor to a
misdemeanor. That's paragraph B.
And then what you're trying to
do is bump a 4th degree felony
to a 3.
And I think the fact that it's
already a felony.
I think the key is to train the
officers to realize that this is
a crime. They, it's in the
context of work in the in the
context of, you know, horribly
dysfunctional, very dramatic
situations and, and they may not
think it's a crime, you know,
but it already is a 4th degree
felony to assault someone with a
deadly weapon. So that's
paragraph C.
But, but sir, but let's take a
look specifically at paragraph
D. D is not contained in the
school personnel, sports
officials or healthcare
personnel statutes, um, so this
is Bran brand new and, and it
contradicts, it contradicts the
the criminal code. So if I get a
bat.
And I swipe at a healthcare
worker and I missed. I said I'm
gonna kill you and I swipe it up
with a bat and I miss them, then
I'm guilty of a second degree
felony, but if I hit them, I
smack them in the head and it
causes great bodily harm. I'm
guilty of a third degree felony,
so that doesn't jive, that
doesn't jive, so, um, so we
can't have that, um.
So I, uh
So I would, um,
A move that we strike up on page
6, lines 5 through
22 that we strike subsection C
and D, and we still have the
enhancement, we still enhance
the uh
The petty misdemeanor assault.
To a misdemeanor.
no,
no, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
I move to strike on page 6,
lines 5 through 22.
The felony enhancements for, for
aggravated assault.
We can take them one at a time
or we can take them both
together.
Page 6
Page 6, lines 5 through 22.
It's it's moving a 4th degree to
a 3rd degree.
An 18-month penalty to a 3-year
penalty, and it's creating the
2nd degree felony.
Um, that currently doesn't exist
in law.
Just a question the amendment,
so does the existing, I, I get
D, D doesn't make any sense to
me. I was trying to read that
language too, and it's, it's
very clunky as to what, what, so
I mean I I'm good with, but I'm
going back to see. Do we have C
in the existing for the
Educators and the
Mr. Chairman, on the NM one
source. I'm not sure what book
he's looking at, but online.
D is in here identical in this
for school employees as well as
CC.
Senor Senator Bergman's, that's
correct. It is in there. It is
the 2nd degree crime is in there
for a school personnel.
And that's a a 1989 law.
It was not put in, however, for
the sports official.
Uh
But it was put in for the health
care official.
Answer your question, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, the, it is in
there in the uh this 3rd degree
crime of aggravated assault is
in there for, for all, all three
school personnel, sports
officials, and healthcare
personnel.
Mr. Chair, but the, the 2nd
degree felony is only in one of
those.
Correct, Mr. Chairman Sarworth.
It's in the uh school personnel,
which was written in 8.
1989, but and also the
healthcare personnel.
But it is not in there for the
sports official.
Sponsors down here, uh, we don't
want to change any of this, but
we're going to be open to what
the committee feels is best, but
you know, again, this was simply
lifted up out of the other and
put in here and we felt like it,
it met what we were trying to
accomplish. I'll just say that
to, to the committee.
unfriendly.
Mr. Chairman, if I just might
speak.
Um, and I'm not sure that the
rest of my
ears are gonna like this, but I
think it's important that we
recognize that this could be
applied to.
And so, so this, this could be
a, this could be a, this is not
just applicable to adults.
This could be this could be,
this could apply to children who
are determined to be.
Uh
Adults, and I don't know how
that process works. I know
there's criteria that you have
to go through, but, but we have
to recognize that and they did
the same in the school personnel
Act, and so I don't know what
the, the
But we have to recognize that
this could be applicable to
children that are deemed to be
adults.
That's all I can say.
Uh
In the chair, I think I just
need to say it again. I, I feel
like we need to straighten out
this behavior when, when they're
a child so that they're not
doing this when they become an
adult.
from
Senator Bra.
And I do have
Senator O'Malley.
Pope.
Senator Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
They're working
Yes.
Senator Cervantes. Yes, that
amendments adopted.
Senor reminds us thank you.
Mr. Kimmel were a little
confused. Are we, do we just
strike C and D? Not all
and that is already gone. Thank
you.
Others
Uh, of the amendment, yeah,
back to the bill free for all
time.
Oh, you're right, Senator
Thornton knew what's next. I'm
sorry, I'm right back to you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
they answered my question
already that they've already uh
made it cap.
Kepler compliant, so I'm good
with that.
Thank you.
So, Mr. Chair, earlier I was
saying we're just putting in
that POA stuff in the context of
Kara, and I'm wrong.
We need to do that on page 6,
put it in on page 16, and take
it out here because this is the
general definition section on
page 9 and 16 are the
definitions that are specific to
Kara, so I'm going to move an
amendment on page 9 lines 17
through 19.
Strike the, the inserted
language.
And move it to
Page 16.
Line 14, inserting that language
before the semicolon. So that
only for the purposes of Kara,
are we defining guardian, uh, as
including, uh, that someone
caring for the child under a
parental power of attorney.
I think that's right. Whoever
emailed me before told me I was
wrong. I'm sure they'll email me
again and tell me if I'm
sure that's a friend.
So.
You know. Thank you, Mrs.
Senator. I, I, I agree that it
needs to be on page 16.
Uh, I agree that that.
It needs to be added to page 16,
the definition of guardian.
But why are we removing that
provision from the Children's
code.
And Mr. Chair, Senator, because
otherwise then guardian under
the entire Children's code
includes this kind of informal,
not court appointed
guardianship, and, and I don't,
I don't think that's that's not
the intention. The intention is
in the Cara context, to make
sure whoever has the kid is part
of
Of this plan of care, um, but
it's not the intention to for
the entire Children's code to to
make guardians be not only a
court appointed guardian, but a
guardian under a power of
attorney. Thank you.
No, we're, we're comfortable. I
mean, this makes it only
applicable to Kara now, whether
we had it the other way around
before. So thank you, Senator.
That's all I have right now, Mr.
Cha.
We define a care coordinator.
On 13.
The bill with
Involve a person assigned to a
newborn.
And the parents, relatives, etc.
How long are they assigned to
the newborn by the bill?
Mr. Chair, uh, a care
coordinator is um employed by
the managed care organization.
A care coordinator is employed
by the managed care organization
through the um
AMCO through the turquoise care
contract, which is Medicaid and
those care coordinators are with
that family and it's it there
those cases are active for a
year.
is that in the bill someplace
where the, the, the, there was
it says the characters assigned
to the newborn in the families,
it's gonna be an important
relationship. Here's how long,
how long is that assignment
specified in the bill.
Mr. Chair, I don't believe it
is.
important when you get to the
next draft of this thing.
Um
So we'll make the point there.
I'm not gonna try and rewrite
this thing here, but that's
gonna be a concern.
that assignment. There, there's
some, there's some ambiguities
that I'm gonna just point out
for y'all and then let you
tackle them.
Um
Maybe you go to page 2.
a brilliant of bringing at the
bottom of page 20 of the new
language of birthing facility.
For healthcare provider may
participate in a plan.
Are we really saying we want
them to participate in the plan.
I mean, when they said they may
participate in plan, they may
may not what, what's the point
if we give them the option.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And so
for that particular paragraph,
um, they may participate in a
plan that's only applicable to
prenatal.
Um, and or prenatal, uh, medical
visits. So that is only prior to
the child being born.
Yeah, but it says prenatal or
perinatal.
If you look at
Um, like.
The
I think that
Yeah, this is where I got really
confused cause I, I hear what
you say, this section is
supposed to be dealing with
Very uh postnatal, right? But,
but the language here says
perital and this, that's why I
got really confused because then
we start talking about substance
exposed newborn's parenting.
Oh, I'll try to give you an
example where that happens.
So in subparagraph being,
Um, Senator Bergman that you're
referring to as the birthing
facility shall, that's the next
part, I'll participate,
including a written plan of care
created.
Prior to a substance abuse or
exposed toward's discharge.
And sent immediately Department
of Health that this is, uh, I'll
just tell you the, all the
drafting here is really strange.
Uh, if you look at the, if you
look at the way you then I'll
just refer to committee members
to the age 21 that lightly
through all that, that's just
really bizarre rafting and
statutory construction. I've
never seen anything like this
before where you got the the
kinda hanging out there, um,
after the B and then you got
those subparagraphs, all of that
is.
Hard for me to read because I've
never seen well written like
that before. Um, and I, I may be
corrected by some of my
colleagues, but this is just
really strange, strange
drafting.
And I'm, and I'm having, as a
result, having difficulty
understanding it.
Mr. Chairman, I just might
respond to that, um, perinatal
medical visit, that would give
um a physician, a healthcare
provider, the opportunity of
creating a plan of safe care.
The child's left the hospital,
but now they've gone back and
they're under prenatal care,
which is after the birth, but
it's still before the child's a
year old, and they could still
access the services of the plan
of safety.
But it's not mandatory at that
point.
So you.
So.
So perinatal is the 5 months
before birth and the one month
after. I think we're making an
assumption in here that
perinatal is, is postnatal. Uh,
perinatal includes the prenatal
tum. That's most of perinatal is
pretty.
OK, so give me a minute to find
that I missed, did I miss that
definition?
Mr. Chair, that is just a, that
doesn't need to be defined any
more than prenatal, I think
would need to be defined. That's
just.
The common definition of the
word.
So, you're saying perinatal is
always understood to include
both uh care before and after
birth.
Perinatal is the 5 months before
birth and one month after birth.
That is what perinatal means.
Oh.
And that's distinguished from
prenatal I entirely exclusively
before birth.
prenatal would be everything
before birth.
Perinatal specifically that,
that those last 5. So, so in
your first trimester, you are in
prenatal all the way upto you
give birth, but once you get to
You know, after month 4, you're
in perinatal, which could also
still be prenatal, but
OK. Well, I'm getting an
education, I should know these
things probably, but
Uh,
we only had 3 kids, so I didn't
some slow, slow learner, yeah. I
do remember the breathing
exercises and
That training, but
Yeah, um, I'm still, so I'm
still kind of back to where I
was at and I was hoping maybe
somebody can help guide me
through and I don't know if I
look in the center here others
the back to what the structure
is strange, right, the drafting
strange, just doesn't make sense
to me, so I'm trying to track it
through. I think it'd be much
better done to be very frank
with you, uh, cause that, that
the, it may seem like a small
thing but that the in the colon
hanging out of my head.
And then
Going from there just seemed
really, really odd.
Um, and those probably should
just be separate subparagraphs,
I think, right, Senator here,
you see what I'm talking about
as opposed to that the way it
was written.
And then it goes, it talks
about, let's see, a substance
exposed newborn's parent. Here,
here's one of the questions I
have here is gonna, I think it's
gonna come up.
This is the world we live in, I
end up in some cases where
really not infrequently where
the parents biological parents
of the child are not married.
Um, and so then we're saying
that a parent has to participate
in this plan, and if you look
online and it says the substance
exposed towards parenting.
Relative guardian can study or
caretaker who is present, had
discharged so received a copy of
the plan.
What happens when
Um
Yeah, I'm, I'm trying not to be
sexist about this, but I may not
have any choice. What happens
when is the infant's gonna be
exposed, substance exposed by
the mother. I'm assuming in all
cases, right? Like in the only
options and possibilities and to
be
Broad in my thinking, but that's
actually the,
the, the child can be um exposed
through the father.
That um can uh fetal alcohol
syndrome.
Um, is definitely something.
Could be a male exposure.
I understand. I'm sorry, so I'm
missing that. So we, we have a
mother who's carrying an infant
and the father's an alcoholic
and the infant can then be
exposed to the substance through
the conception is
I understand. I'm sorry, so I'm
missing that. So we, we have a
mother who's carrying an infant
and the father's an alcoholic
and the infant can then be
exposed to the substance through
the conception has
going on.
And, and help me to understand
the biology. So you're telling
me at the time of conception,
the father who was an alcoholic
would be
Uh
producing a substance exposed.
And that would be detectable
and, and diagnosed at the time
of birth at time of birth as the
fetus grows, it would.
From the beginning. What's that
from the beginning that's,
that's where the child starts.
It's my question, but I'm
fascinated by what you're
learning, so you're, you're
telling me that, uh, an
alcoholic father who impregnates
a woman and create a substance
exposed newborn by the alcoholic
father's sperm alone.
You
And you told me that that could
occur at the time of conception
alone.
OK.
All right, so then it goes, so
then I get to the the place
where I'm, I've got a uh a
curious question, which is, OK,
so,
Let me go to a different
scenario, different fact
scenario, so, um, dad, mom, um,
Are there at birth.
Um, the, at the time of the
birth, there's a determination
that you've got a substance
exposed newborn.
Dad, let's just in my
hypothetical, dad was not aware
mom was a heroin addict, right?
Um
The plan of and he learns about
that really, I guess at the time
his plans generated. So who's
responsible for, for all of
these requirements of
considering to the plans of the
plan shall be signed by the
appropriate representative.
Of the discharging birthing
facility. I don't know who that
is, first of all, I guess that's
gonna be the first question, but
then it goes on, and then, and
this is also signed by the
Substance exposed newborn's
parent relative guarded in our
caretaker who is present at
discharge, that could be both
parents and grandparents, right?
And all of the above, and it
says they're all gonna have to
sign off on that report, as I
understand it, right, or that or
that plan. So I've got, got
birth and I've got mom who's a
heroin addict unknown to the
grandparents and father, but she
is, the doctors determined the.
substance exposed at the time of
discharge, that's got to sign
the plan, grandparents got to
sign the plan, and they're
probably pretty unhappy with mom
at that point in that scenario,
right?
What happens?
Um, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, it would be, we want
to make sure that anybody that
that child is gonna be going
home with.
is aware of the plan and signing
the plan in agreeing to the
terms of that. So if it's
determined at the time that
As you stated, Mother is a
heroin addict, and grandparents
are there if it's determined
that grandparents will be the
primary caregiver, and that they
understand the responsibilities
they would be signing the plan
along with Mother to say it was
explained to them, but they're
accepting responsibility to
ensure the safety of that child.
But I appreciate the thinking
that that's what's going to
happen. That's not what the bill
says though, right? The bill
doesn't say.
OK.
OK. Mr. Chair, go to page 23,
which is talking like all this
is talking about what's in the
plan, page 23, lines 6 through
8. The names of all the
relatives, parents, guardians,
custodians, or caretakers that
will be living with the
substance abuse newborn.
Again, I've got a question there
and I'll come to that in a
little bit, but again, I, I'm
that's still not really
answering my question, which is
who has to sign up for the plan
and who's responsible for it. I
mean, I understand that because
the the the language center that
you're referring to there
describes what should be in the
plan, right? In other words, it
says the, that, that actually
that whole list begins back on
page 22, line 14, right, it says
the and that and then you have
to go back to that plan, go back
to the preceding page. This is
really, really confusingly
written, right? Cause then,
because if you're trying to
figure out
Sen was just reading the names
that's a pair of E is a list of
subparagraphs that began up at 3
on line 14.
Right, you're still staying with
me, so you, so that list of A
through F
Begins up on subsection 3 on
page 22 in line 14, but then
that begins shall at a minimum
include the following, and so if
you understand what that means,
you got to go back to
The page 21, 23, the plan of
safe care. Y'all, are you all
still following along with me?
Right, so to, to understand this
language and follow it all the
way through, really takes a
pretty convoluted road map and
a, and a pretty twisted uh uh
track. I really do think we can
do a lot better drafting, and,
and I hope you'll be willing to
do that, Senator, to take the
time to do it because this is
just not good drafting, um,
because you'd have to go back to
the subsection C to the
subsection.
see on page 21 is the plan of
safe care and it's got a colon.
It's got a list of subparagraphs
one.
2 and 3, and then you get to 3
and shall at a minimum. You
don't need the words at a
minimum.
And you don't need the following
on that line, you should just
stay shall included in a colon,
right? And so there's a lot of
support, there's a lot of
superfluous language that can
really be uh done much better
here too. But when you get to
that 3, then you get to the
listed Senator Dewey was talking
about, but before we get there,
we go all the way back to where
I was at before uh before she
took us there. I'm still back to
the question I've got, which is
this important process and
procedure.
Uh, but who, who signs the plan?
And, and, and what happens when
in my scenario, dad finds out,
grandparents find out that mom
was using heroin and uh
grandparents are upset. So, I
want this child coming home with
us, not with mom.
What happens? How does it get
resolved, and I shouldn't ask
how get result. Where does the
bill say how that gets resolved?
Mr. Chairman, um, I will just
point out and I'm trying to
follow along with you, and I
agree with you. We, we worked
really hard to try to get stuff
out of the uh
So that it was in the rural
section, and I think you're
right.
In the in the rules section,
which is over on
What say January.
What is it? 26, 24, 24.
Yeah, I got it circled there,
uh, line 5 is where we start
like what has to be done by
rules, and I, I, I have to agree
with you that that information
that we've described about the
plan of safe care would be
better in the rules section to
say which must include at a
minimum, and then those
standards.
There's a lot of information
here and, and I think we just
missed that one.
Um, but I agree with you and
I'll work on getting that into
the right place, um, which would
be under that rural section,
where I just pointed out, um, in
regards to uh go back to who
would sign it. We do have ore
there.
And so it's not everybody that
has to sign it. The fear is, is
that you do have a child who's
substance exposed
page 21 after custodian.
So it says, and so, so the uh
representative of the
discharging earthing facility
and the substance exposed
parents and then it lists
precomprehensive list of who
that might be. I there probably
is some.
Challenges happening within that
family, if one person doesn't
know or does know, and so we
just wanted to make sure that
somebody representing that child
is gonna sign off on that here.
And that could include the
heroine mother.
It could.
Cause again, remember, Mr.
Chairman, that uh drug exposure
in drug or alcohol exposure in
and of itself is not a is not a
It doesn't confirm that there's
abuse or neglect.
I understand I'm,
I'm, I'm seeing what I think is
very likely scenario, which is
at the time of discharge. When,
when you find a, a substance
exposed a newborn.
And, and again, I'm using the
mother, father, I could come up
with any number of different
scenarios, but my experience is
usually with the grandparents.
And the grandparents are gonna
be livid, probably to find out
that they're
grandchild.
The most to any number of
different drugs that could be
mom and dad, you said dad's an
alcoholic's a heroin addict and
grandparents and uh by by what
you're describing, Senator, the,
any one of them could sign out.
And that could include alcoholic
dad, heroin mom, and, and
grandparents, uh, putting up a
fight.
And and.
Sorry, sorry dude.
I'm sorry, it's not signing out.
This is just, this is just
signing to say that you, you
understand that there's a safe
plan of care, and, and you know
what's in it.
This isn't this isn't to
discharge from the facility.
And Mr. Chair, if I could just
add um
Or LFC stuff like your
has informed me that in the LLC
analysis they did of the car
situation, is that when families
were leaving the hospital, they
were not necessarily aware that
they had a plan to take care. So
this is to ensure that whoever
is leaving with the child knows
that this plan exists. Well,
sounds like that should be
rewarded in a way that because
what what it says it says the
plan signed by whichever one of
these people is present at the
discharge, right? So that could
be
And then I think you're saying
something different, right,
which doesn't matter who's
present to discharge so much as
you want to make sure that
whoever's getting the custody,
essentially is the person who
gets the plan, right?
But, but this, that's not what
it says. It says whoever's
whoever's there, and I'm sorry
to say this, but, but the nature
of my, my practice.
It medical malpractices you find
yourself at the hospital with
families in crisis and in these
moments, right? This is when
people were screaming and, and
upset and emotional.
Um
And
I, I, I, I, I'd like to see
that.
more clear, right, who, who's
gonna, who's gonna get the plan,
who's gonna sign off on the
plan, not just who's there, um.
Then it goes on to, I, I think
you should probably rework or
rethink the language about who's
gonna sign the plan of safe
care. He just says, by an
appropriate representative.
Birthing facility. I don't know
what you're thinking there is
that gonna be a doctor, nurse,
hospital administrator, orderly.
Lobotomist
Um, what, what is a appropriate
representative.
Um, could be really anybody,
really, that would be the
determined by the birthing
center, the birthing center is
gonna have
a standard operating procedures
for who's allowed to participate
in the discharging action.
That, that could be said, but
the, the concern I have with
that is that uh assuming that
the hospital would take on a
birthing center. I'm sorry to
interrupt, Mr. Chair, but they
take on a tremendous amount of
liability if they didn't have
that predefined.
But I don't, I don't really have
liability, but um unless there's
some consequence for not having
the right person doing that. I
think you want to have a
professional person at some
level and um
The, um, leaving at senator to
the hospital to decide this,
this, it's got a little bit of
support for Senator Doigs, uh,
efforts to me working with
hospitals. Oftentimes the, the
lowest common denominators where
the hospital goes, right?
They're gonna have, uh, they,
they may have a clerk assigned
to do that task as a matter of
policy routine, and, and that,
that's my really my question for
you is, is who's gonna be that
person and that may be the right
person, maybe it's a social
worker, maybe, maybe it's a
social worker, maybe it's the
secretary of the desk at.
2 a.m. I don't know. Um, but,
but that, that troubles me a
little bit, this is an important
thing to me, I think, who signs
off on it. You're right,
Senator, I guess, arguably could
lead to
Exposure of liability, but up
appropriate representative I
think is.
It's a little too loose for my
taste, would it be acceptable to
say healthcare attend um help
attending healthcare.
Provider or designee is in the
healthcare provider becomes
responsible for assigning
someone who's appropriate, not
the janitor, obviously, but
someone that they would
designate and that would be
their responsibility.
Cause they may not be there at
the time of just I would agree
that that's a good solution, but
I don't wanna, I don't want to
get out of my lane of, of
travel. This is an area of your
expertise and your experts, so,
uh, I don't know whether that
has to be a clinic, uh, to sign
off on that, on that healthcare
plan, that plant safe care. I
don't know what that requires a
clinician or not. Maybe, maybe
it could be a social worker,
maybe it could be uh we're being
facetious with saying it could
be the janitor, obviously,
that's not the case, but, but my
experience with again uh the
cases that I handle in
hospitals, they, those sign a
night.
Clerk
stamp it and send them home,
and, and uh that's not be.
Disparaging the hospitals, but
again, I
End up looking at the they they
oftentimes that delegate things
to some pretty low-level folks
that in, in my mind should be
Uh, clinicians, but that's,
that's a decision for you all as
the sponsors and the experts, I
think.
The um
the, that, that language
continues on. It also says on
page 21, 6 and is the healthcare
providers employed a birthing
facility.
Is, is that different? Is that
different than a hospital? Is
this section supposed to be
different purposefully in a
hospital when it says uh played
a birthing facility.
Um, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, that term, I think is
defined previously, it includes
hospitals, but it could be
hospitals. It could be a doula.
Thank you very much.
OK, so birthing facility is
defined as a hospital, clinic,
or birthing center where a
pregnant person gives birth to a
baby with assistance from a
healthcare provider.
So when whenever we see that
term, we have a definition
include hospitals.
Yeah, I, I'll notice back to the
last point we're making, if we
go back to page 20, it talks
about the development of this
plan of safe care development as
a birthing facility or other
healthcare provider, right? So
that would suggest, at least
from that language, your
intention is to have a
healthcare provider doing this,
but it also says a birthing
facility or a healthcare
provider, so a birthing facility
again, who knows what that
means, and who would be
developing or participating in
the development of the plan.
Um, so going back to that point.
16 on page 21, healthcare
provider employed.
Here's where I get a little
puzzle, says Shao Yu's
definitions and evidence-based
screening tools based on
standards of professional
practice, I can go on from
there, but let me stop there for
a moment.
They shall use definitions and
evidence-based screening tools
based on standards of
professional practice, smiling
over my colleagues that are work
because he's been with me. He's
watched me try these cases
before. They, they, the whole
fight in medical malpractice
cases is what is the standards
of professional practice, um,
and, and there's not agreement
in any of my cases about what
that is. That's what the whole
fight is about.
So when it says that that the
people here shall use
definitions. What are the
definitions they're gonna use?
Which ones are they shout, which
ones shall they use?
Mr. Cameron, I will just um uh
uh say uh.
Same thing I said earlier, but I
do believe that this needs to be
Move to the rulemaking process,
and that that needs to be
defined.
Take it out entirely. You, you
could really just take out
The definitions and you know,
the the latest buzz term is
evidence-based, we, everybody's
using evidence-based. Nobody
knows what that means. I mean,
uh,
Yeah, I just, these are just
words that are, I think
cluttering up your bill,
probably unnecessary or or if
their necessary then tell me,
show me how they're necessary,
but, but when you say they shall
do something and they shall use
definitions.
Um, and evidence-based screening
tools, I don't know what that
is. And my guess is you all
probably don't know either.
I mean to be facetious, it's
just, I don't think those things
have a meaning.
Um
And then they're to use these to
identify a substance exposing
born, affected by substance use.
Um, do you really need to have
affected by substance use, if
it's, if it's a substance
exposed newborn, why do you have
to say affected by substance use
isn't that the same thing?
Where's that, Mr. Chairman? I'm
sorry, I've got 2 bla, uh, page
21.
Mhm.
I was talking about the, the
healthcare providers are
supposed to use definitions and
evidence-based screening tools.
This is to determine whether a
child's right substance exposed,
and it goes on to say, based on
standards is to identify a
substance exposed newborn
affected by a substance use.
It's not this, I mean, it's not
that completely unnecessary is
is isn't a substance exposed new
word necessarily affected by
substance use.
Mr. Chairman, I actually think
paragraph 21 and 2 might be
unnecessary because you
basically say, and that's why
I'm saying like, I think we just
need to move language over but
um, uh, senator, yeah, go ahead
and tell him. We found it
somewhere else under the rules
section, so it's already, so
this is kind of duplicative, a
duplication and unnecessary
verbiage here and it could
really clean up your bill, I
think by doing exactly what
you're suggesting, which is
eliminating those paragraphs
almost in their entirety about
doing.
One moment, please. You look for
me.
And we don't have
Uh, give it some serious
consideration thoughts there,
but again, I, you, you're some
of this is just a lot of verbage
that's completely unnecessary.
Um, and I, again, I'm, I'm just
identify the easy stuff, right,
which is, again, if it's a
substance affecting newborn,
affected by substance use, that
really is, it's pretty
unnecessary, uh, and it says
affected by withdrawal symptoms
resulting from prenatal drug
exposure or fetal alcohol
system. You don't really need
any of that, really, right? Um,
I'm looking
You, Senator, but I see all of
you on your phones. So maybe I
bored you already by now, but,
and I can understand that, but
um I think this is important. I
think what you're trying to do
is very important, and I want to
support, I want to support you,
but at the same time, I think
the job of this committee has
always been to try and put out
very good laws, clean laws,
avoiding um surplus language and
Inconsistencies and redundancies
and so forth, so I'll, I'll ask
you all to think seriously about
what you're proposing, which is
strike, really just striking all
of that language on largely on
page 21.
Um
Similarly, on page 21 says the
plan of safe care and then it
goes on to say shall include a
referral.
shall include a referral to an
infantizer program or home
visiting program.
And then
then it goes on subparagraph 2
says may include referrals to
these others. Again, that's kind
of a strange drafting uh
structure there as well too, for
one, and, and second, uh, I
don't know.
Whether it's really necessary to
put into law who they may refer
things to, cause again, May is
very permissive, right? So.
Why do we have to tell them what
they may or may not do, where
the first paragraph you're
saying they shall make a
referral to certain programs,
right? And the other one you say
you may refer them to others,
and I, I don't know if that's
necessary, and then it gets even
stranger because then you get to
the, you get to the point that I
was leading on earlier where um
Senator Dogan suggested that
language and subpar then you get
to the um
Page 22, 14 it says show at a
minimum include the following,
the, the plan shall do this. I
hope you all can see what I'm
talking about. It's going all
over the place. This, this, this
structure, this language, right?
The, the plan of care, the first
part says who the referral
should go to in paragraph one,
then in paragraph 2 it says who
who they may go to then.
And then it includes shallow to
minimum.
Um
Mr. Chairman, if I could just
point out that the, the shall
include the early intervention
family infant toddler program or
home visiting was purposeful,
because those programs in and of
themselves could in fact and
would in fact then refer to some
of the others, but if the, if
the healthcare provider who was
doing the plan of safe care, um,
knew that some of these other
things, these could be
references, but the first one is
an abs
Absolute requirement so that you
can get to the next step. Yeah,
that makes perfect sense to me
and, and I like that in laws. I
like in laws so you shall do
something which says you may do
something it's like, uh, you
know, you may or may not, right?
Um, and so, and, and that makes
sense to me that the show is
going to be the clearing house,
if you will, right? They're
gonna be the ones that they make
referrals to whoever else they
should be, and
What, what really made pro or
what really should happen I
would assume is the, that, that
there may be some directive in
your bill that that intervention
family tiler program home visit
program, then it's directed that
they shall do something right,
but here they say the plan shall
do something and
My guess is they're just going
to develop a form and just say,
here's all these people you can
go see, right? And, and when you
do that, you, you just overwhelm
people, I think when you because
of this, this plan of care is
going to be given to a parent,
and we want you to do this,
right? And we're gonna say, uh,
you might want to talk to the
public health agencies. I don't
know what that means. I don't
know what a public health agency
is, and I have an idea what that
might be, but you were just
telling you may, you may want to
talk to some public health
agencies.
Or you may want to talk to some
maternal and child health
agencies.
Or you may want to talk to some
mental health providers.
Or you may want to talk to
infant mental health care
providers.
You may want to talk to the
public and private children
youth agencies. You get my
point, Mr. Chairman, and I will
just say that part of those
determinations as to which um a
child might be referred to, is
going to be dependent too upon
the um the disabilities that a
child might have been born with,
right? And so there's gonna be
some of these that will be very
clear to the um uh healthcare
provider that, oh, you
absolutely need to go and see uh
public health agency or
developmental services. Some of
those are really clear right
from the beginning, and others
are not.
Yeah,
but I hope you'll clean that up
because again the, the, the,
you, you may refer include
referrals to mental health care
providers. What does that mean,
right? Um, and, and even worse,
the court, it just says courts.
So you grimacing senators, so
you get the point, the plan we
say, uh, we're we're referring
to the courts.
That's not gonna be particularly
good, I would think, for the,
the parent at the time of the
discharge.
Oh
The other, there's other ambigus
I'm just gonna go through them
kind of quickly if, if I think
so. I hope it will help. The the
plan show at a minimum and it
lists things, again, I've
already pointed out, right
strike some of that language and
tighten it up. It, it says the
plant shall include I'm over on
page 23.
The plan shall include a
determination. This this is a
plan that's developed at the
time of discharge, am I right?
And so the plan, if you look on
page 23 line 9. The plan shall
include a determination that the
substance exposed newborn will
have a safe environment.
How the hell are you gonna do
that,
Mr. Chair, so, um, there's been
some debate amongst the
individuals sitting at this
table, um, and, and it, it's
taken more time than I would
have imagined that it should
have. Um, what the, um, the
secretaries wanted it to be is
to have a safe sleep
environment.
And a safe sleep environment.
And what they know, um, Mr.
Chairman, is that many babies
actually die because they don't
have a safe sleep environment,
and the rest of us, and I take
full responsibility for that,
couldn't get past, doesn't,
don't want the whole environment
to be safe, um, do they have
formula? Do they have a bottle?
Do they have diapers? Do they
have a car seat? Do they, yes, a
sleep environment is very yeah
blankets.
So looking at, do they have this
safe environment is just a
preliminary thing, uh, based
upon what the child needs as
they leave the hospital, because
they'll be a family assessment
almost immediately thereafter.
Um, and I don't know what the
time frame is for that. I would
defer to the secretaries as to
how quickly a family assessment
can happen, but this is just
literally to make sure that as
they leave the hospital, that
they have asked about, do you
have a safe place?
your child to sleep. Do you
have, or will you be nursing? Do
you need formula? Do you, do you
need some diapers? That, those
are the kind of questions to
ensure that preliminarily safe
environment.
Yeah, but it's the, the
cooperative word here is if
there's a requirement for a
determination, right? I mean, I,
I can understand making the
inquiries for all of those
things, those are good, but, but
whoever's doing this plan is to
make a determination at the time
of discharge.
Whether the infant will have a
safe environment.
I'm sure you're gonna probably
appreciate how broad and and
ambiguous that is.
And, and the plan's being
developed by who again? Who's
who's right in the plan?
Um, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, the plan is put
together at the hospital by a
care coordinator or a designee,
so it could be the nurse who's
doing discharge. It could be um
the care coordinator who's there
at the time doing the discharge.
It could be a social worker that
the hospital is assigned to
that. If there's not an MCO with
a care coordinator, it could be
a Kara navigator from the
Department of Health, somebody
that's going in and working with
that family to develop that plan
and then work with them.
After discharge to make sure
that they're um following
through on it. But the plan's
going to be developed, I
presume.
Generally, from the some period
of time after birth, I would
guess, right? I'm seeing not
here as a, as a general matter,
that determined is gonna be made
after birth, but before
discharge, which may be 24
hours, right? Or, or so in 24
hours you're gonna make all
these determinations, come up
with all this plan, and you're
going to determine whether the
infant will have a safe
environment by a person at the
hospital.
Mr. Chairman, I, they, they will
make a determination and the
determination isn't gonna be
100% conclusive, but we are
expecting that they'll make a
determination that this child
has the bare minimum.
That will keep their
not then what they will do is
they will then move forward in
making sure that the child gets
that. One of the things that uh
the secretaries have made clear
to us is that if a child doesn't
have a crib, a place, a safe
place to sleep, and they make
sure that one gets delivered to
them.
Um, if they don't have a car
seat, the hospital will make
sure that they get a car seat
before they leave. If they don't
have access to diapers or
bottles or formula or some of
those basic things that a child
needs immediately upon leaving
the, the healthcare facility
that they can make sure that
they get access to that, at
least for a period that's long
enough to get them to the family
assessment, at which time
there'll be a a a bigger level
of determination as to whether
or not
The environment is safe and the
child is safe. After discharge,
is that gonna happen?
Um, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, that assessment will
be done by DOH and in the rules
we're putting in that it will be
done within 24 to 48 hours.
Those of the
the navigator to be doing this
all the time. So when you talk
about Mr. Chairman, you know,
it's could be 24 hours.
There's how many children born
in New Mexico on a daily basis,
annual basis, these are gonna be
plans that are probably picked
up off the shelf and customized
to the individual, but they're
likely already pretty well
written.
That's frankly my concerns, so
that's exactly it, right? These,
because you're gonna have a
birth, you're gonna have a
discharge, you're gonna have a
plan, you're gonna do all that
in 24 hours, you're gonna make
it all these determinations,
whether they have crib, they
have car seat, with and with a
heavy seat have to, you'll have
to make those determinations,
they're not gonna have a choice,
I mean.
Otherwise, Mr. Chairman, your
child lives in, and we know we
know nothing.
We, we don't even know that they
have that's that connection
where they've collected things
to know who's walking out the
door with them, how to reach
them, who this child is when
they go into the home to do the
home visit.
I'm, I'm, I'm trying to avoid a
situation where they just
becomes a form. You said it, so
it's gonna be a war.
I didn't say it was just a form.
I said it's a template for maybe
that was a better term, a
template for what has to be
included. It's likely that a lot
of these are already developed.
They can customize it based on
what they're observing in that
individual situation.
Minister
Trying to
Simply avoid the situation
becomes a routine or paperwork
bureaucracy.
Um
be if, if you'll go with me to
page 23.
I'm gonna look for a good place
to break because we're gonna
with your forgiveness, we're
gonna take a short break so that
folks can get some food real
quick too, but let's get ready
to start up with me on page 23
because just be looking for,
help me out to eliminate
superfluous language and, and,
and tell me that I'm maybe.
language that you think is
important, so on page 23, line
21, it begins there by 2026, the
department and consultation
shall adopt rules, etc. um, and
it says for substance exposed
newborns on the next top of the
next page between 24 substance
export those newborns who
exhibit physical, neurological
or behavioral symptoms
consistent with prenatal drug
exposure, withdrawal symptoms,
from prenatal drug disposure or
fetal alcohol system disorder,
and you see where there's a lot
of language there doesn't need
to be in the bill.
Mr. Chairman, in my opinion,
this is what we would leave
there and the first section we
were discussing on page 21.
Well, I'm, I'm still trying to
figure out if you're, if you're
trying to
stop these rules. It says for um
care of a substance exposed
newborns.
And then the question is, why do
you have to have
Mr. uh, so just kind of
backtracking on why we have
these physical signs in here, is
that the department at this
moment.
does not have authority to just
test the child to see if they're
um the substance exposed. So the
caring physician. We don't, we
don't test every child that's
born in the hospital. They have
to look to see if there are
some, some signs that the child
would exhibit that would make
them think either from the
parent, I'm assuming from the
from the mother or from the
child, it would make them
believe that this child is
substance exposed.
And let's, let's take a break
there, but, but it would, it
would make sense to me that
you're, you're right, all those
signs symptoms make sense when
you're, but why wouldn't you put
that in the definition of what
is a substance exposed newborn.
Why would you say these will be
the indications of a substance
exposure you work and you say a
pen in that just exhibits
physical, neurological behaviors
on and on and on instead of
having to redefine here what is
a substance exposure you work,
that's what you're doing here,
you're qualifying a substance
exposed newborn who then
manifests these conditions.
Why would it just be a substance
exposed to you,
Mr. Chairman, um, I was trying
to hear your voice when we were
working through this, and I was
also trying to hear my own voice
and thoughts, which is that
things that are need to be um
further clarified, should be
done in another section, not in
the definition section,
definition section should be
minimal, and then we clarify
those attributes in another
area, and then you further
clarify those things by rules.
So that, the first part was your
voice and the second part was my
voice about the rules.
We'll come back to this this
section here a moment or two,
but, but, um, I appreciate
you're trying to find a place
where these, these languages
and, and definitions in terms of
should exist and I'm, I'm
simply, my concern is that here,
where you've got substance
exposed newborns on top of page
24 who exhibit certain things,
you're qualifying what is a
substance exposed newborn to a
certain group of substance
exposure rewards, right? This is
only the subject exposed new
words to exhibit these
conditions and so and I don't
know why you'd limit it them
unless there's a reason to do
so, right?
It would seem to me you would
want to do this for all
substance exposed newborns, not
just those who exhibit physical
neurological or behavioral
symptoms. They may not.
And I, I will just, I would just
point out online too, Mr.
Chairman, that again, it has an
oar and so that goes into
behavioral symptoms consistent
with prenatal drug exposure. And
so, so they may exhibit, you
know, physical, neurological, or
these behavioral things that are
consistent with that, and that's
where the definitions would be
further extrapolated in the
rules.
OK
Uh, let's take our break for
just a little bit. I'm gonna ask
the committee to stick for just
a minute. We have Leo Adamo here
with uh some things and he's
been working, I'm sure, right? I
hope the committee will
appreciate my approach, which is
not trying to fix every bill in
the committee process, but
And did you, did you get a
committee sub already? Yes sir,
we're good to go.
Kudos to upstairs.
Right
Yeah, we, we, we're gonna take a
break and come back to you all,
yeah, let me just get senator on
me he's got a
2.5 page bill.
So it's, yeah, we're gonna do
that,
we
will honor some formalities.
What you do, Senator on a meal.
And who'd you get to do it?
Mr. Chairman, I moved quick as
lightning with Mark Edwards, and
here's what we've done.
So as I stated earlier, this
bill would allow small or uh
independent theaters to serve
wine or alcohol, it limits the
amount this committee sub
removes the fee amount from the
license and requiring the annual
renewal of the license, the sub
also removed the wording where
we ask that wine and beer be
served with food, we struck out
with food, and we added an o in
here, page 3, section 31, which
would allow
For the purpose of exhibiting
movies or hosting live
productions and events.
I'm trying to do this quickly,
but I think maybe too quickly
center, so first of all, make
sure you're just reading from
things that I'm not seeing, so
maybe you're going too quickly
this 72.1, is that right? And I
thought you just said right now
when I talked to you earlier,
let's look on page 2. The
earlier amendment was to, I
thought, strike the one-year val
validity and the renewal fee of
$100. I thought you told me
earlier you're taking all that
out.
I thought you just said right
now you're taking it out, but
I'm reading it.
Um
I'm looking at it.
If they left it in there.
Later. Time for a break. Thank
you.
You want to do, do you want to
do the amendments, we'll do them
now.
you know, tell us, uh, I, I've
seen, again, I'm seeing a
version of the bill that's not
what we thought you were gonna
be doing, right?
Well, let's just figure out,
I wanna make sure that this is
just one, this is just one that
glares to me because you just
told me you were taking this
out. That is what should have
been removed and, and you're
telling me that that's what you
did, but I'm looking at it
right, so I just want to make
sure you and I are on the same
page, not having a failure to
communicate, as they say, so, so
that should have been removed.
So what, so what part of it
should be used page 2 starting
on line 3 on the word by.
should have been struck all the
way through line 7.
On a different building, OK,
sorry, the line 2, wait, wait,
just make sure, are you on 72.1,
is that with the footer reads
for you,
OK. Again, try it again, page 2,
page 2.
Should be struck.
Um, shall be valid for one year
of date that it was issued.
So striking on line 3.
From the word that should be
striked all the way through.
I can have it.
The period.
A fee of $100.
Yeah.
I think
go ahead, Sarah just gonna
continue Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Senator Jara. So, so I, I'm
I, I moved the following on page
2.
Uh, line 3, beginning with the
word that.
Strike the remainder of that of
that line, that.
That shall be valid for strike
all of line 4.
And strike all of line 5 until
the word shall.
So that's, that's the first
part, and then between the words
license and shall insert the
word witch.
Bobby
Please.
So you, you could just from that
through this period and just
have that be one sentence and
independent theater may apply
for special independent theater
dispensing license, then it
would start with the next
sentence on page 5, the license
show allow for blah blah blah
blah.
Promotion that I'm gonna take
this brochure I'm gonna take is
on page 23, after the word
lights and striking the
remainder of that line and all
through Lane 5 up to but not
including the period, that
right? That's the motion that's
before us first off everybody
still there with that motion
we're good with that. Thank you.
Any objection to that amendment?
Great, very good. And then
Senator do, was there something
more than that?
I'm really not missing do not
pass
on Senate Bill 159, move a due
pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 159, uh, as with the change
that we just adopted, I,
yeah, rolling out is 02.
And Senator, I, I don't want to
go too bad. Is, is that the only
thing that you were about to
tell us that you've changed that
didn't really get changed.
There's only 2 other small
changes we had asked that the
serving of beer and wine be with
food, we removed the words with
food on page 2, section D, and
we added the word or on a page
3.
Uh, section one of G where we
put in or hosting live
productions and events. We
changed an end to an or.
Like you got that one right? All
right. There's a motion before
us for the Du pass with.
What will be a 0.2 version of
the committee substitute for
Senate Bill 159. Any more
questions, anyone?
Any objection to the Dupas
motion center.
At a meal
No objection.
Thank you. We're, we're thankful
for that's, it's friendly. There
be no objection, you've got to
do pass. You're out of here
super friendly. Thank you so
much, we're gonna be back. I'm
gonna, I'm gonna do it in 30
minutes, so please be back at
quarter till and we've got some
more work to do, so please be
pro for it till 30 minutes.
Thank you.
Is there food or?
Where is back. God bless 2626
Hang in there Emily.
No.
You're doing good. Thank you.
Let me help you.
Yeah, I got it.
26.
seats and toilets and backed up.
What
We spent some time with
Uh, Senator Trujillo, and she's
committed to working with us.
We're gonna try and give you
some staff and we can free some
folks up on our committee and
help you out a little bit too,
but the task before us tonight
is
more than what we think we're
realistically gonna get to, OK?
We'll see you on Monday with 42.
Uh, last item of Senate Bill
279. Senator O'Malley.
It.
I don't have enough cops here.
Senator, just give us a minute.
We're making new copies of what
I think is going to be the right
version of this bill.
Oh
Right.
You're holding it.
I did
So
Very.
OK.
we got a copy?
I think we all have 722.1 as the
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute.
Uh, Senator Stewart, which
helped me with a motion to get
it started, please. Thank you
I do not have some cynical 279
and for purposes of discussion
do pass on the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 279.
Thank you, Senator O'Malley.
We've already gone to the public
before taking input, as I
pointed out at our last meeting,
the um the um
Public and others had an
opportunity to see what is now
in front of us, which was the
original version of the bill, as
I understand it. We spent some
time looking at a proposed
amendment or substitution, but
we're back to your bill and so I
think we're ready to go to
members of the committee, uh,
for questions, and so let's
start there, Senator O'Malley,
and uh we'll see how far that
gets us and we'll do, I think
we're gonna be able to take
action.
Pretty quickly on this bill. I
understand it, so members of the
committee.
Anyone else that my this. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Senator O'Malley.
Uh, Senator Bergman's gentleman,
the um the
Let me just find the page of
mine.
Talks about um
On page 9.
So we're talking about uh
section F says for purposes of
this section and it defines gas
operated semi-automatic firearm,
which is
Which is the key you order to
draw that line between legal and
illegal.
And it
And, and I'm subparagraph E.
On the top of page 10, um,
says has a fixed magazine with a
capacity not to exceed 10 rounds
of ammunition.
Is that gonna, um,
Is that gonna outlaw
A significant amount of handguns
in the state of New Mexico.
Minor I'm not a gun person like
I mentioned the other day, but
don't most handguns have a
A 15 rounds.
Yes, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, uh,
my name is Kyle Delhi. I'm
Deputy General Counsel to the
governor. Um, so what we're
looking at here, uh, under
subsection F, um starting on
page 9 is actually the
exceptions. Um, so under the
general definition section, uh,
which began on on the 2nd page.
Uh, that is where it generally
defines gas operated
semi-automatic firearms, um, so
here on page 9 are the
exceptions saying that these are
not included, so these are not
regulated by our act. So, um, in
essence, if a firearm is
described under this uh
subsection F, it is not
included. So, um,
So for instance, uh, the, the
subparagraph that you're
referencing, that is discussing
rifles, so subparagraph 2, which
begins on line 2 on page 9.
this, these are all the
exceptions for a gas operated
semi-automatic rifles. Uh, so
one of the exceptions is uh
rifles with a fixed magazine
with the capacity not to exceed
10 rounds of ammunition.
Um, and importantly, our bill,
unlike the federal bill, uh,
does not require that the
magazines be permanently fixed,
rather, you can have what's
called a, they call them
California compliant weapons,
which are basically where it, it
just takes a little bit longer
to uh change out the magazine,
uh, so, so that's what this
exception would capture.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, gentlemen. Thank you.
And I, I was on the wrong
section of you're correct
there's.
There's a definition of a
rightful definition of shotgun,
then, then on the bottom of page
10 definition a handgun.
Uh, and so we're gonna go to
page 11, line 12, page 11, line
12, not to exceed 10 rounds. So
I understand it's written in the
exception, um,
And so
So any handgun with 11 rounds
would
would be illegal, correct?
Mr. Chair, Senator, so, um, the
vast majority of handguns are
actually recoil operated, and
that's about 90% of handguns,
and that, those are all
exempted, uh, on page 11, um,
beginning on line 5 through 7.
So 90% of handguns are already
exempted under that paragraph.
and under the next subparagraph,
we also exempt, which is new
with the committee of blowback
operated pistols under 8 inches
in length. So that, that's
covering about 95% of modern,
uh, semi-automatic, uh, pistols,
uh, for the rest, which would
include pistols such as like uh
tech nines, um, Mac 10s, uh,
Uzis, those in order to be fall
within an exemption would then
need to uh have that fixed.
Magazine component. I
understand. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, gentlemen. So, so in
other words, uh a handgun.
With that recoil, uh,
To cycle, uh, that does have 15
rounds would, would be Mr.
Chair, Senator, uh, so,
Uh, that the firearm itself
would be legal, but under a
separate section in our act, we
do regulate high capacity what
we call them large capacity
ammunition feeding devices. So
we do limit going forward, uh,
the magazines to being 10
rounds. But, um, just simply
looking at a pistol by itself
without a magazine, if that
doesn't determine how many
rounds it can hold. Uh, a pistol
can have a, an extended magazine
that can hold significantly
more, uh
bullets or rounds, um, so, so
the, the firearm itself wouldn't
be uh regulated, but under this
separate section, high capacity
magazines would be themselves.
And that high capacity is
defined as 11 or more.
term.
Mr. Chairman Senator, yes,
that's correct.
OK, thank you. So that brings me
back to my original question. If
My understanding that the
average handgun.
Us a
15 rounds of ammunition.
a handgun that did in fact use
15 rounds of ammunition under
this act would be.
would be illegal, correct?
Mr. Chairman Senator, so the
handgun by itself, you can't
determine how many rounds it
it's using except by reference
to the magazine that it is
using, so when you buy, for
instance, uh, like a Smith and
Wesson. OK, let me ask again,
appreciate you, um, a handgun
that has a magazine of 15
rounds, and they're put together
as one piece.
Under this act, that would be
illegal.
Correct? Mr. Chairman Senator, I
think our expert, um, Mr.
Lickenbrock would uh probably be
better to answer this question.
He is our gun guy.
Thank you.
Mr. Leckenbrook, are you there?
Oh
Uh, hello, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, thank you for that
question. Um, so, every gun
maker currently that sells
handguns that accept 15 round
magazines, they also sell models
that come with 10 round
magazines to be compliant in
states that restrict high
capacity magazines or large
capacity magazines, uh, like in
California and New York.
OK, thank you. I think that
answers my question. So if I
have a hang in with a
fifteen-round magazine, I just
tossed the fifteen-round
magazine and purchase a 10-round
magazine uh device. uh, Mr.
Chair and Senator, well, you can
keep your magazine cause you can
grandfather it. So you don't,
you don't need to toss your
magazine.
By going forward.
Then those items would be
prohibited, but since you have
those as of the time, they're
grandfather, so thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and experts and senator, I just
to follow up on what Senator
Maestas says before I even
started my own. I'm trying to
reconcile what he was just
saying with what you guys have
on page 3.
Sections 4 and 5, because those
two sections the way I read it
would bring all semi-automatics
in.
So then your state, your last
response would be inaccurate.
Mr. Chair, Senator, so, uh, the,
the definition of gas operate
semi-automatic firearm under the
definition definition section is
the broader definition, but then
when you refer to section 3,
that, that lays out all the
exceptions. So those are all the
things that even though they
might fall within the literal
definition, they're accepted.
OK, Mr. Chairman.
And sponsor. I
Again, recognize.
The intent.
Of what you're trying to do, and
I think that that was
That was articulated well when
you opened up. We have got to do
something to push back against
these mass shootings.
I, I don't disagree.
I think it's in the details of
who
And the effort to do so, who,
who we're really targeting and
what the real outcome of this is
gonna be. And I think that my
biggest question starts with how
we're defining assault weapon.
Because to me, and I think most
gun owners, there's a very big
difference between when you
would consider an offensive
weapon.
And I think that's what you're
trying to
To to target here and a
defensive weapon.
So the intent then is to target
these.
Mass shootings, even with all
these definitions of how we're
gonna define this and I'll, and
I'll refer you back to page 9
that you just had us on.
Based on these definitions that
you, you reviewed, it would
still include
The Taurus T4, it would still
include.
The
Uh, M1 Graham, the World War II
gun that regardless of what your
expert says, still meets every
qualification without an
exemption. When was the last
time that our World War II M1
grand or a Taurus T4 was ever
used in a mass shooting.
Has that ever happened?
Mr. Chair, Senator, I think this
is a question, best answered by
uh Mr. Lickenbrock.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, thank
you so much for that question.
Uh, the Taurus T4 is an AR-15
that is only sold to law
enforcement. Uh, I don't even
believe it's sold here in the
US. It it may be, but again,
it's only law enforcement. And
the M1 grand, uh, as I said in
our last hearing, that has a
fixed magazine that cannot hold
more than 8 rounds, it would not
be captured by this bill.
I think, I think that that would
be incorrect because I think
your definition of some of these
firearms are incorrect and what
we've been presented in here. If
we turn our page, the next page,
page 10, there's a number of
shotguns that would still, uh,
not qualify under these um
These exemptions, and they're
very, very popular shotguns and
I'm sure you would agree, but
Nelly M4 Remington 1100,
Mossburg 920, Beretta 1301, very
popular shotguns. Do you see any
exemption in this bill for those
shotguns.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I, I would
again refer to Mr. Lickenbrock.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, thank
you so much for that question.
All of those examples you just
listed used fixed magazine
tubes. They're very common for
bird hunting, sport shooting,
the Benelli M4 is a tactical
shotgun, but again, even that
one uses a fixed magazine, uh,
detachable magazines are very
rare for shotguns, but, uh,
again, all those examples you
listed would be fine under this
bill.
And again, the T4 is still a
semi-automatic. We just, uh
appreciate our experts here and
would still be wrapped up in
this film. So respectfully, I
disagree with the gun expert who
has been providing analysis of
what this bill is going to
encapsulate. And I make this
point because when we started
this debate.
Um, well, I guess it was 3
hearings ago now.
It was stated, we, we had a
presentation that came out here
and for those of us who are
newbies and not expert in the
law, we had a crash course in
the Heller case, and in that if
there was anything that came out
of it was.
That the weapons had to be
classified as dangerous and
unusual.
And I make this case to say
there are still so many popular
firearms that have never been
used.
In cases of, of met with mass
casualties, never been used.
They are recreational guns. They
are defensive.
Not assault weapons, but
defensive weapons. They've never
been in the case where we could
name one.
Incidents where, where they
were, you know, misused and
there was mass casualties. They
are very, very, very popular
weapons all over the state and
all over the nation. And so if
the intent one is to.
is to target weapons that are
creating mass casualties and and
Catastrophic gun violence
events, you're not getting them.
And if the attempt then is to
stay
In line with Heller, none of
these could be classified as
dangerous.
And unusual. And so it's a
massive fail and what happens
is, is you're wrapping up
Law-abiding gun owners in this
law-abiding gun owners, many of
which they should.
Agree
that steps should be taken to
make.
Our public areas safer and push
back against those who should
not have firearms and weapons
that can only bring mass
destruction and harm to others
who should be part of, of
wanting to come to the table
and, and find a solution.
This is way off mark in doing
that. You, you wrap up.
Countless gun owners.
With very, very poor definitions
and completely missed the mark.
I, I, I was reading in the
research about this, other
states that have done it right.
Like why is, why is New Mexico?
Why, why don't we just start
popping from everything from
CYFD to education to how we're
going to handle.
Gun laws in New Mexico. What are
some states that are doing it
right?
On here I read that New
Hampshire is actually one of the
safest states in the nation.
Homicide rate of 1.5 per 100,000
acres significantly both the
national average. What, what do
they do? They must have tough
gun laws, not at all. In fact,
have the least restrictive gun
laws in the country.
They do prohibit felons from
owning firearms, agreed.
They were strict transfers to
minors except by parents for
lawful activities, agree. They
limit firearms and specific
places, so do we schools,
grounds where students are,
perhaps courthouses, agree.
But it seems like states who
have come out and taken more
Overreaching gun laws.
Or having the exact
Opposite
reaction and what their good
intentions were aimed.
To do and that's, that's where
we're headed with this. I think
we came in with this to this
legislative session with good
intentions to address public
safety, to push back on the
criminals that are plaguing this
state.
This is not gonna do it.
This then targets the
law-abiding citizens, the ones
that are that that join you in
being sick and tired of the
crime that's taken over New
Mexico.
And this is disingenuous.
To call this public safety.
I think
We started this conversation
saying that we had ethical
responsibilities I took notes,
ethical responsibilities, moral
responsibilities.
To take action and this is what
should drive us to, to adopting
policy like this.
We have God, God sworn.
Responsibilities to our oath of
office, I would say.
We were sworn to support the
Constitution laws of the United
States and New Mexico, and I am
having a hard time not just with
Heller, but reconciling a bill
like this.
Section 6.
Of the New Mexico state
constitution that simply says
that no law shall abridge the
right of a citizen to keep and
bear arms for security and
defense.
For lawful hunting and
recreation use or for other
lawful purposes, but nothing
herein shall behold to permit
the carrying of concealed
weapons, no municipality or
county shall regulate in any
way, any incident in the right
to bear arms. How do you
reconcile something that is so
black and white.
With case law that makes very
clear with something that is so
far reaching is what's before us
today.
Mr. Chair, I guess that that's a
lot
reconcile the Constitution with
this
Well, let's be honest, and it
constitution, if, if everybody
agreed on, on the Constitution,
we wouldn't have uh actually uh
the, the, the conversations
we're having right now, and so,
uh, and that's true with pretty
much every law, which is why we
have laws and we have courts. So
I feel, yes, that it is the it
isn't that.
Ethical responsibility. I have a
moral responsibility to respond
to my constituency to uh be
concerned about the health and
welfare of my family, uh, yes,
that's part of my duties as, as
uh, as a representative for my
district and my district is
very, very supportive of
enacting um assault weapons ban.
So, um, I'm, you know, that's
why I'm here and I think that's
important. I mean, I'm sure that
you, uh, and I don't know you
very well, Senator, but you
know, I mean, we probably would
agree on probably 95% of of of
things because we both want the
same, we want our families to do
well. We want our families to be
safe, we want them to be
healthy. Uh, we just agree,
disagree sometimes on how, how
we're gonna make that happen.
So, um,
I don't know if I answered your
question, but um, you know, I, I
you're certainly entitled to
your opinion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, and I do respect your
response on that. And, and I
will say I'm not even debating.
The assault weapon attack on
here, I think that we, we're not
even gonna agree on what
constitutes as assault weapons.
And what is classified as
dangerous and unusual because I
just listed many, many, many
different types of firearms,
specifically some rifles and
shotguns that are very commonly
used. They are not by any
definition should be ever
considered an assault.
Weapon or weapon of of
Mass farmer or
Even and, and, and has never in
many cases ever been used in any
incident like that. Couldn't, we
couldn't find one and wish it
had been, but they're very
common with cutters, sportsmen,
responsible gun owners, and it's
such far-reaching legislation,
it has swept it up. I think it's
poorly written when trying to
define clearly define which
weapons you're targeting,
because this is gonna wrap up
far more than I would like to
believe, and I do believe
actually is your intent in doing
so. This is, this is poorly
written legis
Um.
I have no doubt that that the
courts will be hearing this
should it, should it pass and
they should.
They should. I'm, I'm
embarrassed that though that
this committee and its
legislators would even let it
get to that point because I
think that we still have a
responsibility as oath takers to
uphold that oath and um by
passing something like that, we
are certainly in violation of
that. Thank you, Mr. Chu.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, ditto with everything with
Senator Brantley just said.
Um
There's a lot about this bill
that concerns me, but I, I
wanted to respond to uh
Senators uh comment with regards
to she's responsibility to her.
Constituents and they're asking
her to do this, and so I respect
that.
I also have a responsibility to
my constituents and we live in
rural area.
Um
I think every sheriff in, in,
uh, these mountains understands
that when they stop someone for
a traffic violation and that
person more than likely has a
gun.
We all carry guns.
And we don't think twice about
it.
Um, and so, cause we believe we
have responsibility to defend
our families.
And uh and so we carry a gun
because we know they are violent
criminals out there.
We have no respect for personal
property, who have no respect
for individuals, uh,
Just uh living their lives.
People that want to rob, steal.
And, and may and hurt.
other people.
The fun of it. We understand
that.
And so we, we take the
responsibility because
Law enforcement response could
be 5 minutes, could be 10
minutes before they would get
there in time to take care of
business.
5 to 2 minutes can be the
difference between life or
death.
And so we have no problem
holding guns.
And carrying our guns with us.
On our property. And so usually
when uh law enforcement stops
you for a traffic violation, the
first thing you do is you say, I
have a gun in the car with me.
Let them down, so there's no
fear.
And show them your license and
everything's cool.
Um
But what I'm seeing here is a
direct attack on, you know,
that, that way of life.
And I wish it wasn't that way. I
wish we lived in the nirvana. I
wish we lived in a place where
There were absolutely no
Prime
You know, that wonderful world
that we all think about.
Uh, but I think that only exists
in heaven.
And
I believe that if you're a
believer, that's where you're
gonna find zero violence.
And er heart.
Not gonna happen here on earth.
So, what I see is, is like, in
an attempt to disarm people who
who are law-abiding citizens who
just want to protect their
families.
The other side of this that
bothers me, this is and this is
a question I have for you, if I
may.
It's in regards to
The certification that, I guess
it's page 15, section 7, where
you actually give the Attorney
General the power.
To
Basically
Identify which gas operators.
Weapons are going to be
OK.
And which ones are not.
And so, even though you have
some very general descriptions
here. The question I have is,
What gives them the authority.
Who gives them the authority to
decide which guns are legal and
which guns are not.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator.
Um, so we have delegated that
authority uh to the AG um
because they have law
enforcement agents there, and
they will do that in
consultation with the Department
of Public Safety, and that's
contained in the bill, which
also have a law enforcement
agents who are familiar with
these weapons, and of course
they will have to follow the
statutory guidelines, so they
can't, if, if a firearm
literally doesn't fall within
the definition of a gas operated
semi-automatic fire.
arm, they can't just add it to
the list because they want to.
They have to comply with what's
in statute, but it will be on
them instead of us listing all
the different brands and models
and makes in the statue, uh,
it's much more efficient for
these firearm experts uh to have
this list and to regularly
update it.
So this list, thank you, Mr.
Chair. So this list will be
updated on a regular basis, so
new manufacturing.
technologies could come out.
And new guns that could come out
and they would have to be
approved before they could sell
them to the public. Is that
correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, it
wouldn't need to be approved.
Uh, no.
So how, how would a manufacturer
sell a gun in, in Mexico unless
it was approved by the Attorney
General.
Mr. Chair, Senator, well, they,
they would be able to refer to
the law themselves and they're,
they're very familiar with how
these weapons work. So I, I, I'm
sure they have attorneys there
who could tell if, if the weapon
they're making would fall under
this regulation.
Um,
So
So I want to get back to the
question that was raised by
Senator Brantley with regards to
the Constitution, and she read
it.
So the question is, is how does
what you're doing not
Not, uh
Interfere with the current.
Constitution law as written.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Senator, so I
want to stress that this isn't
just our opinion that these laws
are constitutional. There have
been dozens of lawsuits filed
post-Brewin, and of those 14
different judges, including the
7th, the 4th, and the 3rd
circuits have held that these
laws are constitutional. In 16
opinions have affirmed the laws
uh dealing with large capacity
magazines, and these include
judges who are appointed by both
Republican and Democrat.
presidents. So, so this is a
pretty wide uniform consensus of
those dozens of lawsuits, there
have only been 3 district court
opinions that have held
otherwise, and each of those
opinions have been stayed by the
circuit courts pending appeal
because they believe that
there's a likelihood of success
on the part of the government.
So it's a near uniform consensus
where you have which is actually
very rare in a post-Bruin world.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
So, have any of these uh cases
gone to the Supreme Court?
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, yes,
they, they, they have applied
for cert and the Supreme Court
has a multiple times, I believe,
about 4 times after Bruin have
denied sir, uh, so that the
court has decided to leave those
lower court opinions in place.
So you believe then this is a
valid.
that we'd be putting in place.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes.
OK.
I would disagree with that. I'm
not a lawyer.
Um, well, I'm a gun owner.
And I know that based on what
I'm seeing here, a lot of my, my
weapons would be considered
illegal.
And
Also with regards to magazines
and why did we stop at 10?
In terms of the capacity of a
magazine. Mr. Chair, Senator,
um, that, that's a, a, a cut off
that most other states who have
these regulations used, and it's
been illuminated in some of the
federal litigation that actually
uh when shots are fired for
self-defense, uh, now let's see
here. Um,
I don't want to get this wrong.
Uh, so what the uh wide study
found that when people fired
shots and self-defense, they
fire an average of 2 shots and
97% of the time they fire 5 or
fewer shots. So that shows for
the vast, vast majority of
self-defense situations. People
need much less than 10 rounds.
That's interesting. So what
about a home invasion?
More than one,
Sa.
So I, I just want to respond to
that because you brought this
up. And I think that
I've seen enough uh crime shows,
real reality crime shows
including Tateline
to know the element of surprise
is really, really, uh, it
doesn't favor.
The person in the home.
Um, unfortunately, right,
because you don't have time to
get your weapon, you don't have
time to do. So I think that
sometimes people are sort of led
in false falsely led that if
they have a gun or if they have
something, uh, you know, weapon
of some kind, well, in
particular on that somehow
they're going to um be
victorious in some kind of
encounter, and uh and so I just
wanted to bring that up because
I think when you're, when you
make that
statement, right? What about the
home invasion, uh, unless you
see it coming, probably, or, uh,
you know, you have your weapon
in a in a safe or whatever is
going on, um, you know, you're
you're, you're in trouble, and,
and I'll just use another
example because um there was a
um retired engineer. He's 75
years old, um, he was well to
do. He, he actually built a
shelter, and I think a lot of
his motivations were fear.
He was fearful, he was older,
and he must have had 75 weapons
including assault weapons in his
home. Somebody knocked on his
door, and he thought he
recognized them, and it was a
home invasion, and he was
He was killed. He'd had no, no
way to defend himself. So I
think that this this particular
bill recognizes that people, you
know, are sportsmen, they, they,
they need uh weapons to, uh, uh,
you know, if they want to go
after wildlife or that sort of
thing. It it recognizes that
that that you have the right to
own those and um so I, I think
though that you can feel it's
really hard to make that an
argument as to why, uh
Other than if you were in the
military or the or you are in a
situation where you were uh law
enforcement that you should
You know, I did, I believe it's
unlawful. It should be unlawful
to to to have an assault with
them. That's my answer, Senator.
Thank you for that. Um,
So I, I, I, I have, like I said,
I mentioned that I have uh
gottens in my home.
We have no kids there.
Uh, in the middle of the night,
my gun is right there. There's
no safe. It's right next to the,
right next to the bed.
And, and I know that may scare
you, but I'm not worried about
the gun is just an inanimate
object.
But if I heard something in the
middle of the night,
Uh, it's in seconds for me to
reach it.
Not, not a minute. I'm gonna
have to open the safe because
We're in the home by ourselves.
Neither one of us are afraid of
guns. My wife is a better shot
than I am.
She'd probably go down first.
And then to tell me what
happened. So, um,
So I, I think, uh, and I think
you're wrong with respect to the
number of rounds because the
question I would have is, I
mean, if I have a magazine that
can hold 10, can I put one in
the chambers and now I have 11
rounds. Does that make me
illegal?
Mr. Chair outsider, no, it's the
magazine capacity, so the one
round in the chamber wouldn't
count.
So now I have 11 rounds.
I'm just thinking that that some
of these things are, they're
arbitrary, sounds very arbitrary
to me. Um,
And I do not believe that this
is going to withstand scrutiny
and, and, uh
But I'm not, I'm out, I'm out of
way.
So I know you all have attempted
this on many occasions.
And we'll probably continue to
take it and if you don't make it
this time, you'll be back next
year. The year after that, and
you will continue. We understand
that.
But I think the goal that you're
seeking.
To eliminate guns from our
society.
It's not reality.
And
There are too many gun owners.
Law-abiding, love sports, love
to hunt.
Love to just shoot for the sake
of shooting.
And uh and these weapons have
value to them, and I think for
the, the attempt to eliminate
them from our society.
Is, is, is a wrong attempt. You
know, when we're in war, World
War 1, World War 2, I believe it
was.
The Japanese knew that they
could never invade the United
States, and they said the reason
they couldn't because they knew
there would be a gun behind
every blade of grass.
We're one of the few countries
that can defend ourselves, one
of the few countries that allows
the population to defend
themselves.
Everybody in the world knows
that.
And uh that's why we're
considered still the strongest
country in the world.
Militarily
Because if everything else
fails, and they tried to invade
this country.
The militia.
The citizens.
We would be able to defend
ourselves.
And that will never end.
So with that I am. Thank you.
Mr. Champion, no.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. I just had a couple of
questions, so I think uh Senator
Branley had referred to this
earlier when she was uh asking
questions. When we started this
off, we had a hearing that was
centered around
2 cases at the Supreme Court
level. Heller and Bruin.
And
Having an opportunity over the
last couple of weeks to really
dig in and try and understand
this and understand the Supreme
Court level, what's taken place.
Uh, I've, I've got a couple of
questions. So it's, it's
Is it
Fair to say that
Heller, the ruling in Heller,
that one of the
findings of that case are one of
the main findings was, is that
it said that weapons in common
use cannot be banned.
But I'd be correct in making
that statement.
Mr. Chair, Senator, not
necessarily. It means that
weapons in common use, so when
we're applying the Bruin test,
that means that they would be
protected presumptively
protected under step one. So
then the government would need
to justify its regulation by uh
resorting the history and
tradition.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm, I'm
talking though specifically for
the Heller case though, and it's
my understanding from multiple
experts that I've talked to
that, that the pri uh primary
finding of that case was that
weapons in common use cannot be
banned. And so when I'm reading
through this bill and I'm
looking at all the different
weapons that'll get wrapped up
in this. I'm led to believe that
That it's unconstitutional on
its face because of that very
fact that it's going to ban a
ton of weapons that are in
common use, and that it's gonna
be the minute, you know, if it
passes out of this committee,
makes it to its next committee
and gets passed out of this uh
legislature, it's going to the
courts. I mean, there's no
question about that, and I have
a hard time, uh, believing that
they won't.
I guess my question would be,
is, would it be
Fair of me to say that a manner
in which this could be
challenged if it was enacted
into law, would be to apply that
common use to this bill.
To challenge it in courts.
Mr. Chair, Senator, if, if I
understand your question
correctly. So,
As courts apply ruin, which uh
was a case following color.
They, they, they apply a
two-step analysis to 2nd
Amendment cases. The first step
is to determine whether these
arms are protected by the plain
text of the 2nd Amendment.
And the way that the majority of
courts have looked at this
following Bruin is by saying,
By looking at this common use
element, knowing that the
central component of 2nd
Amendment is self-defense, they
look at whether these weapons,
whether they're objectively uh
useful for self-defense
situations and whether they are
commonly used for self-defense,
and the majority of courts
addressing this issue have
concluded that the answer is no.
But out of an abundance of
caution, the courts have also
continued on this step too, and
said that even if these arms are
protected, there is a history
and tradition of legislatures
regulating the most dangerous
new technologies while leaving
ample room for people to defend
themselves, which is exactly
what this law does.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
and correct me if I'm wrong,
when we were having some
discussion the other day that,
that even another member on this
committee had said that, you
know, it, it's likely that this
would go to court and that there
would be challenged and uh no
certainty that it would be
upheld in courts. Um, but my
understanding of the bruin, and
I'm not an attorney, so, you
know, forgive me if I'm wrong in
stating this, but the brewing
ruin or ruling was that
It, it, they had to have
historical precedent dating back
to the founding era.
And the
By applying the Bruin even to
this case, that that that can't
be proved. And so it would still
be unconstitutional to enact a
law, a law like this.
Um, you know, there's, there's a
ton of issues with this, you
know.
This is a point in time where I
wish, sitting on the judiciary
Committee that I was an
attorney, just so I'd have a
little better foot to argue
from, um, but in addition to
that, I think the, the fact that
we're asking to create a de
facto gun registry is, is
something else that's crazy and
that anybody who's a lawful gun
owner doesn't agree with, you
know, we don't, I don't
understand the point of creating
a gun registry for people that
are law-abiding citizens, how
are we addressing the
Criminals in this
How are we going to get them to
register, Mr. Chair, Senator?
Mr. Cheradder, so there's no
registry, uh, for those, for
that, the certification process
is offered, uh, so that way
people current gun owners do not
have to turn in their weapons.
Uh, and current gun owners have
the option of filing with their
local FFL instead, so they don't
have to file with the Attorney
General.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So,
So, how is that gonna be
enforced then? Who, who's gonna
run around and, and check
everybody's paperwork to say,
hey, yeah, you registered your
weapon, you know, I have a hard
time thinking that, you know,
that's gonna be anything that's
even gonna
Be able to be implemented in an
effective manner, number one,
and, and not require a ton more
taxpayer money to fund something
that's gonna allow that database
and system and process to be in
effect.
Mr. Chair Sander, well, it's
just like any other um like a
concealed carry, uh, permit. It,
that process is there to protect
the gun owner. Um, we're,
they're, we're not gonna be
sending out police checking in
on people's houses, searching
them, but this is to protect the
gun owner so that way when they
are going out, they can prove
that they have lawfully
grandfathered this weapon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Would I be
correct in stating just based on
how this law is written now
though, that if I was traveling
from my house to wherever it
might be.
To fire a weapon that's on this
banned list, and if I did not
have the proper paperwork, card,
whatever it is that is issued,
that I invent at that point.
prone and subject to a 4th
degree felony.
Mr. Chair and senator, uh, no,
uh, that would only be a
misdemeanor at most, but if you
find, uh, filed your
certification with the Attorney
general. You don't need to carry
around any paperwork, Mr. Chair,
I, I think that's all the
questions I have, like, you
know, at the end of the day, I
think that obviously, um, the
view is that it's
unconstitutional and, you know,
from, from my position, it's,
it's hard to justify trying to
pass a law that seem so
blatantly unconstitutional on
its face.
And then to turn around on the
back end and ask taxpayers to
fund defending a bill that was
unconstitutional from the very
beginning in the courts because
I'm pretty sure that lawyers,
you know, aren't willing to
regress on the fees that they
charge, and so we're looking at
millions and millions of dollars
that'll have to be spent in
courts should this pass, to try
and uphold this law. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
I
wanna just
Question of a few things that
were said that there, there was
an implication, and maybe not,
not right expression that this
law has been passed in other
states and has been upheld, at
least in some circuits and some
federal courts. My understanding
is different, that this would be
the first state ever to pass a
law based on a gas-operated um
definition of what would
constitute a prohibited weapon.
I is there any other state,
my question, has any other state
ever passed any law.
That prohibits a weapon based on
the definition here of
prohibited weapon based on gas
operation.
Mr. Chair, uh, strictly
speaking, no, but the, the
courts have, uh, when they have
examined those other laws, they
have focused on the same
features that we focus, which is
why we're confident that the
same analysis would apply to our
bill here.
Yeah, but the central feature of
this bill, this definition of a
weapon and I'll, I'll back up a
little bit. I, I, I would
welcome the opportunity to try
and find a way to define this,
that what's gonna, that's gonna
be constitution muster and
many of you all have heard me
talk about the mass killing 20
miles down the road from my
house, 23 people killed at a
Walmart in El Paso, um, we got
specifically targeting
Hispanics.
Um, so, uh, hate crime, I think
he's gonna do.
I don't know, I don't know how
many multiple life sentences.
So I, I welcome the chance to
try and explore how to do this,
but I'm, I'm always challenged
by how do we define the weapon,
so
The weapon here, the, the, the,
the definition of the function
of the weapon that
Prohibits and prescribes the
type of weapon is the gas
operation that seems to be the,
the central feature of how we're
doing this. And as I understand
it, the, the, um, a version of
that concept was introduced by
Senator Heinrich at the federal
level, and I see uh a number of
you nodding your head
affirmatively, so that's, that
was my understanding. And and um
for any number of different
reasons that that has not
advanced or is not advancing in
Washington DC. Is that fair to
say?
Mr. Chair, that's correct. Yeah,
and it's a lot of things that
aren't happening in Washington
DC that they find troubling, but
um
But
The
I want to be clear, make sure I
understand that New Mexico would
be the first state to prohibit a
weapon based on this type of a
definition of a prohibited
weapon, which is a gas, gas
operation of the of the weapon
itself and and I see all of you
nodding your heads so that I
just want to confirm that's my
understanding, number one. So we
really don't have guidance in my
mind in the courts. I mean,
again, you're saying, well, the
courts have affirmed.
A certain weapon classifications
based on features that are
similar to this bill, but none
of them have really done so at
the core of what this bill does,
which is the the gas operated
nature of it.
Uh, I think that's unfortunate.
I don't agree with the Supreme
Court interpretation of the
Second Amendment. I don't agree
with, uh, the historic
references and the the notion of
the the the court needs to do
that, and I already see, I
predicted years ago with my
Republican friends and even on
this committee that the Springbo
would have to begin to back away
from their president. They're
already doing it, Rain is a good
example of that where the court
Clarence Thomas realized that
his earlier attempt to try and
and uh prescribe the Second
Amendment.
It's gonna run into problems for
him, and it's gonna run into
problems in the Supreme Court
and we see them already kind of
dialing it back, uh, and they're
gonna continue to do so, but
we're, we're with this court,
um.
Such as it is, and um, well, I
may not agree with
Where they're out on a number of
issues on this, I think they're
pretty clear, at least with
regard to this particular.
Uh, issue as it may relate to a
classification of weapons, and I
think we all agree that Heller
is the case, right? Heller is
the case that deals with
prescribing types of weapons.
The other cases, and we talk
about who can possess and where
they can possess and and so
forth, but in terms of a weapon
ban, I think we, we go to hell.
I just don't see um how we get
Really beyond the Supreme Court,
and, and I think that's
unfortunate, but so far I uh
this last session I passed the
seven-day waiting period as one
of the sponsors, um, everybody
told me we'd be challenged
constitutionally.
We were, we were sued.
Uh, and a federal court has
affirmed and upheld that, and I
think that's gonna stick.
Um, likewise, when the, the
executive issued executive
orders last year, and talked
about bands in Albuquerque and
elsewhere I very promptly and
publicly said that's
unconstitutional and I went to
the federal court hearing in
Albuquerque wants the federal
judge in a matter of days decide
exactly that, that it was
unconstitutional and and
enjoying that that executive
order, so between that, uh,
working on the red flag law
which I was the sponsor of, uh,
today, many of you will help me
pass a concealed carry law. I,
I think it's incumbent on us
that are gun owners I've said
many times before, to try and
find the right place for, for
having a responsible gun
ownership and um I'll continue
to be part of that. So far I am
betting, I'm batting 100%, um.
On constitutional
prognostication with regard to
gun laws, so I'm hoping that uh
that I'm wrong. This time I hope
that I'm wrong. And that, that,
uh, I don't mind uh losing one
in in this instance, but I'm
gonna continue to, to predict
the law as best I can, and if
that's part of what we do as
lawyers, so I, I'll predict that
this law was to password would
be enjoined and would be struck
down by the Supreme Court. And,
and I think that's partly why,
um, no other state has done
this.
Um, in, in this manner, so.
Uh, well,
You'll, you'll predict my vote
from my comments, Senator
O'Malley, but I appreciate you
giving a very good, a very good
effort.
Anyone else?
All right. We'll do a roll call
the, uh, once we get a motion.
We've got a motion already from
Senator Stewart for discussion,
but you'll do the real one.
A mister when I move but do not
pass on Senate Bill 279 and do
pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Cenel
279.
accomplish.
And
so.
do it? Yes.
Hello.
No.
Senator Stewart.
They are.
No.
Yes.
Cervantes? No, it would do best,
said O'Malley.
Thank you. Um,
all right, so everyone, we are
scheduled to come to the floor.
Tomorrow at 1 o'clock, um, we
will meet after the floor
session. We have a very
ambitious agenda. I will
continue to do what I've tried
to do, which is look for those
bills we can move quickly and
we'll take those up first, um,
right now, the, whether we meet
on Sunday or not, I think it's
going to be open to see how we
do tomorrow and what time we get
off the floor. That depends on
how long the debate goes on the
floor and what issues are
debated and why. So, uh we'll
