Chairman members of the
committee HB seventy nine is
absolutely riveting bill the
office of the superintendent
insurance promulgate the premium
rate excuse by the title
insurers in New Mexico title
insurance rates are prompted to
agree detailed evidentiary
hearing every two years
currently in H. recently I
proposed to change the frequency
of these file insurance premium
rate making hearings from every
two years to every three and
with that which is my experts Mr
for more.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is prince more
I'm a registered lobbyist for
fidelity title insurance and
we're proposing to change the
the cycle of the ratemaking
hearing.
Thank you.
Once on the phone as well.
No one signed up in support or
opposition to will go to the
committee Representative.
So this is it is free she was
very.
Madam chair Senator Ivey Soto
correct.
Right anyone else any objection
to that motion.
The line please show Senators
Pirtle Baca were Duhigg o'neill
and I'm sort of in support of
the past thank you madam chair
members of the committee thank
you all right to HB forty do
have representative Thompson or
someone who's here on her behalf
I'm here for that but I think
you know.
Percent of thank you madam chair
so HB forty I'm gonna tell you a
quick story
most of you know I have an adult
son with autism.
A friend of mine also has an
adult son with autism he was at
work his caretaker went to pick
him up.
And the man with autism had to
go to the bathroom so they were
speeding home they were stopped
by the police the man with
autism saw bathroom jumped out
of the car and ran and the
police pulled guns on and
luckily his caretaker was able
to top the situation down.
So basically what this bill does
is totally voluntarily you can
check a box when you register
your car that a person in the
car either the driver or
passenger may have a disability
that may make them that will
make them commute communicate
differently so people I I have
difference in families say what
do you do when you're stopped by
the police I reach in my pocket
to get my card and if the police
are yelling hands up or we'll
shoot.
That things can happen so we've
checked a box on the
registration and when the police
run your plate yes to pull you
over that will pop up that
someone in the car may have
walked to the more the driver
may be deaf or with a hundred
percent voluntary and it's just
to prevent tragedies from
happening.
Sign up no one signed up in
support opposition will go to
members of the committee.
Representative.
Nation.
After years of this.
For us to.
That was
Actually actually madam chair
and senator it could have a list
but it's and I believe to be
able to guys one of them but
it's not an exhaustive list so
the department will determine
what participate but things like
autism deafness TBI dementia and
things like that.
Representative.
The list.
And he was
excluding.
lady of.
I
wasn't.
He also didn't have the sense
of.
That was very very concerned.
That helicopter
Things were just last.
So thank you very much.
Your property
is.
Have a motion for to pass is
there any objection to that
motion.
I see none of these shows and I
just Soto o'neill Duhigg Baca
Pirtle noting is very thank you
madam chair and members.
All right we have a H. B. two
fifty.
Thank you madam chair here on
house bill two fifty of my
expertise years around food
Representative believe the title
insurance
Association here in New Mexico
and house bill two fifty is a
piece of legislation that the
thought of companies desire to
run after I saw their initial
draft by expanded a little bit
and we cleaned up the Scribner's
error this statute to to the
extent we could.
The bill basically does a couple
things number one that allows
lawyers title companies and
other people
senator Graham professionals to
who are familiar with the
description of meshed minor.
Changes to take care of
Scribner's errors when you have
lengthy descriptions are
sometimes not even lengthy
descriptions of real property
oftentimes there are.
There are errors made.
So it allows those minor errors
to be changed by filing of an
affidavit I would note that the
filing of the affidavit does not
make it so it just simply
reports that ends in that
person's opinion that particular
error was detected and is
highlighted and the course of
the Courts could maybe use that
as as evidence later on.
The really is just an effort to
show that people made a minor
error and they're pointing it
out for his future people who
are examining title to sorry
hello I really ma'am.
This instead of that.
So with that would stand for
questions I don't have anyone
signed up supporter opposition
members.
Without
any objections that motion.
None of the show centers more
fertile Costco where do Hank
o'neal and Ivy Soto voting we
have the best don't go anywhere
Representative Nibert let's go
ahead and do H. B. one ninety
five what we got.
Thank you madam chair house bill
one ninety five.
deals with with an issue that
has been brought to highlight
this year with all the fires and
to my ride is Laura McCarthy The
New Mexico state forester.
And it makes and she might
explain the bill will better but
it makes a some changes to
existing statutes.
madam chair members of the
committee
the house bill one ninety five
is going to update the forest
conservation act to oxide
correct federal laws that
provide forestry funding
assistance to states and to
strike outdated language that
conflicts with the current state
and federal policies this act
dates back to nineteen thirty
nine it was last updated thirty
five years ago and the stock
twenty twenty two wildfires are
the trigger to update the act so
that the forestry division can
be authorized to work on forest
health forest and watershed
restoration and post fire
recovery we stand for questions.
We did we didn't have anyone
signed up in opposition we did
have three people signed up in
support.
Hear from them very very quickly
if they're here Jason Espinoza.
Here we have so we Parker.
We see Guerrero.
Well not the mall and and
support
questions from the committee.
Was the will of the.
Us right any objections that
motion.
I was set up.
Sir that the supporters of this
bill.
What.
I showed up.
Yes.
All right well listen Purdue
pass any objections that motion.
The line through shows Centers
more support all bought the
words Duhigg o'neill and I'd be
sent over to an answer for you
have to pass do you want me to
stay here you have another.
Yes with the bills that are at
All right HB ninety.
Thank you madam chair house bill
ninety is the uniform law
commission update of the uniform
commercial code the uniform
commercial code
because of its nature it's very
broad in scope and symbols
virtually most transactions that
occur within the state.
The update is to provide
guidance and direction with
respect to.
Technology advances we have
forms of new money that we
hadn't heard before we have
electronic transactions that
were not contemplated under the
original uniform commercial code
so this is
the substantial update it's
quite lengthy but the actual
updates are not very one three
there are some
There are some sections that
have longer
Additional language but for the
most part it's fairly
short changes to deal with
issues that the technology has
required an update of the
uniform commercial code and
again this this bill was vetted
by the uniform law commission
and the New Mexico has.
Maintained updates of this code
on several occasions over the
last thirty or for so years.
With that the my expertise Mr
Jack Burton who's a stranger to
no one up here and an attorney
with the roadie law firm here in
Santa Fe and the member of the
uniform law commission as is the
the chair.
Myself and and several others
who have served in this body
over the years without restore
questions movie for us.
We have anyone sign up.
All right.
The other special the committee.
All right
that makes me a little nervous.
Seventeen million probably just
really understand.
Through this quickly Senator
Wirth madam chair and I have
someone caring probably the six
hundred or seven hundred page
uniform securities act.
It just about says all off the
ledge which was completely re
written
I realized the process here and
appreciate Representative night
for being willing to do this.
For the past any objection to
that motion.
Seeing none chair Senators
Moores Pirtle Baca working
Duhigg and I've.
Requests for you have to pass
thank you madam chair thanks
committee thank you I think
that's your last one that
Representative Nibert.
Representative of Science Center
Hamblen H. B. one eighty two.
Thank you madam chair and
committee lovely to see you all
what's today Tuesday thank you.
So madam chair thank you very
much and committee this is this
is a bill that brought to my
attention that we actually have
a law that clarifies what is a
Spanish language paper
in New Mexico there is existing
law regarding the application of
print public notices in Spanish
speakers amount to more than
twenty five percent of the
population moreover statutes
read that publishing in Spanish
of the population speakers is
more than seventy five percent
is the only requirement for
compliance however in southern
New Mexico we have a paper that
is not on that list that is
called Camino Riel newspaper is
the only Spanish language paper
in circulation south of
Albuquerque commuter rail is
been in circulation for nine and
a half years it is printed in
New Mexico at here at the Santa
Fe New Mexican plant and is
distributed approximately a
hundred and thirty places in
Dona ana and Luna counties it is
registered with the state and
pays taxes to New Mexico and it
is been the first and only paper
that published the voter guide
of the league of women voters of
Southern New Mexico and yearly
reports of the water utility
pages and COVID nineteen
campaign by empowerment Congress
and the state of New Mexico why
this bill is important statute
states that there's a paper of
general circulation and is
recognized by the state public
notices must be printed there
this bill will include commuter
rail among that list to be
recognized as a Spanish paper
and included in on the list that
the state created in other words
there are English only
newspapers on the list a couple
of Spanish statewide and nothing
south of Albuquerque so that's
why I'm here today madam chair
and committee is to get your
permission to put the Camino
rail paper on that list as well.
I don't think we have anyone
signed up in order opposition
members of the committee.
Etcetera.
I was.
If this is.
For the past is there any
objection to that motion.
Seeing none please just centers
more fertile Baco work Duhigg
o'neill New Mexico you have to
pass thank you madam chair thank
you committee.
Representative Rehm.
Here.
Right as Representative Johnson
here.
Come on up on one sixty one.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee house
bill one sixty one.
Is a bill that will reach three
locate that inner tribal pastor
Morial office from the
department of tourism to the
department of finance and will
rename that inter tribal
ceremonial office to be in our
tribal Indian ceremonial.
And it has three hundred
thousand in H. B. two with that
I stand for questions.
Revenues will have anyone were
session of the committee.
Not just.
Yes is there any objections that
motion.
The.
There's more pirtle kako words
do Hank o'neal in every sort of
are in support you have to have
thank you.
Madam chair and committee thank
you.
Representative Sebastian
Pasquali.
On H. B. one sixty nine.
Thank you madam chair.
House bill one sixty nine the
aligns the confidentiality
provisions.
Four eight made to the interim
legislative ethics committee for
both the complainant and the
respondent.
Thank you we don't have anyone
signed up in support or
opposition and we have lost a
court
So if some.
Thanks everyone for your
patience will.
Think about that in just a
minute.
The.
We have one more member COVID
department just a moment.
All right we are on house bill
one sixty nine we are two
members of the committee.
Well the committee on.
That right we have a motion for
to pass they would have just
sent back to the motion.
None please show centers where
the Duhigg o'neill Stewart and
Ivey Soto putting in favor you
have to.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Serrato.
That HB at three thirty seven.
Thank you madam chair I have
with the my experts really
strong with the department of
early childhood care and
education general counsel of
what this bill does is it fixes
some definitions to ensure that
the city's BCC do is conducting
the right national background
checks using the FBI database
informed by the FBI by passing
this we're sure that we're
getting the substantial amount
of federal funding approximately
fifty million dollars that we
have available to us if we
should we we were to process
thank you Mr president.
I think we have anyone signed up
in support or opposition members
of the committee.
Have a motion for to pass the
certification that Lincoln.
Venantius senators work to do
Hank Neil Jordan Ivey Soto
voting in favor and.
And you have the tax thank you.
Representative in in order.
On page before us.
Representative madam chair
members the committee house bill
four sevenths of the deadline to
search for relatives of the
deceased for fourteen days and
also allows counties to pay the
money needed to very those I'm
unclaimed decedents of indigents
sorry indigent decedents state
law previously caps that amount
at six hundred dollars which
was.
Considerably too well and this
raises that cap to one thousand
dollars and all the counties are
in support of this bill as of
right now and with that we stand
for questions.
There's no one there is no one
mentions.
No members of the committee.
Right is there any objection to
the motion.
Seeing none of the senators were
Duhigg o'neill Stuart Navistar
overloading are you have to pass
thank you to ensure committee
members.
And we no longer have a quorum.
Still no longer half of our.
We've averaging about four
minutes for each of them.
Sounds like we're I have a
quorum in about ten minutes.
Thank you.
Yeah.
The.
Hello.
We have.
What is this.
You.
Senator.
The.
Where we were.
Yeah.
I have to thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee
house bill three ninety nine
looks at three counties in the
state of New Mexico with
populations of thirty five
thousand or more based on the
twenty twenty census to move
those commissions from a three
member commission to a five
member commission with that we
can stand for questions.
The lady
we'll have a revision
opposition.
Our.
Or whatever year over year are
you able to hear.
This year.
This practice.
recitation we've got the right.
Offices of the human.
Right.
That was one thousand three
ninety nine the five members of
the commission.
But just.
But of course.
The other question.
Two thousand lotion.
In the those are the so do you
is what is
your I go for
that thank you Mr chairman thank
you.
For.
We were.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr chair
members of the committee the.
Sure.
Forty four point.
Yes.
And we have a.
What we were the
All the
different layers.
So I asked the lady with the.
The registered
agent on.
We have those
your reserves in opposition.
W. one of the following cases.
Right.
Senator.
By the officers will a move that
we receive.
The your the.
Mr chair yes I believe so.
increases.
Thank you
This is Hey.
This is a bill house bill two
thirty four is a very focused
response to the explosion of
shoplifting in the state.
the response by closing closing
three what we consider gaping
holes in our laws first of no
longer will receive speech
charges misdemeanors while
stealing thousands of dollars
worth of product it does this by
allowing the aggregation of the
value of the items stolen from
the retailers the second call he
creates the crime of organized
retail crime a second degree
felony directed specifically at
the criminal gains that have
become part of this I see third
it creates the crime of
aggravated shoplifting a third
degree felony to punish those
who use a deadly weapon in the
skating from the crime scene my
experts today are.
John Solomon
supervised forty some attorneys
and investigators in the second
judicial district prosecuting
these kinds of crimes.
Rob black with the chamber of
commerce who has been
instrumental in
working with the retailers on
this issue and David Martinez
who is a former U. S. attorney
and works with the City of
Albuquerque on forced there's
with that we stand for questions
of well I'm sorry we have a an
amendment.
that you all should have and
would you like to to to number.
This is the zero eight.
Yes Mr chair
of.
Legislative.
Yeah.
Thank you thank you Mr chair yes
would part of our process of
preparing this bill and it was
to work with the public
defender's office and after of
it had passed through the house
we have some further discussions
and they uh suggested some
wording changes on page three.
Beginning at line I believe it
actually presented by twenty and
it was to make sure that we were
more clearly defining the point
in time when the use of a deadly
weapon in connection with a
shoplifting or in connection
with the
with it would it would do is
skate from shoplifting up that
that was clear in the wording
and so that we were happy to
This bill during the interim I
continue to have problems with
it
So.
And and that.
Look at the FY are issues that
are raised by that.
The department of the public
defender
Like to walk through those and
we also shared there's no way
I'm gonna get through the issues
I want to discuss on this bill
in here is being taken out of
the existing shoplifting.
Representative Lee and.
And is not included for this new
cause of action
That the special this chart for
the separate additional funds
arising out of the same
transaction
the effect of this would be to
expose folks who.
Are being prosecuted for this
new felony Bobby separately
charged for every individual
incidents of theft including
larceny or robbery.
Conspiracy theories fast Pfaff
to accessory charges for every
theft committed by co
conspirators plus a separate
standalone charges of
racketeering by removing the
double jeopardy protections that
are currently in place the
effect of this is that someone
could be convicted for dozens of
crimes the same underlying
contact.
that seems incredibly excessive.
the commission and
will not ask the question.
It also certainly would not
applaud the the purpose of this
maybe generally takes on
prevalence.
Action.
So.
I think that that language would
need to be put back in.
certainly for shoplifting and
for any of these new.
Causes of action that are being
created here
and all the other stuff and then
I'll offer some amendments Mr
chair.
Would you so or is he going to
do and if you're just referring
to.
So let me.
The words taken out so look on
page two lines twenty two to
twenty four they're taking out
the languages for shoplifting
that an individual chart for the
violation of this section shall
not be charged for the separate
or additional funds arising out
of the same transaction that
language is being taken out of
shoplifting and that and and the
reason that we have that
language Mr chairs to avoid
double jeopardy this is a a
process protective language
against double jeopardy it's
being removed in this bill it
also hasn't been added back in
for any of these new causes of
action so.
How about this all all up to the
amendments as we go on page two
lines twenty two through twenty
four
I would move to put that struck
restore the struck language.
And I just want to see what
other changes we would need to
accommodate that and and I'll
tell you Mr chair I have a real
problem with this aggregation
approach that is taken over all
we had a bill of of Senator my
S. is is here a couple weeks ago
and I had the same problem on
that bill to I I think this
aggregation approach is is
constitutionally shaking one and
I kind of backed off of that on
Senator masses Bill and after it
I was told by folks who know
criminal criminal law heck of a
lot better than I do but I
shouldn't have that that it is
an issue is a concern and I I'm
hesitant to to back off on it
again because I I regret having
done so on that.
But
let's say so.
I would move to strike on page
two online stream to a twenty
four restore that language.
And.
On page.
Three I'm gonna Pontic possum
just taking out all the
aggregation language overall at
this point that will probably
come back to it on page three
lines three.
Eight after the period striking
that language.
It'll be my first question Mr
chair.
Thirty one for those two
different more short they seem
to stay the same the similar
okay sure so first page two
lines twenty two through twenty
for restoring the struggling
with.
Three rivers.
Thank you Mr but things are
doing in the I do recall the
conversation we had and I
appreciate the concern you have
that that this language were to
be put back it would essentially
negate section to they would not
allow prosecutors to utilize the
organized retail crime structure
that we wish to put into law I
think your concerns are in the
meeting given the procedural
history of this bill if you look
on up if you look on a page
three.
Of line six seven eight but all
I have Mister Sullivan
make that point if I may Mister.
Mr chair Senator of those
concerns to fiscal impact
reports were actually in advance
of us working with the public
defender's office to get a lot
of this language in fact would
subsection C. currently does
actually provide more robust
double jeopardy protections if
you look at lines twenty four to
twenty five on page.
In order to the top of page
three what that address is is
what's considered are muted
approximation double jeopardy
cures presented shores that
funding divisional cannot be
charged with multiple
shoplifting's for shoplifting
multiple discrete items so for
example somebody walks into the
store and steals four five
hundred dollar watches what that
is saying is no you charge a
person based on the aggregate
retail value of the total amount
when you add up those for five
hundred all watches is a single
fourth degree felony as opposed
to four separate for Canadian
county so that actually provides
additional protections what the
rest of that subsection does is
provide double jeopardy
protections to a defendant
against what are considered
double description concerns our
jurisprudence which is you can
be charged with multiple of
similar fact belated offenses
like organized retail crime and
shoplifting you simply can't be
punished for both so what
subsection C. does actually
clarify the double jeopardy
protections and provide
additional double jeopardy
protections.
And Mister chair I I definitely
appreciate that that language is
that of the provided that
language
I think this is about a.
I'll be honest with you I think
the aggregation approaches about
one
I I.
To.
For.
Other questions of a of those
who.
Senator Baca.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores.
Federal news yeah.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator.
Yes Senator one.
To.
The.
Mr chair.
Then to move on to section D. E.
subsection the.
On page three if you were
there's a.
Going to go see sure sure no
then then thank you Mr chair I I
should clarify that yeah all all
all all move on from in that
world.
So.
This.
The subsection do.
Says that when an individual has
engaging shoplifting more than
once and then that over ninety
day period whether committed at
one or more retailers
that and the issue here is that
whether aggregating shoplifting
from multiple retailers is
allowed given the language and
see about look on page three
line one a single retailer at a
single location yes D. ends up
conflicting with C..
because it is now trying to make
it be from multiple retailers
and also this the the language
in the overall I think is is
confusing and Fe.
It's it's not clear at risk
hello.
So.
He doesn't clearly allow for
aggregation of value for
shoplifting at more than one
retailer whether it be at the
same or different locations
because contains no spatial or
temporal language and again
conflicting with C. it also
seems that this language bars
charging of single incidents of
shoplifting by stating that
shoplifting can only occur for
there's multiple incidents
within the ninety day period.
So that office of that public
defender had suggested that this
language be re written
To say and let me.
Take a look at this and I'll
figure out what my motion is.
So on page three.
All right Page three line
fourteen.
Right.
Probably going to just be
striking that.
Eight fourteen through eighteen.
And inserting.
They live there of.
instance come up or based on the
aggregated at the retail market
value based on multiple that's.
The way that this would create
is when an individual has engage
in shoplifting of more than once
over ninety days period whether
committed at one or more
retailers the prosecution may
charge the individual under the
section based on either the
aggregator retail market value
of merchandise shoplifted.
From a six are in I'm sorry in a
state I also start at one
thirteen after shoplifted in a
single instance for based on the
aggregated retail market value
based on multiple fronts.
The papers page three line
thirteen after shoplifted
tracking the remainder remainder
of language of that subsection
three line eighteen.
And replacing with our in a
single instance or based on the
aggregated retail market value
based on multiple times.
Now I still don't know budget.
the question of whether a single
shoplifting is going to be
eleven of the stature if they're
still inherent conflict between
do and so
that would at least be better
than it is now Mr chair but that
is my motion really we clear.
Session.
I'm sorry thank you no thank
thank you Mr Senator doing thank
you for that because D. provides
the flexibility for the
prosecutor to stay in section
one for prosecutors section to
Serbian friendly if I may have a
Mr Solomon address your concerns
and Mr chair Senator I think the
first lines wanted to on page
three again deals with the unit
of prosecution concerning a
single shoplifting incident so
preventing that person from
being charged with multiple
shoplifting's for single
incident but subsection do does
is really ensure that there's
some prosecutorial discretion in
allowing the state to be their
first to that case based on that
single incident that single
shoplifting or if there are a
series of shoplifting events
over that ninety day period to
pursue those in aggregated
fashion so I think the the
concern one of the concerns with
the proposed language as it
introduces terms like instance
and offended that sort of
confuses really what we're
trying to do here which is there
were stricter prosecution to
shoplifting on a single retailer
at a single point in time for if
this person is a habitual
shoplifters allow the state to
really aggregate those over a
series if within that three
month period.
Mr chair I would just note I
think this discussion is
demonstrating maintenance.
the state.
All of which is all just wait a
little bit this for the last of
the.
One of the bills the last the
last couple of our last
committee meeting.
There was a suggestion by.
Many of the committee which was
really actually over my
objection was that we.
The.
Process so.
Problematic House Bill.
Because this is the issue is
with.
very value.
The right the local.
Senator Baca.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Wirth.
Senator on you yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator do K. yes Senator focus.
To.
Share.
So subsection the help page
three creates a new cause of
action of aggravated
shoplifting.
That was.
Amended with the for the
amendment here to.
To at least give
special.
Connection
But.
The move so this says that when
you're using a deadly weapon in
the act shoplifting and it is
active.
Mr chair.
The.
The deadly weapon was a firearm
which is back in a few most of
the times
Then the underlying crime is
already going to be eligible for
a firearm enhancement
added on to this develop to a
felony sentence anyone has a
prior felony is also going to be
charged with a felony possession
and have heavy to offenders and
Hanssen's added on to
disabilities.
Is it any other enhancements
and this is going to add up
incredibly quickly per charge
because remember again Mr chair
because of this language in C.
someone could potentially be
have dozens of charges against
the same Lujan.
Under he is also going to be
subject to
underneath there actually even
without the they're already
going to have to actually
doesn't all these enhancements
to all of these charges
which means that we don't need.
This is this is an overreach Mr
chair and then overkill for
retail would be sending someone
to prison.
For decades.
Retail.
I understand that retail theft
is is an issue and is a real
problem and in my district and
in my city it is an issue and
problem Mr chair.
It is not been the policy of
this committee or this body in
general two of the folks to
prison for decades better and
even if it's really annoying and
really aggravating and and
really causes a lot of problems
for for businesses in our
district this would be this is
not in keeping with the approach
that we have taken this body to
these issues thanks for quite
some time we don't need an
aggravated shoplifting lots of
action not in doing so is going
to have a significant and and
deleterious effect impact on
folks who get caught up and and
their families and and everyone
else who is connected to and so
I would move Mr chair to strike
subsection eighteen on page
three that as lines nineteen to
twenty four.
Four straight all of subsection
eight.
First of all the Sanchez.
Which is
your Mr chair Senator so the on
Fund friendly at reminded
committee that armed robbery is
is a nine year penalty I think
this is an important component
of the bill.
Top Mr chair Senator this
provision is actually comes
about as a by product of a
discussion with the public
defender department in fact I
believe most of that language is
directly from the public
defender department the initial
iteration of the bill I would
have pursued activities under
the robbery statute an armed
robbery that was with a deadly
weapon and so
that was in recognition of that
I would also mention to the
committee that of course this
does nothing to affect
additional discretion and anyway
there's no mandatory minimum so
see with this and so that's
still within the purview of the
port to fashion a sense they
feel is most appropriate.
To.
Of the unfriendly or Mr.
I don't use that term from
really working but we said
nothing around this place the
state losses.
further discussion.
Question.
Right.
All right last year again I'm
gonna be for the system which
is.
The house bill.
Decisions receiving.
One
of.
Senator Baca.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores.
Senator o'neill.
Server.
Yes Senator Bob.
Those that do.
Mr chair looking on page four
section.
Starting at line twelve.
As a person to miss any of the
following happens certificate of
them for
anyone other we have an object.
You for the work of yes but we
do that.
Right so many members of the.
And if what no I'd like to be
excuse abductions.
On you know I was that we could
have a excuse by having a
message sent to the for the two.
This is one of the issues I
would like to be excuse I'd
rather be on the floor voting
for them.
Appreciate that just trying to
make things easier for anybody
have an objection to us.
Senator by.
Lows down here okay with us.
Please please do Mr.
What we.
Officers.
Our third do you have for.
I'm looking at section two which
is on page four.
And.
Looking at and and I keep
hearing the the experts say.
That that office of the public
defender is business right with
us my understand is they're
neutral on.
and yes they did offer some
language to make it better I I I
don't understand especially for
reading the FIR I don't
understand part of the anyway
once on.
but there's an issue here about.
Because if you see.
Under section two I talked to
access.
We're also talking about a
single person.
Is so you.
That
was a hypothetical of valley
involved go to Walmart and take
headphones and then in the
immediately go to see what the
CVS deal mascara.
Are they guilty of organized
retail crime.
Their actions constitute an act
in concert the private multiple
retail.
and I think I'd like to hear
from the experts what the answer
to that would be under the.
As.
What's not clear is whether all
act have to be in concert in the
New.
or if that would be.
If.
A totally different thanks to
all the different places the
fact that they're both together
and those are all now actually
concerts that are going to be.
Found under that.
That.
And Mr chair Senator unless the
agency care on the other item
you mentioned highs above twenty
five hundred dollars now
organized retail crime as you
can see it subsection one it's
not just acts in concert with
more than one person still
merchandise but it has to be
above the twenty five hundred
dollar threshold over the span
of one year which really trying
to target those official
fundraising gauge organized
retail crime.
Mr chair assume that yes over
over the course of the year they
have stolen over twenty five
hundred dollars worth of
headphones from one place
mascara from another place.
And then those are folks who are
gonna be setting to to prison
for how long
Mr chair Senator.
Assuming of course that the
specific intent of subsection
one is Matt which is with the
intent to sell exchange or
return the merchandise for value
so under scenario if they're
stealing for personal use and
that set actionable affirmative
defense that would not be
considered organized retail
crime if in fact however they
were stealing order to resell on
the secondary market for profit
which is really what organized
retail crime bills about that
yes they would be considered
under this bill.
Mr chair.
So if the purpose of this is to
help businesses who are dealing
with.
Repeated that
Why do we care if they're
they're selling that they're
stealing it versus other non if
the damage that is being done
the damage done to the business
and that situation is the same
whether they're reselling the
mascara.
Correct of Mr chair Senator
correct as to the business but
if you're reselling it you're
actually impacting the consumer
as well your impacting
somebody's buying from Facebook
market place around this on to
is assuming they're getting
legitimate product but in fact
they're getting the state drill
something to that effect you're
actually impacting the folks
downstream converses well.
That I'm also looking at that.
So what about subsection two
acts in concert with one or more
persons received purchase or
possess.
Okay so.
Never.
So.
The the so looking at that
subsection two with that knowing
or believing it themselves or
someone is.
For saying something that this
person things on Facebook
marketplace
as long as they don't think it's
still on this doesn't come into
effect correct Mr chair Senator
if we're talking about from the
perspective of the consumers if
they're buying Fund knowing
someone product than they would
not be criminally culpable now
this is really trying to attack
of the fence in organized retail
crime which compiles a number of
illicit goods to resell on the
secondary market that's what
subsection two is designed to
cover.
What if I am buying something
that is not factual and but I
believe it is stolen.
Then under number two action
concert with one or more persons
to receive less merchandise of
aggravated market value of two
two thousand five hundred
dollars or more overspend of
here knowing or believing it to
vote so on so let's say I think
it's still and it's something
that is worth the threshold
amount I think it's on it
actually isn't I could be
charged under this just for
believing that potentially
because this doesn't say that
has been stolen and I believe
is still correct Mr chair
Senator this does reflect in
your language and receiving
stolen property statute so under
that hypothetical which I've
never seen in practice that a
prosecutor could charge that but
again there's no requirement
that prosecutors charge anything
and I think in most instances in
a case like that the views are
good discretion on to.
But Mister chair I want to make
clear that what you said was
that they could so someone could
be criminally prosecuted because
they had a mistaken believe.
Under this bill.
That is that could happen I know
you're saying you don't you
think they would exercise
discretion and you don't think
it would have been you haven't
seen it but that is not
something that could happen in
the language of this bill
correct Mr chair Senator that is
correct although I okay that's
that I I ask yes or no the yes
or no question Madam so do that
as mentioned that that language
exists today one of the stolen
of.
Positions stolen vehicle and
things of that nature Mr chair
publisher not exist in any
language which should never be
have opening opportunity to
criminally prosecute people
based on their believe based on
their beliefs specially
mistakenly
so Mister chair I would move to.
They figure out what the
amendment would be so that it
only matters of the it actually
was stolen and and you know
where to leave it was stolen and
I think it would be on page four
line twenty.
After process and
Maybe just adding the word
stolen before merchandise.
That.
We're not potentially
prosecuting people just verify
that they have had and.
That's that all make that motion
for the motion is on pace for
like twenty two after the work
that students with with stolen
yes discussion on the proposed
amendment.
Yes thank you that that be a
friendly amendment Mister
chairman Senator.
Discussion.
The public we're doing a roll
call.
Senator Baca.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Wirth.
Federal.
They're part of the.
Senator yes.
Senator about this
K. to get high pattern but the
majority of the committee made
very clear the moment.
The staff was actually put on
the agenda we perfect House
Bills or.
By the.
For
State.
Mr chair I I have to ask if your
approach is only put on perfect
hospitals that don't even.
You just acknowledged this is
probably an amendment in the
flyer we figure this out.
I've.
The last.
Well if we have a very clear
that is not going to do anything
to help build I think I alone
argued against that your perfect
which.
There's a possible of reading
that comes to mind you live by
the sword you die.
Almost exactly are you along
with you for and on house bill
Legisla-.
It would not
so I don't think it was the.
And we had a lot of our
Republican colleagues here we
have that conversations I don't
think it's accurate to say that
it was.
House bill's Mr chair since we
were referred to their Senator.
Their Buck.
Relating the.
Hi Sir do if of.
Or
see I reckon I believe the.
Which.
Listed on the house built at a
concert time and the this option
house.
I.
Lawyers.
State where you're ready
Representative.
The perfect house built in
where.
Mr Kerry thing that this is part
of the national.
The reason.
Both lower than those of us in
the center of the.
Right.
I'm sorry on on just your page
with the amendment.
No I'm just going
to be able to move on.
No we were just.
Sure we will refer to.
Senator.
Looting was.
Bill this this for the public I
just don't feel there's.
I was referred to one yes the
amendment.
Every
every every bill is different
and so is not coming.
Representative local.
Right.
Mr chair.
Looking at page five that
subsection for.
this criminalizes a person who
recruits coordinates organizes
supervises directs and manages
the finances of another hi to
undertake any of the acts
described.
and and that makes a second
degree felony hi this
definition.
I essentially Mears racketeer
the more proportionally expands
organized retail crime to apply
to any statute defining theft of
merchandise which is not defined
we have no definition for it to
provide effective merchandise
here we don't know so we're
creating duplicates.
Vality from Accutane that we
already have and applying it
with this is vague language to I
don't know how many other
statutes by because it's not
defined here.
so I would move to strike all of
subsection four from page five
lines four through seven.
I'd love to hear how you
continue to think that.
All right the motion is to
strike.
Subsection four lines four
through seven on page five
discussion on the.
Most of my news.
Again Mister chairman Senator
the unfriendly with the mix
plant.
Senator
I think what subsection four
recognizes is that it would be
inequitable to potentially
charge other individuals like
boosters and fences under this
ordinance retail crime statute
those folks were actually
getting their hands dirty but
not that punish those
individuals who are actually
leading this operation that
would not be inequitable resolve
this statute is taken from
language from other states that
recognize that these individuals
are to be held accountable and
so that's what that statue
directly mirrors.
Mr chair I'm not saying that
like people who are leading up
these.
Operations should not be held
accountable why do we need it
when we already have the same
language for racketeering and Mr
chair Senator racketeering
actually requires different
elements this is not a
racketeering statute what
racketeering requires which is
actually the original iteration
of the bill that we removed
after consultation with the
public defender apartment is a
pattern of racketeering activity
which is any number of
enumerated crimes doing it more
than once offer some specific
intent in fact shoplifting is
not try to get founding director
special services in fact
different.
Mr chair I mean this whole bill
is about a pattern and
and that have the trouble I mean
that that would sure sounds
pretty similar to the specific
intent just of their I hear you
saying that shoplifting
specifically might not be
covered under that but why are
we just adding shoplifting.
The racketeering rather than
creating the duplicates because
of the action that includes this
vague language that applies to
any other statues describing
theft
can you can you list out for me
all of our other statutes
defining theft of merchandise.
Mr chair Senator there's a
number of problems force that
deal with the theft of
merchandise larceny and others
again all I can say is this is
it's a similar purpose of the
racketeering that is trying to
attack the organization as
opposed to the individual but
this is in fact from
racketeering and what is
required for.
My question was can you tell us
what all statutes were talking
and what all statutes do we have
in New Mexico that are going to
be covered.
Mr chair Senator the only
statute that I can contemplate
what it talks about that the
merchandise you get into whether
or not you can charge the
specific crime versus the
general crime the talk about
version that you're talking
about the retail context so what
this is really discussing is the
shoplifting incidents that we're
gonna be looking at charges that
Mr chair wired we just say under
the stop lifting statute wire if
if that is the only thing that
you can think of where this
would apply why are we narrowing
it to that instead of having
this broad based language they
could bring in any other statute
defining that the merchandise
which I pass out twice for a
list of what those would include
and and have the only answer
I've gotten so far.
so.
There if you want to amend your
your answer to list out the
statuses would actually apply
to.
Mr chair Senator those of the
statutes that I know of that are
considered effective merchandise
Spence certainly yes this bill
is designed to impact of
shoplifting and help retailers
that is the statute of that is
the crime for which subsection
for.
State just shoplifters under the
top of that this but correct Mr
chair Senator that is certainly
the situation that I can
contemplate the face what apply
I have not thought through all
of the other iterations of other
fast certainly there are a
number of primus funder of that
piece of it from local chapter
sixteen I believe but this is
designed to assist retailers and
that's really what started to do
and Mister chair I say it's not
just part of that because the
fact that the the expert on this
bill has not fought through all
the colors this would apply to
is of great concern.
By any other staff that where.
The money that that much of that
I think if the only thing you
all can think of that this would
apply to a shoplifting and it
should say at J..
The shop what is the shoplifting
statute.
Pursuant to thirty sixteen
twenty.
So it should say so that
subsection questions they
recruit coordinates organizes
supervises directs manages our
fund finances another to
undertake any of the acts
described in this section
Or hi pursuant to.
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
thirty that sh sixteen dash
twenty.
Strike the language of for any
other statute defining that
differs.
What is.
Which is it was.
So I just refuse to do so in
this section and then insured
pursuant to NMSA in nineteen
seventy eight thirty eight dash
sixteen dash twenty.
And then striking the remainder
of the line online six and
striking line seven.
Road closed enrollment.
Of today's your ready I know of
no Mr unfriendly.
We.
The motion.
Senator Baca.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores.
Federal news.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Duhigg yes Senator on.
So Mr chair another problem with
taking this had repeated over
time
and is how does how does act
limitations work.
All of this it lets you consider
conduct over the span of a of a
year
so when does the statue of
limitations are.
It's not addressed in the bill.
Senator thank you Mr rooms are
doing the statute.
Could only include those that
that are within that statute
Of a misdemeanor would be a year
of fourth degree would be.
That I used to know this stuff
two years a third degree three
and a second wi fi Mr chair my
question is when does it start
because you could be getting to
those higher levels of of of
degrees.
Partway through the year so does
it start with the first instance
that would have been a
misdemeanor doesn't start with
the last one where you're
tacking that on and rolling that
and I think in violation of our
constitution when does it when
does that system ones is that
what is wrong thank you Mr Mr do
that I believe every single
charge in the indictment would
have to fit within that statue
limitations.
But if you have a different
session limitations for
different degrees part is which
is what I'm understanding you
suicide in the first part of
your answer then which one do
you pick thank you Mr R. thank
you Mr was are doing the would
only try to pick one.
Which one you would depends on
on the on the crime up actually
no I'm I take it back I'm
thinking of the.
It this only deals with second
degree crime so.
So you would if you if you could
fit two hundred fifty.
Two thousand revellers into into
the indictment within within the
five years of the second week
such limitations than I would be
allow.
I'm not sure that we don't know
when it starts and and the point
of the year is that none of the
rest of your.
These are questions that the
judges are going to be face.
Secures a.
Public Enemy none of this is for
us this is a and and and I'm I
really don't care that we get in
here and.
Would be even less.
Mr Chairman center doing such of
a patient's is not.
Of course.
For.
Yes we're.
Analysts.
I'm not sure I don't even know
what the amendment would be
because I don't know what the
answer.
Got but the shared I want to
make really clear that I
understand that there's a
problem with retail crime in New
Mexico in Albuquerque
specifically.
There there is a real problem to
be addressed.
This is not a good solution this
is a may.
Solution that I think is really
more about getting headlines
solving a problem.
and it's one that does so at the
expense of putting people in
prison potentially for a very
very long time a non violent
crime
and that's going to cause a lot
of consternation among senator
and then having to interpret
this because Mr chair this is
not a perfect and I'm really
disappointed in this committee
for not for the same reason that
you were disappointed the other
day and if you would generally
hold this committee to a high
standard of quality and don't
let bills out of this committee
when they're not ready to be let
out and apparently that's what
we're gonna do here tonight and
I think that is a real shame Mr
chair and and reflects very
poorly on this committee.
That's all I have Mister chair
on the phone with the bulk of
the four we do appreciate the
compliment about thank you Mr
chair thank you for bringing
this Tory realize this is a
growing.
Concern.
Unity we see these organized
groups that safe drinking
windows going in and just
completely cleaned out stores.
You see this I do appreciate the
support I don't I don't really
have any questions I I would
point out Mr chair that this
same discussion he'd discuss
learning amendments was
discussed as I recall and Senate
rules only with committee
substitutes and that
determination was made in Senate
rules that we were doing
committee substitutes because it
was tactical to some degree of
what.
And so I think that argument
really you know some of us are
on the on one side when it works
and on the other side with a
dozen
so
Anyway that's that's all I have
on the bill thank you senator.
Use of the it is very.
Legislative action that.
Because of that.
Yes I remember the discussion
that center market is referring
to that was a discussion we had
here is Senate Judiciary Mr
chair you actually went to the
public.
I we're not doing substitutes
point.
So.
That I just wanted to correct
that that was not a discussion
that we had in
here.
Firstly with you leave.
Little.
Whether any other discussion.
We are very revenue.
Our.
They also.
It would also committee.
Right the last together issued
requests for.
In the final days.
Really.
Fire.
I need.
We.
Senator Baca yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Senator Morris yes federal news
yes.
R. Pirtle yes Senator Duhigg
yeah Senator I.
Yes.
Thank you or anyone is for.
The.
Very hard.
And that is if we have any
opposition.
Representative right is that no
reference this.
Representative will act
requirements.
Mr chairman that is funny.
The water yeah.
Resolving.
The floor downstairs.
This.
Mr chairman you should have a
house for substitute for house
bill sixty two so we have the
correct one this is a consumer
protection bill is supported by
the new car and used car dealers
deals with something that's
called courage stoning which go
to page two and lines two
through six the first style with
curved stoning is is I buy a car
from Senator Neil I ask you not
to fill in the name of it sold
to or the dollar amount L. Lujan
including the mileage and then I
go to I advertise it and sell it
to me of Senator Moores.
at that time I fill in the name
of purchasers of sale amount and
it appears that it went from
Senator o'neill to Senator
Moores I avoided the Attorney
General lemon law and I've
avoided DMV fees that I couldn't
be avoiding being registered as
a dealer the second curbstone
name is one fourteen through
twenty three I'm a registered
dealer with DMV my storefront is
my home I take the cars out on
the corner lot and so on out on
the corner lot it's an unfair
trade practice and Mr chairman
with that I'll stand for
questions.
Right so.
I understand section one.
Yeah.
Are you referring to
Mr chairman and senator Ivey
Soto you talking about page one
or polyps.
Straining.
I was just trying to.
The other vehicle.
Less is your house or business.
Which part of our.
Our
placing with.
The latest on page two.
What are struggling to
understand.
Mr chairman and senator Ivey
Soto on page one that portion
that stricken that deals with
an individual selling and what
the fund page to what we're
trying to do is get to the
individual who's acting like it
D. or.
So
they have currently the
individuals to put cars on
corner lots are cited on page
one it's been my experience when
it goes to court that those
citations are dismissed because
it's a zoning issue not a
traffic issue.
But page to yield directly with
individuals who are curbstone
aimed at avoiding of the loss
like I stated.
Okay so one less person is one
of the few or.
A lot of security.
So those are the issues.
Correct Mr Mr chairman and
seven.
For the first Census
I used to.
Just over we don't have a state
where those.
Services jerseys and we will.
Mr chairman and Senator Ivey
Soto yes that is true however if
I put it on private property the
private property owner can have
it towed without notifying me.
Eight hundred.
Hey sandy Act funding based.
okay great thank you.
Actually.
Actually this is that a cell.
Thank you Mr the.
I have a question Mr chair that
on that line six on page two of
the in the person's name.
So what if.
My dad used to always put title
his cars and the name of his his
LLC.
I thought he could avoid getting
that red light tickets but by
doing that
So in the but under this
language it would have to be the
person's actual name not the
name of and entities that they
might phone or anything like
that.
Why why are we going to require
that.
Of Mr chairman and senator do
hick of we're just
Smear question is so technical I
can't pass answer it because of
the L. L. C. I would think that
they would be a member of the L.
L. C. and therefore to sell it
but I really don't know the
correct response.
Well and Mr chair I don't know
if your connection of never
ending health health remains
after I got off the last bill
but I would think that it would
make sense to add in there
More in the name of of an entity
owned by that individual.
or.
Or something along those lines.
Someone else has has better
language than.
That is open to it but I think
restricting it to have a having
to have title in an individual's
name.
Is.
Is there is a restriction that
isn't necessarily serving the
purpose of what you're trying to
accomplish that.
So.
Offer that as an amendment share
on page two nine six before the
period.
For.
In the name of.
Entity.
Thank
The state owned by the
individual who has I own my LLC.
My number on.
What one state owned or operated
by because.
Then you can have in place.
You have any suggestions.
A little bit of the issue that
the point that I made.
Through the.
I think it would be a state to
reverse.
That is the work.
It is just time.
Except.
Just a page to live six striking
in the person's.
The right.
Of the Mr chairman I would see
it from which.
However the committee wishes.
Senator Tallman.
offices.
All of
were the top.
Thank you Mr chair how quickly
the convention.
Change that.
Well I.
The.
You have.
I ask.
That
I our server thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative so that
I understand the the
introduction correctly that
would have to title it in your
name before you could resell it
with that include if traded
vehicles with somebody.
Mr chairman Mr chairman and
senator parole can you say that
again the during your
introduction you you had stated
that let's say I bought a
vehicle from you and you did
fill out the fire portion I we
we sold that that I could do
that any longer.
This.
Which of Mr chairman and senator
pirtle what this is a dressing
is not you buying it registering
it and selling it this is buying
at not putting your name on the
title is it was sold the were
the purchase agreement and then
taking it over and selling it to
a third party so it looks like
it went from the first party to
the third party not to the
second and then to the floor.
Here's chair representative so
that would include just.
People not dealers.
Mr Mister chairman is Senator
Pirtle that is correct it
doesn't include the which they
can do that.
Mr chair I I know that that
happens quite a bit and I've
never seen an issue with that I
think this is going to cause
what if you issues.
Light at longer wait times at
the envy because I know that
happens pretty regular with with
people buying vehicles fixing
them repairing them and then
reselling them as part of that
so that if we're gonna at the
cost of having to title it
register it to then resell it I
think that's an issue that that
I definitely have with that I
know I've done this uh traded of
one drug for another truck and
then sold it and didn't have to
go through the process and it
wasn't a limited issue but you
know I think this is going to
cause some issue for for people
that want to do it legally thank
you Mr chair.
The server.
The.
A little more about that.
Yes.
That sort of yes.
Of course.
Yes.
ceremonial that.
Yes.
About this yes.
Right.
Well thank you Mr chairman.
Good evening Mister chair.
And members of the committee
thank you for having us HB
eleven the office of child
advocate is the creation of an
independent on autonomous office
of child advocate.
Ordered a that as a.
Thank you.
The trough of the law
the budget you.
But status repository.
Mr chair
There are five areas that we
captured that are.
The substantive differences and
leave it to you all to decide
whether or significant or not I
know there were changes made
here but the I are there changes
to timing on the recommendations
of trial advocate and appointed
by the governor Senate bill
three seventy three require that
notice to the investigation also
go to the subject of the
complaint rather than just to
the complainant
number three allowing referral
of complaints to other agencies
such as law enforcement was
moved from the shells section in
section six to the maze section
since they were for that matter
to law enforcement number four
what is a change under Senate
bill three seventy three would
allow the Supreme Court in
addition to the governor to
remove the child advocate for
costs finally the committee
chair rather than a major the
committee may call an additional
meeting on
Of the recommendations committee
those are the bill.
There's some differences that
remain.
Okay we do have received six of.
I believe we can.
We have a version of the.
It was we.
All
the this is a.
I'm gonna be really quick Mr
chair and members of the
committee so the creation of an
independent autonomous Office of
the child advocates
is a national best practice as
demonstrated by the forty three
other states who have a similar
office.
So we stand for questions.
I was quick.
The.
Or use your.
Representative how to be able
to.
As a school for single mothers
were large.
This is.
Single minute for a minute or.
That.
Admission right.
Senator.
yes Mr chair Senator Moores my
understanding was just that well
there were the similarities of
the stage there weren't the
committee subs were being used
and if the will of this
committee was to
amended to conform to SB three
seventy three that that could be
a possibility but that the house
Sanchez expensive schedule time
on this and would like to see H.
B. eleven continue forward and
the issue for us just the will
of this committee to amended to
conform are passed through as
is.
Where is.
House.
Mr chair Senator Moores House
Judiciary.
Able to support their.
Over.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative help me all the
time line so did SB seventy
three do we amend that before
house bill eleven came over.
These.
The past Mr chair and
representative they passed on
the same day.
In the committee when we made
the amend.
Mr chair sorry that is my
understanding.
Okay Mister chair representative
so the amendments were out that
we had done the three seventy
three
and house bill eleven was still
on the house side.
And so usually it was customary
Mr chair representative whenever
you're running identical bills
and you're gonna go into the
other chamber it's it's.
It's customary to go ahead and
get ahead of the game amended on
your side to match the one that
we've made changes on our side
so we don't have this issue with
with amendments I do believe we
we improved Senate bill three
seventy three.
Quite a bit so I'm I struggle
with the fact that
The minutes were known we had
made the changes you still the
bill on your side in those and
then the should have been put on
that's all I have Mister chair.
Representative before you do
going to make a suggestion right
over.
So my recommendation we.
We'll go over.
We'll have your for this the the
this is the to the.
They were.
Very.
The.
Sure.
The last time.
State.
With the rise of.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Right.
This is.
Hi this.
It is.
Right.
Really in the bill one of the
other.
Service.
Following that as and when.
Senator.
That is the beauty of that four
or.
That that is an option.
Sure the sponsor usually this.
It.
I I just wanna make sure there
was nothing additional that you
all had in this bill that wasn't
in the seventy three and I mean
that doing that would get
stuck Mr chair Senator no man
there was not.
Senator so to speak the motion
for.
With you will get it.
The report.
Senator and with.
And I think there are just a
couple of things that were
additional because I see
evidence added in here that like
I'm looking at page twenty
three.
I I I I know that you guys did
add a couple of men and
amendments that would probably
would not be reflected I just
wonder if.
It's worth making sure that that
motion in corporations those
additional amendments that you
all made if you want to hear
about keeping.
And it as Mr chair and and
Senator we we're fine with with
not.
Services state of.
Chairman I move that we
everything from page one line
nineteen.
The end of the bill.
And we answer to are we.
Try that and we answer.
The text of the bill three
seventy.
Service the motion from like
nineteen on.
Why.
The.
Why not why not do it with the
title to Padmavat traceable the
amendment I was gonna go to the
titles.
I did want affect the gated Act
The New Mexico.
Was on.
In that I.
There was a proposal to
approach.
Issue one of the.
That we.
I was I senator Wirth.
Maybe one let alone.
The end of the.
Sort of.
Senate bill seventy three.
Clearly those.
That.
The for the.
The objections to adopting that.
If there is a maintenance issue
so the record reflect.
For.
Lagos of office to fill.
So.
Yeah
go.
Sure to.
Discussion.
There's two options.
The shows Senator Ivey Soto be
able to serve on this block of
course.
Recess was more problem with
regular.
For quality.
Thank you all.
