It says five of the reservation
any public.
and we actually.
But again the rules.
That should be able to go
through that.
The ability to live with the
with the schedules.
But our.
For the New Mexico businesses
and also have.
Does.
The.
Thirteen
year.
offices.
About.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee in two thousand
twenty we created the fostering
connections that could provide
supports for aging out of foster
youth at the age of eighteen
through the age of twenty one
provide supports like housing
transportation medical care help
with that you use judicial
system transportation food
etcetera at this program's been
wildly successful we've had
about two hundred and fifty
youth sign up to the program
since its inception the Senate
bill three to eight we're and
what what I'm here for to it
with you today it expands the
eligibility because we
inadvertently left out kids it
might be in a foster program in
another state but they're still
under the state's custody so
there's about ten or fifteen of
those you said when this program
has been implemented in other
states Mr chair and members of
the committee you senior seventy
percent reduction in those
faster you seeing their children
go into foster youth down the
road to this gonna help the
state in the long haul and so
essentially that's what the
legislation does we had to make
some amendments in in the first
committee because we
inadvertently created some
redundant language and so we
took care that any other
committee now we're here with
you is anyone here in opposition
to Senate bill three twenty
eight is amended in general
opposition Senator opposition no
of anyone here in support I see
no no support opposition
committee members three twenty
eight.
Senator has a motion for to pass
every sort of recognizing Sir
none right any other committee
questions or comments.
Is there any objection to the do
passed motion saying none show
Senator Pirtle survived is to
hate Neil Stewart and Ivy Soto
in the affirmative center
presidio the past thank you
members of the committee.
Sir my Estes.
Four sixty four.
The drills last summer that was
a minute and a half.
Thank you Mr chairman members
this is Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill four sixty four it deals
with the New Mexico outdoor
recreation division statute
within the economic development
department and it that puts in
the magic word I growth tourism
in statute of agritourism as you
know as a multi billion dollar
industry here in the United
States generated more than nine
million jobs it is a growing
opportunity for agricultural
Also producers here in New
Mexico.
With that will stand for
questions thank you is anyone
here in opposition to Senate
bill four sixty four as a
committee substitute we have a
committee substitute the could
give me social conservation
commission thank you very much
all right is anyone here in
opposition to Senate bill four
sixty four as a committee so
seeing no one hears everyone
hear in support.
All right of thirty seconds
please miss weeks.
Which
is what thank you.
That part of my I feel very.
Thank you and you will also
notice someone else members the
committee questions Senator has
a do pass motion any questions
center part of the question Mr
chair Senator so the portion of
the original bill that dealt
with the liability that we
should.
Several hundred percent
stripped.
In terms of the the thought
process that I think this issue
that.
All right answers a guy's face
for a while.
Trying to figure out how the.
To the insurance and whether you
are active at after the
insurance to separate property
out of the different LLCs of
quite.
The issue for a lot of our small
farmers of course have a.
Your amazing that so I was just
years and years or some of the
action of the conservation
committee or.
As of the.
Properties are.
Thank you Mr Senator Pirtle is
just kind of my estimation given
the late the late number four
sixty four in the the odds of
getting past we want to move
this initiative forward
committed to reaching out to the
but there's with regards to that
issue there are exceptions as
you know Mr chairman to skiing
or spec writing other things and
maybe there's some language
folks can agree on in the
interim.
so that folks can have a.
So folks could go this this
economy.
There's also.
That issue that that with.
Something that nobody.
The faces.
Our.
You other committee members
questions over the past motion
of the committee Representative.
Let me ask you one last this is
our.
Mr chair Senator this of the I
salute.
The committee question there's a
market for milking cows every so
anything more.
Still we're still important.
Well in the past motion during
the committee objection.
Reserve those under Pirtle
survived is to a store in Ivey
Soto and worked in the
affirmative yeah would you pass
Mr Burke.
PO.
The two ninety nine.
Right.
Mr chairman Senate tax business
or translations substitute for
Senate bill two ninety nine.
And what this bill does it as an
alternative provision for the
advertisement of a lean.
sales for self storage we do
have a amendments to this bill
Mr chair.
Move the amendment prescription
this is going to seven one eight
point one.
That's correct Mr chair and what
and what this ammendment does Mr
Chairman is our amendment
deletes all references to late
fees and value limitation and
then what it does is it provides
provision that allows the
occupant to select the option of
how the property is to be
advertised in the minimally and
so and once again the option
that we're giving them as to
advertise this on a alternative
like a an online website that
sells.
Storage units to the audience is
there one anyone here in
opposition to Senate bill two
ninety nine on the amendment on
the on the amendment.
In in in the bill through I.
Welcome back to that amendment
loans or any other opposition
amendment are those will just
carry on the opposition
amendment just a moment please.
Always yeah all right very good.
Is there any objection to
adoption the amendment.
Seeing none show the amendment
adopted by centers Ivey Soto to
serve on his Baca and fertile
all right on the bill to ninety
nine as amended Senator pro.
The bill as amended.
Thank you Mr chair
that's all we have at this point
are you explain the amendment
anything more no Mr chairman
solver doing is just giving the
option for the advertisement of
the sale of the unit are very
good in support of the bill
anyone here in the audience here
in support nine nine Mr and
you're coming up don't worry I
give you a two minute Sir that's
about it for opposition thank
you Mr chairman of this
committee Larry harangued
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico press association
Albuquerque publishing company
what this bill is about is what
happens to somebody's property
once there's the the default on
their search self storage unit
although the amendment may make
it better is an option to the
occupant you can still have
somebody who may be sick or is
passed away that you may have a
family member that needs to see
a public notice about the sale
the property so we've we oppose
the legislation because whenever
we taking someone's property you
should be able to go to one
place to find that there's going
to be a sale and that's in in
the newspaper for publication of
notice we propose legislation
thank you Mr chairman chairman
right committee members
questions the bill I think
really relates to newspaper
publication were selected out of
publication center for thank you
Mr chair Senator so if
somebody's publicized in
addition is not available
online.
Mr chair Senator correct in some
cases yes.
Over the years yeah the.
Help save.
In order to.
Mr chair Senator I don't know
the particulars in the notice I
know sometimes there are if
there is a pay wall for online
newspapers but I don't know if
this falls into that.
Let me ask is there anybody in
the audience.
Yeah.
Station.
Less association.
Mister chairman Senator Pirtle
the press association on their
website has all of the legal
notices so even if you don't
subscribe to newspaper you can
go to the press association
website to find illegals.
Figure.
Secretary of state it'll.
Mr chair Senator I I do not know
the answer to that question.
I I guess my issue here is is
there available online earlier
this is.
Sign.
The special more rural areas
fires.
A lot of these is one of the
few.
The latter in.
But it miss out the newspaper.
Necessarily.
Access.
What about this.
The.
We
have.
Lawsuits.
Is there for any other
discussion.
The members.
Those are the committee.
We talked to them yes you should
have that is seven one eight
point.
It is been adopted the committee
question.
The committee.
That.
With with the past motion.
Further discussion
is there any objection to.
Bill with the amendment etcetera
etcetera little.
Those.
The only.
Bills the minutes but the
doctor.
So we'll do a roll call very
quickly.
Senator Baca.
Senator Ivey Soto.
R. Pirtle hello Senator Stewart.
Your work yeah.
Senator purpose yes.
The past motion fails pleasure
community health.
Direction of this time.
The pope no action more this
time right thank you Mr
chairman.
During those not here I know he
had a conflict with me perfect
to schedule again I am
announcing again we're gonna
have some challenges keeping a
quorum very late tonight so
we're gonna try to make some
progress with the committee's
permission less is objection I'm
gonna present sent for twenty
six from the chairs at U. two
general come on up
Representative C..
We're still we're still working
on my five minute scheduling
plan so.
The reason.
Okay.
Thank you for the volunteering
of Attorney General.
For twenty six so we come down.
Sure.
I.
There are certain times.
I did tell you that the rule.
To give you the detail rules
which is the way to listed down
there vice chair don't start
getting big.
Right thank you for all very
quickly okay.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senate bill for twenty
six would create the first ever
civil rights division inside the
New Mexico attorney general's
office it's is about seventy
years now the department
justices created a civil rights
division about fifty years ago
the state California's we're
trying to catch up with some of
the other states in the nation
in this office this division
would have primary
responsibility for ensuring that
no New Mexicans discriminated
against under traditional civil
rights laws but also protecting
born populations and with that I
would stand for questions thank
you.
Sign up for our opposition.
Representative.
costs for this and I'll say
that.
One of the seventy one year old
is that statute last year.
The wrong or.
I.
Position.
C..
In order.
this general.
Recognize the.
Number hello this is working
this way so a service so you
know I agree under present with
you and we this is a big debate
in the Attorney General senator
Joe of time so you just a little
edification but you're right we
were this committee was very
cautious about the idea of
starting to authorized divisions
of the attorney general's office
by stature because let's be
honest there's no need it's not
required and the Attorney
General has full authority to do
this we did so last time because
there was a great deal of
importance attached to that
specific issue the time the
Attorney General approach me on
this bill really well with a
more precise perspective which
was the goal here was to look at
children so rights issues and
and I actually encouraging this
attorney Joe the broadband so I
take responsibility for that so
ready so for for the Civil
Rights portion of this but but
he had a narrow focus as we did
last time around I agree we
shouldn't get in the habit of
doing this and the I think it's
good that the attorney general's
here and hearing us say that but
if you want a new division you
want to do something new and
broader go for it we encourage
and support you do and so you
don't need our help thank you.
Thank you madam chair I just
have one question out of your
creating this new division with
the attorney general's office
of senators to reach of.
It doesn't ask for appropriation
What did then take resources
from your other.
Areas of concern I guess.
Mr chair Senator Baca we
actually submitted an expansive
budget request in it to increase
our affirmative litigation
capacity in a number of areas
that includes the civil rights
division so it's already baked
in to the budget proposal that
we submitted on both the house
and the Senate side I thank you
madam chair and since you
mentioned that Attorney General
what how much do you anticipate
this portion costing this
division cost.
Mister chairman Senator Baca we
we anticipate
being able to hire somewhere in
the neighborhood of five to ten
additional lawyers dedicated to
this on a full time basis in
terms of the hard costs you know
in the first year it will
probably be in the neighborhood
of four hundred thousand dollars
thereabouts because it's going
to take us a while to find
experienced litigators who have
the right kind of experience in
civil rights but over time I
think it will be north of a
million dollars I thank you
madam chair and and Attorney
General of don't you have this
authority all right now though
catchy do this.
Anyway Mr chair Senator Baca one
of the reasons that we four and
I felt it was necessary to
include this and I and I
understand completely where
Center Ivey Soto and others are
coming from is one of the tools
that we have available to us in
other statutes is the civil
investigative demand authority
which allows us to do pre
litigation investigations and
collect information that we that
when we use that it's usually
specifically authorized by the
legislature and so I appreciate
the fact that we have broad
authority to look into civil
rights matters but this bill
includes specific tools that
wouldn't otherwise be authorized
under statute the other examples
are in the anti trust context
and also in the unfair trade
practices act thank you madam
chair water these tools like the
subpoena Authority what are the
Mr chair Senator Baca it's a key
into a subpoena and it's akin to
it's it's similar to the
discovery process but what this
enables us to do is gather
information before an action is
formally undertaken and so what
we do is we would submit
requests for information
documentary information from a
potential target of
investigation clearly identify
the subject matter of the end of
the investigation and then go
through that process of
gathering all that information
if there's some complaint that
the request is to broader too
burdensome then they can
certainly we can take that to
the district court they can
refine the request and make sure
that compliance is is
appropriate.
Madam chair it's all I have.
Thank.
Their story.
Shares of.
Yes I ladies work and.
I'm I'm open to suggestions of
amendment Senator to be a better
way to work.
The mobile to suggestions for
the committee Mr chair on that
we're over six we are.
Yep
madam chair will move on to the
next bill will come back.
A little long standing.
What's the role to.
Representative yeah and so on
transaction dollars in that.
Yeah.
Law.
For public body this issues and.
Session.
Act act with the level of and
then.
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto what
we were attempting to do and I I
apologize I didn't I didn't get
the the notice about not using
not withstanding what we were
attempting to do is to enable
the division to access critical
information that would assist in
an ongoing investigation without
being hampered by a
confidentiality provisions that
would prevent the disclosure of
that information to members of
the general public and so if you
look at the rest of that
framework it walks through how
that information could be used
and how it can be protected.
At the end of that chair and.
Mr chairman and general.
Sevilla is a restrictive labor
on.
and so.
I'm not sure.
Confidentiality provisions and.
The.
That would be.
they should have to overcome in
order to.
met madam chair of center Ivey
Soto
these for for example and I know
there's been some debate about
this about what information is
subject to disclosure under the
children's code would be one
example of the type of
investigation that we may feel
necessary to initiate but we
would have to have that
information
in a way that's held
confidential.
Yeah.
Sure Mr chair I I I think that
this bill.
Not is taking up more time than.
Spent on this rocket docket it
is more than anticipated madam
chair what looks good to the CEO
for Friday reschedule back.
Thank you sorry.
Mr.
Sir do it for Senate joint
resolution thirteen it's for
Senator o'neill hi Mr chair just
before we start that bills and
I'm test center for Senator
Wirth had of issue one emergency
bill Senate the center Pirtle
said bill Senate bill five
fifteen and we would do not pass
on Senate bill five fifteen and
just move Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute find
fifteen for discussion purposes
only and posted some.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair this is a
land transfer of it I think most
of the members of this committee
Ortiz on rules this is in the
north valley this
GST has as property they're not
doing anything with it
Bernalillo county wants to buy
it they're going to use it for a
challenge the field and parking
on at a at a T. ball.
Not built in the north valley
they have that acting secretary
so that here with me.
We're going real fast so I asked
her not to say anything unless
you absolutely need to is there
anyone in the audience against
the wall.
Most of reduce has written a
minute please good I'll stand
for questions right thank you
very much anyone in the audience
in support needs to be heard.
This week's very quickly thirty
seconds who are you and why and
where.
The committee this is a long
time hello.
This challenging.
Issues also.
Thank you very much anyone in
opposition at all.
We'll see what budget committee
Senator you have to do passed
motion.
Referral with discussion.
They're the center of the.
The.
John mills are the.
Little league for those that
would be more.
This is a small
Supporters of the workers here.
This is.
There are.
I I think secretary Silva has an
answer to that Mr chair Senator
Pirtle after the last committee
we did confirm that there was
public notice given we also
confirmed the property lines
which is not affecting the
person and the individual in
that house.
Senator.
Would do best motion if someone
that's what Senator to the past
motion.
I see none it would be best
served.
But harder when it would lead
counsel having on Senator Shendo
Senate bill forty two.
What we're doing quickly bills
that are lasting with the five
minutes for explanation audience
participation and committee
debated discussion can you
present your bill in about two
or three minutes okay thank you
chairman of members of the
committee there's one expert
witness this bill of this.
If you need a substitute yes
they'll be a motion first of all
Senator Stewart with a motion
come around.
Mr Chairman do not pass the
Senate bill forty two and for
purposes of discussion to do
fast from Senate Judiciary
Committee the call for you to
thank you Mr Senator Shendo in
two or three minutes Sir all
right thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
here with the my experts
witnesses have to be also my
with younger brother madam those
director of education for the
poor low payments this bill as a
result of meeting to go over the
last year with the Legislative
Education sticks to the study
committee looking at our
heritage languages in the state
of New Mexico there's eight of
them and this bill is basically
allowing to try to develop a
compact with the state to create
language immersion schools to
each of the respective tribal
communities if.
The tribal council decides to
establish one and what is doing
is that it exams of the schools
from of curriculum and
evaluation from PED but still
has other of items that fall
under PED but it but and then
also the skill of the salary
scale for the teachers will be
the same as what we have of
early in law and so.
That basically is the initial FY
are talked about all the there
was also a federal grand schools
and and schools are run by PED
but this bill has nothing to do
with it is strictly
allows tribes to create these by
tribal council resolutions it's
not converting any B. I. E.
schools into this so that's kind
of where.
Representative Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
So now will.
Sample questions Senator Shendo
you know what I'm looking at
your bill and I should have been
more careful but let me roll
this over for just a few minutes
of so we can take a couple of
bills more quickly this could
take some time to to table the
tax all right I want to Russian
stick with us.
Okay so what does that mean.
Have a seat over here real
quick.
talk talk to fasten apologize
thank.
Interbrand center Brandt.
To see if you can.
The red is the bill we've heard
before my correct.
In one very close variations of
this bill ninety percent of this
all right let's let's remind us
of we're in a five minute stage
of the committee process we've
got a hard stop times will lose
a quorum here in about thirty
minutes so if you can about
three or four minutes please
give us an explanation and then
if you would please for me focus
on the differences between this
and and the bill we passed
previously of this committee
thank you Mr chairman the first
different differences in the
past this is a misdemeanor we we
have moved up to a felony and
then in response to what
happened a couple weeks ago and
talking Senator Stewart we want
to make sure that this this bill
actually covered what happened
couple weeks ago in our schools
and so we've added swapping as
well as one of the first day
states to deal with the issues
wanting which is what they call
what happened with the do a
false report of an actual
shooting to get all the response
and so we've put that in as a
definition definition in the
bill to cover that issue.
Swatting consist of knowingly
making a false or misleading
report from an ongoing emergency
or threat of violence to a
public safety agency or agency
person or to a public safety
answering point with the intent
to cause an immediate response
from law enforcement and other
first responders thank you.
Anything else that's really all
the bill does it just make sure
that those are considered
felonies the with our ally is
there anyone here in opposition.
To the substance for Senate bill
five thirteen one official C.
line here support.
Hi being no support no
opposition member of yes Sir Mr
charges four point out that I
have a child psychiatrist.
Right
With this money so was available
to answer questions appreciate
having that resource thank you
Sir alright committee members
five thirteen yes and US senator
Bach and then Senator.
Thank you senator I wanted to
thank you really for adding the
additional definition of
swatting in addressing that
swatting is you know it's
actually a growing phenomenon
the country and there's been
even several cases now of of
this happening where individual
calls emergency threat not not
only to a school or anything
like that but to a private
person's house swat team shows
up and I just want to go through
this for the benefit of the
public swat team shows up in
here in an elevated
on elevated condition at that
point firefighting Armstrong
there's been accidents that have
happened were innocent citizens
and died in the swatting
incidents and so more and more
state legislators I've seen
assist have been addressing that
type of activity so I just
wanted to appreciate that to put
that in there that's all I got.
You Mr Stewart.
Yes
I knew you're going there.
Well I'm not sure that I did but
but well but it is a good
question what was that
Representative mean center right
what is the purpose of of page
two subsection F. new language.
Of the I think so and I left
real quick and I have your
somewhere the that is
this is the telephone Act in
the.
The federal.
Mr chairman this is dealing with
the
For violation of penalties of
with the nine one one for making
false nine one one calls.
Madam chair that fits a petty
agency.
This is why the.
This is one of those cases were
actually needed to be there
so that it's not just the simple
I called in you know that
You told operator their
refrigerator was running.
The.
I.
Yes Representative.
I do see the definition.
Much.
In
state or the show up for
version.
I.
This other section.
But.
There are certain this is a
public safety agency.
As the five and twenty nine
eighty two.
Four nine eight two.
Says.
Issues of mutual aid pact
publications include the federal
government.
A partner races are of the
tribal council it is.
The state
or the value of.
Rather just by references don't
see.
With this at all yeah.
Otherwise I've got.
I did everything but the not the
status of this.
And I have years for cover that
this is a let's see works for me
she's a defense attorney and try
to write this to where she would
be able to do that of course
recovering Mr chair Senator Ivey
Soto
the reason I I put this in here
the way I did that Senators
requests because is because I'm
sorry.
The reason I put this in it
Senator friends B. hast is
because we wanted to define the
public safety agencies in the
consistent with a as it has been
used in the statutes but
indicate here that that also
there's a because it follows the
hat that says that provides
firefighting law enforcement
ambulance medical or other
emergency services so I took the
basic
definition of public safety
agency for purposes of the bill
but qualified it further by
saying that it would only be
those that provided those
services right although this
gentleman and.
Amendment Senator Ivey Soto.
Given them with you in a moment.
Well part of that is what's
defined over various public
agency no public safety agency
isn't easy enrollment
striking subparagraph of except
beginning with the word
whoever's.
Okay public safety agency means.
The.
For.
For conference of the
I would strike up page three
line twenty one.
Right from the beginning through
nineteen seventy eight.
Just sort of there of body.
Okay.
So consider that a program of
read it again please.
K. three line twenty one.
Strike from safety to nineteen
seventy eight.
And certain their off line.
That area took to the same time
listed all together yeah and
public safety.
At certain points.
That's one of our local
jurisdiction for the patients
facility one
you're you're looking at the
definition page three line
twenty four fifty
I would strike as.
strike everything on page four.
That receives nine one one
service limitation.
Right so you're going to do
given we're doing tonight we're
going to new committee set for
five thirteen yeah we'll take
what we're gonna we're not gonna
try and.
Rewrite the bill center we sort
of want to identify the issues
your suggestions and we'll move
on and we'll come back with a
new self on Friday after also
those are the
two issues of this.
So we got a new definition of
swatting which implicates the
need for the definition of of
both the public safety answering
point public safety agency I
know you're trying to do the
best you can language on the fly
but I don't think we want to do
that so center I was so what
else have you got nobody
Senator.
That's that's that's all of us.
No okay yeah that's a paragraph
from page to.
It's gonna take some work to.
Try to give the sponsor some
guidance on what that's going to
take.
To me it's.
Just striking the not
withstanding through whoever but
hopefully
a lot of the other staff.
This.
Right Sir do Mr chair I think on
that number two on page three we
don't want to change that one
looking at that reference.
Related I public safety
answering point eight twenty
four hour local communications
facility that received nine one
one service agents directly
dispatches emergency response
services or that relates
communications the program
public or private safety agency
this is like just applying.
It doesn't at all although I'll
tell you Senator I I think the
what what I would suggest to
sponsors that he just steps to
that definition just read for
this definition we generally
don't realize the definition by
reference another statute that's
what the poor practice for
reasons with lawyers always.
If you change that statue better
member changes statute.
Do so so I think you're you
would be better move that
way which would explain the.
So yeah I would just adopt that
which from the session that you.
That is the definition or if
the.
Thank you should we do the same
thing with the not withstanding.
There's a lot of that is that
that really makes a long but.
I don't think there was any
worse off presenter because when
you say not withstanding the
provisions of this section I've
been you don't know what parts
of that section that you're
looking at that are your
sensually usurping by doing this
so I just think that we need to
spend some time looking at that
section with a little bit more
to the section it's that other
and deals with the basically the
crank calls to nine one one
which is a petty misdemeanor we
don't want that to be wrapped up
into this and made into a fourth
degree felony so that's why that
not withstanding is there we
need to move that language in
early because of standing yeah I
think the better practice as a
lawyer would be to find somebody
in a way that does not capture
that other contractor behavior
rather than trying to say not
withstanding another sectional
long and having somebody guess
what part of that section you're
you're essentially usurping by
this one too so I think we
deserve more elegant there too.
Any other issues.
We're gonna roll over we're
gonna come up with new
committees but we'll get
something better with I we have
the hearings so thank you so.
We'll see.
Representative Chandler here.
You.
I just want to.
So one of the it Katie so it
pretty quickly okay.
Mr chair
this bill is just adding
appropriate standard for
magistrate judges
they would be thirty years of
age or older have at least eight
years of experience as a
magistrate court judge court
clerk for the equivalent or has
a four year degree from an
accredited institution or two
year degree in four years work
experience
and this is just to
professionalizing are
magistrates courts.
And if the Chief Justice has
anything that you'll do building
are before you started to think
that we do we heard this private
during the interim presents a
presentation I came over to the
committee endorses.
In terms of service right Chief
Justice Mr chair members all
start out with there is the word
not withstanding does not appear
in this.
You know I know we're in a hurry
but I really I use on a Susan I
do appreciate you being here I
wish that more the justice will
come and watch the committee
process from doctor because I
know that ultimately we leave
here leaving these laws for you
to interpret understand and
apply and I think I was pretty
happy with the quote that I got
in the paper today were some of
my my impression is of a lawsuit
has run here have the.
The markings of a hallmark card
and and and I and and you know
that becomes hard for the
purpose of hard for you to do
your job so I think it's good
that you see this and I think
now when you interpret a law
that has an awful expanding
provision you'll understand why
some of us have some trouble
with some thoughts about that
and help to to maybe interpret
what was the legislature
thinking when they passes that's
a lot of what you do is is
trying to deliver what we did
here so thank you chief for
being here I want to add that
point so what year are you happy
with your quote about sentiment
health.
I'm afraid I'm afraid I'm afraid
have implications of my capital
outlay in my junior funding I
think that Mr chair thank you
bill tomorrow and Senate finance
else on the floor of the Senate
after you left yeah I think I
have ordered that hearing we
have some problems with that but
but that's a different issue for
the chief tonight chief can you
summarize of Force in just the
three important sure
magistrate judges the role of
them over the course of time has
become more complicated and more
new ones magistrate court judges
make decisions regarding search
and seizure of persons and
property arrest incarceration of
persons eviction garnishment of
wages taking of property in
similar weighty tasks we believe
that by further
professionalizing the magistrate
yet not requiring a law degree
by any measure because we don't
have enough lawyers in the state
of New Mexico New Mexico to
cover that task this helps move
them in in the right direction
thirty years of age two years of
educ of an associate's degree or
higher eight years of experience
as a judge of for a court clerk
for similar qualifications all
of the current magistrate court
judges will be grandfathered in
under this statute so anybody
serving now is is fine and safe
this will be something that will
not take effect effectively for
four years because we're waiting
for the election cycle but this
allows people to plan should
they want to be a magistrate in
four years we believe that this
is the next logical step to meet
the task in the moment of the
role of the magistrate judge's
in New Mexico.
Thank you to there were here in
opposition to house bill one
thirteen.
The importance of Mr chair
members I forgot to note that
this also makes magistrates
courts a quarter of a record.
And she could just take a minute
of their or lease a couple of
members of the committee lawyers
so all I could explain why
that's important certainly Mr
chairman members all court all
of the New Mexico where in
higher courts all of the
proceedings are recorded either
by audio or by magical court
reporters the proceedings in
magistrate court are not
recorded and it causes a couple
of of problems one is that from
that professional standpoint
being recorded requires you to
comport yourself with the
Decorum required of of a court
room it also helps the
magistrate court judges when
they are accused or a complaint
is filed against them in
judicial standards that there's
actually a record for them to
rely on to defend themselves
often times judicial standards
really struggles with magistrate
court proceedings not being
reported becomes because it
becomes a he said she said
pointing match and there's no
record of back up the judge's
position.
Thank you ladies chief right Sir
one here in opposition house
bill one thirteen anyone at all
we're here to support.
Members the committee center
every sort of then Senator.
Actually where is it.
Thank you for that but.
I have that Mr chair have a look
at it in a couple days before.
Section one last one before
section to the magistrate court
this is exactly thank you.
second question madam chair.
If someone.
The MSAs less.
Thirty years older.
Lower.
And I have to generate.
How could they have eight years
experience as a naturalist
that's in the disjunct
commitment Mr chairman
Senator that's in the
destructive it's in for.
I have eight years experience as
a because currently that
requirement isn't on the books
correct currently all the
current judges Representative
all but if somebody comes back.
Has been a magistrate court
judge and comes back having had
eight years of experience they
would qualify for the position
and we do have magistrate court
judges who returned to the
position
time and time again having taken
a break from the job that would
encapsulate those individuals
thanks.
Q. service for that.
Yes all of which will come after
Center pearls when I get to you
Mr chair thank you senator
Thank you fans will.
Shares and right on the re I
have.
There is here
K. understanding of the law but
you're saying that order of
magistrate court which is
supposed to be working.
Supposed to be less formal most
of the more frightening public
that somehow I wouldn't be able
to
the judge but like the
so I I think it's it's funny how
we want to put it.
Qualifications of the best
qualification is the.
Elector wanted higher qualified
person is that's that's up to
them
do that to vote that way I I
just feel I think it was
senator.
As usual we say that.
The rules committee so I I do
have quite a bit of issue with I
mean essentially what you could
end up with somebody with a four
year degree in golf course
management and working at
McDonald's for her many years
turned thirty income the
magistrate judge but yet
somebody else and maybe have
some more experience operating a
business or doing other things
which can come up provide judges
would be able to so I I don't
know that just by putting in the
requirement of of a degree that
somehow you end up with higher
qualified more intelligent you
honestly just is a little bit of
the state offense to it up I
don't think.
That necessarily a college
degree qualifies you.
To.
Things that some that don't have
one and and this is elected
positions not appointees issue.
Yeah.
Public wanted that they they can
do that through elections so I
think this is a slippery slope
we're going down I think next
will see both cations for
sheriff and so many other things
that I mean it's an elected
position as an administrative
position not necessarily
what is the legislature's trying
to dictate the issue with the
PRC putting in some of those
that I think we might have
excludes people that would have
been fine PRC commissioners
because of the way it's written
we we tie the hands and say well
you know we know who it was that
was pulled off a fantastic
commission and
but because of these
Qualifications that we put in
there he was not allowed to be
on there so I I I just wonder
Mr chair Senator get to a
question why just a four year
degree and one out of more
specific person in New Jersey to
the position that the decision
to.
The gesture to.
Why not a referred it to.
Mr chair members we this is I
will find out bill that has the
support of the magistrate court
judges it was.
a year long conversation about
what they think the
qualification should be not what
I think the qualifications
should be and this is what they
they landed on including the
original language of a four year
degree
so this this is through
amendment to and and lots of
work with the magistrate.
Sell to do this work and
understand.
The challenges that they face
they have selected this as their
next professional step for the
job
the the list of duties that I
discussed at the very beginning
of my time here that's an email
actually that was sent to me
drafted by the chair of the
Supreme Court to budget
committee who is a magistrate
court judge.
Mr chair Senator so essentially
the people who are in office now
one us to limit who can run
against them.
Yes or no I didn't know if that
was a question Mr chair with
this bill limit the sitting
magistrate judges limit who
could run against them.
Possibly we don't know who
future candidates are for
magistrate court judge
positions.
Mr chair and senator absolutely
with limited running instead I
think this is very similar to
what the shares came and they
wanted the to remove the
Term limits so I I think it's
just kind of interesting when we
see these things that you know.
They want to move to a more
professional.
Whatever the term that was used
with I just there there's a lot
of caution I think that we
should take with this issue
I I wonder what it says
experience within the court but
sometimes you need people with
outside experience B. C. that
corporations all the time where
what we did it here in New
Mexico we brought somebody from
Pepsi Cola to run a department
that did a fantastic job just
because of the administrative
skills that that she had the her
name was six three Jacobson
wanting to.
And and so I I think if we just
it all while she's not qualified
because she worked at Pepsi we
woulda lost out on somebody that
that did some fantastic work
within the state so just because
somebody has eight years of
experience working within the
court is that going to inhibit
their ability to statewide we do
things a certain way because
I've gone to magistrate court
and Mr Mr chair and senator gone
white why are we still
hauling in inmates all the way
from the jail into the court was
because that's how we've done
it.
Forever and so I think sometimes
it's good to have an outside
perspective maybe a business
person that could come in
operate quicker faster more
efficient run a better court it
is the people's court and I
understand it's a quarter record
but honestly through training
people can be trained show how
to to do these jobs
in the past we've had private
people do it and I do have a
Mr chair Senator it does it is
not a population based change to
the qualifications so Mr chair
Senator what's the population of
Harding County.
There is a small Mr chair the Mr
chair Senator how many people
would qualify it be even able to
run for this position within
Harding County.
Mr chair I couldn't tell you who
will be eligible in four years
to run for this position Mr
chair Senator what if nobody
signs up because there's not
anybody that wants the position
that can meet the qualifications
what would we do them.
Mr chair the lack of qualified
applicants for all judicial
levels it is a concern for the
entire state that needs to be
addressed over the course of
time.
Mr chair Senator what would
happen if there was not a
qualified person put in for
magistrate there was not a
candidate what would happen
Mr chair in the Supreme Court
would have the opportunity
during the interim to appoint a
pro tem judge to serve in that
capacity.
So Mr chair Senator a fine
addition we just have the the
voting rights act today and we
would basically be usurping.
The voting rights of this county
of six hundred and ninety five
people.
I think this is a very slippery
slope that we must we must be
careful because if that did
happen we're essentially taking
the people's power to elect to
they want as a magistrate judge
and putting it into the hands of
people who were appointed by the
governor that our elected
statewide so I I think that's
that's an issue that is
concerning to me
Elected statewide a lot of times
are pointed because they step
down the road and then they win
reelection has not happens
regularly Mister chair Mister
chair.
but I I think it's it's just a
concern that I have I I don't
know that was well thought out
of that I think I would have a
difference of opinion there
but that's that's just mine and
I'm just one person from Travis
county so but I think I've taken
enough of the committee's time I
will I will vote no I I I think
this is of maybe that that way
forward with with qualifications
I any elected official thank you
Representative every sort of.
actually this three sections.
So I was.
Rest of the.
There's.
I saw the trip statewide during.
Collections other than
why.
so this gentleman.
Yeah.
This.
Yes what is is that how would
that work state legislation.
Basically a cop.
Arrest somebody for taking
somebody.
In them.
Cite them anywhere in the state
wants to do that.
Mr chair Senator this is to
reflect what is already
happening in in the state of New
Mexico all movie motor vehicle
violations have moved on the
line item because we don't have
the ability within districts to
share case loads between
magistrate judges all you Santa
Fe as a group or the first is a
great example the Santa Fe
magistrate court judges are are
swimming in cases and the
magistrate or court judges in
Los Alamos county has two
hundred cases and we don't have
a functional way without using
court order after court order to
move those dockets around and
share the work this is one of
those measures in the motor
vehicle violations the traffic
violations are all on line by
court order
what this gentleman.
Justice.
He has yes the magistrate
district is not physicians.
Related or.
Los Alamos New South.
And so my concern is.
That that you that I have.
Assessors sides someone into.
Different jurisdictions.
That is it for the officer.
Our.
and even though at the moment
they're all on.
I don't know that.
Mr chair Senator there
permanently online.
Okay.
nonetheless it should be.
Says you're going to find this.
This really needs to provide
statewide jurisdiction.
The collection.
Also.
Actually it was more than just.
Entities who.
Criminal action involving a
violation of law related to
motor vehicles and exams do you
why
do you why is it is a very local
matter.
I I just I guess just a question
of whether or not you're going
to a judicial district yes you.
This.
With that researchers are just
sort of.
There statewide jurisdiction for
the motor very closely so that
the court.
Doesn't have to manipulate the
borders but the fact is that the
I believe the authority of the
officer to write the citation on
a motor vehicle is in the motor
vehicle code to the location of
the offense not so that they
could write you a ticket to the
Deming court when it happens in
Los Alamos nonetheless if you
did do that.
The judge in Deming would here
by video at the convenience of
the.
You may be driving through Los
Alamos programs and.
Wherever curry county so that's
the reason why it makes sense to
have statewide jurisdiction for
violations of the motor vehicle
code and that is a fact has been
done for over a year now we
overwhelmingly get positive
responses Mr chair Senator Ivy
Soto from litigants from the
occasional lawyer who appears on
those matters as well
because they can appear from
where this gentleman and
noticed.
According this is so that are
you guys gonna be.
Morning cops where they should
be exciting and.
Balances out.
You Mr chair Senator the law
enforcement will continue to do
the job that way they always
have been this gives us the
ability to balance traffic
tickets in a way that that is is
more a better use of the skill
set that is out there that is
being under utilized with
magistrate court judges with
very small documents.
Okay and then the last question
is.
Because we've gone to civil.
Our application for the work for
little things is usually one.
Mr chair Senator Ivey Soto
I think because I think that's
the intention with regard to the
bill it's a civil matter.
Courts dust if forty to assign a
judge from out of district to to
that case.
Notwithstanding the fact that it
the.
The jurisdiction a statewide for
instance rural for your
magistrate was almost regularly
gets assigned to go to dockets
in other counties.
Senator in criminal right but
that's the judge going to that
County yes the firm as opposed
to the.
The that and going to that job.
Correct.
So that's it.
Or on video which is also
outside their jurisdiction.
I understand but the judge
experts at.
That's different that's
different provisions of the law
this.
Yes Mr Chairman is our acting
secretary so we're taking a step
in the right direction if you
want to Senator and then we can
come back next year think about
that I suppose but the Civil
against just a lot of the.
Where
From.
I would say I'm actually could
survive that day on the
legislation.
The other questions members to
pass.
To pass you have that thank you.
Others so students will by
Senator Pirtle that motion takes
precedence will do a roll call
vote on the table the motion.
The motion is to table Senator
Baca yes Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Pirtle yes.
There Stewart
there were.
Senator Duhigg now.
Senator snow.
Back to the main motion which
was a motion for it to pass
through further discussion on
that I would just like to add to
the discussion and dialogue I
appreciate Senator some of your
comments but you said one thing
that I thought I would like to
respond to you said that the
judges who here is a suggestion
the measure judges can limit
who's gonna run again so I can
understand that's an argument
that could be made the
perspective I wouldn't have us
all about the fact that we can
limit who can run for my
district not the other judges
they could perhaps have weighed
in and participate in the
process but ultimately we're
gonna have that decision making
ourselves along with the
governor's having governor
having a role as well too so I I
don't I don't see this is judges
deciding who's going to run
against them I I see us doing so
Sir Baca maybe on that point all
the all the very brief on the
session itself of course our the
one thing that bothers me about
this bill as it has all these
educational requirements and the
answer partners from the court
of you know I value my Terry
service college and learned a
lot there and there's no mention
of that there should credit
given for that and so that that
that troubles me to some degree
to I I think that might
institutional education
has nothing on my military.
We will.
I'll just and thank you thank
you revenue passed motion is
there any objections the U. pass
motion.
Those sort of problems are Baca.
Voting against the past ocean
show centers do is Ivey Soto
Stewart serve on this Wirth yeah
we do passed motion so.
all do this from the chair we're
gonna do Senate for twenty seven
next I think that'll be able
sure will come back to you they
were gonna get to Senator Shendo
that's my expect still
I asked the general to stick
around to be we use that are
either so we will get back to
hear the bill tonight but I'm of
you all can work through
something before we so we can
make some quick progress and I'm
expecting to still here for
twenty eight so we're gonna get
to Senate bill seventeen they
were to lose apartment seven
about seven fifteen seven twenty
so I'm gonna try to do what we
can the I'm I'm going to start
with the four twenty seven
because I think it's a very
simple straightforward bill and
so I'll have Center doing chair
please and all had down there.
That I would but I would.
They say we're off for five
minutes I've been in.
Sure.
We have lots of.
Let's see we've got your back to
me thank you.
That let's see.
Okay we'll be back okay we're
gonna get center I was about to
have a quorum here shortly.
How do we get started here I
know services very familiar with
this bill.
I had.
The manager sent over twenty
seven would impose a fourteen
day waiting period on the
purchase of firearms in New
Mexico it's a very
straightforward build of the
period of time is clearly
specified in the bill fourteen
days was selected in in my case
because the state of Hawaii has
a fourteen day wait period I
looked at the other several
states that have week periods
and I wanted to know equal the
longest period of weight I think
this is a good opportunity this
hearing to build a few things
and that's how the background
check process works the wait
period it has been shown to do a
number of things statistically
which is people in crisis people
who are experiencing mental
health crisis of domestic
violence so what I think will
benefit from a little bit of a
wait periods between wanting to
purchase a fireman on I think we
I think we can demonstrate cases
where that would have
Representative save lives so I
think that that's the first
reason to have a wait period and
alternately I think the wicker
it's going to become important
because we need to be doing a
much better job of screening
individuals when it comes to
firearm purchases.
And the the reserves and the
work of our staff the main issue
commander commander under real
quick so of he'll he'll help
straighten me out to get some of
this right but I I want to use
the hearing for.
Our purpose which is to have a
the committee understand it in
the public of New Mexico to
understand really how the
background check really works
some of the troubling
information that I that I
believe I have accurately I've
learned is that when you do a
background check when you want
to purchase a gun and I got
owner and I've done it before it
usually takes me about an hour
to go and do the paperwork fill
it out wait for the result of
the background check fortunately
I usually check out pretty
clearly and I'm usually in and
out of there in our
the alternative is for them to
deny the purchase on the
background check and the third
one the alternative is what I'm
calling the call in the office
the the yellow light you've got
the green light red light yellow
light yellow light is
to put a pause on the
application and to give
additional time to be looking
into the the background check
process and I think that they're
allowed to buy up to what eighty
eight days ninety days.
Ninety ninety days for the check
up but but the.
Federal law also seemingly is
that if you don't get back to
them within three days the
dealer is permitted to complete
the transaction so this makes
sense so you you you deserve it
of four gun purchase and if you
get the yellow light the caution
of yours you're not allowed to
complete the purchase that day
in the federal government is
love the F. B. I.'s a lot of the
digital time with a three
business day with with three
there are there a lot of the
dealers logically to track
transaction within three
business days notwithstanding
the fact that the full report
has not been completed and
they're allowed up to ninety
days right to complete that
report and statistically I think
what brand will give you the
numbers but what generally
happens is an ever get back to
you I think they of they may
have what a million of I think
we look at what's up with where
the numbers real quick with that
time frame between excuse me
January twenty twenty and
November twenty twenty one and
in that time frame there was
more than a million delays
that were not answered within
the three days and there were
seven hundred thirty four
thousand delays that were never
answered at all because they
reach that ninety day cut off
period where the federal
government by statute has to
delete everything and scrap the
whole background check.
Yes really impose those are
stored you know from my
perspective from all this
learning and looking at this
list is the federal government
has allowed itself to create a
system that is designed to fail
and so they and and you know
that's probably we don't know
where that pressure comes from
and why that exists but the the
notion that the federal
government purges evidently all
background checks all of the
applications and all it does so
every within ninety days means
that that I guess that makes a
lot of folks happy that there is
no national information cap on
gun sales and purchases but that
seems to be the way it's set up
but but again I hope that this
is being clear that that the the
cautionary likely make the gun
purchase they say we're we're
gonna hold up we're gonna look
into this and then they have up
to ninety days to complete that
the fact is that the transaction
gets completed three days
because they didn't get back
within those three days and so
it's it's a dysfunctional
process it seems to be designed
that way so that the this I
think is a step in the right
direction which is we need to
perhaps allow ourselves some
more time to look at some of
these purchases all know that
this bill is a little different
than the house bill I think a
little more thoughtful well of
the house bill does not include
an exception for the owners of
concealed carry permit doesn't
make a lot of sense to be
delaying a gun purchase with the
idea of slowing down people in
crisis for domestic violence or
suicide when they've already
clearly are already gun owners
of and so we made a few
differences different different
adjustments to the house bill
this I think will board new ones
so what better built.
And also it is important.
Difference between this bill in
the house built at the house
bill actually doesn't apply to
prices dealers.
Several questions thank you.
And Mr chair you have four
people noted as proponents to
really go to any of them if
you'd recognize each one for not
more than a minute Senator
freeship the compactor setter.
Mr chairman members of getting
money Mr center registered
lobbyists for difference in
these words which.
Oster Simpson.
end of the school.
Madam chair members of the
committee co president New
Mexicans from gun violence we
stand very strong support this
legislation.
Janet got can.
Please go.
Thank you I'm I'm here
representing the Santa Fe
chapter of the national
organization for women to speak
in firm support for this fail it
is common sense it's not
political and research has shown
that a fourteen day waiting
period can save lives I can't
see any reason why we would
support efforts to minimize and
lessen violence in our state so
I urge you to vote.
For this failing passes thank
you.
Thank you
and one more time for us or
something.
Mr chair and I since there we
have three in proponents is that
there are one two three four
five six seven opponents signed
up I would because of the year
three of them for for about a
minute Madam chair good did you
give them the option of each
speaking for half the time in
thirty seconds or you can you
hear you give everyone of that
one minute and leave it up to
them but in the you'll have a
balance of time they'll be full
time advocacy opposition and let
them she just just for show hand
somebody once before thirty
seconds only once before one of
our free can get hands folks for
here in opposition.
Okay I I do want to be for
thirty seconds or or do you want
me for thirty seconds.
I want to.
Thank you madam chair on the
amendment right to bear arms
helpers ought to fall on what
Sanchez and in regards to the
background checks the ones that
are still one twenty twenty one
yeah all the two hundred
firearms issues people over that
period.
That forty eight point nine
billion background checks.
Very very small number of the
issues and don't actually have a
background check of course.
one thing is the inspection
records thank you Sir.
Next that.
Thank you so Albuquerque one
thing I want to point out is
there is a real rare case yeah
the.
Right here is states where you
have someone was a project or on
someone else the character
environment working there for
there were five percent try to
fight fires that is also yes so
I ask you of that is built in
such a way that allows that
exceptions we don't have anybody
to the coach he'll
consequences thank you thank you
right on time because that.
We had server you have you
restricted I raise my hand well
that.
Hi my name is desperate chairman
of a calibers interceding rages
we think a much better solution
called education every person
that works for us has to go
through background training on
health mental health issues we
have a sterling record.
Dealing with law system.
Position thank you thank you and
there were two individuals here.
Whatever structure grows close
president New Mexico brewers
Association and strongly
disagree with this and
opposition on this legislation.
Interferes with people's ability
to table right fire.
Also that within days not much
really does have.
Out of all those numbers are
full only a few actually do.
Thank you.
Next year.
Well.
My name is Gerry rose because I
stand in opposition to this
the major reason is that I don't
think right difference between a
ten day federal for the day
makes a difference in ways of
improvements I think this is an
arbitrary number selected at the
convenience of the sponsor.
Thank you at Representative
first on zoom thirty seconds and
then.
Yeah.
Jamie go ahead for thirty
seconds.
Thank you madam chair members of
the Judiciary Committee I manage
all project retail gold and
outliving Care social I am
opposed to Senate bill four to
seven because it does nothing to
reduce gun law that's a criminal
activity the place is a hardship
especially on law abiding
citizens in mostly rural New
Mexico who would be required to
travel twice to legally address
the purchase of our life for
yours is there any evidence by
data two weeks of waiting it
appears to be an arbitrator
extremely.
Thank you.
All right we will go to
questions from the committee
Senator.
Here so.
One I.
It is on the.
So.
Our license.
Are very large.
For.
I want to make sure that we.
Fire right.
By reason came.
A
little nervous about.
So.
Early that.
Licensing is still wrote us.
This RD.
Madam chair Senator it's more
than robust I'll tell you you
and I were around I think long
enough to remember when we
passed the concealed carry bill
out of our house Judiciary
Committee member well we was of
very heavily debated went round
around is a very tight vote
ended up supporting the issuance
of concealed carry licenses and
as part of supporting that body
for it I then obtained a
concealed carry permit I went
through the course to find out
really what whether I.
Well it was the passage was a
long time ago but might make
training my permit requires
updating and periodic of
demonstrations of proficiency
and so we're sort of so called a
very robust programming if
they're just maybe the good
argument the two robust and I
might even agree with those in
the room that.
When you when when when we I
don't think this is our stature
that the state is imposed a
requirement for a certain number
of hours in a couple of days and
I'll just tell you having
attended the course they have to
really stretch to provide two
days of of subject matter I
think it's a nice way to say it
so the the maybe two or of us to
be break and it would be a drop
us a point where it's almost
absurd you.
Many times can you talk about.
Together or we're gonna safety
but they they stretch it up
pretty good.
Representative.
The orange
First of all.
This model workstation that
was raised about somebody was
on.
share your.
Issues.
The manager you know the the
presented the opponent with
right pretty quickly but I
I get so I perhaps you maybe
want to rephrase the are you
with the maid Act again I didn't
find a very persuasive to be
honest with you which is the
notion that bye bye limiting the
access to a gun somebody who
needs a gun to protect
themselves is denied the
opportunity to defend themselves
against somebody who has was I
think the argument is made and I
think that's always good
argument that's made by those
who advocate to easier access to
guns and gun sales of they're
always gonna say look you're by
having a week period at all
your.
Deny me the opportunity to
defend myself I guess
hypothetically that's going to
be true how how can you.
Denied that that point.
If you're gonna have somebody
wait one day five days ten days
arguably that person is without
the opportunity to defend
themselves three hundred that
that.
You can't County we can reject
that you find what we're here to
do is to find a balance between
that concern that possibility
which I consider a pretty remote
I mean I I can see what might
happen but what is the what is
the balance is struck between
that possibility were made to
ality versus the person who's
suicidal for prices and.
We believe in and we have more
than a few basis as well that
happens Christopher somebody
goes by the gun on their way to
even a masculine.
Yeah so that
will that will.
Which is eight point eight
eight.
Yeah.
wondering.
I have the.
That seven
sacks are.
That's what happens
yes resources.
Our actual destruction I see
mobile.
Both ways
the there is also on the status
of your holidays is vision.
So
that will be at least.
Nine zero.
So Senator I have just talked
about that and in the hope to
the knowledge of everyone who is
here in the members equity you
know we have we have admittedly
not spent the time that that the
that the opponents of the would
like for us to spend but again
given the the work at hand for
the committee that's never gonna
be satisfactory but but we you
know we have tried to talk about
some of the concessions on the
days and and I've explained you
I simply picked the fourteen
days because that's the the
longest outside window that we
have.
Is going to make I I gotta tell
you if we were to do it in ten
days or seven days whatever will
be I I would imagine opponents
are still going to oppose the
waiting period without fail and
probably without any less
opposition or resistance so
you know I that's all take the
wishes of the committee and and
hear from all of you but I I
picked the outside window
because the I saw the ad and and
very frankly this committee's
done a good job of having
hearings on the second amendment
the current status of the law
the recent Supreme Court
decisions this is one of those
areas and remember Senator you
and I think voted against the
proposal assault weapon ban here
in this committee because very
clearly of that bills center
souls of big plays on admission
was unconstitutional thank you
pretty much conceded as much of
so this is this is an area where
I think we're going to make a
constitutional law I I I don't
know of any case we we tried to
be real careful what looking at
other states of what laws are
being struck down by courts
because we don't want to waste
our time we don't want to put
our energy and effort to trying
to deal with issues with things
we know we're not going to work
so I I think fourteen days works
etcetera you know if the if the
that'll garner the votes we need
to do more for pick up support
open to that but otherwise I
don't know that we can
accomplish too much by by
reducing the number of days that
I and.
Madam chair Mister chairman.
Up so I was a part of my concern
on a on a.
Forty eight day versus our.
Slightly less of the seven days
which is this is.
Is that
What a court refuses to review
for.
And.
My concern is that we not go
outside.
Irreversibility and that would
also.
They have that regardless of
the.
On the other states while I
while I I did hear very clearly.
benefits researchers research
about.
Senator thousand that whatever
completed.
Admission with that of the
context of a thirty eight point
nine million.
That were that were done.
Time for doctors are chair we're
we're past our our stop time
have why why don't we go ahead
and and what you wanna make the
amendment go ahead make the
amendment will take a vote on it
will I I need to make my point.
Make your point no I know I know
I didn't make my point.
Hello I would like to K. bank.
So the fact of the matter is.
Of the other ones that got
delayed eighty eight percent of
those.
Were resolved within three
business days.
Ninety four percent of them.
Zero six percent were resolved
in time this.
So the thing is.
The characterization that the
impact isn't doing their job and
may not be doing their job on
two percent of them.
They're doing their job on
ninety eight percent.
That's important thing for us to
be aware but frankly I think.
When I discussed this before.
I think that the waiting period.
Part of the.
That we set for.
If the FBI hasn't finished
their their Jack activations.
Maybe ninety days.
Definitions if they don't finish
that process start all over
again.
So.
You don't want to make sure
there's background check we
should make sure there's back.
There is a functional pieces.
I think it fourteen.
Given that that leftovers of
these that are resolved.
Senator to making a motion so
yes the question.
I.
Five ninety eight.
Right forties argument is
insane.
Certainly I respect percent.
You know and that sort of this
is that.
Your own family we're gonna
regardless of really no.
By local printer friendly all
right
in their opposition to the
motion a new one.
Right that motion fans that come
about one million.
Right we have a motion for
default.
Is there objection to the motion
to defer to pass.
The line shows Senators worth to
do Hey your Ivy Soto answer this
morning favorite invest thank
you Mr.
Madam chair of the for twenty
eight.
We have time for.
Yeah.
Their story yes we.
If you currently that is what
you get with a fireplace focal
is it is a.
Direction requests or shuttle
service for all of if you can do
this affirmative.
Or for him okay okay.
Will you here that you and
senator do occur the keys I lose
my court with.
Madam chair for twenty eight.
Is another good.
This legislation address to of
firearms this piece legislation
would modify the unfair trade
practices act in law of very let
me give you background there's
federal law that limits when
actions can be brought up again
under federal law against
manufacturers and distributors
of fire arms we very carefully
and look at that federal
restrictions to try and like
other states find ways where we
can stay within the federal
dictates of doing so would still
allow and actually brought for
false representation of farms
that's the principal purpose
behind this bill is to prevent
representing what are illegal
firearms to be legal farms and
for devices used to modify what
would you so is it legal farming
to an illegal firearm and
Brandon the and the staff gave
me a look this morning a
modified flock to
was.
What about a fight it was any
any model of block can be
modified in the same way it's a
touching what they call the
switch and it allows the block
to be fired and a fully
automatic yes so very so very
simply what was common pandemic
so I am sure many people really
have a respect for their
businesses and I'm customers of
theirs and shooting ranges of
what you can take one of most
common hand considers this
overclock in from of enrollment
and readily available part that
I felt it was more than what
twenty five or thirty dollars a
switch that modify the gun to
fire is an automatic pistol that
would fire what we say in excess
of thirty rounds from an
extended magazine the less than
a second so imagine that you
know a lot of firearm firing
excessive thirty rounds in less
than a second it's a lot of
automatic pistol so that's the
goal behind this legislation is
to
find for cause of action we're
also making general updates to
the unfair trade practices act
you'll see some changes to the
penalty section and I should
address those two please realize
that the penalties are
increasing substantially under
them for trade practices act but
no those have been changed since
nineteen fifty three.
We have maybe the maximum of
statutory penalty ten thousand
dollars because that's the
jurisdictional limit magistrates
court that's a small point our
own definition so what's your
any other questions about the
specifics of the bill and I just
got a note to make sure that
they're the component you're
going to hear about the large
penalty provide for
misrepresenting the firearm that
that requires a scienter element
knowing the requires a knowing
standards so it's a large
penalty I with this is going to
be designed to keep people from
misrepresenting guns is legal
when they're effectively.
December questions you have for
people signed up this
performance want to go through
your phone for the given thirty
seconds at least let him know.
Right there here thirty seconds
madam chair members of the
committee my name is your center
right this is for.
Hospitals or something.
For your online.
Leslie Pierce.
doctor James Webster.
Right there is organized
opposition the that we only
have.
About ten seconds of the motives
will give you up to three
minutes it there the sources.
Madam chair members the
committee under the sort of the
national shooting sports
foundation and we represent
firearm industry this is clearly
an effort to circumvent federal
law the the the chairman
referenced earlier that does
protect our industry against
realist lawsuits to try to hold
us liable for the acts of
criminals over we have no
control
and that was a law that was
passed in Congress bipartisan
bill over the Sanders road fort
no other industry be able to
survive being held liable for
the acts thirty Crawford forty
six rules the exam that was
given earlier the locks which
that is already illegal under
federal law manufacturing
machine gun is for like ten
years in prison a two thousand
dollar penalty nothing in the
federal law that protects us
from for was lawsuits would
prevent a lawsuit from going
forward in that case because
there was a crime committed and
there could the proximate cause
associate with so we simply
request that that federal law
the honor it's been on the books
since two thousand five we are
wholly for liable for the acts
of drunk drivers and harmony
because we should be holding
firearm industry the only
constitutionally necessary
industry liable for the acts of
criminals don't have control
over so thank you for the time
chair.
Thank you yeah members of the
committee.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Are you here the opposition
there was organized opposition
that was there he was designated
as the spokesperson as
opposition and I gave him up to
three minutes and that was the
time that he time.
Senator Ivey Soto.
So trying to understand the
interplay between.
Seven twelve eleven civil
penalties.
We have the the three German.
So badly not exceeding twenty.
This is our.
And.
Seven of ten.
You have.
Under paragraph seven that will
change.
Getting a line on.
This is not part of that too is.
Representative this the court
shallow Ford.
What are the two thousand
dollars.
That attorney's fees the agent
brings it
up to the state I parted
present.
Therefore they get
automatically.
That manager was.
Senator was we we look at those
damage awards we try to come up
with what we thought was a
reasonable figure explained
earlier so those existing
figures under the unfair trade
practices act or.
For example the easy pay system
penalties a hundred dollars if
you look at that of it has been
changed since nineteen fifty
three so we're updating some of
those the one you're referring
to is really to guns and I think
you've ever made have you go
back this is not directly to
your question but I think it's
important one realize that all
the concerns about adding this
to them for trade practices act
if you look at page five this is
really the heart of the bill
there is a federal law that
restricts admission this this
suggestion the same way earlier
was this is a bill to circumvent
federal law no it's not it's
intended to very carefully
comply with federal law the cat
federal law precludes because of
actually gets manufactures
except in there's an exception
except when contrary to state
law those with with the
manufactures operating country
to express state law as we're
doing we're providing express
state law so we look at page
five the unfair trade practices
representing goods and services
as legal to purchase in New
Mexico or the night is when
they're not legal so that's
really that you're you're gonna
find yourself subject to this
act with your agency
representing guns to be legal on
their own and so back to your
point center on the on the
damages have you if you would
please on page fifteen please
emphasize the word knowingly so
that penalty and provide becomes
effective when the individual
knowingly engages in the trade
practice that that relates to
the manufacture marketing
distribution or offering for
sale for our.
I I I hope that address your
question it is not
Yes I'm again I'm trying to.
What I'm trying to stand as.
Is that you have the right.
First I don't.
One H. fifteen to the work that
we saw online twelve.
I'm not saying that there.
What the reverse of this up now.
Sorry.
That point three version.
Could you with a quick
reversion.
I brought along one right up
there but I don't want to.
Fifteen center for that not
from.
Payments of six thousand.
Six it is where you go to the to
the.
Firearms.
you Senator the up we were I
would say I would suggest we
have the word back and I've been
Y. between the point two version
point three version the word
knowingly was eliminated but I
do see knowingly online not
knowingly and willingly.
Okay so it's it's a raise sorry
it is it does Senator different
players right but but again that
the section here is.
That in this section we're
talking about a private right of
action.
Right it is one of age.
For.
Is it true that.
Eight right to.
The ability to actually.
Another two thousand dollars or
sixty eight.
Twenty two.
So first of all.
Trying to understand.
Those two
That based on.
So it's greatly those two
different ones for private right
of action.
The end of the two hundred
thousand dollars.
Subsection B..
Subsection.
H. but it actually just as for
what.
Very helpful.
It's like to live nine.
After that period.
Subsection.
That's part of us are doing this
manner.
Five percent state and.
Section a page.
One more time centers so we we
list sick it really is very
specifically we can assure
hopefully get the team online I
don't there should be a for the
period a new sensation I section
five we let our.
And then.
Face ID like to and.
Instead of this subsection.
Subsection age.
Okay.
Going.
So let me start with that.
I make that motion.
That's from the Kurds are
committed up to this one.
Remembers I I think I think we
probably need to cook like
Senator I'm so it's going to go
for a while I agree this chart
colorful recess was your credit
thank you thank you.
Miss Mister chairman I just on
Senate bill seventeen the dental
insurance I just would ask that
that gets put up for that
there's an agreement reached
just five points is.
A lot less complicated than this
and I just we've got someone
here waiting of everything every
time the committee somewhere or
is it looks like every other
building at six it's a committee
set up I move do not pass on
Senate bill seventeen to do pass
on Senate Judiciary Committee
suffer seventy yeah we're we're
we're in right yeah we're recess
I'm not asking for that.
Things were in the beginning so
my apologies to anybody because
we built centers as well as
sponsors that we we have
commitments others to see.
