Philip and the committee
secretary keep track of the time
of the presentations and and
follow some
semblance of the rules that we
follow during the regular
session so center male please
thank you chairman thank you and
so we have Senate Bill to and I
believe we have Senator Lopez
and Senator doing to presented
as you know both senators we
have our fifteen minutes of
presenting the bill and you know
testimony and then ten minutes
for the opposition and then we
go to questions from the
committee so by all means you're
ready to go welcome.
Thank you Mr.
I'm we appreciate the
opportunity to present in front
of the Senate Judiciary I'm with
there is myself Senator Duhigg
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and of
course we do have Megan Dorsey
who is here with us as an of
person who can help to answer
questions as the committee
process process proceeds I will
be short and sweet and then if I
could Mr chairman for senator do
Hagen Senator Ortiz Y. Pino to
also say a few words.
Thank you chairman as we many of
us remember expungement began
back in two thousand and seven.
Just to make sure I got the
timeline correct and that began
with senator Michael Sanchez we
had many a conversation in this
chamber I know in the other
chamber also about the this is
an important issue for many
persons in our communities.
Finally in twenty nineteen we
were able to pass an expungement
bill it was signed by governor
Lujan Grisham and here we are
today Mr chairman of the bill in
front of you actually is is kind
of morphed what is a out of
house bill ninety six that was
introduced last session that was
a co sponsored by Representative
Andrea Romero and Senator Mark
Moores and what to do you'll see
it in different sections of the
bill Mr chairman members of the
committee that still have the
segments of that piece of
legislation and also with you
whether areas that that we added
a for improvement purposes and
Mr chairman members of the
committee what this Senate bill
two is Pacific Lee is dealing
with automatic expungement only
of cannabis.
So we're we've we've tightened
and that's what to specifically
deals with it is narrow and
limited.
And with that Mr chairman what I
will do is allow my two other
sponsors to stay a few more
words if I could Senator Duhigg.
Thank you senator okay.
Thank you Mr chair Senator so
yeah you know I I think a
critical part of our state
moving forward with the cannabis
legislation is making sure that
folks who have
Been convicted or arrested or
dealt with the fallout of the
fences that were based on
actions that if the cannabis
regulation Act passes will no
longer be crimes are still
suffering the negative
consequences of that.
Your are you okay audio wise I'm
I'm.
Okay.
I'm sorry so that that's what
this bill seeks to accomplish
and it is creating that this you
a novel approach to expungement
New Mexico which is the
automatic expungement which
makes sense in this context
because these are these are
fences that now would no longer
be crimes so we don't want to
make folks on file petition and
pay a filing fee and pay a
lawyer to have to clear this up
because this is something that
are that if the cannabis
regulation Act passes our state
will have said this was no
longer criminal contact on all
once we go back to the committee
all have two small cleanup
amendments to do before that we
should probably do off the bat
before we really get into too
much discussion
but otherwise I look forward to
the discussion thank you Mr
chair thank you our next step
another Sanchez Representative
Romero thank you chairman hi
everyone
I'm so sorry I missed the
presentation by Senator Lopez so
forgive me if I repeat anything
I just wanted to add in addition
to expungement and and and
really truly and and partnership
and in this endeavor to make
sure that this is actually the
bill that needs Our our efforts
to legalize cannabis it's
important to us that we were
talking about rectifying the
wrongs of the drug war have cost
in our communities that ensuring
that if we're going to legalize
that we take these things off of
the record immediately if those
who have been criminalized by
any sort of cannabis related
penalty Representative comes to
possession so this is why I am
so in favor of this automatic
expungement component and
secondly when we're talking
about be being sure that folks
can enter into the enterprise of
being able to look at a cannabis
related industries we don't want
that to be a very.
Year to injury when we talk
about regulation and licensing
so you'll see in our bill that
when it comes to getting a
license in the state of New
Mexico New Mexico one in five
people in the state require a
license to do not just cannabis
related work but any sort of
related work in our state we
currently prohibit folks with a
felony record from even applying
for that work and additionally
one and three New Mexicans has a
criminal record so while we're
trying to create access to the
job market and in particularly
when we're creating a brand new
industry we don't want that to
be a barrier to entry so you'll
find that in our bills well this
is a bipartisan effort on it
related to licensing across the
United States I believe
In my notes thirty four states
have worked on licensing like
this to be able to create that
access point so this is what
we're hoping to do with what
right here right now while we're
at the brand new industry thank
you Mr chair on thank you
members of the committee thank
you Representative and senator
Ortiz Y. Pino did you want to
add to this presentation that is
raising Mr chairman and members
of the committee.
The.
This need to.
Realistically deal with people
who have committed very minor
offenses are and besides being
able to vote of of public
employment the pharmacies minor
offenses in our record.
the issue comes up how many
people are we really talking
about I mean is this is a big
deal or order a lot of people
with us and we don't actually
have the data roaming people in
New Mexico would be eligible for
automation expansion.
But.
Just one little including the
number may be is that.
Just need cream January in June
those six months of twenty
eighteen.
New Mexico law enforcement
arrested more than twenty two
hundred people.
Organization of one ounce or
less of cannabis remediation and
other two thousand citations so.
Six months so is the case going
back in history what we can see
is that we're talking about here
is something that this is not a
minor issues this is something
that affects many many thousands
of New Mexicans lives there by
from employment basically takes
your ban the box concept Mr
chairman and and and and and
moves into a whole other level I
think trying to to make sure
that the consequences of what we
no longer be illegal acts no
linger for months and years
afterwards for protecting
people's ability employment work
or life for educational
opportunities are assessed and
so this is really important
aspect and then removed from the
only mothers milk the regulation
licensing bill to make sure that
we focus really on it and and
maybe this is a centerpiece of
the social justice.
Undertaking that we have for
with this legalization issue
thank you Mr thank you thank you
know US Sanchez you still have
eight minutes by my count so did
you want to go to some advocates
are how did you want to proceed
thank you know Mister chair
before before we do that there's
one part that I I should have
mentioned I because we've been
talking a lot about the
expungement part of this bill
but what it also provides for is
dismissal of of the sentencing
conviction for folks who are
incarcerated or who have
completed a sentence of four
cannabis offense and I think
that's an important part to
highlight as well because it's
not just the expungement it's
it's making for the folks who
are currently incarcerated on
things that wouldn't will no
longer be crimes if the C. R. A.
passes are are not don't
continue to be incarcerated and
that those who who have served
those sentences can have that
completely dismissed from their
record
yes to note I think it's an
important part of the bill.
Okay thank you and so you've got
six minutes left the added you
want to proceed.
Mr chairman I don't know if
Mister sea would like to say a
few words.
By all means Meghan Dorsey.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez members of the committee I
don't believe I have anything
substantive to add I think that
Representative Romero Senator
Lopez and Senator do hate very
accurately summarized the
context of the bill we are
hoping that this is an issue
that interest this committee and
that you are open to this policy
movement going forward and I'm
here to have any additional
questions right so we strive
time for a public testimony on
behalf of of your bills are
Linda do we have anybody wanted
to speak on behalf of this
legislation Mr chair to.
We have
to speak okay so everyone if you
could keep your your comments
thirty two minutes that would be
great.
Thank you chairman and committee
and senators I'm speaking on
behalf of the Democratic Party
of New Mexicos rural caucus.
Its newly formed and we're
revving up our advocacy we are
strongly in favor of SB two
expungement of certain criminal
records specifically those
related to cannabis infractions
and we hope that such records
will be expunged in light of the
upcoming adult use canned
legislation we also are in favor
of we understand that everything
is moving on a parallel track
hopefully with this bill and the
rural caucus is concerned about
rural equity on several levels
this SB to bill addresses are
one of these concerns so we
speak highly in favor and
appreciate the time that given
thank you.
Thank you everyone Linda do we
have another person to speak on
behalf of of this bill Mr chair
we don't but we have received
several other emails from
different organizations such as
bold futures New Mexico and
we've also heard from someone
from New Mexico
For open government.
In favor all in favor thank you
Linda well Sanchez is still have
four minutes so.
Did you want to relinquish your
time and and we can go to
opposition and then we can get
to the committee and your
amendment does that sound like a
plan Sanchez that's fine Mr
chairman okay right so I'm I'm
Linda do we have any opposition
people I want to speak opposing
Senate bill two Mr chair one
person sign up but that person
is not in the meeting okay and
we had a few emails maybe three
emails were folks that were
against.
Could you read those folks that
are against the names in order.
Certainly Mr chairman I misspoke
the the folks from New Mexico
for open government were
against.
We have to have some where the
name of need mantra going.
And Jason Barker also those are
all four of those are all
against okay and then is there
any one that is willing want to
speak during this time Mr chair
they're not logged into the
meeting okay thank you Linda so
let with that let's go to the
committee and and
Senator during do you have some
amendments and perhaps we could
move those and and go from there
does that sound like a plan Mr
chair Senator catalog offer
internet was unstable so she
should be back on shortly okay
did any of the other sponsors
want to put those amendments
forward maybe we should just get
into the discussion of the bill
although what Senator Lopez how
would you like to proceed.
Mr chairman the the amendment I
believe we can wait for Senator
Duhigg to presenter amendment I
I'm good with the amendments and
there she's talking about she
back alright Senator Duhigg your
back are you back.
Hi.
Are you are you ready your
muted.
Okay can you present your
amendments now we're we're at
the amendment part yes I'm sorry
Mr chair might my internet was
unstable I had to restart my
computer all right so the first
amendment this is just putting
in a this was something that was
added in actually no it's not
that we can take that down.
I just gonna do this verbally
because they're real simple
And I on the floor when when H.
B. ninety six was heard on the
floor of the house they added a
reference to a human trafficking
so on page four line three.
Of a speech to.
Okay
after kidnapping Madam it would
be inserting human trafficking
com.
Okay so you're adding more.
Senator you're adding human
trafficking after kidnapping yes
okay and that's that's the of
the amendment I see that that's
amendment number one.
That's you six seconds what
happened on house board and
ninety cents and then the other
amendment would be on page six
of SB two.
Are striking all of subsection
B. this is from lines one
through twenty.
And what that would do that
this is section four section
four is talking about the
automatic expungement
Of charge offenses
when when it's not in that.
In the area incarceration
context and what we realize
looking at this is that
subsection pay which provides
for the automatic expungement of
of an offense involving cannabis
it really subsumes subsection B.
we really don't need subsection
B. it was specific to I
trafficking or possession with
intent to distribute but to the
extent that those things are not
going to be crimes under the
that Kandace regulation acts are
if they if they qualify under
Kandace regulation Act was no
longer being crimes they're
already going to be included
under subsection eight and also
and this is my mistake I forgot
to put the work keep automatic
in subsection B. so I this could
be read to create the need for a
petition process just for
expungement of those of
trafficking our offenses and
possession with intent to
distribute and that that wasn't
the intent of the bill so be
solves that both those problems
okay so Amanda do you have that
and and do all the members of
the committee are we out
tracking on what the with the
amendment is.
Yes everybody's tracking okay.
Okay so yes Senator Ivey Soto
just on a practical note on page
five why I would also say right
program information.
Is that friendly Senator doing
yes it is okay all right so.
I'm Linda do you have that as
well.
Okay Mister chair yes.
Sure Senator won't are just a
question for you if I understand
them the procedure that we're at
right now the sponsor Senator
doing is proposing to strike all
of subsection B. from what is
section for the bill which would
be on my version of the bill
we're all I hope for a long
version sixteen point two but as
I understand the motion we
should probably take this in
this order of a motion to strike
that subsection B. which would
be page six lines one through
twenty eight and then remember
every letter is needed all
right.
Yes that sounds correct and
chairman you wanted resume your
chairmanship at this point now
that you're back I need about
two more minutes Senator okay
okay thanks for the heads up
there yeah I just wanna make
sure we have a clear because I I
think I heard senator doing
perhaps addressing maybe more
than one amendment and
we take them in parts okay okay
that sounds good so following
chairman Toronto's suggestion.
You have a we have a motion for
that the first amendment.
Yes Senator Lopez.
Some of Mr chairman okay
Mr Chairman just to clarify the
first amendment is that paid for
line three insertion after the
COVID at the end of the line
human trafficking comic.
Yes Mr.
Okay so we have a motion for a
amendment number one and is
there any opposition to that
amendment Mr chair can we have
that amendment explain one more
time yes there you are Senator
Pirtle okay yes can we explained
that first part of this
amendment process some Senator
doing.
Yes.
The same wage was in HBs ninety
six during the regular session I
and it was heard on the house
floor this was in addition that
was made on the house floor and
this would be because this is in
section two which is dealing
with a phone licensure
and there there's a number of.
Offenses that that would not be
subject to not being considered
under under that the changes
being made here and it would be
adding to that list to your
things like homicide kidnapping
cruel sexual penetration would
be adding to that list human
trafficking as one of the things
that is going to to to not be
taken off if if you've been
convicted of that in
consideration of licensure.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair your muted.
Thank you sorry about that so
are there any other questions on
on this ammendment.
Is there any opposition to this
amendment.
Seeing on the amendment is
adopted I'm going to amendment
number two Senator doing please
thank you Mr chair amendment
number two which would be on
page six striking lines one
through twenty which is all
subsection B. of section four
hundred and then.
Remembering as appropriate which
would mean on page five one five
taking out that doesn't station
subsection Hey thank you senator
could you read re explain can
you explain again the rest now
for late comer members Mr chair
hi this is because one we really
don't need to be a which
rather early refers to
to offenses cannabis offenses
already by by its nature would
include things like like
trafficking or possession with
intent to distribute and to
because I left the word
automatic out of B. it would
have created a need for a
petition process just for those
those offenses and that was not
the intent of the bill.
All right are there any
questions about this ammendment
especially from our late comers
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair thank you of
Senator do a.
So we don't have a petition
process what's the process going
to be for expungement and who is
the burden gonna be on to to do
that.
Mr chair Senator put on and I
think we're gonna end up having
more of that discussion when
we're on the bill itself
this creates an automatic
expungement process I so.
So for under this section it's
our.
Missy after two years after our.
Basically after everything is
done the that there is a number
two years after the arrest of
there's no conviction two years
After the the date of the
conviction if there is one.
there would be a review bite get
by the attorney general's office
and the the department public
safety depending on on whether
this is our car where someone is
in the process of identifying
which cases should be are
expunged
and it changes and.
And the reason I'm I'm not
answer very clearly right now is
because when we talk later about
folks who are incarcerated or
folks who have completed the
sentence the process is gonna be
different
but not talking about those
folks right now this would be an
automatic expungement that would
happen really under the review
of the Attorney General
and that would be simply just
the expungement as as we have it
in the law now which is removing
those public records from any
governmental websites where they
could be accessed by the public.
What we're talking about the
trafficking cannabis.
Currently is there in the
What with with regard to minors
whenever somebody's traffic can
this is that a different charge
or do we even have anything on
the books now because I know the
new cannabis regulation Act bowl
both bills the one in the house
and in my Neville both
specifically bring in
trafficking of cannabis to
minors which is right in line
with how to treat alcohol
scissor currently anything on
the books with regard to the
selling of cannabis to minors.
You Mr chair Senator I don't
know the answers that I don't
know if the store see dozens.
Mr Garcia.
Thank you chairman Senator is
Senator Pirtle off the top of my
head I can't think of a statute
that's currently enacted for
distribution of Canada or of any
drugs to a minor thing
distribution is distribution
however if I am incorrect about
that at and there is the
distinction is not critical for
this piece of legislation before
you because the at the
decoupling effect of this piece
of legislation says that
cannabis related crimes so that
would include distribution to an
adult or to a minor
anything that is no longer a
crime under the cannabis
regulation Act should one passed
out of the legislature this
session would be automatically
expunged under this particular
cells regardless of the nature
of the crime so for example if
the cannabis regulation act that
does ultimately passed to the
legislature legislature creates
a crime of distribution to a
minor this bill would not affect
that because this bill says only
crimes that are no longer crimes
under the CRA are expunged.
In the in the way I understand
it though is that this is going
to be automatic so who would
have to object or what would the
process be objecting to an
expungement because the
trafficking involved a minor
somebody under the age of
eighteen.
And and Mr chair Mister she has
a response that's all you'll to
her.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
choose Senator Pirtle so the
process and I want to make sure
that we're clear about the two
different process these that are
contemplated by Senate bill two
the first being expungement of
past convictions for crimes and
the second one being their
recall of sentence every call of
what I would consider open cases
where either people are facing
pending charges that haven't
been adjudicated or where
they're serving a sentence at
currently whether there are
three on probation for cannabis
related offense because the
process of for approaching those
cases is is bifurcated in Senate
bill two so first and to answer
your question about the process
as to expungement of past
convictions for people that are
not currently incarcerated not
currently serving a sentence the
process for that begins the
burden starts with DPS DPS in
conjunction with all of the
various jails and prisons in the
state of New Mexico will do a
review of the criminal history
database that is currently
available to them and it is
their task to identify which
cases might be potentially
eligible for relief under this
piece of legislation there is a
very specific time line for them
to then supply notice to
the public defender the court
and any relative prosecutors of
the local jurisdiction where the
cases were originally prosecuted
of the potential for eligibility
I believe if I remember
correctly they have until
January first of twenty twenty
two to submit that lists to the
relevant parties at that point
in time and that process is that
right you process that is the
DPS is responsibility will also
be conducted under the review of
the attorney general's office so
they will have an ability to
weigh in if there are legal
questions.
I need to be answered from a
prosecutorial angle once the
that list of cases is submitted
to the court it is the courts
job then to reopen cases to
determine whether they should
that the past convictions should
automatically be expunged if
there is an objection there is
also a time line in here for
prosecutors to object if they
believe that the cases
identified by DPS do not satisfy
the criteria meaning they are
still legal convictions then the
prosecutor has a timeline with
which to object and the court
would adjudicate that issue and
decide ultimately whether the
case fits as a sufficiently
related cannabis offense or not.
And if there is no objection or
if the board chooses to overrule
the objection to the expungement
and then the the court shall
issue a notice to DPS saying
that the case has been dismissed
up the records should be
expunged which we know to mean
in New Mexico's field that
public records are sealed so
that they are still assessable
by certain law enforcement
agencies including the district
attorney's office and the
attorney general's office it's
just not assessable to the
public.
Thank you Mr speaker I was just
want a Senator pro where we is
she answering your question and
we have our chairman back so I'm
looking forward to the chairman
reasserting his chairmanship but
does that answer your question
Senator Pirtle.
This I believe we're gonna get
into when we're on the bill but
but but if we can does that help
Senator pro.
Mr chair and I'm trying to get
to whites why we want to make it
automatic if there's going to be
some of these cases were doing
in the other direction where the
petition would come from
somebody with a record we're if
we're doing automatic in we're
creating new crimes under the
cannabis regulation act is there
potential that we're gonna
explained records of of people
because it's going to fall
through the cracks you know the
workloads of our dust in our
judges is is quite large because
of the shutdown of the due to
COVID nineteen health orders so
you know that's that's my
concern right now is is we're
putting in a time line and we're
adding workers seems like we're
going to have quite a bit of
work Mr chair that's the the
reasoning behind the questioning
that before we maybe strike
subsection B. we might want to
make sure that it's not
necessary and that is my my
concern with this thank you Mr
Steinborn Senator mantas did you
wanna assume chairmanship here
up we're on the second amendment
to this bill.
Senator Pirtle just asked his
question.
I've been following along
Senator and it's a loaded
question asking what I'd like to
resume well I mean can I ask you
to resume because you're here
you're the chairman we love and
leadership no.
Continue on center on L.
continue on for a little bit
okay okay so
Senator Pirtle you have the
floor are you are you good.
So so Mister chair I I I guess
that's the the question is what
will the workload look like for
our dust in our public defenders
and our judges sorting through
these recommendations from the
department of public safety with
regard to some of these charges
to ensure that we don't
explorations of somebody who
would have committed a crime of
the cannabis regulation Act what
what safeguards are in there
are we going to provide extra
funds for these
district attorneys to go through
the prosecutors to to go through
the number of cases I'm not sure
how many cases there are but
they're already overloaded now
because of because of the the
health order and the shut downs
because the health orders so I'm
that's I guess that's my
question is is there going to be
funding added or is there is the
work load gonna be too large and
and maybe some of these
expungement for cracks that
shouldn't be should be expunged
so Senator doing and I'm
assuming again you know this
gets to the bill that will be
we'll be discussing your sent
but did you want to respond to
that Senator doing Mr chair I I
think one thing that's really
important to remember when
thinking about the work load
part of this is that this is
going to be an inherently
limited time limited process
because this bill is is tied to
the cannabis regulation that
so it it's it's really kind of
meaningless of that doesn't pass
and once that passes there's a
limited universe of cases that
this is going to apply to
because going forward folks are
going to be arrested they're not
going to be convicted for things
that are now crimes but will not
be under the C. R. so while
there might be an initial
increase in workload because of
this that's not going to be a
permanent increase that it that
is inherently time limited
assuming the C. R. A. passes.
But one other thing I want to
mention because one of the the
questions that Senator Pirtle
had had also asked was was why
are we doing this an automatic
way as opposed to a petition
based way and I think it's
because these this is a case
where something that was a crime
will no longer be a crime and we
don't want to put a burden on
the individual to to file the
lawsuit to pay the filing fee to
hire a lawyer to get rid of
something from the record that
we as a state if the C. R. A.
passes are saying is no longer a
crime and so that's why the
automatic nature of this really
is important I don't know.
All.
Questions Senator Senator
Moores.
Believe your hands up did you
want to weigh in on this
ammendment.
But I did Mr chair with Senator
Pirtle before.
Senator Pirtle.
Are you.
Good friend from Bernalillo
county okay thank you senator
Morris sure thank you senator
thank you center do it my
question Senator maybe cheer
expert witness is
I'm looking fused on this with
us right this section of the
question is is we're going to
expunge the records of those
crimes that didn't happen
automatically but under Senator
corals and the other.
Bills are going we were creating
a crime so only we need to a
minor will be a crime so if
we're expansion the same action
I'm where I'm reading this is
that if someone sold and has
conviction of selling
distributing our water we to
someone that was under eighteen
right now their crime was
distribution correct Senator
that's what they're going to be
charged with our work charge
what they had a conviction out.
Mr
Mr Garcia is not in so and she
has to say about it is it is it
doesn't matter the source you
Senator Mr that the person was
fifteen or thirty who by the it
was the same one your
distributing we but under the
new law.
It would still be a crime to
distribute to people under
eighteen so am I correct it will
automatically expunging all the
records so someone had sold
marijuana to a fifty four year
old someone under eighteen their
records going to be Sanchez even
though.
That is now going to be a crime
under the new law because all or
is the aid going to go through
and say that person sold it to
someone who was fourteen they're
actually gonna take take that
effort in the book but how would
they know.
Senator doing Mr chair us the
Senator Moores so no no it if
it's something I'm under the CRA
it is a crime.
For the purposes of expungement
and it would not qualify for
that explanation I think they
would know I by looking at the
case file
I think that's that's part of
what they're review is going to
include in and I think Miss
Dorsey as something that Mr
Garcia yes while you excuse me
Mister chairman Senator thank
you I just wanted to correct my
earlier misstatements while we
were discussing this they did
look at west line if you look
Senators chairman of section
thirty dash thirty one dash
twenty one there is a current
crime and distribution to a
minor and it does specifically
in section eight addresses
marijuana and has a an incorrect
graduated penalty of the first
defense and second and
subsequent offenses so I
apologize very much for me
earlier misstatement of the
current law but there is a
current law for distributing
marijuana to a minor and so if
the cannabis regulation act that
ultimately passes through the
legislature continues to have
that as a crime there will be no
issue.
Okay Senator.
Thank you Mr chair thank you are
Senator thank you for this.
Thank you this point do we have
a motion on this amendment
number two.
Yes Senator Lopez.
Some of.
Okay so we have a motion and I
believe it's appropriate to do
the roll call on this on this
one so we have a motion to
approve amendment number two and
Linda can you call the roll
Senator Baca.
Yes.
Senator do it yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez yes Senator Moores
yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes Senator Stewart yes Senator
o'neill yes in senators about
this yes.
Memon number two is been
approved so now let's go to
amendment number three.
And Mr chair I have no amendment
number three at this at this
time okay okay then my mistake
so we're back on the bill.
So does anybody want to speak on
this bill Committee.
I don't know Russia wants
Do we have a motion and you Mr
Chairman yeah I've got some
discussion.
Our gentleman survived this.
Thank you Mr hello everybody.
Sanchez I'm not sure all direct
any questions to anyone in
particular so anyone who wants
to jump in.
First of all let me say that I
with some sure many others fully
support the intentions and all
the policies that have been
expressed by all the supporters.
And of course the the role of
this committee is to also
wrecked recognized that while we
supported policy.
Your goals such as expungement
we dig into the the bill itself
and how it would be applied by
the courts and how would be
interpreted in law.
I think should begin by telling
everybody I don't do criminal
law at all and have been
negligible experience so can
speak with authority when it
comes to criminal law so I have
questions for some group perhaps
to have that experience about
the bill and and will look to
anyone who who can answer those
questions because I simply just
don't don't have that.
The.
I'll start on the second page of
the bill.
We're we're beginning to deal
with language other than what is
existing language of the first
part of the bill first page page
and a half is all existing
language this this section one
of the bill relates to
eligibility for employment with
governmental entities of the
state or any local political
subdivisions and of course I
think I can say well I certainly
support individuals being able
to return to employment without
the being precluded from doing
so by by a prior history the
subsection B. is where I'd like
to begin on line twelve which is
the following criminal record
shall not be used distributed or
disseminated.
In an application for a public
employment license cetera for
getting a license or public
employment and it says our
records of arrests not followed
by a rally conviction.
Then we're adding some things
convictions that have been
sealed dismissed expunged or
pardoned shall not be considered
that makes sense if that's the
purpose of this bill is to to
create an expunged record really
is expands so it's not
considered for something up
paragraph three it would be new
language that we're not to
consider when hiring someone for
state or government employment
or giving them a license we
should not consider juvenile
adjudications I think that's
good policy to I think young
people should get that restart
the challenge I get is I would
subparagraph for which is
convictions for for the
following our criminal records
should not be considered in
employment for a state position
and the reason I I have
difficulty with it is simply I
think that is so broad ambiguous
the no court or lawyer would
ever be able to understand what
this means so what what cannot
be considered here are
convictions for a crime that is
not recent enough.
I'll stop there reason enough is
not a common legal term I would
say I don't know what reason
enough means and and I think
that's ambiguous enough that I
don't think accord  or lawyers
would understand what that means
I don't know what recent enough
is so so what we're doing is
we're precluding consideration
of records for convictions of
crimes that are not reason
enough I think we have to were
that much better.
We're also not to consider
convictions of a crime that is
that is not sufficiently job
related.
To be predictive of performance
once again.
Terms in language that are very
ambiguous a very subjective and
and really have no meaning in
the law so so the property
estate or somebody who is
denying a license let me stick
will deny a license we're gonna
deny license to someone you're
not to consider crimes that are
not recent enough and that are
not sufficiently job related to
be predictive of performance.
I really I really think that
we've got a we're that much
better because and I think we
should be clear about what those
what those crimes would be an
incentive connection for not
reason enough and it really
doesn't which is quite a year
operating there in crimes within
the two years or three years or
five years whatever maybe we
will understand that his lawyers
courts will understand that if
you state convictions something
that service more than two years
three years five years whatever
maybe it shouldn't be considered
that that's understandable but
when you say you're not to
consider crime that's not reason
enough.
You're gonna have a debate and
you can then really the other
challenge you're going to have
if you're gonna have an
inconsistent application in
other words what a county
government city government and
state government a state agency
may consider recent enough for
consideration may very can
tirelessly on who's making that
decision on any given day and
and what branch of government
there and or what job the
application or licenses for and
so you can have somebody like my
my former profession applying
for an architectural license
from a board of the state
or even I guess perhaps two
other licenses issued by the
state and you can get one person
interpreting recent enough one
way and a different person
interpreting in a completely
different way.
So so I'd like to suggest that
that we tighten that that
language of or frankly even of
strike that that section
entirely because they just don't
know what what it really means
so let me let me stop there on
section one before I go on to
section two and and perhaps
address those questions I would
like to answer thank you Sanchez
anyone and Mr Mr both Mr chair
so this was language that was
from H. B. ninety six which was
sponsored by Representative
Romero and Senator Moores so I
don't know if if Representative
Romero senator Morris would like
to address that.
Yeah thank you Mr chair thanks
for the question so why it is
brought this is language is
being directed specifically to
regulation and licensing
department why it is brought
this is a partnership with work
that we've done with the ACLU
with many different
organizations to give that
authority to the the boards who
have their own parameter set as
to who should be licensed in
that given industry in that area
so the recent enough yes while
it is ambiguous is meant to be
that the boards and and
licensing boards at basically
create the parameters for
barring or allowing someone to
apply and and get approved for a
license so as far as it being
sufficiently job related again
if it's a couple of crime that's
completely unrelated to
something like plumbing or pipe
fitting or something that would
need a license then of course
those two
she'll be the discretion to the
board so this was approved by
regulation licensing department
I'm in the way that it is
broadly worded it so that the
discussion does go to our
regulation and licensing boards
to make that determination.
Yes senator Morris to try to
explain that forming.
Senator Moores if you wish to.
Only wishes to.
Okay Mr Mr chairman.
Yes Ivey Soto yeah I'd love it
if I could just note that that
the house bill that is being
referred to that Representative
Romero.
R. sponsored.
senator Morris is name is not on
that bill of it may have been at
that time of initial
introduction let's look on the
website is name is not
associated with that this point
so I think we should simply
report Representative Romero as
the sponsor of that.
Duly noted thank you senator
Senator salon yes did you want
to respond to Representative
Romero's answer to your question
yeah I think we should strike
section or
the fact that regulation
licensing approved it candidly
doesn't mean that much to me all
due respect the regulation
licensing but but the bottom
line is that we still have to
pass a law that a court can
understand or that lawyers
interpreting the law can acquire
enforced and and so
and then they realize that this
doesn't isn't limited to just
regulation licensing its to any
licensing
or to any job application for
public employment so this is
going to I'm just concerned
what's going to happen is what
with somebody and all in all.
I get trouble with all of this I
always do with everything.
But but if you're in Hobbs you
may think what
they were not reason enough been
sufficiently job related crime
yes differently than you might
in Santa Fe
and so your opportunity got a
job with the city government
Santa Fe may be very different
than the city government this
and then that shouldn't be this
this is good policy it makes
sense what it should be enforced
everywhere when standing should
be up deregulation licensing to
decide who has the job on a
regular day or what would they
may be M. or whether they know
the applicant or not or whether
they're friend of a friend I'm
giving that much discretion.
I think I think is a bad idea
the law I think the law should
be clear I think the law should
be something the courts and
judges and lawyers and the
public and everyone can
understand apply and really not
just be subject to the whims so
Mr chairman I'll call your other
debate or discussion whether
committee members.
But I'm I'm inclined to move to
strike aircraft for assembly on
on and forcible on and I think
by Representative Romero is on
on the grey midnight in Vegas
okay law which I would award.
Senator Baca wants to weigh in
Senator Baca.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
this this is on the amendment so
it's relevant to what senator so
what this is doing here on page
twelve we see the same language
again on section the it's
involved with the definition it
looks like of disqualifying
criminal conviction so I just
wanted to bring that to the
attention of the committee and
the all yield back to Senator
what the city wants to do
something that at the same time.
If I may just on the recent
enough language Mr chair Mr
speaker yes Mr it the EEOC
language of the federal level
does not have that artificial
barrier depending on the crime
so what would be necessary is
literally to go through every
single crime and and parallel it
with every single possible
license and decide what that
the limitation should be one
year two years five years ten
years on it essentially creating
that barrier for it to not be
quote unquote and big US and so
I guess from the standpoint of
what we're trying to do is get
this in line with federal law
which again gives the discretion
to the boards to make that
determination when someone
presents himself to the board
I'm in a plane for a license
that they can make their case as
to why they're rehabilitated why
they deserve a license why
they're credible in that field
and that's what this language
allows for that for us to be in
federal compliance we're we're
not creating those artificial
barriers on the giving the we
rate again to that process to
make that determination.
Thank you so Representative you
view us Senator some months is
proposed amendment as I'm
friendly.
Representative.
Mr chair yes I would I would say
so just a sense of what we know
about federal law and what we're
trying to do with not creating
that barrier to entry
artificially okay Senator some
Hernandez yes I was trying to
miss understanding what
Representative Romero thank
Representative Romero with with
all due respect and I I hope you
take my questions well
if they are you saying that this
language that that time
proposing district is coming
from federal law that's what I'm
hearing you saying and and I I
is this language they're not
recent enough and sufficiently
job related predictive is out
all of the federal on it so from
where in the federal that's
correct so as I understand it
and I'm I'm getting basically
that specific legal language
right now I'm sorry my computers
just running very slow at the
moment but that said Mr chair
the EEOC prohibits essentially
any sort of artificial barriers
to that entry on application in
particular so again this is
about being able to apply for a
license the board still makes
the determination so if in the
law we're creating that barrier
from application that's what
we're trying to prevent from
happening from this perspective
and why we're amending the lots
today for it to have that sort
of broad based discretion again
to the board so again this is an
EEOC compliance this language.
Senator Ivey Soto date you had
your hand up did you want to
weigh in on this.
Thank you Mr chairman and so as
I'm as I'm reading this and I
and I.
Well.
Roger I guess what I'm what I'm
struggling with as I'm as I'm
looking at this and and maybe.
R. one we also just of the state
that I I'm just focus second ago
what I'm when I went to check
the website right now on the
ship one of my colleagues from
the south apparently.
Well Sir course asked think it's
name off this bill he them what
is the impact on the bill and
and it is on one side with the
state so so.
So I guess I would I would
propose is still there the one
of the sponsors of the bill in
the last session or or somebody
else who could answer.
So.
I understand what.
And and I'm with what are
Representative Romero is saying
in terms of the.
Licensure.
What where we're I think we're I
think the.
Well the ambiguity.
Resides.
is it going to talk about public
employment.
And and and and and the
ambiguity resides on talk about
public employment.
Because while our while.
Representative Romero subjective
rights.
About about the ability of each
of these
These are our boards to be able
to make that to engage in
rulemaking.
So that you have a defined in
advance which apprentices would.
All I.
Are we we don't we don't either
direct the state personnel
office we gauge and rulemaking
as to public employments.
The and and then local
governments.
Don't rulemaking authority.
And that and so and so
consequently under the under
under under the state rules act
with the from Representative is
working on for.
That that's only applicable to
the state it is not applicable
to local governments and so so
consequently the ability for the
language and in paragraph four.
To be able to be executed up in
a fair manner and consistent
manner is restricted not terms
of licensure but it is
restricted I I think in terms of
in terms of employment and and
and and while I think so might
have inherent rulemaking
authority that they can engage
them.
Of the the fact of the matter it
still remains so that that local
governments don't have that
rulemaking authority and nor
would they be required to follow
CPOs rulemaking authority on
this issue unless we were to say
so explicitly.
And and so I I I I I think if I
can impact the the kind of the
the concern that was raised by
by Senator provided us a little
bit on a practical basis that is
that is I think how it kind of
plays out and and so I don't
know if.
Senator Moores Representative
Romero ms Dorsey or or one of
the sponsors of this legislation
would like to R. I'm about that.
Then we'll go back to senators
about this of course.
Yes so I'm Madam chair of I'm
sorry Mr chair.
Right now I apologize.
The nineteen sixty four Civil
Rights Act as I understand it
basically says the language we
take from that that we're
putting into this bill is that
the job really it's for job
related job related for the
position in question and
consistent with business
necessity so essentially that's
what would be we're asking folks
to to be able to apply for
within title seven of the Civil
Rights Act and so the language
that we're trying to have here
is mimics essentially just that
in order to be able to allow
folks to apply for the work but
also give the discretion to deny
licensure for that reason and so
what what we're trying to do
again and and if we needed to
amend every possible you know of
license
The application or however we
want to word it we want to give
that discussion rather than say
one year or five years you have
to wait before you can even
apply for a job we just don't
want it to be arbitrary in that
way and M. and Mr Chairman
representative more so are you
referring to the F. O. Q..
Is that during the.
I'm referring to so in in for
federal law and what we're
trying to get amended here today
is from the Civil Rights Act of
nineteen sixty four about how
you can apply for for work
essentially prior conviction and
and of course given that
discretion from a state
perspective to our regulation
and licensing
right Mr Chairman
representative.
If you could if you could point
four that languages because I
believe.
Certainly on the Civil Rights
Act of nineteen sixty four which
at least it's inception did not
talk about divisions.
Did talk about other things and
and so then it made reference to
bonafide occupational call.
That's correct that's correct Mr
chair Senator so in in
correspondence with the Civil
Rights Act the EEOC guidelines
on consideration of arrest and
conviction records example eight
basically states that the policy
does not provide for any in the
individualized consideration and
so that's what we're trying to
do here is so that it's not it's
always on a case by case basis
when someone presents themselves
what with an application
additionally they make us this
reference two four five year
timeline that they had reviewed
and the EEOC finds it reasonable
cause to believe that title
seven is violated when you do
have that arbitrary barrier
because it is consistent with
that and must be job related and
consistent with business
necessity and that was amended
in nineteen ninety one so again
we would be going backwards if
we created that time barrier to
entry on on a application for a
job.
Mr Chairman representative
Romero I I mean I as you know
again I I certainly agree with
the what the policy is being
reported but if we're trying to
mimic the language.
Propranolol then it might be
helpful if we actually.
Yes the language from federal
law because those those words to
have meaning.
And M. as opposed to trying to
restate it.
And and so what you know we're
we're Senators want this was
saying you know for for people
to understand what it means.
If we were to actually use the
price of federal law uses.
B. O. W. F. O. Q. or B. at yes.
The other language that is that
is been promulgated in the.
In the Federal Register
based on based on the nineteen
ninety one amendments to the to
the Civil Rights Act.
Well then then then that I think
would actually provide.
well.
What what would let people
understand what we meet in a
consistent manner.
So Mr chair Senator the language
that is consistent with the
Civil Rights Act is quoted as
job related for the position in
question and consistent with
business necessity so if we
wanted to amend section four
subsection for to be inclusive
of that language that would be
that difference.
Yes
I am and and Senator undecided.
I actually recognize you you
have the floor and and and you
have amendments pending but it
does seem to me that.
Then if we were to look at page
two.
Line twenty two after the work
not.
You the strike the rest of the
sentence and then insert the
language that Representative
Romero just provided.
Then then that would I think I
think that would provide
language for which definition
does exist.
As opposed to breaking all the
up.
But but my to certainly and I
recognize you we've got a
promotion pending and I and so I
look at you as to whether you
want to process that we're not.
Mr chairman I would like to have
my amendment modified to reflect
the actual federal law I I I run
a federal law Serge right now I
can't find this language
anywhere we run a hello Alexis
search for these words not
reason enough it's interesting
The New Mexico bill turns up our
legislation the proposal shows
up and that is the only result
that shows up I can't find
anything in the federal law
consistent with the languages in
this bill so I I agree with the
with the suggestion that that my
amendment be restated in a way
that follows the federal also
lease then we have some cases
some interpretation of what that
language with me to guide courts
and lawyers and and and I think
that's much better than than
just to agree that we need to
have language that's entirely
subjective to whoever wants to
interpret it and I I haven't
understood the explanations
because the explanation that I
received a moment ago was we you
know we I I thought I agree we
don't want individualized
consideration but then the but
then I also heard I made a note
that we want to decide each case
on a case by case basis and I
think that's a mistake I think
you know we get it we get one
job applicant and then they get
one set of of up standards and
somebody else for the same job
gets a different set of
standards bye bye whoever gets
to decide the law on that day I
think that's a big mistake so I
would agree to have my amendment
restated to adopt that language
the Santo Romero for Center Ivey
Soto who have the language and
in your state that for me all at
all except that modification to
my proposed amendment on the
floor thank you Mr chairman it
would be on page two line twenty
two after the word knots.
Right the rest of the sentence
up to the area and online twenty
five.
And insert in lieu thereof
Representative Romero what was
the language certainly there of.
In lieu thereof it would state
job related for the position in
question and consistent with
business necessity.
Mr chairman that would that
would be my my motion at this
time modifying my motion please
all right all right so we have a
motion
I'll and Linda are you do you
have that down Mr chair I do
hello okay so on that note
is there a motion to adopt this
amendment.
That's why most Mr okay thank
you thank you Mr chairman so.
Mr just hear what what I think
also on.
And make your I'm getting out of
things but on page twelve.
We have the same language
on lines three through I.
And so I think the the the
amendment would also be them on
page twelve after the word is.
Just right Representative the
end of the sentence and insert
that same language there as well
unless unless I am the second
handing.
Representative Romero are you
understanding just.
Sorry thank can you just say
that my number again.
On page twelve lines two through
five.
And it would be to strike after
the word is.
Right from the word recent
through.
Other responsibilities on page
five just before the period and
insert that same phrase jobs job
related for the position in
question and based on and I
missed Mr award I think a
business necessity without the
work.
At the that's correct the
necessity job related for the
position in question and
consistent with business with.
Business necessity that's
correct.
Linda do you have that Mr chair
I do okay so we have a motion
and at this point see no further
questions on the motion can you
call the roll.
Yes.
Senator do it yes.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am
Senator Lopez yes.
Senator Moores yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Stuart yes Senator o'neill yes
in senators about this yes.
Okay so we're back on the bill
members do we have further
discussion on this legislation I
don't know.
Yes.
Chairman services thank you Mr
minister we got through of
section one.
I have a few other.
Topics on the bill.
I didn't see anything that
alerted me to questions or
comments in section two and
three and then I know that we've
we've done significant work
already on section four which I
appreciate Center doing doing
because that level I will have
to request and on the the
language issues eliminated I
think that that was why is.
let me start with section for
this new material and this is to
be expungement of court records
this this section is intended as
an expansion of COVID sense of
court records and it begins with
what what what would have been
subparagraph a online I that
that now so far F. A. goes away
because we don't have a cell
program the.
And it goes on to say if a
person is charged with an
offense involving cannabis it is
no longer a crime.
On the effective date of the
cannabis regulation at so I've
not seen before a bill which.
Refers to as an actor another
law that has not yet been
adopted.
and then there's ways that we've
done this always differently
which is with some kind of a
contingency language for a
delayed and an act meant because
hear what we're saying in a year
you can all see this throughout
this bill is there are this bill
as written.
On the assumption that the the
marijuana legalization law
becomes law it in because it
refers to that so this
essentially says of a person is
charged with an offense
involving cannabis that is no
longer crime on and it goes on
to say on the effective date of
this act so so the reference to
the act of the cannabis
regulation Act.
Is this is this this is the
effective dates but but I want
to focus on the first part which
says a person is charged with an
offense involving cannabis.
And I think there was some
discussion earlier but I'm
unclear about it
this would allow for an
expungement of records for an
offense involving cannabis
that's the I think that's the
only way it's divine it is an
offence involving cannabis so my
question really is this is an
offense involving cannabis does
that include trafficking
distribution intent it cetera
and without regard to quantity
in other words if you're a new
year a long standing.
Drug trafficker in in large
quantities of marijuana and
you're convicted of that it is
that a an offense involving
cannabis that would then be
expunged because I heard I heard
senator Ortiz Pino saying.
And I would certainly agree with
this effect you all remember I
hope that that I passed and
sponsor the bill to
decriminalize marijuana and I
certainly support that but but
here my question is is it this
would allow for expungement of
is I read it any offense
involving cannabis
and so my question is does it
the can you have an offensive on
Canada's involving truckloads of
marijuana unlimited quantities
and is that explains how maybe
understand we're in the bill
that is not true.
Senator do it chair Mister chair
chairs around as so no so
because it's what's critical
here is an offense involving
cannabis that under the the
Kandace regulation Act would no
longer be a crime so so for
example in the the CRA someone
can possess up to two ounces of
cannabis and so if you have
someone who was charged for
possession of two ounces that
would no longer and the C. R. A.
passes that would no longer be a
crime under the CRA so that
would be eligible for
expungement if you have someone
who has who's possessing more
than that outside their home but
then that is still crime under
the CRA therefore it would not
be eligible for expungement so
folks who are trafficking
truckloads of cannabis that is
still if this C. R. A. passes
that will still be a crime and
therefore that will not be
eligible for expungement under
the spell.
Well we're fortunate Mr chairman
to have center doing who's now
memorize that C. R. A..
That's right she can refer to it
throughout I just got my copy
yesterday thank you so I'm I
haven't started to memorize it
yet but I'll work on that
tonight but that I appreciate
the answers that that puts me at
ease there
I do think that we should talk
as a committee about passing a
law here that really requires
its operation to depend on
another act that is not yet
passed that and that first of
all presume that act will pass
if it may I think we're probably
like to have something to
justify being here but the
question is then what will will
the provisions of what we do
pass.
Contain the language that
becomes join in this bill of my
making some sense here now is
I'm concerned that there may be
some changes in the bill gets
passed legalizing marijuana that
we're relying upon for this bill
that may not end up in that bill
gets passed and so I think there
may be a better way to do this
and I think historically we've
done it differently so that we
don't have this bill essentially
relying on another bill that
that is not yet passed but but
I'll come home all really leave
that either to committee members
for discussion in a moment
One ten there is language that I
I found troubling throughout
this bill which it provides for
the expungement under the
direction an overview of the
Attorney General.
you know sometimes we like the
Attorney General I like the
Attorney General right now
sometimes with that Attorney
General so I may not.
Thank ideologically along the
same lines of and I'm concerned
that this bill throughout here
says that all of these
expansions and and provisions of
store are under the direction
review of the Attorney General
you're gonna see that language
really throughout throughout
this bill will will come to
those in sections I and
elsewhere cause infection I
becomes really important to me
there too as well but but
I really would would suggest to
the Sanchez into the committee
that we take out that language
we're we're we other expansion
we don't I don't know why we
would make this open to the
determination veto and authority
of the Attorney General to have
the ultimate say I presume
because when you say that you're
going to do an expungement under
the direction review of the
journey General Representative
really don't know why you have
to say that number one every
every law I presume everything
the state does is under the
direction review the Attorney
General but but second of all I
don't know that I want to have
the Attorney General have the
right to decide whether to allow
for these expungement or not so
let me just go through some
general thoughts and then at the
Sanchez with my maybe addressing
them all at one time I'd rather
do that and not do back and
forth I also don't want to talk
at length and then not let you
have the chance to respond so so
it Mr chairman of the Sanchez
feel that I'm I'm going to
faster too far to our on this
please I hope you'll would
interrupt me but but I I think
that's a general observation in
the bill.
Of the bill that provides for
the automatic expungement which
of the the Senators talked about
and I understand that we get to
another area that I think pop
problematic and I see throughout
the bill as well online's
fifteen sixteen and seventeen
which I I I support the idea but
I don't think that it's workable
the way this is written.
And what the these lines of the
bill say is that they're all
just read was is provided the
arrester conviction included
multiple charges only the public
records related to the cannabis
charge this Fund this makes
sense to me if you were charged
and convicted of trafficking
heroin cocaine methamphetamine
and marijuana the only expansion
would be on the marijuana
conviction which makes sense the
challenge I have is that when
you say you're going to expunge
the records it says only the
public records relating to
cannabis charge will be
expunged.
I said when we began I don't of
criminal law it would seem to me
that's an impossibility how do
you expansion a record that
would have if you if you've been
convicted of heroin
methamphetamine cocaine and
marijuana in one criminal charge
and that charges brought and
then you have all the legal
court proceedings and you have a
trial and conviction of the
judgment sentence of what how do
you expansion only the cannabis
charge from from those kind of
records how do you isolate that
when the trial and the chart is
presumably would be multiple
things at one time again maybe
somebody criminal law can help
me I do that I hate funds the
records when you have all those
charges joined one case which I
think would be very common.
Student.
Can somebody help me there
please any of that Sanchez.
Mr.
There are so.
I.
And and and we looked at how so
there are other states that do
specific carve outs on it for
what we need to invest but they
also handle expungement little
different things that so for
example in California they say
that you.
You essentially edit those those
documents to make it appear as
of the cannabis part of it never
existed but but in California
they also do disruption of the
records as opposed to stealing
like we do no but because
expungement here would only
apply to the public records on a
governmental website I think
that we do it how you would
handle this we would end up
being redaction just of those
publicly available records so
for example if you're looking
someone up on and I'm Courts
stock out of and there's the
listing of charges just the
cannabis charges would be would
be redacted from what's publicly
available if you're looking
someone up on the county jail
website and there's the list of
charges there only the cannabis
ones would be redacted the other
ones would not be.
And they would not be read that
they're not redacted from
everything altogether it's just
those records that are available
to the public yes.
I'm sure there are our current
I.
Wonderment that.
Mr chairman and senator I fully
support what you're describing I
I I'd like for this bill to do
that
I'd like for it to redact the
cannabis charger conviction if
you if you look beginning online
tenants as all the public
records held by accord  work
agency of the state or local
jurisdiction that relate to the
arrest or conviction shall be
automatically expand so it's
it's all it's it's not just
isolating or or read acting
things it's all the records
right now the rest of conviction
shall be automatically Sanchez
and then and then the operative
part is is if if the arrest or
conviction included multiple
charges only the public records
related to the cannabis charge
shall be expunged so you are
arguably I think probably the
most logical construction is the
entire criminal conviction
entire criminal charges thrown
out because it doesn't say
anything about read action and
it doesn't say only that part in
the mid maybe it's just that
simple only that part of the
public records related to the
criminal charge shall be
expunged but what it says is not
that it says that it says on the
public records related to the
related to the craft cannabis
charge this funds so if you have
a criminal charges somebody of
it was breaking and entering
did a did a burglary and had
marijuana associate with that
you know how do you how do you
disassociate the different
charges the different crimes
from the cannabis without doing
what you're suggesting center I
think that's the right thing to
do is you read act that you you
do you exclude part that relates
to cannabis but we're not saying
that if you you get convicted of
of trafficking meth cocaine
heroin and marijuana that the
entire criminal charge in all
criminal file gets thrown out
but that's what I that's what I
think this says it's is the
public records related to the
cannabis charge shall be
explained that that record that
criminal charge would relate to
the craft and was chart.
And even though it relates to
other things as well too and I
don't I don't know how you to
course those unless we
specifically state that's why I
want to have happen I I like
your California example I really
do so I'd like to throw that to
the Sanchez and then to the
committee for input so we want
to do that work to to maybe do
something that sounds like
California.
Yeah and and Mister chair Mister
chair I think that is one thing
that's important to keep in mind
in this discussion is is how
public records is already
defined in the expungement Act
and so it's documentation
relating to a person's arrest
indictment proceeding finding or
plead guilty conviction
acquittal dismissal or discharge
including information posted on
a quarter law enforcement
website and then there's a bunch
of things that it doesn't
include.
So I don't know that you need to
go into the problem is I'm.
But it's also important to keep
in mind the definition of
expungement under that act which
is removable removal from access
to the general public of a
notation of an arrest complaint
indictment information plea of
guilty conviction acquittal
dismissal or discharge record I
including a record posted on
publicly accessible court
corrections or law enforcement
internet.
Website I because I.
I think that maybe it's just
that that we're reading the
language differently Mr chair.
But is this language was put in
specifically to accomplish the
goal that that I think you are
trying you are seeking to
accomplish which is if someone
let's say there is a hi charges
for domestic violence and
someone also gets busted for
possession of the same time we
don't want those the records
about the domestic violence
conviction or charges to go away
are we we want them to be we
really do want this only be
limited to the cannabis the
applicables cannabis related
offenses but I think that if we
wanted to to put in information
specific to the redaction.
what I'm wondering is it is if
we would have to.
To change the definition of
expungement under this act and I
I don't I don't know what is in
store
Senator Ivey Soto you raising
read this continuing this
conversation.
With the senator doing.
If I may I think I think this is
consistent with our process that
was started on.
As I look at the inspection of
public records act.
And exceptions to inspection
public records act and section
fourteen dash to dash one
subsection B..
It is except from the public
inspection from improper.
Questions a long court records
that reveal.
And it's got a few different
things and it and it does seem
to me that we may get to where
we're trying to go if.
If we were to say for example on
page five one sixteen.
After the word only.
The state of the questions all.
Mr chair Senator I I think that
that that's a good suggestion
and I think.
I think that would accomplish
the goal and I I would think
would it would address your
concerns Mr chair Senator mantas
Mr chairman you know sometimes
you wonder whether you've been
at this job too long.
My wife and I finish our
sentences we finish each other's
spots we read each other's minds
Senator Ivey Soto is proposed
amendment is almost precisely
what I had propose which is
afterward only although I I
but not only that part of the
public Representative records
related to the kind of structure
we expunge I I I sort of got
that's exactly what I'd written
he's got the sense of the same
amendment and center doing seems
to provide that favorable
although Senator Ivy Soto is
using questions which is
probably better to be consistent
with the open meetings I'm sorry
public records inspection act so
all the use his word over mine
but it's the same idea which is
only that that a portion of the
public records shall be
expansion I I hear Senator doing
to be favorable to that and it's
a good it's a good.
A fix because otherwise where
they're going to litigate
forever the words related to
online sixteen that really is
the kicker there which it says
only that part of the public
records related to the kind of a
strange that's gonna be the
question we're gonna fight about
that what part of that record is
related to the cannabis charge
so I like Center doings example
you got a domestic violence call
somebody's gonna be good
terribly beating a spouse you
want to keep that record you
don't want to get that expunged
but there's a marijuana charge
that comes with it and and we're
we're growing as policy we do
want that expunged so otherwise
somebody's going to argue with
defendants can argue the public
record of the domestic violence
does relate to the cannabis
charge because it was the
domestic violence that led the
police to come to the house that
then went to the Canada's charge
so you're gonna fight forever
lawyers are going to debate and
judges are never going to be
able to agree with the words
related to me but we what we but
we solve that problem with this
proposed amendment and so I like
it I propose it and I move it Mr
chairman and members of the do
that several other places in
this bill if it's the wish of
the committee and lots of
nodding of heads is there any
opposition to this proposed
amendment and let Linda do you
have it are you track and.
Mr chair I got it okay so is
there any opposition to adoption
of this ammendment.
You have amended bill so far
okay so back to Senator doing Mr
just just for Berlin the state
so that would be on page five
line sixteen after the work only
and starting the questions all
also on page five line twenty
two after the word only
inserting that there is well.
One other place where is similar
but not exactly the same
language is used is on page nine
line sixteen.
R. we're just talking about only
the cannabis charge shall be
expunged
but we could it is Sir instead.
The portion of the public
records relating to.
R. after the word all night to
to make it consistent with that
other language if the committee
such terms about this what do
you think about that if they all
track the idea the concern the
problem and they all solved my
concern problem and and I'm
interested right now that there
may be other places I can recall
again I don't have these
memorized bills but the but but
at least we found three other or
two other places where that same
change should make place so Mr
chairman I think that
Before maybe get that last
example we should probably
attack and get a get a approval
info to the committee on the the
first instance online sixteen
probably while we're at it one
one one two on page five and
then the other one may take a
little bit of new on saying the
other but I I I Mr chairman I
would suggest you the take the
wish of the committee on those
two amendments on page five.
Okay our committee is there any
opposition to the proposed
changes these amendments.
I see none okay we can proceed.
Your tracking right.
Yes Mr chair thank you you're
good track.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman I I I'm gonna move off
for now but I hope will come
back to this issue of whether
we're going to do all of this
under the direction and the
review of the Attorney General
of because again we've struck
subparagraph B. from the bill
but you'll know that that begins
that says under the direction
reviewed during general that
would have I don't I don't I
wonder what went with me say
that whether we're gonna give
the Attorney General the right
to veto expungement let me turn
to.
Section five.
I think section five is going to
be an enormous challenge and
it's of us so substantial part
of this bill is for I was like
pages of the bill so let's be
clear we're talking about
section five relates to
individuals who are presently
imprisoned individuals are
incarcerated in our correctional
facilities or even our local
detention centers and jails.
and section five for those
individuals says that within
I would I'm sure within thirty
days of adoption of this law
became effective within thirty
days and it goes on to say again
under the direction review the
Attorney General again I don't
really know why we have that in
there.
Candidly it says in a
correctional facility in jail or
juvenile facility in which a
person is in car parks rated for
crime is no longer crime of that
there to notify the court of
this.
And and and I understand and
and.
Generally support that although
I'm gonna talk a little bit
about what the bird is going to
be here in a moment to do that
but but I I don't know why this
would have to be under the
direction review of the Attorney
General we're saying we want
every president every jail to
notify the court that that
person may be eligible to have
their case re opened because the
the case for which they're
convicted is no longer against
the law and and that and that
makes some sense to me but again
I I would really get serious
consideration why we why we but
this under the direction review
the internet job particularly
because we're saying here that
this gonna happen within thirty
days of this act with all due
respect to any attorney
general's office expected them
to do this in thirty days is no
ordinary burden on them number
one number two realize what
we're asking we're asking every
prison every correctional
facility in the state to review
every case.
A century of every person in
their present I think I think
they have to review everybody in
there.
To figure out whether there are
in there for a charge of
marijuana and my other question
here is I don't know.
Whether every president every
jail and every juvenile facility
in the state has the information
capacity to do this do they do
they keep if you're if you're
running a prison in the state do
you have the files on every
inmate there that would indicate
whether they are or convicted of
and whether it was a cannabis
related offense that would be
excused by our our adoption of
the cannabis regulation Act so
let's assume let's assume that
the marijuana legalization bill
gets passed we're gonna be
asking every president every
jail in the state to evaluate
every inmate in their facility
against the law we passed to
determine whether that is no
longer crime and candidly I
think that's probably beyond the
capacity of a correctional
facility or jail or juvenile
facility I don't mean to sell
any of them short but that would
seem to be an inordinate passes
got to be thousands of cases
that would have to review and
assess for the criminal history
of everyone other inmates and
then and then they would have to
have the knowledge of the law we
passed to see whether it would
be excuse under that law and
then and then within thirty days
notify the court of every such
person.
so help me help me to first of
all understand why we want this
under the direction review of
the Attorney General when that's
needed and second of all the
confirm for me that every
correctional facility in county
jail and juvenile facility is
going to have the records the
legal expertise the lawyers on
staff for the capacity to notify
the court that the inmates they
have incarcerated are are now
protected by the law that might
get passed by this legislature
thank you senator Ortiz Y. Pino
you wanted to speak on us.
Chairman thank you immensely
Senator Rogers.
They really only applies to
those charges for which they are
currently incarcerated so it's
just this whole criminal history
it's one of the in serving time
for now and then every
institution would have readily
available what the person
Senator them is sent there for.
And it was just it just seems
incredible to me and believe
that in jail with no what this
person is serving time for or
prison or juvenile facility you
got to have that writers and I
don't think this is really bring
some.
Chairman but certainly would
would destroy the other sponsors
or extra witness on this issue.
We're doing.
I I think Missouri has more to
offer.
Mr chair I just wanted to add
that the so sorry the
supermercado share was just
going to clarify that the the
the files themselves self as far
as administration over that
recordkeeping is is for the
courts to keep so as far as who
would be directing that how
would be administrated and and
who would oversee that process
is is the court's intent with
that that record itself so I and
I guess maybe I'm I'm
misunderstanding the question
I'm seeing make confused face up
so I I guess it's just as far as
how that recordkeeping would
continue it is it would be the
initiation and record keeping of
the Courts.
Can you weigh in on this.
Mr chairman and senators Senator
Cervantes yes thank you I think
that's a it's a really important
question that you're asking and
one that we wrestled with for
quite a while in the regular
session and so I see it is sort
of a two pronged question
Senator however the answers are
somewhat inter twined the first
question I heard you poses why
are we involving the Attorney
General of this process and
Senator with the same respect
that you display to our current
Attorney General and I agree and
I believe that the sponsors of
this legislation agree that we
certainly don't want to be
legislating based upon the
current elected or appointed
official knowing that that
position is likely to change
however at the same issues we
may have with it a sitting
Attorney General we also have an
at the department of corrections
and also at individual
facilities that incarcerated
individuals and so part of the
reason for including the
Attorney General in the
oversight of this notification
process is to make sure that
there is somebody else keeping
tabs on it a sort of checks and
balances if you well and at and
insert your second question
Senator excuse me chairman the
every single facility whether it
be a jail or prison is required
to keep on hand any relevant
judgment and sentence that was
issued in the case issuing a
sentence of incarceration and
they have to keep that in part
because D. O. C. is respond the
department of corrections or a
jail facility is responsible for
calculating the release states
the point don't actually do that
most of the time and so they
have to have the need in us in
order to help them decide what
kinds of meritorious deductions
are to be awarded whether people
credit off their sentence for
participation in different
programs etcetera etcetera so
they do all have their judgment
and sentence in those judgments.
Sentences are updated if there
happens to be probation
violations parole violations or
any sort of modification of the
sentence following the initial
sentencing and each individual
person who is incarcerated is
assigned to a case manager who
manages those documents and help
them under it helps the
individuals understand when
they're released state might be
that it I agree however Senator
the air chairman you are correct
that it is not going to be an
extremely simple task to go
through every single case filed
for every single person that's
incarcerated in the state of New
Mexico to see whether there's a
crime in their sentence that
makes them eligible for early
release under this bill and any
possible a cannabis regulation
act that made passed however
that's the policy that I hope
the legislature is is leaning
towards adopting here to ensure
that people who are being held
in jail for conduct that is no
longer criminal are released and
that our state government or
local governments are taking the
onus taking the responsibility
for assuring that that equity
happens doesn't need to be the
Attorney General that oversees
this process not necessarily I
and I don't I don't want to
speak for any of the sponsors of
this legislation but I don't
know that it has to be within
the purview of the attorney
general's office and we
certainly would not want their
inclusion to slow the process
down that was not the intent
behind their inclusion it was
more to make sure that they're
somebody else overseeing things
especially for those smaller
jurisdictions were a local jail
may not have been on staff
attorney like in DC would have
for the Santa Fe County
detention facility has multiple
staff attorneys and so the
attorney general's office could
be there to help and guide in
the legal questions thank you
madam Senator Hernandez yeah so
I appreciate the education The
and during a senator Ortiz
panels are jury hi Centers EDD's
you've been out.
Maybe the rate of COVID which is
he said presumably all these
facilities will have these
records and miss Dorsey you
confirm that they would have
that the that judgment and
sentence you you also though
confirmed I think the point I'm
trying to make this is not going
to be a simple task I don't know
how many people we have today
incarcerated in New Mexico or
and then add to that all of our
juvenile facilities and all of
our local detention centers in
jail so I don't does anybody
have any idea what that number
is right now.
You know I I don't either I
don't Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
What we know thank you Mr
chairman Senator so as we know
that in the prison system there
are currently about seven
thousand inmates in the prison
system so but and we're talking
about all the jails and so on we
keep in mind that we have
multiple versions we have
multiple jails and we will
trickle General the facility so
no one the ministry of energy is
going to have to do all this
research is doing dealing with
the weather and forty there in
the million and county jail
they're dealing with the.
fifteen hundred M. D. C.
and so the total is huge but
they're also probably three
dozen institutions of their
partially out the word among
themselves.
They are the general the state
incarcerated juveniles two
hundred under CYFD care but that
doesn't count generals that are
incarcerated in county jails and
so forth but but anyway go ahead
Senator it's a good point
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and you're
right that seven thousand or the
two hundred and and plus that
Center o'neill's discussing will
all be divided up in in ways
that drugs are more manageable
except for one thing which is
that we say they're all under
the direction review of the
Attorney General then they all
come back to him.
In this case M. mail Attorney
General and so so ultimately
those seven thousand whatever
they are all going to get going
through that attorney general's
office and and realize what
we're saying they've got to do
that within thirty days of the
enactment of this bill now the
good news is the bill doesn't
have any consequence for not
following the law so if nobody
does this and if they ignore it
there's really no consequence to
it but it's certainly defeats
our goal here which is to keep
not to you know to have people
that are in prison right now
we're offenses that would no
longer be illegal to let him out
but but unless I'm missing
something there's nothing in the
bill it would be a consequence
of failing to do this and and I
just simply gotta believe that
that this is right this is going
to fail because I think Miss
Dorsey rightfully said it
candidly which is this is not
going to be a simple task to
review everyone of these case
files and you've not only got to
determine whether there's been a
conviction for a cannabis
offense in the file of each in
may but anyway to figure out
whether that cannabis offense
has now been excused by the
legislation to make it past the
session being called the
cannabis regulation Act so
everyone of those files has to
be assessed presumably by lawyer
or somebody with very competent
legal skills to compare that
conviction and that crime for
which the person is incarcerated
against whatever it is that
we're forgiving under the
cannabis regulation at so and
and remember remember and repeat
myself all this has to happen in
thirty days.
So I would rather just pass laws
that we don't know we're gonna
fail I candidly I tell you I
know this will fail there's
there's just no way this could
be done in those thirty days and
get all that notice the court
except for one thing which I
think is what they'll do.
you know creative lawyers doing
what we do they'll they'll just
notify the court of everybody
or anybody who has anything
resembling a cannabis conviction
they want try and make an
independent assessment though
just voters dump all this
problem on the courts and that
the courts figure it out because
we're running let's say running
a private prison do you want to
invest the hours in time and
resources and lawyers to
evaluate every and making K.
well I don't think you're going
to do that I think you're gonna
just take every inmate has got
account of his conviction and
notify the court to open a file
and then the burden shifts over
to court and that's why state
and that's why I'm presenting
you with great caution because
very candidly here our courts
are already over burdened other
already under resource they're
already understaffed in there
already a year behind because of
COVID and now we're going to ask
the court to essentially open
and reconsider every case of
every inmate who has a campus
convention in the state of New
Mexico I think that's the
inevitable result of what we're
doing here and we should just
acknowledge that and perhaps
give more time to the Attorney
General and to the corrections
and to the jails and to the
other facilities to really do a
meaningful effort to doing this
otherwise if I was one of those
institutions I would just give
the court everybody what what
what is what that what's the
harm in doing that none and and
that's easier that I can do that
in a half a day with one
employee as opposed to the time
that they may go through
hundreds of files and assess
each inmate so I I hope I'd like
to hear your thoughts on that I
think maybe the solution is as
simple as taking the Attorney
General out as a choke point
which is what I think that might
be and and then giving
substantially more time
realizing when I say that that
that's not good because it's
keeping people in prison who we
don't think should be in prison
I realize that I am at the same
time the alternative I'm just
giving the court all of these
notices of all these people is
simply going to that's the need
of the same error error when it.
The same result which is with
the courts are just gonna be
overwhelmed with all of these
cases out all of these files and
those people are still gonna sit
and present for the duration of
that time and I think that that
concern I have run throughout
this whole process because
remember you got to notify the
court.
Then the burden shifts over to
the prosecutors and the
prosecutors have to evaluate
each case and decide whether
they think the case should be
expunged or dismissed or what or
why otherwise there's other
language that's used in here
that I want to talk a bit about
but but again if you if you put
all these hundreds I guess it
was gonna be hundreds and
hundreds probably thousands and
thousands of cases on
prosecutors suddenly to assess
and evaluate and they have to
notify the court whether they
want to keep the case open or
pending her discharge or not my
guess is a lot of prosecutors
are you're just gonna say you
have tell the court yeah we want
to keep this this file
and and I'm just trying to
appreciate what opening this
many new cases and files in the
courts might do so I I know
there's a lot in there and I and
I didn't give you a chance to
frappes answer everyone of my
questions or comments but but
Senator doing or or any of the
other Sanchez help me not feel
that this is just a
recipe for for people ignoring
this part of the law or
alternatively just creating
chaos in our court system.
Mr chair Senator you know.
There do these people nor this
part of the law I think that
folks can will always have the
ability to bring a written of
mandate mass to to force to
force our folks like the G. in
the course to to to do what they
are statutorily required to do
but in general I'd like to get
to kick this to major because
she she practices in this area
and I think we'll have a better
sense of the.
The day today impacted this is
likely to happen but I want
thank you Mr Garcia.
Mr chairman senators Senator
wanted yes at a think it is it's
always been my practice to try
to be as straightforward as I
can when we're addressing
something as complicated as this
and I in no way shape or form
ever want to put forth the
assertion that this is going to
be an easy task it's not and nor
should it be we're undoing years
and years and years of
convictions for something that
we hopefully are now determining
should be criminal it's not easy
it is going to be challenging
and it needs to be done
correctly and Mr chairman if the
perception chairman if the
perception is that the AG's
office maybe and unnecessary
bottleneck I certainly
understand that perspective and
and personally not as a sponsor
would have an objection to
considering elimination of that
section at the will of the
committee however in terms of
your greater question is are we
setting this up to be a useless
law that's not going to work I
mean I think that's always the
case that's always a possibility
and I think you are right that
it would be naive to assume that
all of it department of
corrections jail facilities
etcetera are going to be
As exuberant as perhaps we might
wish they were in their review
and that they're going to catch
every single case that they need
to if they do a careful review
or as you suggested chairman the
flipside that they'll send too
many cases to the court and
cause a bottleneck that's
certainly possible to however
and I think that that means that
if we we need to give an
additional thirty days sixty
days whatever amount of time is
deemed appropriate by the the
the legislative body so be it
but you were accurate Mr
chairman both chairman in in
identifying the fact that there
is no teeth to this if there is
a failure to comply within
thirty days there is no
consequence other than the
inmates ever present ability to
petition the court for redress
and that is specifically stated
chairman o'neil and chairman
serve on days on page nine and
subsection J. that incarcerated
individual always has the
ability to petition the court
for redress under this act and
so if somebody's cases miss
there is an outlet for that I'm.
Alternatively I do think it's
also important to note that as
far as I know at least all of
the facilities that I've had the
privilege of working with their
databases are electronic so the
search message method should be
pretty easy I would assume you
would just enter into the search
bar the statute numbers related
to cannabis it'll search through
the PDF that are already
searchable see Mr in their
database it'll flag ones that we
need to take a look at and it
should be the courts ultimate
decision to to to to review
those case files and decide
whether the criteria is met or
not that's not necessarily the
DOC's job that's why it is going
to the courts for further review
and determination
I don't think providing D. O. C.
with more time to accomplish
their issue is necessarily
problematic if that would
help relieve some of the
pressure of the process but I
think it is important to keep
the pressure on as much as we
can so that we are getting
people out of custody to do not
belong there.
You Mr see you know if I can I
just wanted to act of no I some
experience with the correctional
institutions both adult and
juvenile and I am very concerned
about this thirty day
requirement I mean I totally
your senator Sanchez concerns
about that I think know what
we're what we're maybe not
getting as the word is going to
get out on this like very fast
okay and and people in prison
are gonna know the state
suddenly have this new right to
petition and that's really going
to put pressure on facilities I
think it's going to really help
in terms of the time
implementation so I I just want
to say that and I I
I agree I agree I don't know why
we have the Attorney General
being of lord over everything
and us but anyway that's all I
just wanted to say that but
getting back to getting back to
discussion not Senator Ivey Soto
said Senator Ivy Soto senator
Sanchez yes thank you Mr
accident center I was what was
your recognize no unless he's
got a specific issue on a point
I I like going
I'm sorry.
Of course.
Go go ahead on that point so to
speak which we don't like but
quickly.
Just no just just just
information of everybody
while while it is true that the
court system has through its
Odyssey stopped our platform.
Our.
Gone through and and is they
haven't close Mr everything but
on the process of doing a lot of
a lot of those C. R. on on
documents.
Exactly for what is the the
corrections department is still
on their legacy system.
R. despite the fact that that
the that the legislature has
provided the.
Repressions with over eleven
point three million dollars for
the upgrade in HTML system.
They they are to the COVID that
is been delayed and in my
conversations with the secretary
of corrections.
The current projections for them
moving to the HTML system are
from the legacy system which is
still out of
but in many cases out a a
command line system on our is is
optimistically April of twenty
twenty two reliably July of
twenty twenty two when that
would be taking place and so and
so and so the conversion of the
documents and in that HTML
system would take place
following that just for the
information over Senator
Hernandez thank you Senator Ivey
Soto yeah I hear a number of
members of saying that that they
understand why I would I would
strike direction review the
during John I gotta tell you one
thing I've got to believe the
Attorney General would love us
to strike him in his office from
this impact expect I'll get a
very nice a Christmas card from
him this year because otherwise
yeah he is going to be
responsible under his direction
review for all of these
notifications from every jail
correction facility for every in
may and then reviewing them and
then directing what has to
happen for each image and doing
that within thirty days I I
think this was shut down the
attorney general's office and if
and if if he was lucky you can
get it done in thirty days are I
think you will up.
I was gonna say kiss my feet but
that probably comes across wrong
so I won't say that strike that
from the record please I'll get
a very nice thank you card I
think from Attorney General well
there's I cannot imagine he
would want this job and I think
you used the right word earlier
historically I think it becomes
a bottleneck so I I would look
for the opportunities in this
bill we get to specifics of
amendments from four or limiting
the the requirement the Attorney
General has to be in charge of
all of this
interestingly in response my one
of my questions is that there's
no need to this agency Dorsey
agreed but then but then
somebody said well a an inmate
can always file a petition for
redress and then I smile because
I remember that we have on the
governor's desk the Civil Rights
Act I don't think yet passed but
of course that then gives a all
of those inmates New Mexico
Civil cause of action presumably
for not following these
procedures which would be
interesting because of course
those of us including me as a
sponsor that bill said well this
is not going to be a the the end
of the world that the all of the
governmental agencies thought it
might be but now now all of
those inmates would have a Civil
Rights Act potential cause of
action of an attorney's fees so
so what would happen is I think
Center o'neal got it right the
word will go out very quickly we
have this new law and and every
correction facility that does
not want to get sued by every
inmate who didn't identify them
as a potential case the as I
said those do a document out not
every every correctional
facility would be very smart and
I presume they have a good
lawyer every day every detention
facility every juvenile
detention facility I'm gonna so
they all have good lawyers I'll
give them all free cheap legal
advice for and you get what you
pay for they should all
immediately notified the courts
that they have every individual
who has a cannabis conviction
and that way all of those
institutions of.
Potentially being sued and
liability for civil rights
violations that's their way out
of the problem and then they
would be very smart to do that
then then you get to the next
part of the bill though that it
says in subsection B. so the
court shall reopening the case
pursuant to section five and
then we'll talk with more about
the remainder that sucker up in
a minute so so what will happen
is I think the court which is
get everyone of these everyone
of these files and the I think
it'll be a challenge I really do
and I appreciate Mr see it
knowledge in that I think we all
do and and I'm I'm concerned
about that I I don't know the
solution I don't like to do so
identify problems without
solutions but the only solution
I can think of right now is
perhaps giving much more time
than the thirty days realizing
that the the downside of that of
keeping people in prison longer
but I think ultimately
that's going to be.
A little more money on the front
end as opposed to just dumping
all these cases on the court's.
So I hope the Sanchez will
consider that that idea
favorably.
In the paragraph B. I was saying
that when the court gets notice
from the corrections department
or I'm sorry from the
correctional facilities are from
the jails so the court shall
reopen the case jobs the court
shall reopen so the court must
do this and then as is and this
mess of the court must dismiss
it is legally invalid is when
the bill word is worded the
court shall dismiss it legally
invalid so then of course the
the next question is what is
legally invalid and we we get to
some of that in subsection C.
but I I just want to pause there
for a moment to to realize how
important that is is of the
court's going to get everyone of
these files and then dismiss
them if legally invalid the
question is whether the court's
going to do that without a
hearing and what procedure the
court's going to follow because
in subsection C. it talks about
what is a legally invalid
offense online twenty two at
this talk about a person who's
completed their sentence.
that conviction shall be
dismissed and expunged because
it is now legally invalid so we
know that when a person is is a
completed their sentence is
legally invalid but we're
talking to people who are in
jail so they clearly have not
legally completed their sentence
to be legally invalid and then
and then on page on page seven
one twenty three says of course
all dismissed and expunged as as
legally invalid because of the
enactment of the cannabis
regulation that.
unless goes on to say unless the
court makes a finding the
commission is not legally about.
Or was not redress is a penalty
assessment citation so when when
you say that we're making a
finding that's going to take a
hearing I presume I can't see
how you do that otherwise for
the court to make a finding and
then we're saying the court has
to make a finding with the
conviction is not legally
invalid
and and we're not really I think
what I think we had a circular
definition here we tell the
court in subparagraph B. they
have to dismiss if the sentence
is legally invalid we say
a sentence is legally invalid if
it's up invalidated by the
cannabis regulation act but then
we say but it's not invalidated
the court makes a finding the
commission is not legally
invalid and so it seems to be
very circular to me there and
and and and evidently means the
court's going to have to have a
hearing on everyone of these
prism with thousands of cases
and files so again I think that
we're going to I I support as I
said from the beginning the idea
of expungement the idea of of
having people released from
prison for offenses we deem are
not going to be I'm awful with
the same time I think we have to
do so in a in a sensible way and
and asking the courts to
thousands of cases very promptly
and have all these thousands of
hearings on all of these matters
maybe maybe problematic and and
I also think it's it's
problematic to have of the
definition of what is legally
invalid.
Essentially defined by I
sensually saying something's.
Legally invalid unless the court
finds it's not legally invalid
and that that that circularity
causes me some pause.
I'm just gonna I'm just going to
continue on and then we less
it's okay with us Sanchez unless
you want to pause there and I
see Center doing you want to
pause there yes Mr chair I
believe that that Mr Garcia has
has response to to to the issues
that you are raising okay Mr
chairman I would just note
Senator Stewart has or had.
Can we go to Senator after Mr
Garcia thank you.
Yeah thank you chairman o'neill
chairman surrounded just very
quickly I I see what you're
pointing to chairman in terms of
the circular nature of the way
that section C. is supported and
I I don't think it's necessary
to have it reflected in
opposites however just to your
your point about the requirement
of the hearing just wanted to
draw a parallel attention to
weigh the expungement process is
currently working I'm currently
not under this bill under our
current expungement Act when you
file a petition for expungement
in court the court for the most
part has the choice to decide
whether to have a hearing or not
based upon whether the the sheet
the petition is sufficient and
so I would assume that similarly
the court would have the same
discretion in this context now I
clearly understand that the
petition process is different
because in that case hopefully
somebody's using the form
created by the court they're
checking all the boxes to make
sure that the petition is
sufficient the court shouldn't
need to have a hearing unless
there's a weighing of facts that
needs to happen but if that if
it's sufficient legally they
don't need to have a hearing but
it it at our firm we've done
dozens of these where we filed a
petition in the court has made
findings and issued an order
without having had a hearing so
I would think that most of the
time for very simple cases if
we're just talking about a
simple possession case where
that's the only thing the person
was convicted of for example
with possession of marijuana
there would be no need for a
hearing whether we clean up the
circular nature of section C. or
not thank you Mr Singh and let's
go to Senator Stewart and then
back to senators about this is
to us before but Senator
Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman I've been
trying to figure out within
thirty days following the
effective date would really be a
so it seems to me that
If we pass this bill the
governor would have twenty days
to sign it it would go into
effect ninety days after that
doesn't have an emergency clause
we're talking about the end of
July at the at the at the
earliest that this thirty days
would go into effect and then if
you follow the rest of the
section there's even a dates
that are in two twenty twenty
two for the department of public
safety and twenty twenty two for
the prosecutors so I think the
way it's laid out make sense to
me it's not thirty days from
when we vote on it it's not from
twenty date thirty days from the
end of the session it's not
thirty days from end of the
twenty days it's thirty days
from the time this would go into
a fact so we're talking about
the end of July I just wanted to
mention that of course it then
does
not require different times
through the rest of the section
but it's not like it's that
immediate that's the only point
I wanted to make thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator I am
back to senator Sanchez I think
that's an excellent point and
ended up with me in much greater
ease to realize there is that
much greater amount of time that
may that may be adequate Mike my
concern then so however I think
any any well advised
correctional facility jail or
detention center with this Ms
potentially just ask the court
to open all of these and avoid
any exposure to liability I I do
appreciate miss Dorsey
recognizing the circularity what
I perceive to be of a very
strong circularity in trying to
define what and the court has to
dismiss so the because as the
court shall dismiss of its
legal.
Invalid and then we seem to have
a circular definition of what is
legally about a and I also
appreciate ms Dorsey saying that
that her firm has done dozens of
these I'm glad to know that I
think that's commendable I don't
know a lot of law firms and
lawyers probably.
Making a good the practice of
doing expungement says probably
not a big part of what practice
so many offers many lawyers in
the state Mr G. smiling I think
the question maybe the one of
the few that does this work and
it's probably not very lucrative
so good for you you're you're
shaking your head no so for
everybody can see it up I'm here
confirming it's not very
lucrative you doing this for the
good of the because and good for
you but the issue is if you've
done dozens of these we're gonna
be calling on you and others to
be doing hundreds and hundreds
not thousands of these and and
and I appreciate Mr sees
suggestion that the court may
not need to have a hearing but
but I think she's right it
doesn't happen in her case
because there's a petition filed
provided the court with adequate
information facts to support the
need for expungement without
requiring a hearing but in this
case that doesn't evidently
happened in this case what
happens is simply by virtue of
having a cannabis conviction the
correction facility advises the
judge the vote up five vote no
file and the judge then I think
it's gonna wonder what I do now.
and I guess we could say that's
up to the judge to go research
the file reserves the convention
reserves the charge familiarized
himself or herself with the
cannabis regulation Act.
And then determine whether they
can make a finding on that alone
but it's a big task I just think
I'm just simply trying to be
mindful of the the the task at
hand here and as much as
anything the suggesting that
that we need to be put in very
large resources into the cords
and to the and you'll see here
in a few moments into the public
defenders and into the district
attorney's offices we're going
to be administering all of this
so I I hope that somebody will
perhaps come up with a good
suggestion while I continue on
about the how we avoid that
circularity and and what is
legally valid or invalid.
I am I can continue on its and
pick page eight subsection do
this is the real was referred to
earlier in January of next year
the department of public safety
show review all of their records
in the state criminal history
databases and identify all past
convictions that are eligible
for recall dismissal of sentence
dismissal expansion are
redesignation after presumably
passage of the legalization law.
So as worded here my
understanding of subsection do
is work directing the department
of public safety yes to review
all public records in the state
criminal history databases from
inception of all time there's no
there's no look back period
we're not even looking at
individuals who may still be
alive.
and and I can understand some
folks may want to expunge
records of deceased relatives I
I would think of to maybe clear
someone's history a record or
expansion of the records but
here we're saying we want the
GPS to review all the public
records of the criminal database
and identify all past
convictions that would be
eligible for recall I don't know
what a recall is I don't know
what it and this is dismissal of
sentence and then it says this
mess so I don't know what the
difference between those two
would be so awesome moment to
maybe trying get answers to
those and then it says expansion
or redesignation I don't know
what redesignation is and they
also a pursuant to the cannabis
regulation Act so perhaps Center
doing most familiar with the
cannabis regulation that can
tell me what we call or
dismissal of sentence or
dismissal or re designation mean
under that act but but really I
think the first step of
paragraph do is to recognize
once again what we're asking by
this coming January STPS to
review public records of every
criminal conviction I think in
their database and identify all
past convictions that would be
eligible for some different
treatment under the cannabis
regulation acts that means
looking at each convention in
history and finding out which of
those have a cannabis component
to them and then looking at
those files and comparing them
against the cannabis regulation
act to see which of those
criminal convictions within B.
excuse under that act once again
that seems like a very big task
by itself and then by January of
next year the department of
public safety supposed to notify
the corrections department the
prosecutors and public defenders
in all cases.
That would be eligible for
recall dismissal of sentence
dismissal expungement or
redesignation so that to me
seems like a very big passed to
and I don't know how many
thousands and thousands of files
that is going to involve the
department of public safety to
notify the prosecutors and
public defenders and department
of corrections in the state.
I'm I'm always puzzled because
we don't have anybody here for
the department of public safety
we don't have anybody here for
the attorney general's office so
I don't know why I'm feeling
like I gotta help out of the
Attorney General's office by
relieving them of all of that
work but but now like wise we
got nobody here right so for the
department of public safety
thank you we don't want to spend
of the remainder of two thousand
twenty one before January
looking at every record of every
criminal history database that
we know of in the history of the
state of New Mexico so it seems
to me like there should be some
limitations on this but let me
let me turn Mr chairman and I
made to the the sponsor of
Center doing on that point on on
on my concerns with subsection
do Senator doing our Mister
chairman Senator
I think the the timing.
Under subsection the is is less
essential than it is what we're
talking about before because
there are people sitting in
prison I under the that the
cases are being looked at under
subsection do so to the extent
that more time needed to be
built in there I don't think we
we run the same risk of of
inappropriately incarcerating
people for things that were the
this and this year it's going to
affect would no longer be crimes
as for the the specific the use
of the language recall and
everything I'm gonna let Mr C.
address that because she's more
familiar with the the drafting
history on this.
Dorsey.
Thank you chairman o'neill
Senator Duhigg Senator our
chairman serve on to is
So it in the way that this was
originally drafted back when it
was part of I think house bill
twelve originally or house bill
ninety six which everyone it was
in in their in the regular
session at the intent here for
this section was to ensure that
TPS was we're reviewing all
records and you're correct
chairman the way it is drafted
right now without limitation
for people who may be eligible
for some sort of relief under
this piece of legislation and
the different pieces of relief
available at dismissal and
expungement is a two step
process so the idea that the
term recall as far as I know in
all candor is not statutorily
defined nor is it one that I've
seen used in other places in New
Mexico statutes but that was a
term that was selected in order
to try to encompass this idea
that we want to make sure we're
capturing not just cases that
have already been adjudicated in
which case expungement would be
the proper remedy but also
capturing cases that may be
currently pending so somebody is
facing filed charges that hasn't
been resolved they haven't taken
a plea they haven't gone to
trial they haven't been
sentenced those cases should be
recalled or reviewed to
potentially eliminate those
charges not one would hope that
the prosecuting entity whether
it be the DA's office or the
attorney general's office we do
that independently or the
defense attorney in each of
those cases would have the
ability to file motions to amend
criminal informations or
indictments or whatever but in
case it doesn't happen we wanted
that that Courts to have the
ability to recall those cases on
their own upon recommendation
from DPS once a case is at is
recalled then to the court can
dismiss the sentence that was
previously imposed and then.
Expunge the records related to
that dismissal.
So Mister chairman Mr Garcia
you're confirming I think what I
intended to say which is that
the the term recall really has
no meaning in the law that I
know of and I think you're
saying aye sees Center doing
nodding your head as well too I
don't think that word has any
any understanding or any meeting
very definition I would I would
suggest that you all strike
those kind of words the words
are superfluous and right really
then they just give the courts
and lawyers bunch to fight about
in what in the world in a fight
with the Legislature mean when
they said recall I think we need
to do is identify of all past
convictions that are eligible
for dismissal I don't understand
why dismissal of funding setting
different and dismissal and I
heard major to say what you want
to do you want to have dismissal
because that relates to cases
that have not yet been
adjudicated I understand that
and then explains why for cases
that have been adjudicated and I
understand that and I think you
get there would just dismissal
an expungement I don't think the
settlement recall or in the end
I don't understand why dismissal
of sentences any dismiss thank
you for the dismissal or any
different expungement so there
seems to be superfluous language
there and and and and
unnecessary language there on on
those and so I would suggest
those changes being made to and
and then I will I will I would
really think
That we want the department of
public safety to I think center
I do explained we we want we
want this to help people who I
think are are above ground and
and so us the best review
everywhere every record in the
criminal state criminal history.
You know we're gonna end up with
Billy the kid.
you know in in the you know
we're go back to governor
ridge's and wanting to expand
his records I guess or something
so I think that I think that
makes sense to maybe limit This
the people that are really
benefit from this rather than
requiring GPS to go to every
every criminal conviction the
past.
so I would I would suggest those
changes and all all think
probably this point time let
other members of the committee
on on this.
Or the Sanchez so we maybe we
can make some amendments here
and not forgetting that we want
to maybe take out the Attorney
General in various places and
also address that that
circularity in in defining what
is a legally invalid action but
admitted Mr chairman I'd like to
maybe hear from others on the
committee or the Sanchez before
I proceed on on you'll notice
that I'm not amending as we go
along
as a I'm gonna leave that to
others on the committee starting
with Senator doing my nose
making good notes and center
Ivey Soto was at an eagle eye
for these kind of things and
suggesting alternative language
I leave that to you youngsters
to to fix the problems my goal
is to identify the problems at
at tonight's hearing so Mister
Mister chairman I can turn to
the sponsors and to up his doors
Senator Duhigg or others.
Mr chair and and turns around as
I think it taking out the recall
language I I think it's
absolutely friendly My one
question about your we have
dismissal sentence I think what
they should say is dismissal of
conviction I I I because I think
those are two different things
dismissing the Suttons and
dismissing the conviction
and and all if Mr C. disagrees
with me I'll defer to her on
that
but but I think just dismissing
the sentence would not get rid
of the conviction if if that was
something that was a because it
because that is a a remedy that
we otherwise have here and in
subsection fire in section five.
Mr chairman I if I may yes.
I think this is.
Sexual about this project some
discussion.
Maybe not yet refined government
and I think we need to overcome
that students okay thank you
senator.
So center director.
Sure and and I don't know if it
Mr Garcia has a response on Mr
Garcia during the.
Thank you chairman Senator
Duhigg Senator Vontaze.
I'm trying to just work through
the the mental gymnastics there
I I agree Senator Duhigg that we
it is the the conviction that
needs to be X. but know the
conviction that needs to be
dismissed
But what I am concerned about.
If we just dismissed the
conviction for a candid.
It gets complicated we're
talking about the cases we were
discussing earlier or there
might be inter twined charges if
somebody is serving a sentence
for multiple charges only one of
which is cannabis related we
want to make sure we're only
striking the sentence and the
conviction and the resulting
sentence for the cannabis
Defense and so just off the the
cover I'm not positive how best
to structure that
but I'll think on it as we move
forward at I do think I would
feel to mention earlier and this
is my fault at chairman services
when you were asking about the
differences between a dismissal
and recall I also forgot to
identify redesignation as a term
I do think we need to keep that
term in their and that is
related to the decriminalization
that was enacted last year the
year before
but I'll work on this language
while the debate continues.
Senator Stewart you have your
hand up.
Mr Chairman I've just been sent
an email
based on what senator Candelaria
try to get information about how
many cases in our prisons and
jails have can of those related
to them and what they finally
found is that there's a hundred
and eight.
Basis out of the almost seven
thousand.
Convex hundred and eight.
You.
Thank you that's very helpful
thank you thank you.
Okay.
where are we here.
Let's see Senator doing and and
going at that no that is Mr
chair that is fantastic
information to to have
good and surprising
and but going back to one of the
other points that chair savant
has raised about limiting this
so that the search is really
done for the purposes of folks
who it will benefit and not
Billy the kid
I guess would would that
limitation the first thing that
occurs to me is.
Of for individuals who are still
living but I I don't know if the
D. FTPS would have the ability
to to do that search against a.
A search for
Death records for instance I
could be a limited part of the
circuit Fund functionally I'm
just not sure how that search
could be wrong in a way that
that is not overly burdensome
but if others have other ideas
about how to to limit the
applicability to those who are
alive
I I want.
Okay
Senator about this well first of
all thank a Senator for the
information you know even if
it's a hundred and eight cases
and if that information is
accurate then then then within
all of the discussion tonight is
a lot of concern about nothing
hundred eight cases is nothing
it's really hard to believe that
that's the only we only have a
hundred eight because of course
the the criminal justice
component of this whole debate
discussion of marijuana it's
been a big part of the topic for
the last two years right is and
in fact the whether there should
be a separate bill whether it
was in the bill that was all of
the bill you would think from
part of the discussion that this
was a big big problem we've got
a bunch of people in prison for
marijuana offenses may turn out
we've got that mixed in nobody
in prison for marijuana offenses
and I hope that's right that
would that no with nothing would
please me more as a guy who you
know work to decriminalize
marijuana of but but let me ask
if I can Mr chairman Senator
Stuart if you don't mind you got
that information to you know
with the what the root source
the reliability of the source
words act where does that come
from because I I'm like you I
think centers during the Senate
I'm I'm shocked by that candidly
that we only have a hundred
people in prison for marijuana
offenses
Chairman I'm show up to
this was
Of someone the person who sent
this to me said use the New
Mexico system listing to our
debate.
And it and of course senator
Candelaria has been asking for
this information for years and
this is a K. O. B. four story
about he finally got his answer
the name of that is Senator
finally receives data about New
Mexico marijuana incarceration.
So and then here's the long
article state leaders are
preparing to legalize diss
August eighth twenty nineteen.
Oh one state senator is been
trying to figure out how many
that is finally after years of
us this administration did the
right thing is acting in a
transparent fashion and gave me
that data.
Out of six thousand nine hundred
and fifty inmates in New Mexico
prisons one hundred and eight
have at least one marijuana
related offense
I'll leave out the political
machinations that then people
are saying
let's see up a hundred and five
of the hundred and eight have
other charges that are no and
some involve charges for other
substances as well.
So meanwhile the enrollment in
New Mexico's medical marijuana
program has increased more than
thirty percent over the last
year.
so all send it to you Mr
chairman.
Thank you all thank you Senator
so I'm even more fascinated
because if if that information
is accurate we have a hundred
eight individuals in our prison
system for at least one
marijuana friends and a hundred
and five of them have some
charge other than marijuana so
they're not going to be released
so all of this to bill is to
help three people as I
understand.
Maybe an over reach of my
deductive logic but but at least
this part of in the this is
about having people in prison
which is been our concern and a
lot of our discussion today we
have a bunch of people in prison
for marijuana I think by this
legislation we're gonna we're
gonna be looking at three
individuals we're gonna be
coming out
and so waiting I probably right
price spent too many hours very
based on tonight to just why
three individuals who might get
released I hope I I can't
believe I'm analyzing this
correctly but if that date is
right that's I can't reach any
other conclusion hundred native
eight hundred hundred million
individual imprisoned for
marijuana hundred and five of
them have offenses other than
marijuana we're not going to
release them because we're only
gonna release those who have
only marijuana offenses so so
there's three lucky people out
there today who were all working
on to get out of prison my
missing something here.
It will be fewer than forty
because likely those are not
crimes that are being
decriminalized are present.
Mr chair chairman.
Nobody I think it's important
that we we're not just talking
about letting folks out who are
currently incarcerated we're
talking about people who have
have this on the record and I
and prior convictions and that
these are records that are are
impacting the rest of their
lives.
And so it's not just it's not
just the people who are
currently incarcerated it's the
people who have been impacted by
these policies for years and
years and years and can continue
to pay thank you senator Ortiz
you know you have your hand up
which I then that we're you know
that in those data are for
prisons but a lot of people go
to jails or the juvenile
facility so and probably are
more than three and even and and
and I I think Senator doing it's
point is a good one that we're
really talking about a lot of
people from the past whose whose
lives continue to be impacted by
a by a prior conviction for
something that we hope will not
be a crime in the future.
Thank you thank you so Senators
lantas back at you and of course
that's a that's a good reminder
the reason I was talking to
people in prison because we've
been talking about section Hey
of section five of for good part
of the evening and and that is
the section that relates to
people that are in prison right
now who have redress you by
being in prison of course I I
agree and support those
individuals who are negatively
impacted by by a past criminal
history we certainly want to
help but but for all the time we
spent talking about the
corrections department and and
jails and notifying the.
Chords and course being required
to open a file and then the
court dismissing cases after
notifying public defenders and
district during all that
discussion I I again I was
concerned that this was going to
be hundreds or thousands of
cases on the court's in a major
not to be three so so I I'm I'm
I feel a lot better about all
those concerns in terms of that
burden and I I guess we should
put it back under the review of
the Attorney General he can.
he can handle three K..
Well as I I I I take back
cutting.
All there is a break I think I
think we should give those three
cases
Mr chairman
going on to but I I do I do
agree with the sponsor I do that
we should take out the word
recall I think we should talk
about redesignation a bit more I
hear the sponsor suicide
dismissal of conviction may be a
better way to word that as
opposed to this missile sentence
I would agree with that I think
dismissal of conviction is
better your major saying she has
to think about this maybe a bit
more to think of how we do this
and we're this perhaps a little
better but I think we see this
language throughout this bill
this little does this
terminology here I think that
should be reworked at the very
least we should eliminate words
they really don't have any
definition or meaning in the law
so I I would suggest that to the
committee.
continue on with paragraph do.
After the the department of
public safety reviews all the
records that says the prosecutor
the case has till next July to
review all the cases and
determine whether to challenge a
recall which my word I think
we're gonna get rid of
challenger recall or dismissal
the sentence which I think we're
going to re word and then
dismissal or expungement
redesignation so you all can see
how paragraph being relates to
what we're gonna have to do with
maybe rewarding paragraph the
I'm sorry Representative B.
relates to how we're gonna
rework perhaps RFP are with
regard to some of those terms
and words that more may not have
meaning and they were saying the
prosecutor has until of that
next July to review all cases
and determine whether to
challenge that the goes on the
same paragraph the prosecutor
may challenge the resentencing
of a person when they don't meet
the criteria under the act so
we'll have to see some
prosecutors may want to work
hard and and evaluate every case
very carefully into the act some
of them may just let it let this
go and see a lot of cases in
prisons get this mess and others
may
Our answer is really and it'll
be interesting how this all
works out but well we may find
out once again there are very
few people that are eligible for
any of this but it goes on to
say them then in paragraph G.
the prosecutor has to notify the
court and the public defender
that he may be challenging a
particular case and then the
prosecutor informs the court
ways when when he or she is not
challenging a case of the public
defender then gets the notice
from the prosecutor and the
public defender in paragraph age
as to make reasonable efforts to
notify each person once again I
have been thinking this prime in
the thousands or hundreds but it
made and then may not being
right so this may not be a big
deal I hope we can get this
information and data actor
because you all hopefully
appreciate the the burdens that
we're talking about putting on
public defenders prosecutors
chords and others if this is
going to be in the thousands on
much less of a burden with the
hundreds and and very little
bird at all it was just a few
people but but this is a lot
that prosecutors got a notify
the course the prosecutors got
evaluate each case notify the
court what they want to do
the their prosecutors got
notified the public defender the
public defender's got to try and
find the person and notify the
person
and
And so we see that that folks
that are already understaffed
underfunded we're getting a lot
of work and an oddly more maybe
not oddly they're not here today
public no is here for the public
defender the state G. you're
giving us a lot of work or from
the district attorney's to say
you're you're giving us a lot of
work for the courts to say
you're giving us a lot worse so
maybe I should just a.
Not be so concerned about the
about everybody else and let
them.
Let them live with the
consequences of of taking the
day off and enjoying Easter
week.
Of the rest of us so.
The the the operative languages
really isn't a program on page
nine which says that the
prosecutor does not challenge
the case by July of next year
the court shall notify apartment
a public safety the case has
been dismissed
And that the department of
public safety show that expands
the public records relating to
the offense provided once here's
I language again provided that
of the rest involve multiple
charges only the cannabis we
will charge will be expunged we
talked about modifying that
language earlier to to be clear
that we would only be expanding
the cannabis related charge so
Mr chairman that summarizes my
comments mercifully for everyone
else I didn't really see too
much to get too much of my
attention until page twelve
where we define what
disqualifying criminal
conviction means and we've
talked about modifying that one
as well as we already did that
earlier I can't recall so
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members were let me go
through my.
Concerns I I hope to be able to
support this bill but I also
feel there's a so we're that I
am I believe I hear the
advocates in the sponsor
agreeing of can make this much
better bill I hope we do that
tonight and that's the function
of Senate Judiciary thank you Mr
chairman thank you thank you
senator Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and.
Senator survive just identified
a number of the the issues where
I think.
I probably would have to ask
some questions.
Thank you
So let me if I may though Mr
chairman and Sanchez committee
members.
Before I go to some issues with
with regard to specific language
of the bill that Senator on just
as I think done a good job of.
Well identifying what we're
dealing with things such as we
call.
We don't know what that means
re designation which means more
C. suggested should remain based
on the D. from bell that Senator
mantas.
Read up a couple of years ago.
Let me just let me just personal
identified related to that one
issue.
And then and then and then try
to take a ten thousand foot view
of a couple things as a seems to
be that we're doing we're trying
to some procedural gymnastics.
Not very well and and
What I say procedural gymnastics
not very well what we you know
we have in here that the court
shall notify you know the
language where things are
survive just ended up on page
nine or online well of course
on notify the department of
public safety the case's been
dismissed the governor doesn't
talk about the court and
training for.
Things happen courts wouldn't
work.
And and so
And and this is some of the
procedural gymnastics and I
think the work that we're trying
to work through and and we get
there particularly since.
As a general rule.
Connection there are stairs
normally.
On thirty days following notice
will kill with some exceptions
around that.
And that after that really we're
talking about a habeas
Representative in most cases in
order to bring it back to the
court.
And and so and so it.
Part of this business is is is
how do we get around all of that
but.
But but but the first one I want
to make is that is that we're
talking about.
expungement and and and and what
not based specifically about.
Based on the cannabis regulation
acts.
Which just on the side we just
got out of the sixty day session
with the C. R. A. was the Civil
Rights Act and so it's a little
disorienting for me when we talk
about Syria.
But
But the the thing is we have to
we have the serve on tests the
formalization bills we've had
other bills and we may have a
built in the future that are
going to decriminalize certain
things related to campus R. and
and so I it does concern me that
we are limiting.
Those things are no longer prime
on the effective date of the
cannabis regulation Act.
As opposed to simply those
offenses involving cannabis that
are no longer cry.
Regardless of whether no longer
from.
And and and so and so.
As I think I think that that
that there are some people whose
food crimes of already been
decriminalized.
But we've never gone through
this process.
But in terms of the procedural
gymnastics it seems to me and
and and then this is going to
pick up on a conversation that
was Dorsey and I have a couple
times during the legislative
session that just recess
adjusted during.
That that that part of this is
that we're trying to vacates.
Terms.
I find it interesting as a
former prosecutor myself.
Where we say you know in section
five B..
They're on page seven if it is
legally invalid I would argue as
a prosecutor that the conviction
was completely legally valid.
Because it was a crime at the
time that the commission plates
there is nothing invalid about
the conviction that took place.
And and and so.
Certainly you know I think I
think that actually invites the
courts.
Finding that the conviction is
not legally invalid.
Because because impact at the
time goes across.
And so and so this is something
I think I think we need to.
To attack from a different
perspective and and and and so
one perspective protect us from.
And and and I get that is novel
but so is a lot of what we have
in here is very novel.
And and then yes it.
Is it is very.
Is there is there is a case in
New Mexico.
Well United States of America
versus Reese.
It is our it is a case that
Well relatively recent case of
the two thousand fourteen K.
it's a published its two
thousand fourteen.
New Mexico spring court zero one
twenty.
R. decided may first of two
thousand fourteen and the this
written by.
I believe justice possum.
And
and and and in that case.
The the Supreme Court had to
determine whether not Mr Reece's
rights have been restored.
R. this was a case
I'm cert The New Mexico for
import.
From the circuit court of
appeals they were considering an
appeal of the conviction of
someone in federal court.
Not.
And and and and so the the tenth
circuit past the New Mexico
Supreme Court.
Whether or not Mr Reece's rights
have been restored.
Because of the have been
reported in his commission level
would be taken.
And and the in this particular
case get a deferred sentence.
A deferred sentence creates a
legal fiction.
Residents sometimes.
but then but then you can ask
the court to dismiss the targets
at the end.
And and the the Supreme Court in
New Mexico.
Are determined.
that eight the first sentence is
effectively a legislatively
created.
Judicial part.
And and so we've always I think
we've always thought about
pardons as an executive
function.
What we've always thought about
for instructional aide that is
something that the executive
gets to the side the the the
chief executive of the state yes
the gentleman whether department
and individual.
And I think that's true the the
the chief executive has I think
exclusively toward.
As to whether or not to pardon
an individual.
What the Supreme Court of New
Mexico recognize that the
legislature had created.
A second apartment process in a
different in addition to the
executive pardon.
There was now created a judicial
pardon.
In New Mexico and this judicial
pardon restore people's rights.
When when a judge dismissed a
case.
based on that procedure.
One of the things that I think.
Candidly we should explore.
Is whether we should contemplate
the creation of eight provided
part of.
Right class of people.
I want to be very clear.
If we were to say.
That.
By the state as a legislature
that Frank Miller's conviction.
Is thank you.
And your my part.
That would be stepping on the
executive support I think the
executive has exclusive
authority.
To review and individuals.
Our induction and look at an
individual's life and decide
whether commutation or pardon is
appropriate.
But given that the New Mexico
Supreme Court has recognized
that the legislature was able to
create a judicial pardon
process.
Probable to those people who
follow that process as
established in law.
I think it is entirely
conceivable.
That we are able to create a
provided pardon process for
people in a class.
Then this case a class of people
who have a cannabis conviction.
For our for a crime for
something that was criminal.
And his sense beat them
decriminalized.
If we were to pardon
legislatively this class of
people.
Them the result would be.
Not having to worry about having
a hearing not we're having to
worry about having to re open
cases.
Not having to worry about
whatever we intended by recall.
Or redesignation.
Not having to worry about all
these things.
But but instead the indicate
that the legislature it's
creating.
A provided pardon of people
who have been convicted of a of
a cannabis crime that has now
been decriminalized.
What with them results.
Is over for those people in
prison and and and and although
I think we have a bit of fun
that we're only talking about
four people or three people
actually.
What are the other hundred and
five people what you have to
consider is how much time of
their sentence is based on the
cannabis conviction.
Person is been sometimes to say
eight years in prison.
And years of that is based on
the cannabis conviction.
It affects the release states.
So in fact it does affect all of
the other people.
Important purpose of.
And in fact what it does if we
were to do in provided pardon.
Is that what prompts.
Corrections review.
All of these peoples are are
these these hundred people and
and we calculate.
But when they would the that
they would leave press.
And we calculated the date that
they would leave present them.
Some of them that meat would
mean that they would be released
immediately.
But I don't have a hearing.
Our.
Well I mean those were in the
president federal mail knows us
well you know they would have to
go through before the parole
board determined are you know if
they have an acceptable for all
plant.
But it would.
It would it would change though
that date and in some cases they
might get credit for in house
for all.
If there if they would be kicked
out already.
If if we were to.
Do a legislatively created.
Martin.
Of this class of people.
Them as to everybody else who's
not incarcerated right now.
What we would do is simply.
Our our.
Correct the judicial information
division.
At the Mr Ross the courts.
To.
To in search in the file in the
in the court file of those
people who have a termas
conviction.
To insert in there.
A notation that for someone to
access law.
The conviction of whatever
whatever cannabis conviction the
more.
It is actually.
Much more streamlined it does
not require the.
The gymnastics but Damascus that
are required.
To to try to on to people's
convictions no the court
process.
Because after all as already
indicated those connections were
legally valid at the time that
they have to.
And and so I I I do believe that
we could still do this in the
special session.
That is challenged we need to
revisit the issue and the thirty
day session we could do that.
but.
But it it seems to me that that
gets us closer to justice for
people.
because because what we're doing
when we expunge somebody's.
If you look at the less expunge
minutes.
All up under under the
expungement Act the the
An expungement.
Simply means removal from access
to the general public.
Okay notation of an arrest
complaint indictment information
plea of guilty conviction
acquittal dismissal or discharge
record including up a record
post on publicly accessible
court corrections or law
enforcement internet website.
Date.
They remain.
It.
When we expunge these people's
convictions they remain convict.
Impact on main convicted because
unless the conviction is I'm
done.
It is in fact legally ballot.
And so and so in fact part of
the section five.
Circular logic that we enter
into one second section five.
Is what we're talking about
expungement will what what I
mean we're also talking about
them.
This is in jeopardy from the.
Right within the criminal record
expungement Act we're now
talking about expungement of
some cases and dismissal of
sentences or or presses
additional convictions.
I don't know by what authority
we just less compaction.
Because something is no longer a
crime.
Unless there is a part.
That is the procedure for
dismissing a conviction.
Or which somebody was found
beyond a reasonable doubt.
Or by means of a plea guilty of
a crime that existed at that
time.
What does a factual basis.
So that's my that's my ten
thousand foot view that I that I
guess I would Mr Chairman like
for a discussed a couple of
minutes because because I think
that would save us from where we
end up in the ten thousand it is
that would that would save us
from from a fair amount of of
having to go through and make a
lot of.
commitments to try to get.
Get through a real.
Issue of of
a procedural gymnastics not the
least of which is.
That there is an assumption here
that everybody is represented by
the public defender.
That is not the case unless we
authorize a public defender or
director public defender to to
our.
To.
Representative all of these
people.
because a lot of these folks are
not indigent.
And and and there's there is
also an assumption.
Our.
In here that we know who the
prosecutor of the cases but the
brand we need to talk about some
point if we don't.
Some ten thousand foot view
because.
For the prosecutor on several of
these cases does not mean that I
made because I was a prosecutor
of the case on those.
And and and so and and then and
then you know we also removed.
Although although Senators do it
restored the language based on
language that was in the bill.
From the house there was
language that that was amended
in the amendment to.
These provisions in the Senate.
That is not included here that
deals with the filing of a
petition that was based on
advice from spring fort that was
needed in statute which was
dropped from the bill.
And even if we're talking about
an animal called automatic
expungement there are going to
be people.
The automatic expungement does
not work.
And they're going to need to
file a petition for explained
and the petition language was
removed.
But but I'm not sure I'll the
distinction I'm talking about.
Is whether the approach we want
to take.
Is an approach which results in
the.
Well.
Whether the approach we want to
take is an approach that results
in people.
Having a conviction in most
cases.
Suppressed from public view on
the Public what's on the on the
on the government's own
websites.
But which all of those
convictions exist on much shop
dot com and on other private
websites on lexis nexis on on on
on all of these.
Privately owned data collection
websites.
Reddit reddit a website's
recollection websites.
All of it still continues to be
there.
What we want to do is to vacate
those convictions.
indicate as a governments.
That we've convicted people of
something for which they
probably never should have been
convicted.
In the first place.
Senator I'm wondering you know
can we can we go to the sponsors
for that I personally really
appreciate appreciate your ten
thousand foot view make a lot of
sense to me I have some
questions but you're just moving
this along I've just can we go
to the ten thousand view
response from the Sanchez and I
understand that Senator doing
has some amendments already to
go as well so but continuing on
that are you okay with that
Senator Ivey Soto just to go to
the Sanchez right now.
What what what what I was
getting.
Okay.
We vacate them.
Frankly they would remain public
but but will remain public is
that they're no longer convicted
which I think is a much greater
value thank you more hearing
center of.
Senator doing.
Thank you Mr chair yeah well
well I think the concept of a
provided pardon is it is a very
interesting one that's not
something that I would want to
do on the fly here I think
that's something that should be
done in a regular session when
we can make sure that we're
drafting correctly back because
I think they're there are real
concerns that that it could be
found to be unconstitutional
because pardon power rest excuse
exclusively with the governor
under our article I section six
of our constitution
and so well well I think I think
this is really interesting idea
and and one that that should be
looked into I don't think right
now is the time to to try to do
do is to craft something
that would be that much of a
departure from from our existing
jurisprudence.
All.
And I don't know if that's
that's my overall reaction to
the I I think the biggest part
of what senator I do so now is
suggesting and I know that Mr
Garcia is is working on the
amendments
I can I can address other
specifics on their other folks
who but you know chairman you
you said that you had some
questions so.
I just want to and I want to go
to the other sponsors to assume
their response to to Senator
Ivey Soto very very well thought
out and I totally get where he's
coming from but I would say you
know just because as a co
sponsor of that expungement Act.
You know it's not to be
dismissed you know I am not an
attorney but for the people
involved when their record is
expunged that is gone it's it's
not just public record like it's
gone when they apply for a job
when they asked when they're
asked about convictions it's
gone it's nobody it's banished
so to me you know.
That's real and and when we talk
about the expungement Act I mean
that that is a major landmark
legislation enrollment for our
state but but but but again I.
welcome Senator Ivey certainly
are like your ten thousand foot
view I just I'm also aware like
this practically we're up
against you know we're here in
the special session and you make
good points as always but but I
just wanted interject that it
and go to and any others let's
see Senator Stewart did you want
to speak on this.
Thank you Mr chairman
so I think that after etcetera
survive yes went through the
bill I think he has offered some
good amendments and I think the
Sanchez doing that
our floor session because of our
committee has been delayed until
seven on that does give us forty
minutes to finish on this I
would hope that we would do that
so I am interested in hearing
from the Sanchez on the
amendments that they're going to
accept so we can move forward on
the bill it's it's too late to
change horses in the middle of
the stream of when we are
In such a time crunch I believe
this bill has been worked on a
fair amount in the regular
session and in this one
certainly took part of ninety
six and put it in here of
course.
As normal for Judiciary they had
to change what they passed
unanimously before
it's probably better now that if
we go to the sponsor and accept
some of these amendments and
move forward would be good to do
it in forty minutes.
Your muted.
Want to go back to center Ivey
Soto no regard so that's you
kind of get a sense of where the
committee is I mean that you get
answer or help of the gentleman
so I think well I well I
understand the plain language of
what.
do it right from the
constitution effective pardon
powers not specific to talk with
the governor that was
established by the state Supreme
Court in two thousand fourteen.
Those very clearly established
by the spring for the two
thousand fourteen.
So so there is in fact more than
one way to partner in New
Mexico.
And the legislature is in fact
allowed to create.
A part of the process because of
what have found that to be the
case.
So and so we need to recognize
that.
Because after all the
constitutional means what the
Supreme Court struck me.
I don't find it to be excludes.
The second thing is that that
the extent that we're going to.
remain with the with the process
we have in this bill again.
I don't think that the that the.
I don't think that the
expungement should be based on
simply those are that are.
That are done.
All of those those offenses are
changed by the cannabis
regulation Act because we have
several that were changed by
Senator Sanchez.
And and and we need to figure
out also there is I think that
that that that one of the
issues.
With this bill is a couple what
is our.
But I would say automatically
expunge it still requires a
court order.
And there's nothing in here that
provides for a court order.
On the automatic expansion.
And so and and and and if it
doesn't require a court order.
That I am looking to see.
How it is that those records are
expunged and who.
Expenditures those records and
and so Mister chairman if if if
if if Mr speaker help me out
with that.
I would appreciate.
Mr Garcia.
Are they I apologize chairman
senators I was working on the
amendments and I will question
you would think Center directly
if you want to speak to that and
I and gentleman I I think the
question is does the bill have
to specifically say an order
will be entered right level of
loss or is that.
Or is that is that language that
explicitly has to be in there in
order to effect out what that
what the court will be doing
under the spell.
And and and and and then just
put out the under the
expungement Act as it exists
right now.
It is very clear that sponge
might exist after an order is.
When we say automatic
expungement was it funding and
if it's a clinics funding.
I think we need to find better
orders after Mr is not.
Thank you chairman Senators
Senator Ivey Soto I think that's
it an interesting point you
raise it is true obviously for
the the lawyers in the room that
in order for the court to
affection effectuate a change
they do need to issue an order
it was not my position that it
was necessary to state that
explicitly I'm sure the court
knows they need to enter an
order that that would be what is
provided as notice to the the
following parties after it's
taken place however I I wouldn't
see it as problematic to state
that explicitly in the bill if
it would provide additional
clarification for the judiciary
or for the members of this body.
No specifically Mr chairman our
our Senator Senator doing and
and the store see if I may I'm
looking at page five.
And which which by the way even
if we don't change any other
part of the structure I think I
think line twenty one before
expunged.
You all intended to work I'm
happy to be.
But
but.
But
what I and Mr Garcia if you
could.
Walk me through than with the
actor is.
Medic Bunge's.
And how we know that based on
the language that's on page five
because as I'm reading this.
Under the direction review of
the Attorney General.
All records of our corporation
see that relate for system very
restaurant conviction shall be
automatically expunged two years
after the date of the person's.
Direction.
For the rest of the right no
conviction.
So is it the Attorney General is
expanding here.
Or is it part that is expunging
here because we don't clarify if
that support.
What the court.
Process unless the unless we're
granting the Attorney General
the authority to expunge and
this week can you speak to that
or Senator Derek.
Go ahead Mr state.
I think chairman Senator.
Senator Ivey Soto you are
correct that section or page
five if you're referencing does
not explicitly state.
The court is the one who will be
expunging the records it does
not explicitly state that on
page five in subsection for what
was previously subsection for a
however there is no statutory
authority anywhere in the law
that would give the Attorney
General the a power to do that
independently whether in this
bill or elsewhere
and I think that the when you
read this act as it would be
enacted in its entirety it's
very clear that the court is the
only entity that has first of
all the authority to enact an
expungement and they would be
the ones required to do so and I
think that that procedure is
expanded upon in the subsequent
sections of the bill.
Thank you.
You know it's just it to me as a
lay person if I can interject
it's just understood that's just
what happens I mean some things
don't need to be spelled out by
us
you know with the court order I
mean you raise a good point it's
always Senator but but I I feel
like you know this I just
personally feel and others.
On that that that's not
necessary thanks.
Mr chairman I I I appreciate
that do.
Well however what you know if
you look at the and expungement
Act which doesn't deal with so
called automatic expungement.
R. all of these funds into
currently takes place requires a
petition.
So if we're talking about so
called automatic expungement.
Then the question is how is it
that and brought to the
attention of the court.
In section four.
I was brought to the attention
of the court I'm I mean I get
that it's under the direction
review of the change I don't but
what what is a procedural
mechanism for doing so.
Report to automatically issue an
order and I'm not aware of a
methodology for the court to
automatically issue an order
that's a fairly manual process
individualized projects.
And so and so right we're not
dealing with data records if
we're dealing with data records
Mr chairman etcetera etcetera
etcetera delinking
Mr Garcia data records to be
automatically modify.
And so but but in this case
we're dealing with as you
indicated it's implicit that
there be a court order.
What quarter is not
automatically issue.
These.
You know at this point I have to
I have to just go deal deal with
some Senator savant this is
willing to assume his
chairmanship as is right but
place in the Senate Judiciary
Committee so I please excuse me
but continue it with Senator
Cervantes you're you're the
chair okay I'll be right back I
promise you certainly I'll
transfer you given that time
Office of so if I can interrupt
I know the flow I know there's a
question pending firs Center
doing also want to be mindful of
the floor session in the time we
got on the bill Senator if I
could just a point of of of
information center to a and miss
Dorsey I understood you are
working on some amendments to
address a number of things in
and we were trying to make sure
you had some time to do all of
that are you all a place where
you all have those ready to go
on to discuss before we continue
on with the questioning from
Senator Ivey Soto.
Mr chair we're still finishing
those up it would be really
helpful if we could do a ten
minute
Beavan up a five minute recess
to finish up those those are
amendments and then come back in
and continue
we're trying to draft those most
at the same time and it's thank
you know that's.
That's why you know what I don't
even try to amend on the fly is
just not in my wheel house so
we'll we'll make sure you get
here at the five minute break
let me find a good place to do
that Senator Ivey Soto we're we
going with what you're working
on are you working on amendments
or brought for our principles
are where we gonna go so I can
find a good place to break now
this gentleman I.
If they're willing to think
about the question I just posed
as are as working on amendments
that's fine with me that they
take a little bit of time to
work on that of the one other
thing is that we do have I think
drafted by the Legislative
Council Service to reinsert the
amount one of the members that
we put in in the Senate
Judiciary Committee before
because when we're dealing with
them in the automatic process
some people will get left out.
And some people will have to go
through the manual process.
And and I see that senator elect
react responded that.
So Mister chair I that that
amendment that was put in and
Senate Judiciary that is why
much much broader that that it
that changes that applies to
overall expungement for
everything whereas we're just
really focusing on cannabis here
but to the extent that that
amendment addressed the problem
of when someone does file
petition that petition is still
public record that issue is
already addressed in this bill
hi so what would that be
addressed I I can look through
it so
I can let you know when we come
back from finishing our members
but I mean I'm or in this that
to address that problem
throughout late so it's actually
in here a number of times
and and that would be fine if if
if if if you wish we were that's
addressed but but I will also
note that that that to the
extent that that is a.
The initial that affected with
cannabis and maybe a broader
issue it is also an issue that
the administrative office of the
courts of asked us to address
because they perceive that there
is a problem that is president.
For people every single day with
the belt Senator o'neill Care
and Mr Kirk uh when we have the
opportunity into regular session
to do a comprehensive approach
to the expungement bill and
clean those things up overall I
think that would be a great
thing to do but that the focus
of this bill is specific to
cannabis because that's what's
on the call for the special
session.
The last thing I would indicate
is that if you look at the parts
of section one and section two
as well as.
Section.
Seven of the of the bill none of
those are specific to campus and
so that actually is not
consistent throughout the thank.
So we're gonna take that break
I've got
six thirty four will convene
back at quarter till a little
bit more than the five minutes
just a little bit but I'm but
I'm gonna rely on the committee
to being timely given the fact
that were wanted on the floor
that they're holding back to for
another work and I know some of
you all would like to that of
the dinner break in here
someplace to so let's try to be
quick all be ready for you in
ten minutes at a quarter to the
hour okay.
These kids are staff and
everybody a little bit of a
break we'll see right back in
ten minutes Mr chair.
Quarter till I'm back who we
got.
Members control the camera for
just a moment to sign up we have
back.
Could be you and me Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino.
No we got Senator Stewart
Senator.
There.
Really need to have Center
doing.
They're doing we've got most
everybody we need back I think
on the committee.
I shouldn't say that quite that
way we need everybody of course
but we have a quorum.
Which is a start I think we
track here looks like yeah we we
do all right.
We were.
With you.
Senator during your work out
some amendments do you have the
time to be added to get the
timing right of trying proposed
amendments to the bill.
Absolutely Mr chair.
So we sort of had the floor but
he
I think we'll defer to well
let's see generally so you had a
you had a mentor to as well too
is that right.
Mr chairman I'd I do I'm I'm I'm
happy to allow Senator to go
first money will not take very
long at the very end if it is
not included.
Good we're gonna we're gonna get
through everybody what we're
gonna do we've been on the
discussion quite a bit now we've
been through the bill thoroughly
I think it's time to in the
proposed amendments that have
committee votes on them take
action and consider the bill our
product of the committee so
Senator gonna start with you
your we need some time to work
on some amendments if only you
had the time to do that.
Yes Mr Garcia is finishing my
last one up right now but we can
start with the others okay and
we've got our committee
secretariat staff I presume
standing nearby to keep track of
all the so Senator doing the
floor is yours on amendments.
All right so the first one is
our and and and just to to make
clear Mr chair I believe the
ones that we have already voted
on occurrence Miss Vigil were
the ones changing that the
language that the but one that I
made for staff human trafficking
taking out subsection B. and
adding in that job related
language from before.
So but there's a couple in here
we talked about that that will
be added that we didn't vote on
so on page five
starting on lines nine and ten
after convicted strike the comma
and then under the direction and
review of the Attorney General
comma.
And and I could strategist run
through these all Mr chair.
It gets a little complicated
sometimes of the of the
amendments have a relation or
don't have a relation to one
another so because members may
vote on them differently Senator
XO you know what you're doing is
something maybe I online you
said nine and ten you're you're
proposing to strike under the
direction review the train
general.
Yes Mr chair okay we've all
discussed that issue before I
think what would be appropriate
center is if you can identify
other places where the bill has
that same language perhaps we
take all of that on one motion
striking all references two
hundred direction an overview of
the turning generals and I think
that all makes sense to be heard
together think we all understand
why we're we don't want to do
that so that was on that right
so it is page five lines nine
and ten and then page seven line
one and then the economic loss
for general is online to.
Okay striking the same reference
there.
To Attorney General page seven.
C..
In some yep under you're gonna
be just we're gonna striking
calm under the direction review
the train general yes.
Yes Mr chair okay all right
let's take that as one motion.
Members the committee is
everybody with us right now more
secretary in Stafford body with
us on the proposed amendment
strike can the language under
the direction revealed Attorney
General as one motion that's the
motion before the committee on
that amendment is there any
further discussion on that
proposed amendment.
Right is there any objection the
adoption of that amendment.
Senator Stewart Senator I'm
checking all right any others.
Our show all members voting in
support of thank presume might
without asking the sponsor
consider that a friendly
amendment since the Sanchez one
supporting the amendment so
without goes without saying I
think it all right that
amendment is adopted by the
committee that'll be amendment
number four Senator do it with
your next amendment.
All right so then hi this is
going to these are three changes
that are going to make the
changes so that's only portions
of the public records related to
I the cannabis offense to get
struck it's page I line sixteen
R. after only the insert
questions questions up that.
And we're make that same change
page law page five line twenty
two.
Well I.
Actually we don't need to
restructure.
But on page nine.
One sixteen after only we would
insert the portion of the public
records related to.
All right so one more time he
said page five one sixteen does
not need to be made as an
amendment all right pays well I
live sixteen and page five line
twenty two those to do need to
to to be done try this okay
those remain in place and in
each case after the word only
your inserting the words
portions of the yes right.
Okay and then age six line
twelve is that the one that
could be your that one.
But page nine lives line sixteen
after only inserting the portion
of the public records related
to.
Right
members of the committee any
questions
debate we've we've discussed the
read.
A loss only the portions of the
criminal record that relate to a
kind of a connection
and so was there any other
discussion you'll recall the
debate discussion.
All right ready for a vote is
there any of the adoption of
this amendment this.
More Mike is open.
Talk about your congressional
race.
Let us know your strategy.
I need them motion before the
committee is to adopt those
amendments are H. five two
places page nine one place is
there any objection to the
adoption of that amendment.
All right see none that
amendments adopted a German
number five Senator do it.
Page five one twenty one this is
a good catch Senator Ivy Soto
after with the word be in Sir
automatically so that the
automatic nature of this would
apply to both juveniles and
adults.
On page five one twenty one.
After the answer automatically.
Committee members questions or
comments on that proposed
amendment yes Senator.
Mr Chairman H. five eight twenty
one.
That's what I heard yes yes
after the word in the.
B. B. of the okay.
Before the word expunged right I
see it thank you.
Committee members with other
questions is there any adopters
any objections the adoption of
that amendment.
Right that amendment is adopted.
All right.
Lines twenty three through page
eight line three.
We are deleting I starting with
the court shall it's deleting
that tire sentence this was that
circular language that was in
there Mr chair are we don't need
to have it in there at all so
we're just taking that whole
sentence out.
What is the address but you
didn't have to try and fix that
H. seven line twenty three
starting after the period
striking everything.
page eight line three.
Questions of the committee.
Any debate or discussion on this
proposed amendment of.
Judiciary staff I assume you're
going to interrupt me if you
need clarification on proposed
amendment.
Yes Mr chairman okay good
hearing silence makes me believe
you're up with us seeing no
debate it is gosh on this
proposed amendment is there any
objection to the adoption of
this amount.
Right this is adopted as our
number seven I believe eight
seven one twenty three through a
J. one three striking that
section all right center do it
next will be amendment number
eight for more remember it will
be a number of changes all of
which cleanup that recall
language and also take out the
repetitive.
Language about dismissal the
sentence so that all of these
things one what we recall at all
and will read discuss on
expungement or redesignation and
solve read all all of that the
changes that would affect that.
Versus page one line thirteen
our strike recall for.
Page six and tell me to slow
down if if need be page six line
twenty three again struck recall
or.
Page seven line nine strike
recall or.
Page.
Lines seven to eight after
eligible for strike recall or
dismissal of Sutton's dismissal
and expungement and and
certainly there dismissal and
expungement.
We're gonna make that same
change page eight lines twelve
to thirteen.
Page eight line sixteen strike
line sixteen and certainly there
of dismissal and expungement.
Same change maybe page eight
line twenty five strict in line
inserting dismissal and
expungement for.
Page nine lines three of four
strike recall or dismissal
sentence dismissed on
expungement and and certainly
there are dismissal or
expungement.
And Miss Vigil I'm gonna send
all this to you in writing.
Page line line seven to eight
making the exact same change
striking recall or dismissal
sentence comma dismissal
unexpended inserting in lieu
thereof dismissal or
expungement.
And page nine line eleven
striking that line inserting and
lieu thereof dismiss on
expungement.
All right we're good those
should all be taking the others
one motion you explain the
reason I think all the committee
members recall the discussion
hearing I think it's fair to
summarize the reason for the
change here were concerns I had
with legal terms that we're
trying words that I think didn't
have any legal definition are
important and also there was
some redundancy or opportunity
to maybe simplify things yes.
Yes Mr chair very good good
committee members with questions
or discussion on these proposed
amendments.
Seeing is there any objection to
the adoption of these
amendments.
Right those amendments will be
adopted as a minute number eight
Senator Wirth would potentially
member number nine number nine
and you know when when I Senator
Ivey Soto and I were talking
about the changes to make the
petition itself also I expunged
I was thinking of a back up
amendment I was writing and so
to transfer that language here
page nine line nineteen strike
the word and a N. and certainly
there of a cannabis and then on
page nine line twenty one after
the period insert if the
petition is granted the court
shall issue an order within
thirty days of the granting of
the petition requiring the
portions of the public records
related to the cannabis offense
as well as all records of
proceedings related to the
petition for expungement to be
expunged.
There be expunged.
All right so
more complicated than the early
years so and we're the one more
time just not on page nine one
twenty one you said.
Yes and an online nineteen we're
just making clear that it's
specific to the cannabis offense
and then on page twenty one
after the period inserting if
the petition is granted the
court shall issue an order
within thirty days of the
granting of the petition
requiring that the portions of
the public records related to
the cannabis offense comma as
well as all records of
proceedings related to the
petition for expungement comma
be expunged.
And this would make it so that
there there's not a record of
the petition for expungement if
someone uses this back up
procedure of doing that and this
is a change obviously we would
like to make over all I to our
expungement Act and I hope that
we would will do that in the
next session.
But for now it would be at least
apply to the can just once.
Many questions or discussion.
Mr yes Representative while I
certainly support the amendment
I will note that this only
applies to people who are
incarcerated for work plus
rated.
And so this does not apply to
everybody who's had a cannabis
conviction thank you.
Senator Duhigg said the intent.
I'm you know right now is that
back up procedure that we're
putting in there is for the
people who are are or were
incarcerated
in case that automatic review
that occurs doesn't they they
get lost in the track and the
cracks
so so I think it matches the
intent of of this currently
although I I certainly
acknowledge that it can be
expanded in the future R. as a
program.
And I just a quick question I
maybe should've put more
specifically is doing do we want
to try and do that here today
now Senator.
Yeah I don't think so Mister
chair.
Senator Ivey Soto you had some
amendments coming so we'll give
you a chance to make your point
on that perhaps later Sir doing
next amendment please and I
think the last one and Mr
Garcia.
We brought that one place.
No yes on the last one I'm sorry
thank you.
Yes we had discussion debate any
other debate or discussion
committee members.
Is there any objection the
adoption of that amendment.
Right seen on that amendment is
adopted this is the members to
age nine and you said page
twenty one center.
I this is our page nine lines
nineteen and twenty one.
Thank you.
Number nine percent are doing on
the member number ten the last
amendment I believe Mr Garcia I
can present and it was to
address Senator Ivey Soto is
concerned about about sexually
for full handed over to Mr
Garcia for that one.
Thank you chairman Senator at so
that the last one that I I've
been thinking about and I
haven't been able to come up
with this is simply to do it
perhaps Senator Ivy Soto will
have some guidance and he had
mentioned that prior to our
brief recess that it might
improve this bill if on page
five in section four it was made
explicitly clear that the court
should order issue an order
expunging the records that are
contemplated herein and I'm just
not seeing it a simple way to
insert that in here I think that
is a friendly amendment and I
wonder if the senator may have
some words missing suggestions.
But but I do not at this time.
There's a steep haven't thought
about I think structurally if it
takes more to get there.
With a I would at this point of
that.
You're you're muted please thank
you Mr chair I it you know I I I
think that what Mr Garcia was
originally saying on this point
which is that even though it
doesn't explicitly say.
By court order because that is
the only way it could happen
under our law the courts will
know that there is that there
will be a.
Basically it's not laid out by
it but the process will will be
able to proceed so I think in
the absence of any specific
language we would just proceed
as as on that section.
I like the rest of the committee
are still been shocked that
Senator Ivey Soto does not have
a proposed changing the language
but I'll get over it
other members Senator doing any
other amendments.
Your Missouri not this time Mr
chair Senator Ivey Soto your
amendments yes our Mr chairman I
have an amendment to add back in
language that was inserted by
this committee in the sixty day
session well related expense
I believe on the semester has a
copy of that thank you for back
up on the screen basically it
provides what does that provides
that when you file for
expungement it is filed under
seal.
Along with with the current
process and this is actually
double down on by the language
that was insert on page nine is
that when you don't file under
seal mugshots dot com and all
the other data collection
organizations get a copy of that
and the fact expungement is
obviated because in because now
there is a public record of the
expansion so you remind people
of your convictions.
Because you filed for
expungement.
And so this takes care of it it
was requested it was we had an
email from the.
I will counsel to the admission
Ross Office of the Courts that
indicated this would be helpful
we've had a conversation with
the Chief Justice he then the
kid this will be helpful I think
we should respect with the
courts want in terms expungement
not everybody is gonna have
automatic expungement and again.
On this one.
Two and seven of the bills are
not specific to cannabis this
will help people with cannabis
we're not picked up by automatic
expression thank you.
I some of.
In center let me make sure I see
how this works so the way that
the the and that we see on the
screen reads.
You change the title by the
first paragraph.
On page four you're adding a new
section four is that right.
This so that it would work for
them population otherwise it's
out of accomplishing order that
is correct and then and then if
those the maestro would please
move up to the next page would
that make the existing section
four than section five of the
bill Mr minute what.
We would remember accordingly
that is something.
So and and and so the the the
the primary languages it's
subsection C. R. which is what
is what what again the point
system has indicated they need
statutory authority for them
they don't believe that they can
go back for rural
less so and then if you would
please move up page three.
And that's that's just the end
of it right there very good all
right
back to the full screen with
members the committee first of
all so Senator Duhigg or other
Sanchez is the amendment how do
you respond the amendment Mr
chair I I think that if we.
So it really depends on if the
committee wants to be making
wholesale changes to
expungement.
Right now or if we want to keep
in their to cannabis if they
want to keep it there to
cannabis I think we can at the
language about filing under seal
or under student them on page
nine in subsection J. I. to
effect that change
And and and that would be my
recommendation I love the look
that the amendment that was
made.
and previously.
There were some problematic
language in there when I was
looking at it before and but I'm
not for that we have the time to
go through that now it.
For example their stuff around
the delay is based on.
owner maybe something else.
But.
The intent of this bill other
than the language from H. B.
ninety six that this committee
had seen before was so with the
new language that that that this
before the bill of the committee
for the first time was to keep
it narrative cannabis I just I
certainly would have no
objection to adding in that
under seal or under student
language of for cannabis
petition specifically again I
think it's be it be great to
come back when we have the time
to do so in a really considered
way and expand that overall I
don't think right now is the
time to do it so I can suggest a
counter amendment that would add
that language that Senator Ivey
Soto has identified that the
courts and asked for
Or perhaps I can offer that
depending on how how this
ammendment whether this
amendment passes or not.
Mr chairman I'd like to stay
with my man.
All right.
So Senator doing great then take
that as an unfriendly amendment
from you is that right yes Mr
chair okay other members of the
committee with more discussion
on the proposed amendment.
Right seeing no other committee
members on Senator o'neill on
the debate of the amendment.
Your community center now.
Yes so basically what Senator
doing is saying she wants to
keep it limited to cannabis
where is this ammendment that my
colleague Ivey Soto has
proposed would expand it to the
original expungement Act is that
correct.
This gentleman Senator o'neill
so the there are three sections
in this bill that I'm and the
original expungement Act.
And what's.
The amendment that is being
proposed as an amendment that
this committee adopted in the
sixty day session.
But we adopted it as part of the
cannabis bills we added to the
council
session.
That's all I wanna do is
maintain what this committee did
in the sixty day session with
regard to this issue.
I like to respect the
committee's work.
In the sixty day session and I'd
like to respect what that you
did on expungement given that
this but the Chief Justice of
the Supreme Court and the
general counsel of the measure
of office of the courts have
both said this is needed
language.
Senator right now Senator Kamil
when someone tries to expunge
under your belt.
It does not have the effect of
an expungement.
Unless we adopt the cement.
Okay okay thank you Mr all
listen to the debate thank you
thanks for clarity clarifying
that.
And
if I may very quickly I I
realize what it was that was
that I had gotten kind of hung
up on on this ammendment so in
subsection C. it talks about.
Various time frames subsection
D. which is talking about
objecting to the petition on the
basis of reciprocity shins from
the FBI must provide a copy of
that record at no charge within
the deadline set forth in
subsection C. it was not clear
to me what that deadline was
there's a reference to a ninety
days prior to the date the
petitions filed but I don't know
how that would affect that it
would not make any sense for
that to be the deadline there
there was just there is the
language in that and I I
acknowledge this was adopted in
Senate judiciary
But I think there's still some
problematic language just like
H. B. ninety six was adopted by
a judiciary but we changed and
fix some language and from that
language here today said just
the fact that has been adopted
by this committee previously
doesn't mean it doesn't need
work and that subsection do
concern me that it needed work
and so that was why I I I wasn't
crazy about just wholesale
docked in this.
Thank you Sir do the committee
members with questions or
comments.
All right just weigh in as the
chair I favor the amendment very
simply because I I think Center
doing.
We're very commendably wants to
keep this bill focused on
cannabis given the limitations
of our special session at the
same time my thinking is that we
weren't.
Constrained by time and and by
focus on on legalize marijuana
this session I really do believe
Center doing is saying that she
favors the concept of of this
realize you're not in your head
affirmatively I think it's a
good thing what we're doing here
I I I recall Committee doing
this and I I know the reasons
that one that it's being
proposed which is if you have to
petition publicly for
expungement you're laying all
the reasons for expungement out
there in the public which kind
of defeats the whole purpose of
the expungement some I favor the
idea of being able to do this
confidentially with privacy I
think that this really furthers
everything that we're trying to
do with expungement and while I
respect the goal to keep this
limited for cannabis purposes I
I don't think that level I think
we all use the quoted of we're
only the the perfection be the
enemy of good this is a good
thing this is a this will help
people who want to get expunged
so I I favorite that so that
concludes the committee comments
I go last we'll take a roll call
vote on the issue Emily would
you please I'm family sorry
three would you please take a
roll call vote for the committee
sorry about having thank you Mr
chair for the amendment yes it
is okay to do.
Yes Senator doing now.
Senator Ivey Soto yes ma'am.
Senator Lopez now.
Senator Moores.
You yeah.
Senator.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator Stewart.
No.
Senator o'neill.
Yes.
Senator Pirtle one more time.
Senator.
Yes.
Did you call in center Ivey
Soto.
Yes okay you're welcome pirtle
server no I have a vote of five
in the affirmative and three in
the negative.
That amendment is adopted as our
amendment number ten.
Senator Ivey Soto did you have
other amendments.
And Mr chairman Mr chairman.
There are there are other areas
that we discovered.
I'm sorry so just a moment
please I used before Senator
Woods center doing did you have
something that needed to be
brought to the attention I do
just because we've adopted this
amendment there is language in
it that refers to a deadline set
forth in subsection C. there is
no deadline set forth in
subsection C. so I think we need
to fix that night would you
propose an amendment into the
amendment Senator I would say in
subsection dean
starting at the the second to
last line it's it's not numbers
the lines are numbered a
striking within the deadline set
forth in subsection C. and of
this section I would strike that
language now that said with we
do that there is no deadline for
when a copy of the record has to
be produced to petitioner at no
charge.
But right.
But other than putting a
deadline in subsection C..
Not sure how to fix that right
now and I'm and this gentleman
if I could add and so Senator
has in front of our perhaps we
can just simply say within
ninety days of the request by
the petition.
And Mr chair my only concern
about that is do we really want
to delay someone's case for
ninety days I to it to get to
get this this record if someone
has a that is trying to get
something Sanchez we're now
building and an extra three
months.
To that petition being.
Being granted or denied this
what would you do this.
I think thirty days would would
be a lot would be more
reasonable don't differently
enrollment Mr chairman if there
be no objection from the
committee would be to strike
that line and certain into their
off within thirty days of the
request by the position.
But it's not Mr chair it's not
request by the position because
this there is an obligation if
you're making the objection
based on this you have to
produce it so I would say within
thirty days
Of.
It's if they seek to it to
objects to it
I guess within thirty days of
I'm objecting I I don't know
because with the the objection
then then there's a delay thirty
days before the court actually
rules on the objection.
But they get the record and and
given where the courts are right
now I think I think that's
reasonable yes.
If we could just write it and
I'm fine with that.
However you'd like to proceed
Senator do it I will follow your
lead on this Mr chair I I think
this is overall protective
language for petitioner and so
that that's what I'd like to get
it right and and that's why I
was urging not to this on the
fly
but I would point of order
actually I think I have it has I
think I was pollution but for a
second I've got Senator whether
hand raised and I want to well
what folks I can tell you tell
me your hands all right Senator
is right well it was raised a
long time ago but you know it's
not about this course this is
what you said we wouldn't do and
here we're killing at.
Okay Sir Sir Senator Baca.
I was just raising a point of
order Mr chair we adopted the
amendment as it was so if for if
there is a an amendment that
needs to be made to the now
eleven amended eleven amended
time bill
I think I would have to be
presented as such rather than as
a negotiation Mr chair on the
bill that's amended right now
well I I I agree among cover
with the negotiations going on
but but here's the issue we we
did adopt the amendment Senator
doing is rightfully pointed out
that there may be an issue with
the amendment I think the the
sponsor of the amendment
Sarasota agrees there maybe that
that issue with the amendment so
for us to do our work well we
should correct the amendment to
members properly on the bill we
have the opportunity to amended
now and so Senator Duhigg you
and center Ivey Soto we're
discussing resolution of that
and I'm gonna ask Center doing
for you to propose a resolution
and then Senator Ivy Soto the
responses who was is amendment
Senator Duhigg yes Mr chair I
think that the the way to fix it
is that it's a party seeks to
object at the time that they
object we must produce those
records to the petitioner there
shouldn't be any any gap in time
if they if they're objecting on
the basis of those records they
have those records they can
produce the.
so I would maybe put in a
requirement that I'm and take
out within the deadline set
forth in subsection C. of the
section and it read and
certainly there I have at the
time.
The party is objecting.
Senator Ivey Soto let me ask for
your response.
Not a problem.
Right very good we do this
because we put the amendment
back up on the screen please in
the operative language just so
we're clear what was striking or
inserting in where
you.
When you put it out hello one
second let's get the screen up I
paged right here in subsystem
section state yes I can do six
started the second to last line
of subsection do start striking
within the deadline set forth in
subsection C. of the section.
And inserting in lieu thereof.
At the time the party seeks to
object or objects whatever you
all think is best.
The party objects.
Yeah I agree.
All right at the time the party
objects
that is a proposed amendment by
Senator do is going to treat it
that way Center doing with the
proposed amendment any further
discussion members of the
committee for the amendment of
the amendment any further
discussion I I need to have the
screen back so I can see who may
need to be recognized.
Right anyone on the proposed
amendment.
Is there any objection to the
adoption of that amendment to
the amendment.
Already passed all right seeing
none that amendment is adopted
thank you Mr thank you senator
for that I appreciate.
very good Senator Stewart you
still have your hand raised I
move the due process as many
times amended.
What Jan eleven really eleven I
think we'll call it ten because
the last one was amendment of
amendment so treat that as one
of members of any further
discussion on the bill and the
do passed motion before the
committee.
With what are called is any
further discussion at all seeing
none.
Let's do a roll call vote on
this bill please.
Senator Baca
Senator do it yes Senator Ivey
Soto yes.
Senator Lopez yes Senator
Moores.
No.
Senator Pirtle.
No.
Senator Stewart.
Yes Senator o'neill yes and
senators about this yes vote of
six to three have a due pass the
so Duhigg presenter I or Ortiz
Pino
I can't tell who also still with
you from the I don't think
Representative Romero's still
with okay she actually was
Representative Romero is still
with us all of you have a due
pass all this bodes a very very
interesting for the marijuana
legalization bill.
In a committee of the whole so
get some rest tonight and we'll
see on the floor thank you for
meeting and Senate Judiciary
tonight.
Thank you chairman.
Thank you Mr chair.
