Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
members, we are here on Senate
Bill 57, uh, with me is Doctor
Eve Espe from the University of
New Mexico Health Sciences. Um,
this bill is an amendment to the
inspection of public Records Act
to exempt.
From disclosure, any record
containing personal identifying
information or sensitive
information related to the
praxis of a medical provider who
performs medical services
related to abortion.
I'm gonna let Doctor SB go
through the specific world that
she's been living in the last
number of years, I will just let
the committee know when I heard
her story.
And what she has to deal with on
a regular basis with respect to
IPRA.
I was willing to do something
that I'm always hesitant to do,
which is actually take a look at
the IPRA statute and see if an
exception made sense in this
case, after you hear.
Her world, I think, I hope
you'll agree and we can talk
about the specific language, so
I'm just gonna yield straight to
uh Doctor ESB and then we can
open it up for some public
comment and then go to
questions.
Thank you, Majority Leader
Werth. Uh, thank you to members
of the committee and um uh to
you, Chair Cervantes, for the
opportunity to come before the
committee.
Um, my name is Eve Espy. I'm a
board certified obstetrician
gynecologist, uh, and I've had
the privilege of providing full
scope OBGYN care here in New
Mexico for the last 34 years.
The 1st 6 years was in Gallup,
New Mexico, and then the last 28
years has been on faculty at the
University of New Mexico.
Um
I'm here as an expert on SB 57,
a bill to create a narrow
exception to the IPRA Act for
medical providers who offer
abortion care as part of the
full scope of their practice.
And I first just want to
acknowledge that IPRA serves a
very important purpose in the
state. Um, I and all of my team
members strongly support
transparency and open
government. The point of SB 57
is not to hide information, uh,
records, documents, but rather
to prioritize safety and to
protect people from potentially
being targeted. Um, for harm.
Uh, so my team of OBGYN
physicians and those of us who
include abortion care as part of
the full scope of our practice,
we have been subject to
continuous random, and
essentially anonymous IPR
requests.
These requests are always from
out of state PO boxes and
typically are, are voluminous in
the amount of material that's,
um, that's requested.
Uh, for example, just in the
last week, I received a request
for all emails to and from Eve
Espe from September 20202024 to
the present. So that's 6 months
of emails. That's thousands,
literally thousands of emails.
So the, the way we see um the,
the problem with IPRA in its
current form, that this
legislation would address.
Uh, is primarily one of safety.
Abortion providers already face
violence and disruption that we
know has been increasing in the
last several years. I personally
have been picketed at my home.
I've had people yell insults at
me as I've walked across campus
and I've received threatening
mail at my home.
But who I'm worried about is my
trainees, um, other, other
people who correspond with me,
uh people from out of state,
other providers, um, and a
variety of different kinds of
students.
Documents that are responsive to
IPRA requests contain enough
detail for targeting. So their
names, personal information,
clinical schedules, travel
plans, calendar information,
requests for mentoring. All of
this feels very unsafe to be
provided at a time when we know
how much violence there is
against uh people, not only who
provide abortion but who may be
interested in providing that
care.
So although we make a major
attempt to redact uh personal
information, the sheer volume of
their requests and the limited
scope of uh current IPRA
exceptions creates a dangerous
situation. So, like me, every
member of our team that gets IPA
requests goes through every
single page of the the, the, the
documents that have already been
redacted by our IPRA custodian
to make sure that anything that
we are able.
to legally redact that we're
able to do that to preserve the
safety, um, of the people who
correspond with us.
And I'll just say the second
issue is, is one of workforce,
and I know we've talked a lot
about workforce, the session,
and we certainly are talking
about it a lot, um, among
ourselves as, as.
Providers that this feels like
and is harassment of clinicians
who dedicate their careers to
serving our communities. We need
every OBGYN we can recruit and
retain in New Mexico, and these
voluminous and onerous requests
are frankly demoralizing.
So I'll just conclude by saying,
we're so grateful to the New
Mexico legislators who put into
place many other protections for
clinicians who provide
reproductive healthcare,
including abortion care. This
bill, we feel addresses a gap uh
in safety of providers,
trainees, and colleagues by
extending those important
reproductive health protections
into IPRA.
Just quickly, Mr. Chair, if I
could, I know you like to go
straight to the language in the
bill, which is why we're here to
discuss, um, and I pulled up the
statute book because again, the
definitions that are in IPRA,
some of those carry over to what
the language that's in here. Uh,
so that I'm just going to read
it on page 3 line 11, the
exception would be for records
containing personal identifying
information. So that is a
defined term in the statute for
personal identifier information.
Uh, or sensitive information.
This is the one that we've had
some challenge with. Uh, again,
it's not a defined term and I
attempted to go back and we had
some discussion about going back
in and trying to come up with a
defined term in the, that's
already there in the statute.
The problem is what Doctor SB
faces and her colleagues on a
day to day basis is much broader
than, than the definitions that
are used in there. So I've left
it the way it is and and that's
what.
we're here to discuss today, uh.
That's really the big issue that
I see that that does merit some
more discussion. Uh, how exactly
we, we deal with that and
certainly we can get into the
types of things that would fit
under that from, from Doctor
SB's practice to give you a
sense of the scope if you want
to go there. So with that, we're
happy to, uh,
Have you go out to the audience
and stand up for questions.
Thank you and uh we have 3
individuals who registered in
advance.
Um, they're not part of your
presentation, is my
understanding, Senator word so
we'll recognize each of them for
one minute, uh Kat Sanchez,
followed by Jennifer Goetz,
followed by Haley Zo, uh, if
you're here, please uh come to
the microphone, all of you line
up and I'll recognize each one
of you for one minute.
Chair and members of committee,
my name is Kat Sanchez. I'm with
both Futures. We are a statewide
reproductive justice
organization that centers black
indigenous women and people of
color.
At our organization, we center
community leaders and their
authentic lived experience. And
we are also keenly aware that in
this day and age, personal
information can and is made
public and doxed. For instance,
an IPA request about provider's
logistics and work calendar can
be tracked and they can be
targeted for one small aspect of
the totality of their work.
There is a balance of
transparency via the IPRA
process and also the reality for
individuals getting care, as
well as the privacy and safety
of providers, clinicians,
students, and clinic staff. We
support and urge a do pass on SB
57. Thank you.
You recognized up to one minute.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jennifer Rafael Goetz.
I'm the director of the New
Mexico Commission on the Status
of Women. I speak to you today
in support of SB 57. I believe
in transparency in government,
but I think we can all agree
that in an attempt to be an open
government, we can create some
logistical nightmares. After
speaking with representatives
from the OBGYN community. A laws
and transparency have become a
problem for some medical
providers in New Mexico for
several reasons.
Because an IPA request can be
filed for almost any reason. The
administration at UNM Health
Science has had to allocate time
every week.
To responding to these requests.
That's time they can't spend
with their patients or doing the
work that they have been trained
to do.
Another issue I want to speak
with you about is safety for our
OBGYNs. While I appreciate
diversity of opinion, I know
everyone has their own opinion
on women's reproductive health.
Medical providers deserve to be
safe in the workplace. We have
heard about how safety is at
stake based on these IPA
requests, and I urge you to
consider it as safety of the
medical providers in our state.
We talk about wanting to train
and maintain medical providers
in New Mexico and passing HB 57
would remove one of the barriers
for OBGYNs to do their job.
Goetz, Zak, you're next. Thank
you. That's a minute. Thank you.
Thank you.
At least
Good afternoon, Chairman and
committee members. My name is
Hailey Zo and I'm the staff
attorney with Southwest Women's
Law Center. I strongly support
SB 57, which adds a crucial
exception to the IPRA, to
protect the privacy and safety
of medical providers who perform
abortion care. By ensuring that
personally identified
identifying information and
sensitive details about the
practice are not subject to
public disclosure. This bill
safeguards providers from
harassment, threats and
violence, and as an attorney
who's used it for quite a few
times to get information.
definitely understand that this
can be used um for harassment,
threats and violence, and I have
quite a few friends who are
attorneys that do IPRA they
process IPRA requests, and they
experience a lot of that, um, on
a daily basis. So I definitely
know that this is something
that's needed, and I urge you to
support this bill today. Thank
you, uh,
registered in opposition by
Zoom, we have Alisa Martinez,
Angela Putnam, um, and Patrick
Brenner. Do we have those
s on Zoom.
All right, Ms. Martinez, you're
recognized up to one minute,
ma'am.
Uh,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Alisa
Martinez. I'm the executive
director of New Mexico Alliance
for Life, um, and I stand in
firm opposition to SB 57, and I
would note the sponsor just
admitted this bill is all about
one person's concern, his expert
and her feelings. Uh, also the
volume of requests and scope is
already limited by IPRA, uh, and
additionally, the safety of
public employees is not more
important than that of their
patients. Uh, I've personally
fought against UNM's attempts to
Stonewall, my public records
requests on their reckless
abortion practices after a long
battle, those records were
finally obtained through a
congressional subpoena revealing
disturbing truths, thousands of
aborted infant body parts were
harvested for years in violation
of both human research laws and
women's rights to informed
consent. This led to criminal
referrals, the suspension of a
doctor, and the resignation of
nearly everyone involved. All of
this was well documented by
national media and congressional
record and covered through the
use of IPRA of this specific
issue. SB 57 is not about
protecting women. It's an attack
on on transparency, the supposed
protection of sensitive
information is a smokescreen
designed to shield corruption,
cover up, and even deaths. If
the goal was truly to protect
privacy IPA already does that
you very much, Angela Putnam,
you're recognized for up to a
minute.
on, uh, Patrick Brenner, are you
here?
No, all right, members of the
committee.
Questions, comments?
doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, for bringing this. I
think this is an incredibly
important, uh, change to Ira,
the existing EPA,
uh, exemptions that we have.
Would not allow for this, and
I'll note that, uh, we have made
it so the legislators can keep
our addresses and uh hidden, uh,
because of concerns about, uh,
threats to our safety. Uh, I
don't know why we would treat
our medical professionals, we
would not give them the same
consideration, I think probably
I suspect Dr. Espe deals with a
lot more than I do, uh, with
people with getting targeted. So
thank you for bringing this.
And
he was a chair.
There were that something did
come up in terms of like, what
exactly is meant by sensitive
information.
And medical services, do you?
Do you have a concern about
that.
So Mr. Chair and Senator
O'Malley, I think, uh, Doctor
Hespe can go through the
sensitive information that
she's.
Dealing with that needs that we
believe needs to be protected
and would be protected by this
bill, so I'm gonna yield to.
her.
Thank you, uh, Chair Cervantes,
um, Senator O'Malley, um
we look to certain catalog and
a, a number of issues. So the
ones that we came up with were
travel plans, resident and
faculty clinical and shift
schedules, activities, and
locations of activities.
resident career planning, um,
and career planning with other
trainees, inquiries from
students, residents from other
institutions, particularly
worrisome are those from uh
restricted states, trainees from
other states, um, and colleagues
across the country who are
working in hostile environments.
OK, thank you very much. Thank
you. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So I just have a couple of
questions I'm trying to, I
think, a senator Moy asked one
of them with regards to your
definition of sensitive
information, so you just gave
that sounds like it's any
personal information that, that
identifies individuals and or
persons.
Who are involved in, in this, in
your practices. Is that correct?
So Mr.
So certainly part of it.
Uh, I think, as was mentioned.
You know, the calendars, travel
plans.
in addition to those.
References and I just think it's
it's, it's the attempt to
basically, and lots of these are
coming from out of state. So
it's just a, a bombardment of
Doctor Espi in her practice and
trying to get information on all
kinds of different.
issues that quite frankly,
But her and her staff at real.
Risk
And so that's what we're trying
to do.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
I understand this issue, um, I
mean, it's certainly a concern
we, we see in the modern times
now a lot of this activity going
on, um,
Just yesterday I heard that
there was a.
Um, there was some doxing, if we
want to call it that, there was
some doxing going on in LA with
ice agents who were trying to.
Enforced immigration law in LA
and they posted their pictures,
their personal addresses, their
phone numbers on telephone poles
all over LA.
So I understand the concern and,
and, and think that is wrong.
um, and it's wrong in any event,
no matter where we are. But my
question here is, is we know
IPRA has a particular role as
the uh speaker.
Um, Martinez mentioned.
That, uh,
Openness is a transparency is
critical.
And so the question is,
What should we be doing to
ensure transparency if your
particular um clinic or all
clinics related to abortion are,
are.
Excluded from giving that
information, whereas, is there
any other medical services right
now that don't have to, that
don't have to apply. Are there
any other waivers for any other
services besides this one. So
Mr. Chair and there's a whole
bunch of questions in there. So
let me start first by saying
this IPRA applies to the
University of New Mexico because
it's a public institution.
Anyone performing these services
in a private setting is not
subject to IPRA. So there's a
different standard that applies
here. There are certain issues,
and, and again, I think it's, I
want to point out that it's, we
don't have anyone.
From the Foundation for Open
Government, the other folks that
really are concerned about this
issue and the transparency here
opposing this, and I think it's
because there are very, very
limited areas where an exception
makes sense. And let me give you
an example of one that we passed
through this committee, I
believe, in 2019. So what was
happening is police reports that
disclosed rape victims' names
were being IPA.
And so we made a policy decision
that that was not.
But that balance, and this is
the thing, it's a balance and
it's a policy decision. We made
a decision in that case to
create an exception for that,
uh, that ultimately passed. And
so I do think this is, this is a
practice that is.
Incredibly specialized, but
obviously, given the risk and
the danger that Doctor ESB and
her colleagues at this public
institution face certainly folks
providing these services at
private institutions also face
those. But it when when IPRA
becomes weaponized, and when it
really creates a risk of the
level, I think it's here. That's
what leads me as a policymaker.
To think that this exception
does make sense against what
otherwise is the whole purpose
of IPRA, which is to provide
that transparency.
Thank you for that, Senator, uh,
Mr. Chair, I.
Just a
I understand all of this. I'm, I
tend to move for open
transparency, and so I'm still
struggling with.
How I could support this this
effort at this time. Thank you
very much. Couple of things,
Senator, maybe some
reconsideration of language just
with a small modification will
explain why my uh my second
daughter, Bella is doing her 2nd
year of residency in uh OBGYN
and Baylor in Houston.
And as you probably doctor would
appreciate she's delivering
hundreds of babies in in her
residency, but she's also
providing other services of, of
abstract obstetrics, uh, care
and gynecological care.
So, the way that I'm reading the
language right now, Senor, if
you read it, it says the the uh.
Exception would be for records
containing this information
won't go to the definition of
the amber just yet. I'll get
over that. It's related to the
practice of a medical provider
employed by a public body who
performs medical services
related to abortion. So, she's
in Texas, so um you can imagine
she doesn't uh get anywhere near
the issue uh in Texas.
Uh, but, but if you've got a
doctor, let's say at UNM who's
doing what she would be doing,
you would be potentially
performing medical services
relating to abortion. That would
meet this, but you wouldn't,
your, your goal here is to
protect the records related to
the care of abortion related
services, not all of the other
obstetric and gynecological
services that provider is
delivering. Does that make sense
to what I'm saying here? Um, and
so, for example, so, and I'll
just give you my example.
Uh, sometimes difficult, but I,
I have to be frank about my
practice, and there are
practicing lawyers in here. If,
if I've, I've got a case that um
of tragically a child died in
childbirth, um, and going to
trial shortly and the, the
contentions are that the
obstetrician was negligent in
the delivery of the child that
caused the child's birth.
Now, in this, in this case, that
doctor, that obstetrician would
be a medical provider who's
employed by a public body who
performs medical services
related to abortion if they're
providing medical, those medical
abortion services, but you
wouldn't want to protect all of
the records or information of
that provider.
Um, um.
Because the protection here
would be so broad.
That, that provider is providing
abortion services, but you're
not intending to protect the
records and, and, um, documents
related to that position outside
of the performance of, of the
abortion services.
And, and I guess the, the
records would contain that
personal identifying
information.
So, but you don't want to
protect all of the records. You,
you want to protect the personal
identifying information.
But you wouldn't want to protect
the, the medical records for the
chart from me, I wouldn't think,
uh, at least I would, I wouldn't
want to think that that's
protected from disclosure. Am I
making sense to what I'm, I'm
trying to suggest you said a
word.
I think there's an easy fix that
I can propose for you to
consider, but I want to make
sure first of all that what I'm,
the reason I'm doing so is to,
to strike that balance of
keeping out the abortion, uh,
personal identifying
information, but not just say
that a provider who provides
abortion services means
everything they do is is
immunized.
Mr. Chair, I see where you're
going. I think it would help to
get a sense of what your fix
looks like, because I think,
and, and I can, and again, you
and I getting into the specifics
of the practice, that's why
we've got Doctor Espi here, so
let me, let me yield to her and
just because again, I think she
can.
Target directly what you, where
you're going.
Cur Cervantes, thank you. Um, to
me, this is not actually the
kind of situation that would be
covered under this exception,
um that's it. I mean, it says
that the records.
here with the, uh, and I'm sorry
to be
sure.
Or uh anybody, any provider
who's employed by a public body
who performs medical
service-related abortion. So if
you're, so if you're a doctor
who provides any abortion
services, uh, you shouldn't be
able to protect everything that
that doctor does. Right, I'm
just, I, I guess what I'm saying
is that in the situation that
you're talking about, those
records would not be available
because of a HIPAA protection,
but they would be completely
discoverable in this situation
of a lawsuit. So what I'm
thinking about is more the
situation where your daughter
sends
an email because she wants to
arrange a rotation, uh, to get,
you know, reproductive health
training in New Mexico. That's
the kind of information. It's
not patient information, which
is actually covered under
different statutes.
Yeah, except that the, the,
again, the, if the language
that's being proposed here would
exempt the personal identifying
information or the sensitive
information alone, I would say
yes, I understand your point.
But what it says here is this
any records contain that
information are, are protected.
So if you have a chart, if you
have a patient chart in it, it's
gonna have that information in
the charts protected.
Well, the chart would be
protected anyway under HIPA, but
I do, I understand the, the, the
concern, but that, that, that
information would, I would not
be allowed to give that
information, you know, through
an IPRA request anyway. It would
have to go through, you know,
the, the legal process of of
discovery.
Well, that was the case, then
you wouldn't need this bill at
all, right? Uh, because then if
that's the case, then it builds,
build, let me, I'll give you my
proposed fix. I think it's easy
enough and it probably shouldn't
cause any concern, but I would
just on on line 13, uh, what you
want to do is I think is they
would read a medical provider
cleared by a public body and the
performance of, um, after the
word body.
Uh, and then strike the
remaining part of that.
Line
And that should do it, I think,
so it would, it would protect
records containing this
information.
Related to the practice in a
public body.
And the performance.
Of those medical services
related to abortion, so you're
protecting abortion related
records, but not all obstetric
gyne gynecological records that
are, that are records of that
doctor who may be doing all of
those things, right? That doctor
may be doing, I, I presume
that's the case, I'll ask you,
is that, am I not right about
that? I think I just know what
my daughter tells me she's doing
all day long, but, but she tells
me that she's doing, uh, OB Gy
and then she's doing uh uh uh
urology, right? And she's, so
she's doing uh any.
number of other services in
addition to to the uh obstetric
care and delivering babies. So
we, we don't wanna say that, uh,
and again, Texas is a bad
example cause she's clearly not
performing any abortion services
there.
Uh, but, but if, if uh you have
a doctor, you tell me if you're
a doctor doing uh a stretch
abortion-related services, are
you not also providing obstetric
care and gynecological care.
You're not a yes.
I'm paying attention to my
daughter when I talk to her on
the phone,
so
I'm paying attention to my
daughter when I talk to her on
the phone,
thank you. No, no, no, we do all
those things that that, you
know, that is full scope OBGYN.
I guess what I'm saying is the
way I'm interpreting this is
that that would also pertain not
just to a a medical record like
a, a care record for a patient,
but it would also cover the
email that you're, you know,
that a trainee sends me from
Texas, who wants to get the,
you, you know, specific
typically wants to get training
in abortion care, that that
would be exempted. Now she was
asking me about a urogynecology
rotation, you know, another
aspect of OBGYN care, that would
not be accepted because uh
exempted because that, that does
not relate to the medical
practice, um, of, of somebody
who provides abortion care.
Yeah, and I'll I'll hear from
you center work because uh
again, I, I know you and many of
us are very committed to
transparency and any doctor in
the example you gave me, I would
argue that shouldn't be
protected. In other words, if
somebody's sending you a letter
said I'm interested in doing
care, um, and that shouldn't be
protected because you're not
dealing with any individual or
patient or or a person, a
woman's a particular abortion
care, my daughter's writing you
a letter saying, I'd like to
come do work with you. I don't
see how that should be
protected.
I'm sure I just disagree with
you. Yeah, if, if your daughter
is looking to do an abortion
rotation, and she's living in
Texas.
That it that that puts her in
incredible risk if all of a
sudden that email making that
request.
Is is Ira and ends up back in
Texas and the next thing you
know she's down.
A whole direction.
Well, and that, and that that
doesn't influence the, the
proposed language that I'm
proposing to change to, but I, I
understand what you're saying. I
guess the, the issue is that I,
I understood your bill, you to
be protecting the woman who's
receiving the abortion services
and, and your, your bill goes
far beyond that. It does, Mr.
Shan. I think you heard Doctor
talk about the different, the
things that are being IPRA right
now that put
Her at risk and put all those
folks that she's interacting
with at risk, which go beyond
the specific patient.
Information
OK.
I
I stand down, this is, like I
said again, I respect the, the
position you're in. So this is a
difficult area, I, I get it.
All right, Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I move
it to pass pass motion. Is there
any objection to the do pass
motion.
Senator Paul, Senator Thornton.
Uh, objecting all others, you
have a do pass as it's written,
thank you. Thank you.
numbers.
Senator Stefaniks.
Good afternoon, um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
here today with uh Commissioner
Linda Harmio from Torrance
County and Jordan Varela, the
county manager.
Uh, I have Senate Bill 152.
Uh, it's a county petition for
cannabis license pause.
And specifically, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, it
would allow a county high
resolution at a public meeting
with the boat to petition the
regulation and licensing
department to put a pause on
cannabis grow permits for up to
2 years.
And my expert witnesses have uh
comments on how this
specifically addresses their
county. I know that the FIR
talks about all 33 counties that
I don't, it's expect that all 33
counties would be in the same
situation.
So I'm gonna first turn to Mr.
Berea, who has some of the facts
about his county.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
Jordan Brea, county manager for
Torrance County, uh, so for, for
those in the committee who
aren't familiar with Torrance
County, um, Torrance County has
a very strong agricultural
roots. Um, and the agricultural
community, specifically the uh
commercial agricultural
community, ah, is still alive
and well in the community today.
So as such, there shouldn't have
been a lack of expectation that
once the cannabis Control Act
was passed, uh, recreational
cannabis operations, we're going
to move in.
County. Um, what, what is a
little bit striking is the
volume and amount of of uh
operations that have moved uh
into our county specifically.
Uh, so just to put this in in
context for, for this
commission, um, the last
information provided by the
Cannabis Control Division, um,
to our planning department
indicated that there was roughly
32 uh production and
manufacturing cannabis licenses
in the county, um, in relation
to our population, that's about
one license for every 488 county
residents. Um, so we have
inundated with new applications
and as a matter of fact, I
believe there are 3 new
applications, uh, in the
planning and zoning process
right now. Um, I think Torrance
County, um, needs to take a look
at how we approach these
operations, um, and some of the
negative ramifications that come
with them. Um, some of that is
wear and tear on roadways, odor
control, um, light pollution,
um, some of the issues that
we've seen, um, regarding litter
that has impact on livestock
operations on adjoining
properties, um,
encampments, um, located on some
of these operations, um, but,
you know, I, I, I sort of equate
this issue in Torrance County
kind of to uh fixing a broken
water line, um, you know, you,
you can identify the issue, know
what the fix is, but at a
certain point in time you have
to shut off the water to really
address those issues
fundamentally. Um, and that is
why the Torrance County
commission, um, in, in once the
bill proposed by Senator
Stefaniks was proposed, um,
really got behind the bill and
passed a resolution in support
of it, um, because to.
a certain degree, it gives
counties the ability, um, based
on, um, the sentiment of
constituents and based on the
conditions on the ground
locally, um, to take some step
to petition the cannabis Control
division, um, to, to address
some of these issues and provide
some much needed breathing room
so those issues can be addressed
holistically through a land use
perspective.
And then I'd like to have
commissioner Linda Harmio, uh,
say a few words.
Good afternoon,
Chair,
and.
And members of the committee, my
name is Linda Aram, Lawrence
County, newly elected Barnes
County Commissioner, I was
county clerk for 24 years.
Um, resigned and then the
commission appointed me to serve
the remainder of the clerk's.
Uh, term and with the intention
that I was going to run for
commissioner, and I won.
So mine is a more personal view
of this. I have lived in
Torrance County for 70 years. I
know the people of my county. I
know Torrance County very well.
I grew up in Willard. I
worked in Mount Me, I, I'm a
member of the Manzano land
grant, and I've seen our county
change over the years. It's,
it's really
Going downhill, actually, from
what I remember. And I know a
lot of the ranchers and the
farmers in our, in our county
and they have concerns about all
these cannabis farms going, not
that I'm against the
legalization, that's OK, but we
needed to get more control of
this. It's just running rampant
in our county. They're coming up
all over the place and the
ranchers and the farmers are
very concerned about their way
of life. And I just like for you
to pass this bill so that we can
get a control, more control.
Of the, of the cannabis industry
that's coming into our county
and
I'd appreciate I do pass on
this. Thank you so much.
So Mr. Chair, members of the
committee will stand for
support, opposition and
questions.
Have anyone who registered in
support or in opposition to your
bill, so we'll go directly to
questions from the committee.
Any questions or are doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator, the much yours.
Um, so I think we made a we made
a mistake when we passed the
cannabis regulation Act and in
having completely unrestricted
licensure. Um,
Most states did not take that
approach. Uh, and I think we
have seen since then, why, uh,
we have.
We, we.
There, there are a lot of issues
that come when you do, uh,
unlimited license or you'd get
bad marketing equilibrium, you
get communities that are looking
different to you, um.
And, and I think that's a real
problem, and I, and I think we
need to solve it. I don't think
this bill is the way to do it.
Um,
This language would come
directly conflict with language
in the CRA that is not amended
in this, that says that a local
jurisdiction shall not prohibit
the operation of a licensee.
Um, so this, this would be
contrary to that.
Um, I
I, it's limited only to gros,
which I understand is, is
primarily your concern where you
are, but frankly, any mechanism
that we come up with to limit
licensure, uh, has to also
address retail.
Um, and, and should address
licenser overall.
Ah, and, and not, not just one
aspect of, uh, of this industry.
Um, because we're seeing, uh,
you know, drive around in
Albuquerque, and you'll pass
about 14 dispensaries, uh, in a
couple blocks drive. Um,
I also
I also suspect that the division
won't actually grant these
petitions. Um, I'll tell you,
uh, we did a, a big, a big
cleanup of the canvas regulation
Act last year. And I really
wanted to include in that bill.
Um, language that, that would
limit licensure or would provide
for some sort of mechanism to
address.
What we're seeing with these
with the unlimited licenses now,
uh, and I was, uh, and it was an
agency bill, and I was asked not
to put that in there.
Um
the division and, and I'm sure
they, they had all sorts of good
reasons for that, but
My sense was they didn't, they
didn't want to be in that
position.
They didn't want to be put in
the position of deciding.
When licenses, uh, who gets.
If licenses should stop being
granted or not. Um,
And so
So I understand what you're
trying to accomplish here, um,
but unfortunately, I, I can't
support this bill today.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Stefani
commissioners, thank you very
much and love Torrance County
and you have a strong advocate
here in the Senate from tons.
The um couple of things. One is,
Mr. Chairman, Senator Stepanics.
I don't believe
Or question, just because the
county petitions.
And in this bill, it says the
department may grant the
petition.
I don't
I don't believe this bill gives
the department the authority.
I, I don't think there's any
legal authority to not
Uh, to do what this is doing,
two reasons. One is
Accounty commission could do
this today. County commission
can petition the department
today, but even with this bill,
I don't believe that department
can deny a
Um, can grant the petition.
What, what do you think?
So, um
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, in the
FIR, the cannabis Control
Division is indicating that it
has, it believes that it has 10
days to evaluate the request and
issue a decision.
Now this is not to prohibit
forever, this is a 2 year pause
and the pause could be uh a
shorter period of time as well.
But I'm just going by the FIR
that the CCD did indicate
They believed they had the
authority. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Senator,
I mean, it's funny that they
would think that. I think, uh,
and I said department RLD, but
yeah, it would be the division
uh cannabis division. I think
that, um,
One of the concerns with, with
not opening licenses.
was to, or frankly, the concern
to create a finite number of
licenses is because we didn't
want to run into the same
problem as as alcohol licenses.
In the 50 60s there was a finite
number of licenses and they
became commodities in which
people sold and bought state
issued licenses.
Um
Which is like me selling my
driver license so you can like.
You know, have it for the
weekend.
And then here we are, you know,
40, 50 years down the road with
them.
And, and all the problems that
that creates, this was a little
different. It was never
Um
I don't think anyone would ever
contemplate buying or selling a
cannabis license.
So it may be time to consider
uh.
You know, doing a moratorium on
the licenses for a year or so,
but I think that would have to
be done in the cannabis Act,
not.
Not this bill, so I share a
similar opinion too.
Senator Doha, but I do
appreciate what you.
Trying to do for your county,
um.
And the problems that, that
that the industry has has
created in your, in your
hometowns. Thank you, Ms. Chang.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So
So I understand what I just
heard from Senators Maas and
Senator Doig with regards to
this issue, uh, but it, it seems
to me it says from the cannabis
Regulation Act.
That the local government cannot
ban, you're not banning, you are
putting a moratorium.
So it seems that you're sliding
under the regulation by doing
that.
So whether or not that's
Legal or not is another
question, but, but I understand
what you're, what your attempt
is trying to here. My, my
biggest concern here is not
necessarily.
Um
slowing down the flow of
cannabis operations popping up
everywhere. My understanding is
right now we have an issue with,
um, not, not regulating these
folks properly. Um, I know that
there was a huge bust in
Torrance County not too long
ago.
And they found uh
More than the number of plants
they were allowed to grow. And
in fact, uh, the county had to
come in and actually take the
cost of bearing these additional
cannabis plants because they had
to dispose of them.
Um
So, and I actually had a
conversation with the FBI agents
who were involved in that
activity. So I know that there's
a lot of activity like that
going on in Torrance County. And
what you're trying to do is get
a handle on it, so I will
support this bill, not being a
lawyer, uh, but I understand the
rationale, and it seems to me if
they think they can do this by.
Slowing down the, the popping up
of these operations on a.
Daily basis, then that would
help the, the local community
and what they're having to deal
with, so.
So I will support this bill.
So we got newer members on the
committee, and I think it's
useful term I asked just kind of
walk down memory lane for a
little bit. Let me expand on it
just a little bit because I I
think it's good for the public
and the newer members. I, I
didn't support the legalization
bill for exactly this issue and
and instead of doing points it
out now to this notion that we
would give unlimited licenses.
And in Senator Maestas does an
interesting comparison to
alcohol because that was the
challenge that we had allowed
alcohol licenses to become so
valuable because there were so
few of them that we went the
opposite extremists said we're
gonna make, we're not going to
create that problem for these
licenses, we're gonna do
unlimited licenses.
What we didn't, what we didn't
give enough attention to was the
fact that the limited number of
alcohol licenses also meant
enforcement of alcohol, uh, was
very easy to do because if you
owned a bar or a package store,
your risk was losing your
license, and if you lost your
license, that might be a 500
$600 700,000 dollar investment.
So they policed themselves very
well, restaurants and bars and
package stores police their
servers and everything they did
because they didn't want to risk
an asset that was.
The license. The state would
take the license back and they
lose potential asset.
Because we created unlimited
number of licenses, we, we lost
any opportunity to enforce this
because I can have 40 licenses.
And so you can take my license
today and I'll say, great, have
it because I'll go use my second
license or my 3rd, you can have
those too, if I violate your
laws, I'll go down to my 40th or
50th unlimited licenses. And,
and so, unlike alcohol, where
there was the self regulation
because of the value of the
asset here the asset is
unlimited and so we
gave way and he really
opportunity to enforce this in a
meaningful way, and so I, I
think it's an interesting, uh,
we were, I think we're trying to
do the right thing.
Uh, and not create the situation
we did with alcohol, but we
created an entirely different
problem.
Um, and, and that's again why I,
I didn't support this at the
time because we weren't ready
for, for where, where we put
ourselves. Yeah, I, I represent
a community of Sunland Park, New
Mexico. It's got a population of
18,000 people. There's one
grocery store.
There's 32 dispensaries, um, in,
in that community. And you can
imagine it gets into your head,
I believe, uh, where you've got
one of these just at every every
street corner, every block, uh,
everywhere you turn, and it's
Texans so we can celebrate the
fact that it's bunch of Texans
coming and leaving us their tax
money, but it still does
something to the community when
it's become essentially a one
just big dispensary, um, and it
does something to the children
and to the attitude of the
families and everybody else
there, so.
Um, I, I, I
Appreciate the problem that you
have, commissioner very much and
and you all in Torrance have had
a, a very significant problem.
I, I am, I've been some somewhat
surprised there's been so little
effort to try and enforce the
illegal growing that's taking
place in Torrance County.
I mean, we're gonna see that I
think later in the session,
there's been some argument that
the, the authority there to
enforce that our laws against
those growers didn't exist, but
we had just horrific, right, we
had a horrific grow farm in
Torrance County that really
operated what for years, I
think, right?
I'm looking aten Jet, because I
know she knows the situation
well, but, uh, probably human
trafficking, right? Um, Chinese
labor, uh guns.
And we, we did it, we knew about
it, and it was in the news and
Larry Barker did a story on it
and we have the AGs and others
present about it, and everybody
just kind of said, well, uh, the
regulation licensing so they
couldn't do anything about it.
State police said they could do
anything about it. District
attorney said they couldn't do
anything about it. General said
he couldn't do anything about it
and.
I, we, we just scratched our
head and and it was really, I
think it was, it was essentially
a an abdication of of government
really, so I really do
appreciate.
Uh, you're, you're concerned, I
just, I, I don't think we can do
this, given the, the framework
of what we had in mind, which is
that we were gonna let local
governments, who we're not gonna
let local governments preclude
uh this in their communities
and.
Uh, some states do that. Some
states, I think when they, when
they legalize it, they said
local governments can pro
prohibit and preclude it, I
would have supported that too.
But that's not what the
legislature did, so I think
maybe we need to revisit that
issue too and let local
communities do so, uh, but, but
the issue before us today is
should we let
Um, this process to go and I, I
have to respectfully disagree
with them.
Senator Maest's reading of the
bill because it's real clear to
me, this gives the, the division
of discretion. They do have to
make a decision, otherwise, it's
not an automatic deal. So if you
look at the language on the
second page it says the county
submits the petition and says
the defend the division shall
render its decision. Well, that
implies they have a decision to
make if they're going to render
a decision.
Uh, and you're, you're saying
your head knows, so I'll come
back to you, but, but it says
that the the vision shall render
his decision on the petition,
um, and it says informed the
county of its decision. Again,
when I see language like render
a decision and make a decision
and it says a decision to
approve or deny, that suggests
to me that they can approve or
deny it because that's what it
says. Um, and then it says if
the division approves, well,
that suggests that maybe the
division doesn't approve if it
says if they approve, so all of
the language that's in here
suggests to me that, yeah, the
division.
Mm.
has to make a decision, um, and
they can make it one way or the
other here, and I don't, I don't
know how you could read that any
other way, but, um, in any
event, I, I have those and other
concerns with the legislation
senator. So Senator Duke, did
you want to respond to that?
Oh, Mr. Chair, I, I think
Senator Masis is right, and I am
shocked that the division is
sane in their analysis that they
think they have that authority
already. We did not, we have
never given them authority. Um,
I don't know where they're
getting that from, uh, but no,
I, I think Senator Masas was
right this this presumed that
they already have the authority,
and that gives them the
discretion to say yes or no,
but, uh,
Am I reading of the cannabis
regulation Act, they definitely
do not have that authority and
would not absent us giving it.
I think we're talking about two
things really, uh, but, but I
hear what you're saying, and I
don't disagree with you either.
I don't disagree with that, that
authority doesn't exist. I'm
saying if we enacted this bill,
this suggests that when the
county petitions to the
division, the division can say
yes or no on that petition, or
the, the moratorium, or else why
would there be this language
that talks about them approving
or denying or.
Or making a decision and so
forth, but I, I, it may not
matter. Let's see how the vote
goes here and then if it, if
it's gonna go different than I
think it's gonna go, we, we may
need to.
Great, it's some, some greater
length and maybe not so others,
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And
I'm just reading this as, as
the, the county has the ability
to ask.
Um, or a moratorium and um from
the FIR and of course there's
disagreement about that.
That, uh, that, um, that it can
be denied, but that gives them
the ability to at least ask and
uh explain why they would want
something like this and um I
think that's important that they
be able to do that, so.
I'm going to support you. Thank
you.
So Mr. Chairman, you know, the
FIR has all kinds of information
about.
RLD not really being able to do
this.
I mean, I, I know I've heard
people say they think they can,
but
I mean, I'm not looking at our,
our analysis. I'm looking at the
SIR and
They say 10 days isn't enough.
They say they need criteria to
criteria to use to approve or
deny, nothing like that in the
film.
Um
They also say that they expect
those two issues to have legal
challenges.
If when, if they make any
decisions, they would would be
challenged. So, um,
Also, they talk about this
doesn't really uh uh comment
about how would this impact
pending license applications.
So, I, I, I understand the
problem. I, I'm, I am not happy
that we're not able as a
legislature to change what we
put in practice. We should never
have done licenses like this.
That's what we need to change,
and it, it doesn't seem right
that
You know, sit or do implied
that, well, said that the
transition didn't want it, uh.
I don't care about that. I think
we need to change those licenses
and that's what we should be
doing something that really
works, and that addresses the
complications that we have and
tries to solve problems, uh.
I mean, I, I, I think it's
outrageous that we have so much
cannabis. I mean, I have
probably the poorest district in
the state in southeast
Albuquerque. Iest crime, highest
unemployment, etc.
And they're everywhere.
everywhere. I, I drive down
Central, but there's another
one, there's another one,
there's another one.
And this is where poor people
live.
So I don't like all the
licenses. I think we've been
stupid about it, and that's what
I want us to change, um, cause I
agree, I just don't think this
works. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'll move to the
table.
Yes.
No.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, this
bill really came out of my
experience, um, after I won my
race and in November discovered
Through an interesting route
that my senator had vacated his
position or resigned early and
our county commission and myself
were not aware of it. Um, so
this bill was born out of that
experience because my district
went without a senator for an
entire quarter of the year.
So I think it benefits the
citizens of our state as a whole
and um we did amend after, um,
being in rules, um, we all had a
meeting about this and we
understood the spirit of the,
what was it the point thought of
a friendly amendment in um
rules, but the more we talked
about it, that amendment
actually took the teeth or the
accountability out of this bill.
So I also had a conversation
with the Secretary of State and
um one of her employees who is
here in the room today as well
if we need.
To go a little bit deeper, but
we're asking that the Secretary
of State be notified by the
legislator when they're vacating
their seat and that the
Secretary of State's office has
15 days to notify the
appropriate county commission so
that they can start their
process, which does vary from
county to county, how they
appoint and fill that vacancy.
That's it. Proposed amendment.
And is this, this is your
proposed amendment, Senator?
Mr. Chair, yes, it is, and I
didn't get that copy. I guess
they just ran it up to you.
Um, but it just is that
amendment is just saying that
we're, we would like to go back
to the original proposed bill,
which just states that the
Secretary of State is notified
and within 15 days notifies the
appropriate county commission of
the vacancy.
So
I'll be with the amendment for
discussion. There's a motion for
the amendment discussion
purposes on the amendment.
Questions, security members
they're doing.
So Mr. Chair, Senator, so this
was my amendment in rules, and
the reason for it is because if
the goal here,
yes,
not what they had as your
remember but but the Senate rule
was your amendment amendment
that went on in Senate rules was
my amendment, yes. Um, so this
would be striking, the amendment
that I made in Senate rules.
So the point of this is to make
sure that the county commission
knows if there's a vacancy.
Uh, because they are the ones
who.
Would, uh
point, I guess it's the, the
governor that the points, but
who would nominate a successor.
It doesn't make sense to me to
make the make the Secretary of
State, the middle man in that.
What makes a lot more sense to
me is to have the resigning
member.
They already have to give that
information to the Secretary of
State.
They should also give that
information to the county
commissions.
Of their district.
They should may say that. Not,
not the Secretary of State for a
couple of reasons. One, then
everyone has the information at
the same time.
The way this is written, it
would it could delay up to 15
days, that information being
passed on. Um, but 2, my
understanding is our current
Secretary of State, she has
gotten emails sent to her
personal email.
They get buried under all the
other egos. One, just said, I
quit.
I
The way that she is being,
right, the way that she is being
notified currently by members,
uh, it could very well. She
could not see that for a month.
And then we are saying, you have
done something terribly wrong,
Secretary of State, because you
as the middle man, didn't find
this lost email in your personal
email, uh, account, um, that was
that it is the member's fault,
frankly, for improperly giving
that notice. But we're gonna,
but we're gonna
roast you for it, secretary. And
so it is on, it is the response
as we as members, if we want to
resign, we should be
responsible.
For giving that information to
the people who need to know it.
So what my amendment did in
rules was to say that the the
resigning member would notified
both the Secretary of State and
the county commissions in their
district, and it took all the
language on page 2.
Where within 15 days, Secretary
of State is the one.
Who gives that notice. Uh, it
does not make it, it does not
make any sense to me.
To make our Secretary of State,
a middleman in this, and
And say, well, we want
accountability, but we don't
want accountability from the
member. We want accountability
from our Secretary of State, but
the member doesn't have to be
accountable for for
Doing what they should do to
appropriately resign. So I
would, I would oppose this
amendment striking the Senate
rules amendments.
Mr. Chair, Senator, and thank
you. Um, I don't necessarily
disagree with what you're saying
overall. Um, my conversation
with the Secretary of State,
they actually volunteered
creating a form that legislators
are required to fill out when
they're vacating a seat, um, and
I think the bigger question is,
here we had, in my case a
senator who had been here for, I
think, well over a decade, um,
that everyone knew really well,
um, I'm not sure who that uh
later was, um, that you're
talking about, she did share
that story with me. But the
problem is, is if someone's
leaving and especially if they
have the attitude of sending a
personal email and just saying I
quit, which I don't think any of
us here could imagine doing,
then can we count on that
legislator being responsible
enough to actually let their
county commission know in a
timely manner. So if they filled
out this form, the form would
then be a, a proper um official
notification.
both on the side, side of that
legislator filling it out and
maybe putting some information
there. The Secretary of State,
who was over elections would
have that, which is very
important and vital, and then
they would pass it to the county
commission. Now, if the
legislator wants to tell the
county commission that is
something that we would assume
would happen, um, but it seems
to be tradition.
That that legislator
definitively goes to the
Secretary of State. So we felt
like it at least had a paper
trail too, where then they can
send it right to the county
commission.
And Mr. Chair, I mean I think
the idea of that form is a fine
idea, um, you don't need this.
To, to have that form, um.
But I also, I, if we're again,
this is about accountability,
but we are saying no
accountability on the member.
And it, so it's not tradition
that that they have notified the
the Secretary of State it's the
law. I mean, that's what is
provided for in, in our, our,
uh, statutes.
But
But the idea that, well, we
don't trust our members to do
things right. Therefore, they
should have no accountability
for doing it wrong, but we're
gonna hold the Secretary of
State accountable.
Does not make sense to me. It is
not asking that much of member.
If member.
Can, can check our statutes
enough to know that they're
supposed to contact the
Secretary of State.
Then they could see that they're
supposed to contact their county
commission too. I don't think
that is asking too much of
someone who
Who wants to to resign. And if
they don't do it correctly, then
they have not.
Affected their resignation, just
like if they hadn't contacted
the Secretary of State. They
would not have affected their
resignation, but it should the
the onus should be on the
member, not a third party.
That's for sure.
Mr. Chair.
Just have a, I have a question
maybe for Senator Do. I'm
sitting here looking at Senator
Brantley's placard, Catherine
Donana Grant Hidalgo, Luna,
Sierra, and Socorro. So what
happens if she submits it to 4
of the 7.
What's the and what happens if
the Secretary of State, is there
any remedy here? What, what
happens? I mean, there's no
penalty. I mean, what under the
statute right now, if we want to
resign, we give notice to
Secretary of State, correct?
I mean, is, is the remedy then
if Senator Brantly decides to
resign, she gives notice to
Secretary of State, and then she
gives Catherine Doan and Grant,
but forgets Hidalgo and Luna,
she's still sitting member?
Mr. Chair, probably, yeah, she
didn't affect the, the, the
notice to resign, then, then
possibly. Um,
yeah, yeah, you could it's all
yours, Mr. Chair.
Please, Senator Deig, I think
the answer is yes, because,
because there's the operative
language, which is on the first
page. I think this is a critical
thing.
The, the resignation becomes
effective upon filing with the
Secretary of State and his
lawyers, we know the filing of a
document has a date stamp and
time and place, and the
resignation moment could be
critical, right? I, I can see
scenarios where the you need to
know the date and moment that
the the office is vacant. And so
the existing language suggests
to me in our existing statute,
the, the vacancy occurs at the
moment that's filed with the
Secretary of State, regardless
of when it gets to any or all of
the county commissioners. So I
think that was your question.
that are worth, and I think they
are doing, I think you were
suggesting that maybe something
different than that, but I'm
reading that right, I think the
filing with the Secretary of
State is the operative trigger.
and and Mr. Cha, you're right,
so, so with my amendment, it
would be so on your email to the
Secretary of State, who would
also copy.
Your county commissions.
And that
Communication to them would,
would that your resign
resignation would be effective
upon doing that, yes. That, that
is, that is how it is, is now,
and it would continue to be the
only added thing being you also
include your accounting
commissions for all the counties
that you represent on that
email.
So Senator, we still has the
floor and then I had yielded to
you, Senator Do and then got
Senator Stewart after you, soen
words, Senator Stewart.
Back to center.
Just to be clear, just, yeah,
just to be clear, so, so the
amendment and it's hard to
follow, I, I'm gonna suggest if
we adopt the amendment, we
should put this out in a sub
because this is really hard to
follow. This is a perfect
example. Just when you get to
the floor, members trying to go
back and forth, it's just messy.
But so you're actually adding
into.
You know, in the amendment in
rules, Amendment number 4.
You're adding the additional
requirements, so that's it, Mr.
Chair, that's, that's the
answer. Under the current law,
it's very clear, it's one thing
for Senator Brantly to resign
under this, he's gonna need to
give one to the Secretary of
State and 7 each county
commission.
Doesn't really say what format.
Email, certified mail, delivery,
but if it's not received?
It just
Um, I think I, yeah, but the
Secretary of State, you've got
one entity here, you're gonna
have potentially 8 in her case,
11 in ours.
But 8 and her so.
I'll keep listening, it's an
interesting, it's an interesting
discussion.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So,
Filing the written statement
doesn't mean it's right then. I
know of at least 2 legislators
who have resigned by sending a
letter in saying I'm resigning
at December 30th.
Of this year or
You know, I'm not from now. So
just because you file it does
not mean the date is then. You
put it in the letter.
Uh, Sara Hempel sent a letter to
Secretary of State, and she
didn't resign till the end of
this year, last year.
Uh, so, uh.
So, I mean, I, I voted for the
amendments and rules because I
agree that it shouldn't all be
on the Secretary of State.
So I, I think that this is the
right way to do it, that you
notify county commissioners
also, if, if the issue is it
took too long, they didn't know.
I mean, what is the issue again?
I, I mean, I certainly remember
the legislator who resigned, but
don't quite remember that issue,
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, um, the
issue was that the county
commission was not notified
actually no one was aware of the
resignation, except
for the Secretary of State's
office, so for an entire quarter
we did not have a senator and
once we found out, it was so
late in the process, based on
current Bernalillo County, um,
laws or rules centered around
how you appoint a senator, um,
they weren't going to be able to
appoint me as, you know, the
elected, they couldn't appoint
me from the county commission
until January 6th, while as the
elected, they were able to swear
me in on January.
first.
So it, we went from the end of
September when his resignation
was tendered in official to
January actually till the first
day of session here without
actually technically a senator
sworn in, and that is not in the
best interest of the people and
the voters. So that's where this
conversation started from.
And so thank you for that and so
really what you're trying to do
is just put all the
recommendations and the
regulations and the timelines on
the Secretary of State because
that's what this says, 15 days,
Secretary of State shall provide
the notice. Yeah, I just don't
think it's their job. I think
it's the legislator's job, so
that's why I like the
amendments. I mean, we clearly
should do something, but I think
we should have everybody who are
the decision makers notified.
The same time.
So we had a decision maker right
here who uh
was part of that in Mr.
President, Senator.
I'm OK.
Mr. Chair, you can be president
for a moment. That feels good,
doesn't it?
Please, no more puffery.
Hang out with Elon Musk all day
long.
So I, I do like the idea of
asking our legislators to notify
both at the same time.
At the end of the day, I, I
would be open to an amendment
where that, that happens, but
then where we still keep
The accountability of census
secretary of state is like a
vampire, right, than county
commissioners, and they're in
charge of, of elections.
Could they not just make sure
through this form and through
some reasonable course of time
that they also let that county
commission know.
Because the, the attorney for
Bernalillo County actually was
asking the Secretary of State
for the official notification
and it kept getting delayed and
delayed and delayed, which is
why at one point they said, you
know what, at this point, we're
just.
We're not even going to worry
about it because you can get
sworn in before we can ever
elect you or appoint you at this
point.
So that's where I think if
you're stuck on the.
You know what, they should.
Ultimately, we all should be
that responsible to let our
county commission or a county
commissions know that we have
vacated our seat. However, if
the Secretary of State really
knows, and that's, that's the
law. Then why don't we put that
safeguard of accountability in,
in back into this. That's what's
missing currently with.
Hold on a second, so I've got uh
you send it?
Sara, Senator Duo and then
Senator O'Malley. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Senator Towson, this is a great
statue to look at, um.
Cause if you look at page 1 line
17.
This statute was written in
1919.
So it's the black socks,
amendment, but, um, but it's
kind of neat, uh, that you
brought this forward, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Boston because
General O'Malley was the chair
of our local county commission
when both Senator Stewart and
myself got appointed. So we're
all intimately fami familiar
with all this good stuff, the,
um, and so what happened is it
seems like you wanted to solve a
specific problem, which probably
won't happen again, where
someone just resigns and just
they're out as opposed to
sending a press release
something on social media,
something.
So, so I don't think your
situation will happen again, but
we, we got to make sure it
doesn't happen again. So it's,
you know, so your goal is to how
do we notify the county
commission so they could fill
the vacancy as the bill stands
now, uh, 299 as amended, it's
changing the conditions upon
when somebody resigns.
Um, so it's kind of 6 to 1, half
dozen of the other.
Uh, I think that that we should
definitely look at this statute,
uh, if this bill doesn't pass it
and fix it.
Because to me, uh, there should
be, there's conditions upon.
Uh, what, what makes it vacant
because the point is the vacancy
in filling the vacancy. And to
me, what makes it vacant is if
somebody dies, which isn't in
statute.
Somebody uh resigns, and how
does that happen? And can they
say, I resign as of.
Uh, I think if they
Under this statute, if they say,
I resign as of.
March 1st, and it's filed, I
think that, you know, are they
resigned or not, you know, and
then, and then also if they get
sworn in on a
On a uh another constitutional
position because I got sworn in
in the morning as a senator, I
didn't.
And then I drove up to Santa Fe
and handed my resignation, you
know, I become a center in the
morning. Can I hold two offices
at the same time. Anyway, Jim, a
long story short, Mr. Chairman
Senator Tobias, I think, uh,
this statue definitely needs to
be tightened up. I would, so I'm
gonna support the amendment
because I think the goal is to
notify the commission, the, the
commissioners of.
No,
no, um, Mr. Chairman, Senator,
Senator uh do like if, if the
amendment were to pass, if
Then, then, uh, then the
original bill would be in place.
And the Secretary of State would
then notify the commissioners or
the or the commissions. And I
think I would even propose
changing 15 days to 2 business
days, the Secretary of State's
office.
Deals with tens of thousands of
documents a day. They are a well
oiled machine. It it just seems
like forwarding an email is not
that.
It's not that onerous. So
anyway, I support the amendment
and um, but nonetheless, I think
uh regardless of how this bill
turns out, if it doesn't pass,
or even if it passes, we should
probably fix this statue at some
point. Thank you.
Thank you. Let's see had next
Senator Doig and then Senator
O'Malley.
No.
Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think I
had PTSD over this whole thing.
Um, I, uh, I, OK, so I
It's not an ideal situation
right now, that's clear.
Um
But as I recall, there is, and
maybe that's not clear how
someone resigns, right? So if
someone said, I filed, I said I
was gonna resign, and then you
resigned a day later, I mean, or
if you put another date in
there, then, you know, um, so
does it start from, you know,
that day or the day that it says
they're gonna resign, there's a
little confusion there, but we
were waiting as a commission
from uh uh a letter from the
secretary acknowledging that
that someone
has resigned.
And uh and so uh we, we
Dependent on that letter, and
then our processes started from
there, um.
Yeah, that was the
responsibility of the Secretary
of State to let us know.
that that had happened. Um, so
then it's like, someone said, oh
it's a responsibility of the
legislature.
Or you know, if it, if the
county commissioner doesn't get
it. There has to be some formal
process for us to get that
information so that we can move
forward.
And so, um, I think that some
things definitely need to be
cleared up.
Definitely how someone resigns,
I mean, what, you know, and in
that period of which is the
turnaround period, what is the?
You know, right, turnaround
period, uh, you know, Senator We
mentioned 2 days. Is that
reasonable?
Uh, to do 2 days, do they need
at least a week or whatever. I
mean, I don't think anybody, you
know, I mean, there was this
question, oh my God, the seat
isn't filled, you know, for like
a whole week, uh, you know, it's
not even in session, you know,
we had no one is uh
And it actually is spilled until
someone resigns, even if they
say they're going to resign
later. Anyway,
Uh, I, I guess what I'm saying
is this thing does need to be
cleared up. It's not clear, and
we need to probably work on
that, um.
So, I don't know if I added more
to the confusion, but uh.
I know what you're saying. I I I
do think it, I, I like the idea
of the secretary, you know,
getting that uh letter.
Maybe it has to come in some
formal way, right? And then
notifying them, the commission
or the commissions.
depending on how many you have.
That someone is resigned in the
seat is vacant. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
we have Lindsay Bachmann from
the Secretary of State's office
here with us, and I'd like to
hear from her.
Chair members of the committee,
I think this is an important
discussion, and I think it's
important that the sponsor is
raising the discussion, um, for
the legislature. Um, I would
like to just share how things
play out, um, when it comes to
resignations in our office
currently, Senator Duhe did
touch on this, and that is that,
um, it doesn't, it doesn't play
out in a uniform way. We, we
receive sometimes we will
literally see that a resignation
has occurred via a news
clipping, and then we'll spend.
time, um, collecting everybody
together to find out where the
resignation has landed if we've
received one at all, um, and
oftentimes it's, it's not
through a formal venue, um, the
secretary receives them in her
personal email, so all of that
is is factual, um, what is true
right now is there's not an onus
on the office to notify the
county commission. Um, so once
we receive the resignation, it
has been filed with us, but
there's no sort of requirement
on our
Of to follow up with the county
commissioners of the counties
that are impacted by that
resignation. Um, it is the
office's perspective that it
would be more beneficial to have
the member resign, um, at the
commission level, um, in
addition to notifying us if
there's still an onus on us to
do a second notification to the
county commission. We are, um,
agnostic on that and would do
that if that's the desire of the
committee.
Well, no, thank you, uh, thank
you, Ms. Bachman. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um,
I think what I'm
What I'm hearing
As
I think perhaps what Senator
Tobiasson was suggesting of
having the requirement to
contact the counting commission,
um, I still, I mean, I, and I
hear that the Secretary of
State's office is saying we're
we're.
We'll do that second contact. I
I think it's busy work that we
are giving our Secretary of
State to then give a second.
Uh
Second, uh, notification, but
If that is busy work that
The office
is willing to do then.
That's it, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
can I ask a question?
So
If a legislator has our is part
of our retirement program.
And his pain into that
retirement program.
Who is notified so they know
that that legislator has
Actually retired and might
actually start drawing on that
retirement.
Mr. She's a second notice you
need to go to PERA.
And there's a whole separate
process that triggers and starts
that process.
again, I think the legislators
the one.
My understanding has to go.
Go down that separate.
Separately
And so if the legislator, Mr.
Chair, goes to Parra.
How does Parra know that that
legislator is actually indeed
retired.
Mr. Chan, I don't know the, I
don't know, I don't want to miss
the, I don't know the answer
specifically.
Mr. Chair, would it be someone
on a state level like the
Secretary of State who would
confirm that resignation and
vacancy of that seat.
Mr. Joe, I would think so right
now because if right now you,
your resignation is effective
when you deliver a letter to the
Secretary of State. My guess is
he probably would walk that same
letter over to the
to the era, and they would
probably confirm with the
Secretary of State, and I would
assume that would be the
trigger.
Could I confer with my
Expert witness. Is that what we
want to call you?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm, I'm actually not
familiar if that's how that
takes place, um, I do believe it
would be on the onus of the
member to interact with Parra.
it does raise an interesting
question. I mean, I keep going
back to Senator Brantley. So
does that mean she would have to
walk in 7 different letters to
each county commission and now
Paras got to figure out if all
those were property delivered to
determine if she's resigned or
not.
Yeah, yeah, email.
Possibly assuming it's sent to
the right address and.
Received and
Yeah she could just do what our
previous senators did and walk
out with their chair. That's
when we knew they were really
resigned.
Mr. Chair, that could.
Mr. Chair, that could explain
why my chair has a lot of
scratches on it. So, Mr. Chair
and
And I don't know what the
Secretary of State's office
position would be on this. Um,
What if we make resignation, you
do it the same way you file for
office.
You file something with the
accounting clerk where you live.
They send it to the Secretary of
State.
Secretary of State would notify
the other counties, um, like
why, why?
Why not use a process that we
already have.
Uh, that we know works.
In this, in this situation too.
And I, I don't know.
I, I don't know, I'm putting you
on the spot, um.
But cause that's clearly not
what this, this bill does, um,
but
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that's certainly an
interesting idea. The structure
is already set up to do that,
um, I think one difference is
that the decision makers in this
scenario of resignation are the
county commission, so notifying
the commission probably is more
appropriate in that scenario.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I, uh, move
the proposed amendment.
Yes to the amendment.
Yes.
Mr. Cha, moved to the table.
Chair has the prerogative of
accepting the motion and not
accepting the motion, um, and I,
I practiced just so you all
know, is to make sure that we
don't use tabling to stifle
debate prematurely and so is
there any further debate or
discussion that anyone feels is
important to them, given the
amendment and the adoption of
the amendment of the bill before
we accept the tabling motion.
Anyone else?
Right, so then we have a soyan,
you know, the tabling motion by
Senator Doig. We'll do that one
by roll call as well.
Senator Grantley.
And I do, yes.
Senator O'Malley.
pal.
Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
No, the table.
I know
No.
Yes,
motion fails on the bill.
Motion, Senator Masters.
Uh, no motion, quick comment of.
On the bill, one thing we got.
Uh
But we may want to put in this
statute at some point is his
conditions deadline on the
county commission, a deadline on
the governor when there's names
on the governor's desk, things
of that nature.
Under the current Berne County
rules of
Some were to resign today that,
that, or frankly, even if
someone were to resign on day
one of the 60 day, it would not
get filled, um.
But anyway, uh, anyway, it's a
great uh statute to look at. We
should definitely fix it at some
point, in addition to this, this
bill. Thank you.
members.
Action? Anyone?
Any motions at all?
Before do pass.
As amended on Senate bill 299.
pass motion.
Uh, let's just see, cause I
think we've seen this before,
show of hands, those in
objection to the do pass motion,
show objecting Senator Stewart,
Senator Doig, and Senator
Cervantes, all other members
present voting in the
affirmative.
Senator, you have a due pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members.
Senator Doig, Senate Bill 319.
Yes, I do.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, this
is a bill that.
would make uninsured motorist
coverage, uh, mandatory. Right
now in New Mexico, liability
coverage is mandatory, and
liability is, is the coverage
that people often think of when
they think about insurance
coverage or especially auto
insurance coverage. They think
about if, if I hit someone else,
if I hurt someone else.
Is there going to be coverage
there to pay for that?
Uninsured motorist coverage is
probably the most valuable
coverage someone can have,
because that is what, when you
get hurt.
That is what takes care of you,
uh, and especially in New
Mexico, where we have incredibly
high proportion of uninsured,
uh, drivers out there on the
road. Uh, if you don't have this
coverage, I and you get, let's
say you get hit by uh a hit and
run and you are.
Horribly injured.
There is no way that you are,
you are on your own.
Um, so over 20 states have made
uninsured motorists coverage,
uh, mandatory, the same way that
liability coverage is mandatory,
and this would have New Mexico
join that approach. I am here
with Jeff Romero, who I think is
one of the leading experts in
the in the state on UM issues.
and so you wanna, I don't know
if you want to say anything or
just be here to answer
questions, but he will know a
lot more.
You will be able to answer
folks' questions far better than
I.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair members. Thank you
very much for the opportunity to
speak with you.
I am a local attorney. I have
been practicing in this area for
approximately 30.
3 years, uh, I've been analyzing
this insurance statute, the
uninsured Motorist Act and
uninsured Motorists Coverage
since the end of my first year
of law school in 1989.
I worked with State Farm as
intern to house counsel.
And in that role I analyzed oh
rulings coming down from the
courts and all statutes being
issued pertinent to those
coverages.
I've been actively litigating
uninsured motorists claims for
the entirety of my career since
1991.
This statute hasn't changed and
litigation continues to a point
that the Supreme Court
expresses, uh, some, some
fatigue from all of the uh cases
coming forward.
Uh, the statute as written has a
few problems that insurance
companies exploit the
disadvantage of New Mexicans,
the consumers. And this, these
proposed changes seek to protect
the consumers and expand
uninsured motors coverage in New
Mexico. The problem of uninsured
motorists is about 20+% of the
drivers out there are uninsured.
Most people don't recognize the
danger and risk that they're in
when they're hit by an uninsured
motorist and the importance of
this.
coverage
This bill does 3 things.
It mandates uninsured motors
coverage in the sale of the
automobile policy.
It makes the sale mandated on a
per vehicle basis rather than a
per policy basis.
And it changes the definition of
the term underinsured motorist.
To reflect what most consumers
believe an underinsured motorist
actually is.
There's litigation on these
points. And even the Supreme
Court recognized most people.
I think that an underinsured
motorist is a motorist who has
insurance.
But not enough to pay for your
damages when they've hit you.
They have insurance, but not
enough.
The way that our statute is
currently worded.
That makes that belief not true
and underinsured motorist under
our statutory scheme is one who
has liability coverage less than
your uninsured motorist
coverage.
And as a consequence of that
definition, and this is very
significant, uh, our courts have
written to uh our law and
offset.
Of the liability coverage that's
paid by an uninsured motorist
who has less liability insurance
than your uninsured motors
coverage. And so what most
people buying uninsured and
underinsured motors coverage do
not understand that when they
buy a certain amount, $50,000 of
underinsured motors coverage,
they will never get that amount
because of the definition.
And this statute fixes that by
changing the definition to
reflect what most people
understand it to be this
motorist has insurance, but not
enough to pay for all the damage
caused, and it takes away that
offset.
The per vehicle, uh the per
vehicle amendment, uh,
eliminates insurance companies
opportunity to manipulate
premiums to collect premiums and
not provide insurance. I'm happy
to explain that in my questions,
uh, in detail, but I've got
experience with the insurance
company strategies of billing
premiums and not providing
coverage and how they do it, how
they manipulate the opportunity
to reject uninsured motors
coverage into a premium scheme
where they can collect.
Uh, premiums for uninsured
motors coverage would not
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the American Property
Casualty Insurance Association
and for Allstate Insurance, and
we stand in opposition to Senate
Bill 319. The reason we stand in
opposition to to this bill is uh
as it, as it has been noted,
uninsured motorists is a problem
in the state of New Mexico, and
this bill has the potential to
make it worse. The average uh
premium for one of our members,
uh, for
insured motorist each year is
about $300. By mandating uh
mandatory uninsured motorist
coverage, you make folks have to
go pay for it instead of having
the option of rejecting it. Now
this coverage is to protect
them, but they can have the
option of keeping their premiums
low and rejecting the coverage.
When you mandate it, you make
them pay for more insurance, and
that creates an affordability
problem. We think that that
leads to the potential that
people make that hard choice of
do I buy insurance or do I not
buy insurance? You're making a
man.
Auditorium and we think that
exacerbates the problem. We also
would note with the offsets when
you're talking about um
uninsured motorists and
underinsured motorist coverage.
Remember, you're buying
liability coverage or when
somebody is in an accident.
fees, but the person who causes
the damage, their liability
policy.
And what offset
Sorry, uh, what offsets do is
they don't allow for double
recovery. If you remove the
offset, what happens is you have
double recoveries and you have
essentially excess insurance.
The offset is there to make sure
that the person who is injured
gets the full amount of the
underinsured coverage that's
provided, admittedly at the
lower levels, there is some,
there is an issue there, but the
superintendent of insurance has
addressed that through a
bulletin that makes it makes
sure that folks have that clear.
explained to them, but removing
the offset will will result in
double recoveries or in excess
insurance. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Anne
Conway and I'm the registered
lobbyist for the State Farm
insurance companies, and I won't
repeat what Mr. Moore has said,
um, certainly our, our concern
is as well with the increase in
premiums that this bill would
necessitate, um, as Mr. Moore
said, this coverage can be
purchased now or it can be
rejected when this bill came
out, we looked at the numbers
and
For both the, the policyholders
that we have in New Mexico who
currently reject
And for our policyholders who
have
both liability coverage but
uninsured motorist coverage, but
it's less than their liability,
um, limits, the increase would
be 38%, so almost 48%. So for an
average State Farm driver who's
insured.
Um, now under this bill with
mandating the uninsured motorist
coverage at the limits that are
um set forth in this bill, it
would be about $220 a year
increase for our policyholders,
for the reason that was already
said.
Everyone in this body, um,
certainly uninsured motorist
coverage is very important. We
don't dispute that at all.
Um, but we also don't wanna keep
raising the cost of insurance,
so that other New Mexicans can't
purchase insurance at all, so we
think they should be allowed to
reject an insured motorist
coverage and choose the level of
limits that they think is
appropriate for their own
families.
Um, so I don't, that's all I
have members of the.
Questions, committee members.
Looking around.
Senator O'Malley
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I'm just looking at the um
Um
OK
I.
Um, and I'm looking at the,
this, well, I'll just read it.
It says the bill explicitly
prohibits insurance insurers
from offsetting underinsured
motors coverage by the liability
is paid by the at-fault driver.
Ensuring the policy holders
receive the full benefit of the
coverage they purchased. Could
you explain that in?
Lay terms, layman terms.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Senator O'Malley, I
can happily explain that to you.
Um, the way that the statute
currently operates because of
the language when an a motorist
has any insurance, any liability
insurance coverage. If you're
hit by that motor, you have a
higher level of uninsured
motorist coverage, the amount
that you have is deducted. It's
reduced by whatever you collect
from the other driver. All you
now have available of the
coverage you paid for is a
reduced amount. You paid
for the full amount, but now
you're paying only a reduced,
you're getting access only to a
reduced amount. Uh, that's
significant. I, I need to
discuss too the
Misconception of double
recovery. That's not a thing if
it's not true. Uh.
The underinsured motors coverage
kicks in or takes effect when
the liability coverage is not
enough to pay your damages. So
if there's not enough there to
make you whole, to pay your
medical bills, to pay your wage
loss, then you're underinsured
motorist coverage takes effect.
If you have minimal injuries,
and there's more than enough
liability coverage. You don't
get paid twice. Double recovery
isn't a thing.
And
Is the, the
The Committee will allow. I can
address the premiums issue. I
think that's the big concern,
the the big elephant in the
room.
Uh, and it's interesting that we
have Allstate here because
Allstate has been the defendant
in very significant cases
addressing these kinds of
premium abuses. Um,
historically, insurance carriers
have loved to build a premium on
every vehicle for uninsured
motors coverage.
But denies stacking. I don't
know if you all know what
stacking is.
Senator O'Malley stacking is.
The the situation when you have
multiple vehicles and each has
uninsured motorist coverage on
them. You have access to the
coverage from each of those
vehicles. The coverage follows
you wherever you are. So for
example, you have 3 vehicles
with $25,000 of UM coverage
available to you, and you get
hit as a pedestrian. You have
$75,000 available to you. Excuse
me.
Insurers don't like stacking.
They like to prohibit that by
contract, but still paying or
get you to pay a premium on
every vehicle. And that's been
decades that they've enjoyed
that, and that there's been kind
of a battle between consumer
protection and the courts
protecting consumers in New
Mexico and making sure New
Mexicans get what they pay for.
And so historically,
There's a case called Jimenez.
Where the Supreme Court said
it's repugnant conduct to charge
a premium on each vehicle and
not provide stacking.
And they they disallowed it. And
if you're charging a premium on
each vehicle, you have to
provide stacking.
Insurers responded to that. They
didn't want to give up the game
of multiple premiums and denying
stacking. So they responded by
pretending on the face of the
declarations page that one
premium was being charged, and
then for each other vehicle,
making little insertions like
included, and then telling, we
only charge one premium.
So we don't have to stop.
The reality was when you get
into the books, they were
charging on every car, but they
were misrepresenting on the face
of the declarations page.
So the court disallowed that, so
you have to make it clear.
Insurers like Allstate,
continued to try and play a
different game where they hid
the additional premium. So in
2004, there's another Supreme
Court case, and it involves all
state, Montagno versus Allstate.
Allstate was found to be
charging an inflated premium for
multiple vehicle policies, but
denying stacking because they
wrote it to look like a single
premium. But once you got into
the accounting multiple premiums
are being charged.
So the Supreme Court then said,
all right, we're not gonna allow
this, you know, we don't let the
multiple premium thing happen
and to avoid ambiguity, if you
want to reject stacking, the,
the multiple premium thing is
still in effect. If you're
charging multiple premiums, it's
repugnant not to allow stacking.
You want to be clear about
stacking rejections, charge one
premium, and get a written
rejection of stacking. That way
it consumer will know.
We're rejecting stat.
But the game continued and again
with Allstate very recently, we
argued the case in the Supreme
Court, uh, where they changed
the form again to look like a
single premium for non-stack
coverage and a higher premium
for stat coverage. And so what
you're a consumer was faced with
is
I can, I can pay 50 I'm gonna
bring you back to a little bit
to get into the stacking is
gonna get you way far into the
weeds, but really what the what
the, I think the fundamental
policy is that we kind of bring
it back to your bill. OK, thank
you. Thank you.
That's the per vehicle part of
this statute that now they can't
hide the multiple premiums on
something that looks like
non-stacking and charge the
inflated premium to encourage
behavior of rejecting, checking,
checking the box, rejecting
staging, that's the premium
issue. They're already billing a
premium on every vehicle. So
that's not new and won't affect
the prices. That, that's the
point I was getting to. Thank
you,
chair. Mr. Chair and Senator
O'Malley.
I think
I think kind of the big picture
here is that we have repeatedly
seen abusive practices by
insurance companies that are
aimed at maximizing their
profits while not providing the
coverage that we are paying for
every month, and it keeps going
to the courts, and the courts
keep saying, stop doing this,
and then they changed the game.
And they do it differently. So
we need to address it in our
statutes, so that we can put an
end to what our Supreme Court
has said is repugnant practices.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, so this
You know, it's always like the
money's got to come from
somewhere, so.
There was the issue of, OK, so
we require this insurance.
Uh, and, you know, we've got
folks, you know, a lot of people
who paid their insurance because
they.
They feel like it's important to
have insurance, and so, uh, and,
you know, it can add up.
Uh, will this increase, uh,
You know, that those premiums
for other folks. Mr. Chair,
Senator, there'll probably be a
small increase. UM coverage is
actually very cheap. Uh, when
this was heard in rules, uh,
there was a, a check done on the
comparison, having just
liability versus liability and
you, and I think, uh, increase
the premium by $13 a month, I
want to say.
Um, so yes, there will be a
small increase in premiums. The
value of the coverage you get
for that.
The, the, the return on that
investment is massive.
So you're talking about $13 Mr.
Chair, you're talking about $13
per vehicle or whatever or.
And if you have several
vehicles, well, that starts to
add up a little bit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you
Others. Questions?
Anyone else? So I, I, I support
the initiative, I understand the
concerns of the industry, um, I
don't know that I need to even
support my um argument for this
legislation by.
Um, denigrating the insurance
industry um I be happy to do
that some other time in some
other place for some other
reason perhaps, but, but not on
this bill. I think the
fundamental issues that we in
New Mexico decided long ago that
we want a mandatory require
people to be insured, um, and to
ensure that, that uh people who
are injured as a result of an
auto accident and have a means
of recovery, I think the limits
are far too low, the mandatory
limits now are far too low as it
is.
And anyone who's needed health
care and had to pay for
healthcare, has any idea what it
costs? Probably recognize that
what we, that minimum coverage
we do have now is probably
inadequate. The other thing too
is I had a good conversation a
while back with our former
colleague, Senator Sain who
talks about the fact that people
will get the coverage.
Just long enough to get there, a
registration on their vehicle or
something else taken care of and
then allow the the uh insurance
coverage to lapse, um, and so
that's not healthy either for
any of us, but I think all of us
who are on the road would like
to believe that if we're struck
or injured by somebody else
that, that there's gonna be a
resource there to make us whole,
and, and that's, I think a
policy that we've adopted here
in the state, fundamentally
require insurance and this just
seems to be a very logical
extension of that, um, that
goal.
Policy, which I think makes
sense to me, so I think this is
a good idea, but uh those are my
thoughts on this, uh, any
comments or questions beyond
that.
Anybody got emotion, Senator
Thornton. Well,
not yet. I just, just one quick
question that I'm looking for
clarification on that.
Go a a report here that says
that if we were to pass this
bill.
That it would result in a 16%
rate increase for full coverage
policyholders.
And a 43% rate increase for
policyholders with only state
minimum required coverages. Do
you agree with that?
So Mr. Chair, I saw that. I was
surprised to see that in the
OSIs analysis, and they also
said UM coverage is very
expensive, which just isn't true
in my experience. I, I'm sure
you all have.
UM coverage. Uh,
You probably saw the cost of it,
it is.
It is not that expensive. I'm
not sure why they said that.
Um, I will say I met with them
before session on this bill, and
they were supportive.
Of the bill.
Um, I think Mr. Romero might
have something to say on that.
Thank you, Senator Dock. Uh, the
issue is if you make it, uh, so
if you allow it to be rejected.
That's where the price is high.
The price actually comes down
when it's mandatory. The reason
for that is that the insurers
compete, and they're always
competing for the lowest price.
And they also influenced their
sales. If they don't want to
sell uninsured motors coverage,
they make the price high. So the
figures you're looking at
anticipate rejection because if
it's coming in and use the
current pricing, the current
pricing scheme is priced to get
people to either reject stack
coverage or high limits and
choose the lowest limits. That's
the pricing that we're under
now, because it can be rejected.
If you don't allow it to be
rejected. They have to compete.
Everybody has to buy it, and all
the
insurers are competing for the
same business. So the pricing, I
think would stay flat or in fact
come down for better coverage.
Thank you. That's all I have.
Thank you. Emotions.
OK.
To pass
motion for do pass, do that as a
roll call, please, Emily.
I
That
Senator.
Senator O'Malley, yeah.
Paul
Senator Stewart.
I
No.
work
Yes.
They
Yes, do pass. Thank you very
much.
Oh, that's not gonna work. OK,
yeah, go ahead.
Oh, who's, I'm next up and
He master just said he's.
And use the restroom, so.
So Senator Doug, you're chairing
the committee.
Thanks.
505507.
That
Mr. Chair, go ahead on SB 505.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and.
If um, if you'll allow me a
moment, because we have new
members to the committee, I
think some of this will be
useful to take a look back a
little bit to uh years ago back
when I was in the house, I was
part of an effort to adopt
Mexico's concealed carry law,
uh, I'm sorry, we're on the body
cameras, I'm sorry, body, the
same thing. So, not so long ago,
I was part of an effort to adopt
the body camera legislation, um,
at the time, the legislation in,
in the enactment was necessary
because very frankly, we had a
sheriff of Burnley.
County, who was refusing to uh
apply and use body cameras
technology.
Most of the law enforcement, the
state had already done so, and
we were seeing it widespread use
around the country and so forth,
and and I'll just tell you,
having done some criminal
prosecution in the past, body
camera video footage is very
useful to a prosecutor. It's,
it's a almost a slam dunk when
it comes to enforcing things
like DWI and other and other
such crimes. And I think the
other thing that's that's useful
with body camera footage is an
important point to make, which
is I, I watched these videos, I
encourage all of you to do so
when you watch these videos.
you can be incredibly impressed
and proud of the professionalism
and the exemplary conduct of the
law enforcement officers on that
video footage. I, I haven't seen
one yet where I wasn't
incredibly impressed with law
enforcement officers sometimes
in very difficult circumstances,
sometimes with unreasonable
people acting very
professionally. Um and so the,
the video footage, in my
experience, really reflects
highly on the job that law
enforcement do.
But, um, when we were compelled
to do this, the sheriff of Breno
County was refusing to do so and
his argument was that it was too
expensive or that the technology
didn't exist or was not reliable
or it was too much of a burden
that rang hollow with me,
because again, most law
enforcement around the country
was already doing this, most law
enforcement in New Mexico was
doing this. So we, we enacted
this as a law. We, we created a
compulsion.
For a law enforcement to do so.
Um, we, uh, also felt it
important to put it in a
consequence for the failure to
do so and so in the original
version of this bill, there was
a consequence that uh was
mandatory, we we put in the word
shall that there shall be this
consequence for the failure to
utilize the equipment and and
follow the policies and
procedures adopted by that law
enforcement agency.
Let me take a moment to pause
and emphasize that the law that
we adopted and the law that's in
place right now requires law
enforcement to comply with their
own policies and procedures.
We don't try and establish what
those are, we don't try and
dictate what those are. We leave
it to the professionals who
utilize equipment and have the
equipment and understand the
circumstances under which it can
be used, we, we entrust them to
develop their policies and
procedures, and the only time
there's a consequence is when
they fail to follow their own
policies and procedures.
Now initially when we adopted
this, we, we put those
consequences as as mandatory, we
use the word in the law shall
when when we put in the word
shall in the law means something
must happen.
As opposed to May.
Um, uh,
In a period of time after the
mandatory language, law
enforcement came back to us and
and thought, um, and expressed
that that burden was was too
strict.
And that there should be greater
discretion, that it should not
be shall, but should be may and
that there would be some
discretion about the consequence
that would befall them if they
didn't apply the technology.
The body cams.
And I'm back here today to
suggest that that maybe that um
standard by lessening that
standard, uh, was not a good
idea because now we have uh at
least one noteworthy example of
late where the um that
permissive language has now been
I, I think use um in a, in a
very public way that we've seen
to make law enforcement perhaps
less committed to use of body
camera, um, technology.
The bill does one other thing
too, which is in the last year
or two, it came to my attention
and again in press accounts that
University of New Mexico was not
using body camera uh technology.
I was disappointed to see and
hear that New Mexico State did
so, and I think most of the
other colleges and universities
of the state did use the body
camera technology, but UNM took
the position that because we
didn't specify university police
as opposed to sheriffs,
municipalities, um, and other
law enforcement, state police,
where we were specific, they,
the, the UNM took the position
that because we did not express
the requirement as applicable to
university law enforcement that
they were exempted.
And again, I'm repeating this as
a UNM graduate two times over, I
was disappointed.
By that, and I was, and I was, I
was happy to see the anime issue
and others were, were uh
complying with our, our wishes
and the, and the public's wishes
for this party, camera
legislation.
So, um, the good news is that uh
between our interim committee,
um, references to UNM situation
in this bill. My understanding
is UNM is working to get
themselves compliant with the
statute, but what this bill does
is it makes it very clear,
abundantly clear that we expect
university police departments to
follow the same standards and
technology that all other law
enforcement do.
I, I expect the, the principal
um issue before you is gonna be
this issue of what the
consequences to a law
enforcement agency if they fail
to, to comply with this, and uh
there was an amendment put on to
the bill back in the rules
committee, which I think will
probably dig into somewhat, but
you're gonna hear opposition to
the mandatory May versus shell,
and I'll just be very blunt
about this, and the chief of
police for Albuquerque PD
involved in an incident did not
turn on his body camera, uh,
when, uh, internal affairs
investigated.
a failure of the chief of police
of Albuquerque to use body
camera, he invoked his Fifth
Amendment right not to, uh,
respond.
That is a reflection, I think,
of again of a cavalier attitude
toward all the wishes of the
legislature in compelling the
use of this equipment.
You'll also hear some arguments
that um that this is too strict
because, of course, law
enforcement are oftentimes
called into difficult
situations.
Um, they may find themselves
under assault themselves and and
I think we can all respect and
appreciate without even
beginning to, to, um.
Imagine what that must be like.
But again, the bill does not
provide for this consequence,
unless they fail to follow their
own policies and procedures and
presumably those policies and
procedures have uh a um
circumstances under which they
have to activate and how they
activate the the equipment and
my understanding is also we'll
hear from law enforcement, I
hope to. My understanding is
that some of this technology now
is so advanced that it
automatically operates. Um, and
it's triggered by any number of
different things, or that it's a
relatively simple matter to to
operate.
The um
The law recognizes something
called spoliation of evidence,
and that's the language you'll
see in the bill as well too,
spoliation is essentially takes
the position that if there's
evidence that would be expected
to support one side or the other
in a given case that they that
an individual who destroys that
or or loses that, there's a
presumption that that evidence
was going to be favorable to the
other party who did not lose it.
And did not have the
opportunity. So we're adopting
some of those spoliation
principles in connection with
this, this bill as well too. So
with with that uh senator Mr.
Chairman, I'll take questions
and.
Hear from, I'm sure some
opposition.
Thank you, Senator Shavante. I
think you covered it, but we'll
we'll leave a minute for
rebuttal, we have a lot of folks
in opposition, you folks in
favor, so why don't we hear from
the opponents of the bill. I'll
just call you by name and we'll
either step forward or, or jump
on the on the zoom.
From New Mexico Association
Accounting Mark Allen.
Followed by a Jason Bowie and
Paul Joy.
Welcome, sir.
Mr. Chairman, I'm general
counsel for New Mexico counties.
New Mexico County has yet to
take a position on this bill.
It's on the agenda for the
executive committee tomorrow.
But I do want to share my
concerns with this bill.
Changing, changing shall to make
takes away the discretion of the
court.
And there are circumstances
through no fault of the officer
that they're not able to
capture.
The encounter.
These are mechanical devices.
Sometimes they fell, sometimes
in using force, it gets it gets
dislocated, it gets damaged and
it doesn't operate it. And there
are also times when when the
officer is surprised where he is
immediately confronted with a
deadly encounter and has no time
to operate and turn on his
camera. We do not want to see
innocent officers be penalized
with a presumption of bad faith
and then counties and and
municipalities face that.
That those damages that are
associated with those spoliation
claims, and, and for, and those
are my concerns. Again, the
Mexico County is, has not taken
a position at this point.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity. Jason Bowie,
secretary for the Department of
Public Safety. um, EPS strongly
opposes the bill because it
reinstates the legal standard of
Shell, and that's really the
heartburn and the rub with us,
the presumption of intentional
spoliation of evidence anytime
an officer fails to comply with
body worn camera policy without
considering the realities of
policing and technological
limitations. Now law enforcement
has never pushed back on
body-worn cameras. Uh, we
believe it's a positive, uh,
step for law enforcement,
something that the community
expects, and the senator's
examples, uh.
You know, using one case example
of of Chief Medina in contrast
of 5000 cops out there working
tirelessly every day, and being
in compliance with the law of
the 2023 legislative amendments
struck really a fair balance by
holding police officers
accountable when they acted
intentionally while protecting
those uh faced.
Uh, by, by human error or
technological failures. This
bill really eliminates that
balance, and I was really proud
of the legislature, uh, last
year for, for changing that, and
we speak at conferences and in
large part law enforcement feels
like they're not supported and I
use this as a positive example
of the legislature does listen
and supports his law enforcement
officers, and I feel like we're,
we're going backwards again and
where else in the law do we jump
to this foregone conclusion
without someone having an
opportunity to explain the
circumstances before we assign
guilt to someone. I don't know
why we do that to our own police
office.
There's no evidence that the
current law has weakened
accountability, making this
change both unnecessary and
harmful. Um, I, I asked and
urged the committee to reject
this bill and uphold the fair
balance standard that's
currently in place. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. Thank you, Mr. Chief
Joy, followed by a social
compost bags.
Chair of the committee, Paul
Joy, Chief of police and police
department. I have a whole list
of things I was going to say
until I got here and I get to
watch you all work through these
previous bills and the care
effort that you take to make
sure the words you use are the
right words.
Words are important.
Ho.
Uh, and that brings us to today,
the words as they are now with
May is the right word is the
appropriate. We talk on day one
in our profession about the
importance of.
Everyone is presumed innocent
until proven guilty. Everyone
gets their day in court.
Everyone gets to to work to
defend themselves.
Uh, we have a profession where
uh we ask these officers to join
into something that most people
can't do.
Uh, we asked them to get into a
profession that may very well
cost them their life or their
quality of life.
And with this language change,
it asks an additional thing. Now
we're gonna ask these folks to
get into a profession.
Where that due process, it's so
important to apply to everyone
else, no longer applies to you.
Because whether technical error
or human error.
Uh, we're we're going to presume
that you are a bad faith
officer, you're acting in bad
faith, you are a bad actor here.
And that's gonna be our starting
point.
Uh, that is a powerful message
to send, that is the wrong
message to send.
And I would ask that you vote
not in favor of that. Thank you
Ms. Campos big, followed by uh.
Carol Hume and then Steve Hebby.
Hello, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Soil
Campus Biggs. I'm a system
social worker and the chief
policy advisor at the
Albuquerque Police Department. I
urge you to see this from a
systems perspective, because if
you change one thing in the
system you have to think
forwardly about how it will
affect other parts of the
system.
When I think forwardly, I think
the officers will see this as a
threat to them personally that
the safety net for their careers
and their livelihood will be
taken away by language that
opens them up to the personal
threat of lawsuits.
If this bill passes, I foresee
officers who hesitate to
intervene for fear of making a
mistake, and on the other hand,
I see officers putting
themselves in danger to follow
this legislation in exigent
circumstances, because being
hurt would be easier than being
sued.
I ultimately see this
legislation making officers less
safe, and in doing so, the
community less safe.
The impact of this legislation
isn't about one person. This
will affect public safety across
the state.
While I appreciate some of the
language in the amendment, we
remain opposed to any bill where
officers quote unquote shall be
presumed to have acted in bad
faith.
I am a reasonable human being
who's trying to do good here,
and I believe my colleagues
police officers are too.
This legislation degrades their
humanness and will burden them
with the self-doubt and
insecurity of being able to do
their job with the support of
their department in the state of
New Mexico.
I don't think this is the
desired impact to the system any
of us want to make.
Good evening, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Carolyn Wynn. I'm one of the
deputy chiefs for New Mexico
State Police, we want to express
our opposition to Senate Bill
505, specifically the language
that would change me to shell.
We believe the current language
in Senate Bill 505 unfairly
shifts the presumption of bad
faith onto our officers and
introduces unintended
consequences that could
undermine the fairness of the
process.
Technology used by law
enforcement such as body cameras
is an important tool for
ensuring accountability.
However, it is not fail-proof.
For example, during a critical
incident, a technical issue
delays one of the officer's body
camera footage by just a few
moments. Other cameras captured
the full event, but this new
presumption was still
automatically suggest misconduct
despite the absence of any bad
faith or malicious intent.
Our officers operate in a fast
moving, high stress situation
where things can go wrong
despite the best efforts to
ensure evidence is properly
preserved by presuming bad faith
in every case, the bill
overlooks the broader context in
which these events occur.
But
could unfairly penalize our
officers. For these reasons,
state police respectfully urges
a committee to remove the
language that changes made to
shell. We believe that
continuing to allow for case by
case analysis where the context
and facts are fully considered
before presuming bad faith is
the fairest approach to ensuring
accountability without unfairly
punishing our officers. Thank
you.
Thank you, Deputy Chief Wen.
Good afternoon.
Sorry.
And
SP 505 is a statement to police
officers. I'm sorry, Steve
Hebby, Armington Police,
and president of the New Mexico
Chiefs of Police.
SP 505 is a statement to all our
police officers largely based on
one high profile incident.
Last year there were 2 police
officers in the state of New
Mexico that were killed in the
line of duty.
This morning before I drove down
here, I was meeting with our
district attorney about the case
of Elias Buck, who shot one of
our police officers a couple of
years back.
Mr. Buck is currently in federal
prison on 10 years for a felony
possession charge under the
federal system.
I was told today that that is
more time than he will get under
state law for being a felon who
escaped from prison in Colorado,
armed himself with a handgun and
shot our police officer at point
blank range.
New Mexico is a state that has a
crime problem right now that
some media outlets are described
as out of control. New Mexico is
a state that had 2 police
officers shot in the line of
duty last year.
New Mexico is a state that has a
recruitment and retention
problem for law enforcement that
we spend hundreds of thousands
of dollars in bonuses and pay
raises to a fix, but which has
not been fixed.
We need a strong statement from
the legislature siding with men
and women in blue that we
abhorred their being attacked
and killed. We need a strong
statement from the legislature
on crime bills that support.
Our men and women as they
attempt to battle crime.
SP 505 is a strong statement,
but it's not the right statement
at this time. Thank you.
Thank you, Chief. Now we'll go
to the zoom, uh.
I have a
Shane out, Abigail Hills, Jeremy
Story, are they still online?
Uh, uh, this
Yeah
I am here.
Please introduce yourself
enough.
We can hear you.
Thank you, sir. Bye.
members of the committee.
Mr. Chair, uh, my name is Shane
U.
I am general counsel for ask me
New Mexico, camera worn, uh, uh,
regulation. However, a statute
that presumes our state law
enforcement officers are acting
in bad faith.
It projects a level of.
Trust that is harmful to the
public service offered by these
men and women who asked me to
represents my clients also
opposed the strict liability
standard for spoliation of
evidence. A peace officer shall
be deemed liable for exfoliation
means that the court or a jury
must ignore the officer's intent
or level of care. It also means
that plaintiffs don't need to
prove the officer's intent,
negligence or fault. It
eliminates reasoned-based
defenses which began to subverts
justice in many instances.
And we stand respectfully
opposed to those provisions of
the legislation. Thank you.
Miss Abigail Hills.
Cheap story, you there?
Yes, Mr. Chair.
We can hear you.
Mr, members of the committee,
Jeremy Story, police chief for
the city of Las Cruces.
There's one aspect of this that
I think we're not taking into
consideration. That's this
statute already uh sets the
requirements for what has to be
in our policy. In Section A
requires essentially that a
police officer activate their
camera anytime they're
interacting with the citizen.
And keep it activated throughout
the duration of that.
And the only exceptions in
section B are for undercover
operations and explosive
disposal.
And so what happens in section C
when it shall, is that there is
no allowance in this statue,
which means there's no allowance
in our policy for those times
where the officer was acting
reasonably, but their camera
malfunctioned. It ran out of
battery because they were
working 16 hours, or they're on
their way to the station where
their cameras docked, and they
had to intervene to save
somebody's life.
Agencies already take this
seriously. Uh, LCPD in the last
three years is disciplined 26
officers for violations of our
recording policy and therefore
violations of the statute.
And most of the violations of
our policy should be, there
should be some type of
corrective action or
accountability.
But there are genuinely times
where it is out of the officer's
control, and we should be able
to look at those situations by
preponderance of the evidence
and say it was reasonable that
their camera was not activated.
We can tell with this technology
by the Audit trail, that it ran
out of battery, that it
malfunctioned, that there wasn't
an intentional deactivation of
the camera.
And right now in the bill, there
is no allowance for those times.
There's not. So it's not just
about the, the agency holding
officers accountable for when
they violate the policy.
If there was an allowance for an
exception for those times we're
talking about, we, we might be,
uh, more in favor of the
amendment.
But without that, it's just not
fair to say that the officer
acted in bad faith, even when
they're working 16 hours and
halfway through, it ran out of
battery, or they're on their way
to the station and they they
have to intervene and they don't
have their camera with them.
There has to be a case by case
analysis. Um, I understand what
the Senator Cervantes is trying
to accomplish and we're actually
probably closer together than it
seems because when officers
intentionally violate this
policy, there should be
accountability. But I would
submit that that's already
happening amongst all these
agencies that have spoken. Thank
you.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you, Chief. Now we'll go
to folks in favor of the bill
was.
Denali Wilson.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Denali
Wilson. I'm a staff attorney
with the ACLU of New Mexico and
the ACLU stands in strong
support of this bill. Body
cameras are a critical tool for
transparency and accountability
in policing, and inappropriately
disabling body cameras
undermines public trust and
obstructs justice. This bill
reinforces the expectation that
officers operate with integrity
and ensures that failure to
record interactions are taken
seriously.
Without real consequences for
inappropriate disabling of body
cameras, the protections that
they offer to both the public
and law enforcement are
meaningless. New Mexico has one
of the highest per capita rates
of people killed by police in
the country, and the public is
still learning the full details
of a decades-long corruption
scheme that affects
At least 3 of our state's
largest law enforcement
agencies. This bill is a
necessary step towards ensuring
accountability and restoring
community trust in police.
Mr. Sid Lopez
Good afternoon, said Lopez. New
Mexico trial lawyers. We stand
in support of this bill and the
amendment, I'm sorry, as what
this bill is trying to
accomplish as the senator and
chairperson has stated, uh, this
is I read the bill does not.
Um, mandate what.
Local policy shall do, the local
policies can write for
exceptions if there's a
malfunction in the camera, or
something like that, there's not
a presumption of bad faith, but
it does require that the policy,
the bill be um
Uh
Uh
It does require that the bill,
I'm sorry, that the, the, the
local government or the police
officers enact a policy that
mandates the use of these
cameras.
And we also believe that um for
the University of New Mexico,
uh, because they, they are
police officers, they should be
using these cameras as well.
Thank you.
Thank
you, Mr. Lopez
in a minute or please,
first of all, I, I do want to
disabuse everyone in the room
from any notion that this is
anti-law enforcement.
Um, when we enacted this
initially, we really did try
hard, and I think most of the
existing language in here is
stood the test of time to try
and be very cognizant and
respectful of the difficult job
law enforcement I do.
But we have to accept the fact
that at the time we enacted
this, the only reason we did so
is because we had one particular
very large sheriff's department
that said they wouldn't do it.
They, they, they said they
wouldn't do it. Um, and so the
argument will often be made here
today. Well, we shouldn't do the
policy based on one agency, one
department, one cop, whatever it
may be, but sometimes, uh, look
at us with you and them. You
didn't hear anybody opposed to
the fact that we should capture
uh law enforcement at
universities, right? Not one
person in opposition and um UNM
didn't do this voluntarily. They
didn't say we were going to do
this. They said we're, we're not
required to do this.
So sometimes we have to bring
people.
Kicking and screaming, uh, to
where they don't want to be, and
that was the case with uh Berlio
County and the Sheriff Gonzalez,
who just said he wasn't gonna do
it.
And even after we enacted it,
and after, even after there's a
public outcry for him to do so,
even after he passed, he still
refused to do it.
Um, and came up with absurd
things like I'm gonna use
iPhones and have the officers
use their iPhone um and because
he said the technology didn't
exist when we all knew the
technology existed, so it's,
it's a, it's regrettable, but
sometimes that one bad instance
illustrates the perhaps the need
for us to make our will and the
public's will, very clearly
known.
Um, so, um, I, again, I urge the
committee to recognize that
there's no opposition at all to
the, to the, including
university law enforcement in
this part of the bill.
And, and I, and again, I, I
would really want to emphasize
the fact that I don't see this
as anti-law enforcement. I chief
story you just heard from him
before we came up here, and when
I went and had lunch with the
district attorney, the three of
us, and had a great
conversation. I think he's doing
an extraordinary job if you want
to see an exemplary law
enforcement agency, go see what
he's doing in Las Cruces right
now. It's extraordinary, and
he's got the public behind him
strongly.
But this is not about uh
anti-law enforcement. This is
about trying to make sure that,
that we are clear.
How this should be done. And,
again, it's maybe, again, a
comparison to what happened with
the sheriff who wouldn't do
this. You've got the APD chief
who uh didn't do that. There was
an internal affairs report,
their own APD did an internal
affairs report and said that he
intentionally did not utilize
his camera.
Um, and, uh, the report says the
chief intentionally and
purposefully did not record the
interaction. Uh, what happens
when the top says I don't have
to do this.
Um, and in your own internal
affairs says, you don't have to
do this, and then when pressed,
The chief invokes his Fifth
Amendment right, says I didn't
have to do this because I have
1/5 Amendment right not to
incriminate myself.
So sometimes we do kind of have
to do this, and it's not us
versus law enforcement, it's us
versus what I think are the
people that are in this room who
want to do this right and and
want and want us to all know
that with great confidence that
they're doing it right, and as
I, that's why I begin the
presentation by saying, I've
watched these videos time and
time again. They're
extraordinary.
To see the professionalism of
our of our law enforcement and
the training.
Um, and so, um, I, I don't want
to leave us with with that
notion.
I, I do have a proposed
amendment that I hope um law
enforcement will
study carefully. It's pretty
simple amendment, but it, it
really leaves in the existing
statutory language. It strikes
the rules committee um
amendment.
Um, I'm, I'm, I, I'm, I, you all
put a lot of hard work into that
and I respect that work, but,
but what we're doing is we're,
we're simply proposing to strike
the rules committee amendment,
which seems to be the big
concern here about Shay Shao
versus May and so forth. We
would leave all of that language
the way it is.
Um, and, um, and again, I'm
gonna reemphasize, the only time
there's any consequence at all
is when law enforcement does not
follow their own policies and
procedures. I mean, I can't
think of a lower standard, uh,
to, to say, you guys get to
write the rules, and if you
don't follow your rules, then
there's a problem, and that's
what happened at APD. Let's just
be honest.
You write your rules and
policies, and with the person at
the top of the chain of command
says I don't have to follow
them. I'm intentionally and
purposely not doing so, and I
have a 5th Amendment right not
to do so.
Then, yeah, there should be a
consequence.
Um, so what, what we're
proposing to do is to leave the
existing language, May versus
shall, but inserting the words
knowingly and intentionally on
page 3 line of 7 to show a
greater standard of what lawyers
call science or mens rea, a
mental component to this that
the officer has to, that that
for this sanction to occur.
For there to be a sanction,
there has to be a showing that
the officer knowingly and
intentionally did not utilize
the body camera equipment, and
that would have been the case in
in Albuquerque where the chief
of police, where his own
internal affairs that he
intentionally didn't do it.
So that's the proposal
OK, we're gonna go on the
amendment, Senator Stewart.
Um, so Fronte I'm not, not quite
clear. Um, I understand the
striking the rules committee
amendment.
What are you doing about Shell
and May.
it
would be the word. So may would
still remain in there.
That, no, it's not right.
You know, we did not do anything
with the May in the shell and
rules, we just took out like
1011, and the first three words
in line 12 and put instead
engaged in.
The shell turning the man to
shell was in the original bill.
So if you take off the rules
committee amendment.
Uh, you know, you, you keep the
1011 and 12, uh, but you still
have a shell.
Sure, so you're right. So we're
striking 1011 and 12 through the
first three words, I think on my
12, right? Right, that's the
rules you're right, and so, um,
I'm taking what I, what, what
we've done in rules was we take
out the bad faith language,
which was, I think part of the
big concern, but, um, again,
that, that, that faith component
and, and so where they're all
part of that independent to all
part of the.
existing statue now, right? So
the, the only issue really there
seemed to be the neighbor versus
shell, and you're, you're right,
I corrected that that Maia would
still be in place, but for that
to kick in for the show to
apply, there would have to be a
showing that the officer
knowingly and intentionally did
not did not follow the policies
and procedures so it it it it it
still shall, you're right, but
it's a heightened standard, uh,
for that shall to apply. Does
that make sense? Absolutely, and
I really like the knowing.
ly or intentionally. I think
that's what everyone complained
about is that that kind of was
missing, so I like that part. I
just didn't want you to think
that the rules committee had
been the one doing the make we
did not,
you're right. I'll, I'll take
the, I'll take the full response
right there, but again, I hope
law enforcement hear what we're
saying, which is, yeah, the show
would apply, there would, there
shall be a sanction, but only
when there's a showing that the
officer did so knowingly and
intentionally. That's a pretty
high standard.
Uh, and, and I don't think
that's gonna occur when battery
runs down or the equipment
malfunctions or somebody's in a
in a a crisis situation. That's
not gonna be annoying and
intentionally failure to to
record. But again, I hate to
hammer away at this issue. We
have a very clear example where
an individual knowingly and
intentionally by his own
internal affairs department, so
that's what he did, um, and I
don't know how you get around
that. And, and Mr. Chairman and
Senator, I also think
That the
The law enforcement agency
should create that in their
policylicies. They could say,
you know, here are the
exceptions, you know, battery
runs out, etc. so uh I I think
they have more work on these
issues that they're bringing
forward.
Thank you, Mr.
Senator, and I want to emphasize
that because as one of the
origin, as the original author
of this, we really tried to be
incredibly respectful of the
difficulties of their job by
saying, you adopt the policies
and procedures.
You do it.
Um, and, and as long as you
follow them, you're in the
clear.
Senator Do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So I see that we're, so we're
putting in the knowing, knowing
our intentional standard, but
then we're still leaving in the
language about uh negligent
spoliation of evidence.
Why, why do we need that in
there if we're creating a a
knowing and intentional
standard.
Um, don't we just need the
intentional spoilation?
Language.
You, I think that's a good
point. I think you could make
that argument that you're right
when you're when you're putting
knowingly or intentionally in
there, you're getting to, you're
getting to an intentional tort,
so it wouldn't be negligence,
and I think you're right, you
have the cross of the two, so I
think that would be a good
amendment as well to Senator to
take it, but I, I urge you, I
drop this amendment first,
right? And then, and then if you
adopt this amendment, then you
take out the negligently part
two. Maybe if I make an
amendment not in rules
committee.
I'm kidding. I'm kidding. Any
other discussion on the
amendment, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
actually had written down that
exact language and I I think
that addresses.
the concerns, but, but I will
just say.
Given the time, I'm about to
walk out, I've got to put a bill
on in 30 minutes.
I do think, uh, I mean, I think
in fairness to law enforcement.
I think I'd like to hear if
they, if they are OK with that.
I mean, that's the thing. This
is a pretty substantive
amendment here.
And I, I actually, uh, I had put
that I was gonna ask you that if
you would consider that
friendly, because I think that
does address all the concerns
I'm hearing. It also addresses
what you're trying to
accomplish.
But, but in fairness, this is a
big, and I know that I'm hearing
there's gonna be a lot of the
discussion here on this bill.
I'm just gonna throw out here. I
mean, you, yeah, your decision.
I, I, I kind of think we should.
roll this let let law
enforcement let everyone weigh
in, let's come back and let's
get this right, uh, because now
I'm hearing there's another
piece to it too, but I, but the
big piece though, is I just,
this is a big
Moment I, I, I was really
probably was not going to
support the bill without this
change.
Because I hear the arguments
that are being made, and I do
think we're in a moment here. I
know exactly what you're doing.
The UNMP is great,
and I think this do
Well, I do know what you're
doing. I mean, I never know
exactly what you're doing, but I
have a pretty good sense, the
UNM piece is great. I just think
that we're also in a moment here
where.
Working with law enforcement is
important and I think they
should like this.
But I just think it's fair to
give him a chance to weigh in on
it and, and we would go have to
go back out to them, for them to
do it. And I, I'm gonna walk out
because I've got a 6:30, so
that's that's on my issue, and
you can certainly all stay here
if you want to, but I'm just
throwing that out as a possible
suggestion.
Thank you for that, Senator. I
think I, I, I take this
suggestion, let him, let him
chew on it and sleep on it, and
I, I, I assumed that we're gonna
be um pleased with that change,
but let's look at it in context,
which we're, we're adding what
um
Uh, 3 words, really, uh.
And, and taking out
The rules committee stuff. So
let's do that. Let's just roll
it over and we'll, we'll hear it
and everybody can go study it
and figure out what the hell
we're doing. Senator Cervantes,
you wish us to take a, a vote on
the amendment and then come back
with a
a sub or why don't we do that?
Yeah, I'd like you to take a
vote on the amendment so that
they know what we're talking
about rather than guessing what
we might be doing. Thank you.
uh, will of the committee.
There's a motion to do pass on
the amendment, uh, please call
the roll.
That
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes. And Mr. Chair, just so
that, and just so that law
enforcement have the best
opportunity to know what they're
looking at with Senator, would
you allow Senator Dewey to make
the amendment with regard to the
negligent language. Let's act on
that so that we can look at a
very clean version of this bill.
I think it'll take us 2 minutes.
And do you have the floor. So
page 3.
Line 10, strike the.
all of line 11.
On page 12.
Strike independent tort of.
So we're also taking out that in
independent language that we
discussed in rules doesn't
really make sense. So everyone
take a moment to strike out
those words.
We don't wanna go.
Yes,
so page 3 strike the at the uh
or uh page 3 line 10, strike the
last word on that line, strike
all of line 11.
On page 12, strike the 1st 3
words independent tort of.
So it would read, shall be
deemed liable for intentional
spoliation of evidence.
On the amendment. A quick
question, but weren't those
words struck?
And rules
we're undo, we just accepted an
amendment that undid the rules.
Right.
Understood. OK.
I
And, uh, any, any discussion on
that amendment, I'm still
confused because I thought that
was the amendment from Senate
rules.
And we didn't just his amendment
was just 3 words. It didn't
strike the Senate Rules
Committee did. I didn't realize
it did. OK.
And that's my uh.
I'll take responsibility for
that, Senator Worth. I did not
emphasize to folks that we were,
that the proposed amendment that
we just adopted was 1 and 2. I
thought we were just voting on
2.
Here we're not putting it.
OK.
So, uh, so, so the Senate rules
have been struck as well as 3
words added knowingly or
intentionally, but we'll go back
to, uh, they do it for her
proposed amendment on the
language that is back in the
bill.
It's the same amendment that I
just said.
It's we
we, we
remember we've already adopted
now we've added a knowing
intentional and negligence is an
entirely different standard, so
we're, we're making it
consistently intentional.
Discussion, uh, Senator
Brantley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Cervantes.
To to meet the elements of, of
intentional spoilization of
evidence claim. It seems pretty
significant.
You have to prove that there's
an existence of a lawsuit, the
defendant uh knowledge of a
lawsuit, the destruction and
mutilation or alteration of
evidence, the intent on part of
the defendant's disruption or
defeat of a lawsuit, casual
relationship between the active
spoilization and inability and
damages. If, if we are striking.
Negligent.
But we're leaving the
intentional language, couldn't
you argue that this is now more
punitive than the original
language. If meeting the the
definition of intentional
spoilization remains, but we're
removing negligence
spoilization.
It seems to me that now this is
actually more punitive than
before. Could you explain that
to me
the common law or case law, in
other words, spoliation can be
established in different ways
and, and uh they exfoliation
sometimes is recognized by the
courts in the ways you just
described, in other words, if
certain things take place, the
courts will say there's
spoliation of evidence. What,
what this is doing is this is
essentially saying there's a per
se, um, uh, exfoliation of
evidence by the statutory
violation, so you can have
spoliation by the common.
by cases, by the way the courts
have defined it, as you just
read or the legislature can say
if you do this, this will be
spoliation, and, and that's what
we'll be doing.
Thank you. I don't, I don't know
that I can, uh, your question is
would it be more harsh or more
strict. I, I don't think so. I
think it's more clear, certainly
because the the criteria you
just went through is subjective,
right? If you look at those
criteria you just read, that's
gonna require a judge and a jury
and, um, and, and this will be
somewhat true here because
you're gonna have to prove that
there was an intentional
annoying violation. It's pretty
hard to argue that it wasn't an
intentional violation when
you're on internal affairs said
it's indenial.
I think Mr. Chairman Senator,
that, that knowingly or
intentional can often be
subjective too, and I think that
still remains a concern if even
with the words knowingly or
intentional in here, if we, if
we keep the, the word shall
instead of may.
This is still too open-ended to
say that they shall be presumed
to have been attended to to meet
these standards of intentional
spoilization, which are pretty,
pretty hard to meet, it would
seem, but we're automatically
assuming they shall be presumed
to do that if they didn't turn
their body camera on or if they
were traveling to and from work
and didn't have a body camera
on. It, I still don't like
intentional spoilization in in
the amendment. I'll say that it
seems to me that negligence
spoilization?
I can understand more than the
assumption of intentional to
assume that they intended to do
that seems still very strict,
more strict than the original
amendment in my in my.
Senator Cervantes, uh, with your
permission.
Uh, I'm trying
Go
this might defer to Senator to
answer that question. Sure,
thank you. I would just urge
you, Senator, the opposite is
true of your analysis and uh
that, that there's a heightened
standard. It's harder to prove
intentional.
Conduct, uh, negligent conduct
is a much lower threshold, but,
but I'll do it your way.
When Mr. Chair, Senator, you
can't knowingly and
intentionally do something
negligently. Like those are
The those those contradict each
other, so if we said because
we're putting in a knowingly and
intentionally standard here.
We can't say that results in
something negligent because
negligence is not knowing an
intentional.
So it would, it would, ah, it
kind of be an oxymoron, say if
you knowingly and intentionally
did this, you are deemed liable
for negligence.
Thank, thank you, Senator Duhoe.
I appreciate that. And either to
the senator or the sponsor, what
are the elements that have to be
met for the definition of
knowingly or intentionally since
we know that it's pretty
high bar to meet for intentional
spoilization.
Are you asking the sponsor of
the bill or sponsor the
amendment? Yeah.
Yeah, I, I'm not prepared to
answer that on the fly, Senator,
I'm sure we have case law that
probably have where the courts
have defined that.
I don't know that we have a
knowing or intentional.
A definition in our statutes,
but I know the terms are used
pretty consistently in a
criminal law, and so I assume
the courts have given us some
kind of definition of cases, I
can't do it from the fly, but
Brandon will, so here you go.
Um
And we're coming, this is taken
from, yeah, so we've got a case.
Let's see, we've got, looks like
a Wyoming, about
10 circuit. So, so we, we've got
some federal law, senator that
might help you.
Um, and as I said, as I told you
a moment ago, the courts
probably defined this for us and
they in fact do. So Brandon's
showing me where the courts have
said that knowingly as a person
acts knowingly when they're
aware of their contacts of a
certain nature and that a
particular circumstance exists.
It does not require an intent to
break the law, but does require
an awareness of one's actions
and the likely consequences. So
that's a, that's a Wyoming case.
Um, they also explained
knowingly means a person acts
with awareness deliberatelines
or intention, I think that's
important there too. And it's,
and the court goes on to say
it's distinguished from
inadvertent or involuntary. So
you've heard the law enforcement
officers talking about when
things happen in involuntarily
or inadvertently, that wouldn't
be knowingly, uh, and the courts
have said that's not Mr.
Chairman, Senator.
it seems that that's even more
if peace officers who knowingly
or intentionally, but we don't
know really what that means.
Don't comply with really a just
a, a, a policy, they shall be
presumed to have met the same
standards of what is very
clearly defined.
As
Intentional spoilization.
I guess I just don't like making
amendments on the fly. Yeah, no,
I understand. I mean, Senator
Cervanteselli, the amendment,
they're focusing on words that
are not.
Proposed to be struck in the
amendment, the amendment. I, I,
it to me as a grammar. It's a
grammar fix.
Knowingly and intentionally and
negligent.
Contradict each other.
So
So that's, I believe that's the
point of this particular
amendment, but you have the
floor Mr. Chairman, I still
don't like intentional
spoilization of evidence is I
don't care. I still don't like
intentional spoilization of
evidence.
we are like you don't make just
like we don't like doing things
on the fly, but like we're doing
this amendment on the flight
too, but it's still, it's still
very muddy.
It, it still comes across as
being actually more punitive to
me and I, and I recognize that
we just took an amendment that
did this, but now we're trying
to go back since we've taken off
the, the uh rules amendment to
make sure that it still reads
correctly.
Uh, I'm a no vote on the
amendment.
Mr. Chairman.
and lastly, uh, I think um
To me, it's a grammar amendment
uh.
And uh
Anyway, there's no further
discussion on the amendment of
pleasure. Oh, Senator O'Malley.
Oh, thank you. So the idea is,
uh, you know, even if we look at
passing these amendments, we're
going to look at the bill again.
We're giving it.
Some time and it's going to be
rolled into the next.
committee meeting, is that the
idea?
OK,
we'll come back with a
substitute.
OK
OK the
the house if it gets that far.
OK, and I think that's gonna be
really important and it's also
gonna be really important for, I
mean, we never, you know, I was
never.
I don't want to take the time to
comment on the bill itself or
this issue of body cameras
cause, well, I was right there
and Buro County, and so I just
want to uh have that opportunity
at the next time, so we don't
have to, you know,
on this, but, uh, at least this
that that that's the uh folks
who are concerned about the
language, our officers, um, give
them the time to look at this,
and then we can make that
decision. So I just want to be
clear on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator.
Thank you, Senator. In light of
Senator Wor's concerns, normally
we don't take public comment a
second time, but it'd be, I
think it'd be great to hear
public comment on the committee
so there's a there's a correct,
correct. Well, let me just
finish my sentence because you
guys kind of interrupt. So
anyway, even though we don't,
uh, normally take public comment
a second time because it's a
committee sub, uh, I think it
appropriate to take comments and
to see where folks are in terms
of favor favorability. We have a
motion on the floor to amend the
bill.
Is there any objection to the,
to the amendment.
Note all those in with the
exception of Senator Browley,
no, not the all those in favor
of the amendment. So you have a
2nd Amendment bill and uh.
make sure that everybody in the
room gets a plenty of time to
look at it before our next
meeting.
You want to try the next one or
not? Thank you very much. 507.
I'll, we'll hear the next one,
at our next meeting. So we'll
see you on Friday. I'm OK.
Yeah, we've got leadership's got
to be downstairs, so that's OK.
Understood. Thank you,
everybody. We are adjourned till
Friday.
You don't mind if they go.
I thought you liked the next
bill.
I actually
You could probably pass it.
There was no question.
back
It's back on.
What's that
I
too
knowing that he's using in a
punitive damage instructions,
you know,
