Sure the only advanced practice
nurse that actually has been in
the aft Formosan I guess since
the beginning and it was just in
the the last sessions were never
that was nineteen twenty one
when other advanced practice
nurses like nurse midwives nurse
practitioners clinical nurse
specialists were added to the
act a series of always been in.
I have asked this question last
time from before of course the
army's posts near other eligible
to practice as a as an entity a
limited liability company as a
corporation as as a organized
entity I think what has not
affirmatively.
So
it seems to me the.
from from the experience I have
your C. R. R. NA what you do is
you create an LLC in practice in
the LLC and you have no assets
in the LFC is so patient is
harmed or injured.
I negligent practice there's no
remedy to the patient under that
circumstance in a letter not to
be a medical malpractice act and
and why would they like to go to
the activation essentially have
a LLC with no access.
There's no reason to protect
themselves under the medical
malpractice act of it that Mr
chairman that's Dr but I I do
know they care a personal and
professional liability insurance
for the work that they perform
in order for them to do that
that's good advice but they're
not required to do so there's no
requirement that's the issue I
have is are not required to have
the insurance number one and
number two.
From a business standpoint
before for them to carry
insurance
potentially because if they have
an LLC with the last of.
Insurers are pretty good to me
for nothing.
So I'm just glad they would
insure themselves but the
question I guess you just you
centers physician we have all
the time here in the last couple
years how much the issue
themselves for.
Then start growing to comment on
that she's actually a
practitioner can tell us very
same levels of the movie is
there any requirement that they
have insurance.
You're saying yes remember we
are going to go to work for a
hospital we have to go through
credentialing process and part
of that is that we have to
submit who our insurance carrier
is and I'm gonna interrupt you
for a second I understand that
and that's missing so that's why
we work with hospice but when we
say you don't have to work in a
hospital then that what were the
requirement that you ensure
yourself.
Mr chair
the committee with a single
in order to get Medicaid you
have to prove that in order to
be reimbursed for Medicaid you
have to prove that you have
insurance.
And I don't mind members soon
and then most other insurance
requirements.
So what is the level of
insurance.
Water from the mount of
Insurance.
In the past it's always been the
one million three million if
you're in the compensation fund
this initiative.
Yeah that seems that seems
interesting to me because it was
one million three million that's
more than doctors have to issue
themselves for a doctor we have
patients those for two hundred
thousand dollars so so this does
not make sense but welcome back
to my question what is the
requirement for us in order to
insure themselves and you're
saying the federal government
may require you're going to
participate in the can see
Medicaid patients.
but what if you don't see
Medicaid patients what we're for
is there any requirement for
this year and are are in may has
to show themselves at all.
Mr chairman it would seem that
that motivation would be to
cover years for to cover
yourself because you'd be
cutting out a large slice of
your potential patient
population because such a large
part of the state is covered by
Medicaid.
Motivation would be there to
make sure that you meet all
those requirements.
will will continue to follow
some interesting to give them
bring in only the perspective
the world I live in New York
heard it many times before maybe
not so much to me center of the
the area of medical malpractice
is pretty creative you have a
lot of spent a great deal of
time trying to figure out who
really owns the hospital and who
the doctor works for and as
often as not all taken
deposition of doctor and they
can't tell you they work for
they don't really have any idea
what they were framework for
some practice group that's
incorporated by somebody who
they contract with as an
independent contractor and they
do a very creative job of making
sure nobody knows who is
responsible for anything in the
end and so that's that's always
the thing that keeps my
curiosity and interest but in
anyway we've we've been joined
by a couple of centers and so
we're on a committee substitute
sent off in which we recommend.
Yes thank you Mr chair.
My question is somewhat related
to Mister Rogers question
If if I'm a health care facility
wouldn't it
wouldn't benefit me to avail
myself of any liability by.
By simply hiring of if nurse
nurse and this this up in an
independent role rather than
having them within my facility
and thereby avoiding the
insurance that they would be
required to carry with them.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator what's the normal.
It was so.
So normally they either choose
to hire us as employees are also
an outside group will be our
employer.
However that is that to find
their insurance but we also have
a national organization that you
can get either additional or.
in place of insurance.
I guess Mr chair what what
concerns me a little bit is that
a health care facility that
would normally utilized to the
services of this and this this
is my this is a bill like this
might actually push them out of
their out of their organization
into an independent role maybe
in a way Mr chair described or
some other method because it's
simply more cost effective
rather to have them in your own
organization to have them as a
third party that you're now
contracting with because they
simply don't have the the cost
of liability insurance and
things such as that to do you
see that possibility at all.
More Mr Chairman answer to the
question
so the way this but this bill is
written we actually give two
choices for the hospital can
choose who they want to keep the
same collaboration or do they
want to allow an independent
role because a lot of times in
the rural area they really
depend on is working
independently to do that so this
really is geared towards the
independent of need in the rural
community so hospital will
continue to have a choice either
leave it like it is or if you
need to you can.
Make changes Mr chairman I do
want to say this simply you know
codifies what this group is been
do and I don't Mr leader you
walked in a little bit later but
you know the whole purpose of
the bill is simply to put in law
what they've been doing for
nineteen years twenty two years
anyway so this is gonna change
maybe the motivation of the
behaviors of the hospitals or
whatever they've been operating
this way for under executive
order for quite awhile.
okay I I thank you Mr chair I
think a.
Hi I was getting more at and I'm
not going to believe right to
much but I do I guess my concern
would be is this this seems to
be motivational to if I was a
health care provider and and I
have this nourished and the
state assist I would in my mind
as a business person.
Consider them having them in
some independent role outside my
organization because then
they're not covered by any
insurance is are things that I
might have to a choir for them
it would levy a cost in that way
and then the liability is
somewhat I'm protected that's my
only concern I'll leave it at
that I don't think it's a bad
idea I'm still reading it
looking through it so I do
appreciate your answers Mr chair
map thank you.
The committee members Senator
yes thank you Mr chair thank you
senator thank you I do have a
question with with regard to
hospitals is there do we know
how many hospitals use a forty
who's in this and that this is
and how many of our members on
the web site how many are
employed by the hospital and how
many are contract.
Mr chairman if I may answer the
question I really don't have the
exact numbers of.
by looking at gas works for one
of the employees search I'd say
it's pretty much the need for
and I was just going Mr chair
and senator off of the line of
questions from Senator Baca
that's already happening now
we're some of the hospitals are
choosing to either have them as
an employee directly under the
hospital for contracting it out
as as many of us do they've
already metals business so I was
just hoping maybe we had a
number that if this is passed
that we can keep track of living
for to see if with we see a
pattern of that and unintended
consequence or if it just stay
the same Mr chairman I did
invite as I mentioned we into
one introduced legislation today
the director of the New Mexico
border nursing and I'm you know
I can certainly work with or
that they can start point at
data together.
And in Mr chair Senator I plan
to support this coming from a
rural area we struggle to get
doctors we struggle to get
certified nurses in whatever
field so I I think you know as
long as there's proper training
and inadequate training
inadequate insurance I attended
to support thank you Mr.
I think Senator got more than
enough support to pass the bill
also so you roll your eyes
that's good so I live in a
positive way.
So we'll be Nibert all this if I
may just
because it's been said
repeatedly this is the way that
it's always been this way was
codified the way it is and I see
not in the hands of the
affirmative that just doesn't
make any sense to me the the
bill does it takes morning
witnesses right now C. N. A.'s
must be part of an
interdependent.
Health care team this changes
we're from interdependent to
independent that's that's very
different no interdependent to
independent to me has a couple
of different meaning
so sick so I'm just having a
hard time understanding that
that's what we've always done it
right now the system also they
have to be independent on a team
directed by a licensed physician
or osteopath for others and this
takes out all of those
requirements some again it seems
to me like a very big shift
from what we what we are using
law is made and what we've been
doing it for twenty years but we
have been doing it country the
statue which.
First.
Ignores what we write statutes
but we provide just a small
little the description of why
that is yeah sure so that line
actually describes who is going
to be the primary care provider
of the patient and it lists
physicians podiatrists and
dentist that's probably twenty
years ago pretty accurate but
twenty years later now we also
have primary care providers who
are practitioners nurse midwives
without rather than try to keep
up with that it would be the
best way to remove that as far
as the interdependent language
when we're down in the rural
areas we may have a surgeon one
day a week who comes in and goes
home we work a lot in the middle
of the night weekends holidays
and we work by ourselves
performing procedures that we
are trained to do and so that
protects.
Access.
You know by letting us continue
to have that safety that
everything is listed in writing
like like we do it.
Representative do important
things serve important role of
the people in rural parts of the
state so we appreciate that very
much I hope none of my questions
would suggest otherwise that
that you know very value
I'm just concerned about also
the patients in the so we're
on a two passed motion of for
the committee substitute is
there any objection to do pass
motion show me all the on the
next play.
Senator Wirth.
Yes Mr chair well we're on the
past motion to you of us
rejections do you object.
No.
Social centre worth the risotto
some Stewart's no new Senator
markets and promoting the for
motive since about is against
Senator Baca to explain your.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
just quickly normally this would
be exactly my Cup of tea I see I
think what is a gap in liability
protection for the consumer
based on the insurance
requirements but the reason that
I supported this bill today is
we have a a massive deficiency
in our medical practices across
the state were really suffering
due to some of the policies in
place and so I think this will
this route simply just going to
be helpful to that and that's
why support the bill today thank
you.
Committee thank you will do for
us of.
for more info Senator Hemphill
orchard Senator Hamblen yes.
It's in the back of.
All right so Senator Ortiz are
you still here in the room.
We'll hear of.
Mr chair if we actually before
we of yes we did we heard Senate
bill sixty eight.
Railing to pass motions that
sixty eight.
That's the.
Of the other things I've learned
members that the Senate bill
four oh four.
A merry loan repayment act is
rolled over at the Sanchez
request.
you Senator one eighty seven the
roll over relief pitchers
request because I thought it was
four percent of those years.
yes.
Your product is to.
Senate Bill and also known to
have a hard stop at five thirty
decision so we are working
between the.
So I'm just of so you'll have
the early as heads up to we're
trying to plan ahead I'm
expected soon judicial meet
Saturday afternoon please put
that on your agenda I think
we're gonna have four sessions
Saturdays wonder sentiment will
be immediately after four
sessions of Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino says ninety two thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Senate bill ninety two is a bill
that of brought to me by my
expert witness dealtaker on
behalf of the.
Clinical pharmacists in the
state.
The the bill.
Amends the pharmacy act and it
will allow pharmacists to
prescribe devices or some
supplies for prescribed drug
therapy.
Entry for certain conditions
based on the test results.
Of the the.
Substitute before you.
has been modified to require the
medical board approval of any
pharmacist prescribing protocols
so you have a committee so Mr
chairman.
You want to do it.
Give me continuing to deal with
the committee said the focus of
the motion so for.
This chairman I move a do not
pass on ninety two and for
purposes of discussion hasn't
featured Committee substitute
for Senate bill ninety two.
Mr chairman there there really
are are are a number of things
that the that the bill does but
the real import of the bill is
to allow pharmacists to be able
to properly treat patients after
the perform certain tests and
and the the section to hello the
pharmacists to order yes screen
and treat for I enumerated
conditions COVID influence a
group a strip there enjoy it is
uncomplicated urinary tract
infection and HIV limited to
prep and pep the and then if the
health department identifies
other conditions in the future
it opens the door to them being
able to deal with those but they
would all have to be approved
first by the medical board you
know Mr chairman that in many
parts of the state we have a
very a tremendous shortage of
medical practitioners.
Pharmacists especially those who
have been specially trained is
clinical pharmacists have a
great the capacity to fill that
gap in our care system and so
this is a bill that that tries
to make clear that there are
certain conditions that they can
yes for prescribed for and and
and actually help save money
because instead of now reading a
prescription for having to go to
see it the primary care doctor
to get a prescription for
something that could be
purchased over the counter if
the pharmacies pharmacists can
do it themselves make the
prescription and then and then
provide the needed materials
that then becomes injured
insurable and so the insurance
company will pay for saving the
the patient a lot of money and
like to have my expert witnesses
spell us more information about
this bill.
Mr chairman Dale Tinker with New
Mexico pharmacists Association
this bill the intent of this
bill was to allow pharmacists to
provide treatment following
what's called flee away yes
please stand for clinical
laboratory
initiative something.
The other term improvement
improvement
At a minimum so once pharmacists
do those CLIA waived tests
currently they're not able to
treat the patient so they do the
test and they tell a patient
they need to go back to another
practitioner to get treatment
it's not a very efficient system
they're mostly
Conditions that pharmacists are
well qualified and well trained
to deal with and so we're we're
attempting to rectify that the
the intent of the bill is to
make it a little more
streamlined process so patients
can get the care they need
without having to be sent back
to another practitioners.
And with that was sent to
questions Mr chairman thank you.
in support of us a proponent.
Very minimal.
Struggle with the last name but
this is Amy.
Bacteroides sis's.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
Senators yes I just wanted
you're you're recognize for the
two minutes thank you thank.
I am a pharmacist I worked for
Walgreens and University of New
Mexico college of pharmacy I
just wanted to say we're really
hoping that she'll thank you to
support this bill for the
reasons that the expert witness
and Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
mentioned
during the COVID we were able to
give thirty to forty percent
increase in vaccines that we're
all prescribed by pharmacists
and so pharmacists also have
identified the shortage I am
testing lots of patience for
COVID for example and then they
don't know what to do so I'm
referring him to an out of state
telehealth Dr Stewart as I can
help them and I don't just want
to do it if you want to certify
and train our pharmacists to do
this so that they have
appropriate protocols using
evidence based medicine
and so also patients are
identifying three to six months
waiting to see their doctor
especially in some rural areas
so we're really hoping that
she'll allow Senate bill ninety
two to help your constituent
using evidence based practice
the protocol getting certified
to do so in training that would
be required by the board of
pharmacy and appreciate your
support and Senate bill ninety
two thank you.
In two.
Two opponents registers
Christine Jamieson and Dr number
of cap we will recognize each of
those two individuals for two
minutes Kristin Jamieson are you
online.
Here Dr Caplan actually I'm she
and I with the same organization
she is on the line I can speak
for both of us.
The chaplain.
Hello hi
I am America plan and I'm here
on behalf of both the American
Association of clinical
urologists and the American
urological association to speak
in opposition to Senate bill
ninety on the immediate past
president of the AC you and I
have a four member of the
American urological association
and I'm a practicing urologist
here in Albuquerque
we oppose the language in Senate
bill ninety two that allows for
urinary tract infection testing
and treatment by pharmacists
you know this is a far more
complex scenario in some of the
others that are listed
urinary tract infection may not
always be a simple infection if
you pass it on or even flatter
Cancer and I think that there's
a lot more sophistication in the
diagnosis and treatment of
urinary tract infections then is
what is put forth this bill
thank you very much thank you
for the complete those
registered on the bill in
support and opposition members
the committee.
Questions is there I think
there's somebody in the audience
who is going to speak in favor
of it did you.
service we have a we we can have
everybody register in advance we
can plan our time and so forth.
Sir go ahead we're we're making
good progress you all recognize
you for two minutes but that we.
More for to New Mexico statewide
LGBT rights organization I'm
specifically to access to
private and half as a gay man
who is trying for most of my
life to avoid
to avoid infection the HIV virus
the onset of practice three six
closure prophylactic medication
as many games Center for our
entire.
Requires two things that I take
a rapid HIV test which I can
create the committee ten minute
walk from this building in seven
different directions that proves
I mean check the negative and
the prescription hi however on a
regular basis have to make a
doctor's appointment C. H.
medical provider in their office
for a twenty five minute
appointment just to get that
task and get rice for free
allowing me to get that test
from a pharmacist would ensure
hi is a very Health Care
literate region and the
multitude updated by sexual and
trans people younger than and
not as sophisticated in health
care literacy able to continue
access the I which is probably
short the HSD academic and
market right thank you.
This Mr chair thank you first
off I apologize for not
registering in advance and make
sure it doesn't happen again
half lock registered lobbyist
for Walmart we support the bill
the feel like stated in the
significant issues of the FIR
this is a perfect way to
increase the supply of the
provision of healthcare services
to meet that demand right now
thank you thank you very much
you have the
Appreciate your recognition we
we ask folks registered vessel
you can plan for a time and and
know how to allocate the time
this and so we can work within
some structure so thank you for
that completes the committee
members Senate bill ninety two.
Senator Neil.
Yes Mr president today press and
I gotta tell you know every time
I hear the fridge because I sit
here and think only because
nobody would want to do the
stuff that Senator our president
has to contend with so.
Anyway yeah thank you thanks for
it thanks for being a scope of
practice.
This.
But it is concerned about the
urinary
Yeah it sounds like as far as
Senator Wirth.
It's not so it's it's not just a
practice by everybody agrees.
This and I just heard that one
issue which seems to make.
Our system for the public could
you respond to that criticism.
Get deals with.
It Mr chairman and senator
Senator o'neill my response
would be that
pharmacists know how to
determine if it is within their
capability or not and if it's
not they will referred to the
appropriate provider
I I would like to point out the
pharmacist do have a significant
education the entry level is
Pharm.D which is a doctor of
pharmacy so it it takes at least
seven years for pharmacists to
get through pharmacy school so
that
I would hate for this one line
to be the very this bill that
but I do think pharmacists are
qualified to manage.
And if I could add something and
Mr chairman and and senator any
of in the spect hearing on the
bill the right the original
version of the bill had eight.
Conditions that would be allowed
and after
Opposition was raised about
those Mr chair met with the
medical board renegotiated we
cut it to five and the Medical
Board requires us to say if you
see on the bottom of page nine
pursuant to the board approved
protocol written tuning in
consultation with the New Mexico
Medical Board of pharmacists may
order for those five conditions
so the the the the medical
board.
Was of the opinion.
That the the uncomplicated
urinary tract infections could
be dealt with if as long as the
protocol that they've written
would be fault and that's
exactly what we're asking for.
Thank you I that's right at the
more for the city seems like a
complicated it's pretty subject
this thing that urologists vapor
point but I am in.
For this to work on this and
that's cemex.
For explaining.
And and just on the point is the
point of the uncomplicated I
think of.
This.
Hi Mr chair members of the
committee I'm a lot of dances on
the Medicaid medical director
and I raised a lot of these
concerns at the last hearing and
they made all of the changes
that I was concerned about
uncomplicated as a urinary tract
infections is a term that has
clinical meeting if there are
kind of two kinds you know how
many you have in a year if you
have kidney stones there's
there's criteria and and I I
think that really resolve the
problem to me just to kind of
give you that clinical
background.
I think things.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator and I guess my one of my
questions here is we talked
about the urinary tract
infection what about all of
these other yes so I guess I'll
call in who's who's performing
all of those right now doctors
nurses both.
And madam chair Senator Baca
I assume doctors and nurses can
performance but in terms of the
CLIA waiver are pharmacists have
been providing those tests for
years they've been able to do
the tests they just have not
been able to treat for the
result of the cast and that's
what this bill does but but
Thomas is to the east clear away
yes now so so they do these
tests with the treatment then
was left to the medical
professionals doctors nurses
that sort of thing is that
writer now that I have that
right.
Mister chairman Senator Baca was
left to other medical
professionals not to include
pharmacists at this at at at
this current time right.
I guess you know and again I
guess I'll just reiterate a
little bit about what I talked
about before Mr chair and
senator you know it seems like
this year we're seeing a slew of
bill such as this that are
coming forward especially as of
late because as we believe
people from the medical
profession out of the state in
really an effort to fill the gap
if you will and you know again
I'm gonna be inclined to support
this bill but I I think it would
be negligent of me not to point
out that fact and that that for
medical professionals are
understaffed in the state and
and these types of fixes are
although well intended and and I
believe pharmacists so well
educated you can do a lot of
this work
it probably even be asked for at
this point but but for the fact
that we're losing medical
professionals thank you Mr chair
Senator Wilson Bill services.
I thank you Mr chairman up and
it's my understanding that the
you know health systems is
taking a look at this bill on
the control with it as well in
terms of their overall our
system process I do have a
couple questions just
structurally on the bills the
first is on page eight.
Where you agree with certain
within the practice of pharmacy.
devices or supplies for
prescribed drug therapy for
health conditions including
diabetes and and I guess the
question is why are you
specifically calling out this
there as opposed to simply
saying for health conditions.
Distributed to.
Mister chairman Senator Ivey
Soto that is specifically to
address a problem that we have
as.
Many of us are diabetics now the
prescriptions that are are
prescribers give us don't
include all of the peripheral
products for.
Rating R. conditions they may
not include glucose monitors for
example and that adequate the
test strips and so when the
patient gets to the pharmacy
with a prescription that doesn't
include all those things they
have to be sent back to their
position our other prescriber
and we're of this is the intent
of this is to allow the
pharmacist to be able to correct
that which would be great
corrected by the prescriber in
any case it's just.
Our hope that if it.
Cuts down the time frame that
would be costs by going back and
forth for a while.
this intent to allow pharmacists
to pick up those pieces that the
prescriber may have forgotten to
include on prescriptions and Mr
chairman and senator and and
miss I understand that.
I guess might my concern is that
we use we start off with a broad
term health conditions.
Which is relatively low this and
then we say including diabetes
and the thank you so then my
question is.
How restrictive does it become.
Once we used this as the only
thing that's called up in that.
Mr chair Senator Ivy Soto I I
guess I would say it's it's very
broad but it's it's pretty
limited in terms of
of how the board of pharmacy is
going to respond to.
Pharmacists.
stepping into that practice.
They will be looking at it they
will have to work through
protocols with this as well so I
think there'll be some limits on
that at the the second thing is.
The pages nine and ten.
As part of the people understand
the structure here and I
understand the structure here is
based on the.
On the negotiations that you
have with the folks have
It includes Medical Board
mothers but there is a pharmacy
board.
That generally regulates the
practice of pharmacy but with
regard to.
This new material it's a board
approved protocol approved by
the New Mexico Medical Board she
of the medical board approving
the protocols that pharmacists
we use.
Pursuant to this section.
Mr Chairman Senator Ivey Soto
this language actually takes it
back to the existing statute
that has been in place since two
thousand one.
Our camp with this bill
initially was to get it to be in
consultation with.
Which got the medical board up
in arms and the medical society
up in arms and so we negotiated
that out went back to the
language because they're too
many other things in this bill
that are critical
the importance cell we agreed to
propose amendments met to grow
effectively keep it the way it's
been in terms of medical board
approval.
Not on page ten though line
eight.
Right number six other emergency
emerging and existing public
health threats identified by the
board.
Or department of health.
During civil or public health
emergencies.
And and the structural problem
that I think you have here.
Is that.
I just look at number six.
When there's a raise public
health Representative the
department of health during the
civil or public health emergency
can authorize pharmacists to do
additional tests.
Introduction to subsection pay.
There's all of these are
pursuant to board approved
protocol approved by the New
Mexico Medical Board.
So my inference of what is
perhaps intended.
Online eight.
It is overridden by the
introduction to subsection
eight.
Because.
Whatever the problem help
identifies is gonna have to be
approved by the medical board
before pharmacist can do.
Mister chairman Senator Ivey
Soto I believe you're correct it
is in the it is the impact that
we would.
Go through the board of pharmacy
with the protocol which would
then be submitted to the medical
board and I think that would be
true of Department of Health
declared concerns as well
if the department of health
finds that a concern I'm sure we
fast track as much as we
possibly can.
But I think you're correct it
would still require protocol
approval.
And so Mr Chairman.
So the work board.
There are page eight refers to
the pharmacy board.
Not the medical board correct
and I understand that that
there's a there's a definition
of the term board.
In the pharmacy act that means
the pharmacy board.
However given that that.
This this begins with.
The New Mexico Medical Board.
It might be helpful sep from
committee seven away.
It it might be helpful to to
clarify that it's the pharmacy
board trump on online eight
Mr chairman Mr.
Mister chairman Senator Ivey
Soto get discussed that with the
draftsman in the process and he
didn't feel like it needed to be
clarified because it's in the
pharmacy act.
And so he felt like it this was
specifically when you say board
you're talking about what's in
the in the act and Mr chairman
and and Mr Tinker I agree with
you on the normal.
Except when subsection a begins
with pursuant to board approved
protocol approved by the New
Mexico Medical Board and then
choose the board.
That leads to confusion.
It seems to be.
So while I think structurally
the driver was correct I do
think.
To avoid to avoid confusion
saying board of pharmacy.
Their online based on line eight
would would ensure that that we
understand that these are things
identified that would then have
to go back to the Medical Board.
Mr Chairman Senator Ivey Soto we
certainly would accept it
changed.
Practice of Mr when I would move
on page ten line eight after the
work.
Yes okay.
Good to know after the word
board in search of pharmacy.
That the extent that six
separate family do you have
that.
Thank you yes is there any
discussion and I proceed with a
friendly food consider different
administration discussion on the
amendment yes senator per and
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator well I don't think
subparagraphs six is even
necessary at all if we learned
anything from the comment
pandemic and from the section of
law dealing with health
emergencies the governor under
subsection Z. can pretty do
whatever she wants at that point
time and could even though I
this section under that law so
at that given time she could
authorize or do in the future
could authorize any medical
border any body to do anything
at that point time so I I really
feel like the the the paragraph
in its entirety is is
unnecessary because we're
talking about health emergencies
than under the help of urgency
Act under the any other action
clause this is redundant
language is not necessary thank
you Mr but we are on Senator
Ivey Soto sentiment sent and
also I I'm pretty sure levels
the issue from.
Right so just keeping with
Senator Ivy Soto cemex proposed
then is there any opposition to
that amendment when we can get
the center for possible.
Just saying we have amended
bill.
Okay so Senator Pirtle did you
want to make an amendment for.
Did you realize that Mr chair
which is that the amendment was
not necessary that actually the
whole paragraph should be struck
with okay.
This.
What.
This is a making a motion to
strike is results that I haven't
heard.
Okay back to the bill
what's the will of the committee
would you Mr chair yes Senator
Wirth all.
I just want to express that I
continue to have reservations
similar to how you express about
urology issue it just seems to
me that.
That goes farther than the other
issues so I realize you know
there's been a negotiation and
discussion and there's really
important parts of this bill but
I just wanted to express that I
continue to have reservations
about that thank you Mr chair
thank you.
Okay we'll do pass it Mr chair
well as a as a point four
committees up.
Four point four committee so
move committees to percent of
bill eighty as is.
Not a or whatever we are ready
to do.
This is really point four it
will be a fight or with the
approved as we need to change.
But it's point one now so when
you become point to.
I agree we're like every three
yes yes yes okay with you know
I've been working over the wrong
one.
No wonder there are questions I
had no.
Senator be reduced to support
your bill is yes.
So we have both of those said
bill
is there any opposition to this
bill Center works for you and
no.
Yeah show me voting no.
But the US.
You have on your we're Mr
chairman thank you very much
members of the committee
appreciate the attention XL one
of seven because the hearings
within two hours Mr we have a
committee substitute.
But I know.
Senator Diamond.
Representative okay.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
Let me just start by saying that
the this bill.
In its inception was a bill
that.
Report attended hearing to
happen within seventy two hours
it was passed unanimously by
**** in in that in that form
however following back in before
coming into Judiciary of as
sponsors we have the opportunity
to meet several times with CYFD
and so we've come in with this
committee substitute let me turn
it over to my co sponsored
explain what the committee says
to us thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee we've put a lot of
work into this bill just in
preparation honestly just here
for Judiciary the intent of this
bill still remains to reduce the
revolving doors of children who
were taken from home and
replaced back into the home and
again removed from the home
there's a couple things that
this committee substitute does
it's kind of a three part of
first addresses it address
existing offer views in the
collect requires CYFD within two
days of that child being removed
from home to find a family
placement either return the
child to the family from which
the child was removed or file a
petition in court and so this
two day time frame chokes the
ability of CYFD and their staff
from properly getting that done
this committee sub extends that
two days to three days.
Additionally the child has been
removed from home for abuse or
neglect and then return to that
same home.
Within the past six months and
then removed again for a second
child time the case must be
reviewed by a CYFD supervisor
it also had those before the
check a children's court
attorney to determine how that
cation proceed ensuring these
cases get properly reviewed the
three day deadline didn't that
normally applies is extended to
five days in those cases and
whether an abuse or neglect
petition is filed the course
must hold a probable cause
hearing the most important part
of this within five court days
they may apply for an additional
five is necessary.
The intent still remains dress
is repeat now treatment and I
think the most important if I
can say the most important part
of this is that a child if the
child has been rich removed from
home and then returned by CYFD
to that same home and again
removed within another six
months the department shall not
return to the child that that
child to the home and less order
by a quarter I want to thank
Senator Ivey Soto whose but a
lot of work into this preparing
for Judiciary also the agency
has been very helpful in a
addressing any concerns and so
we stand together for any
questions.
And.
The audience.
Yes.
Mr chairman I know that do not
pass.
Oh one oh seven and for purposes
of discussion I do pass on the
Senate Judiciary Committee sep
two percent of the one of so.
Thank you so is there anybody
here in the audience in support
of this going please to keep the
two hundred ninety seven.
Yes.
Yes please.
Thank you chairman and committee
members my name is Maryland back
and I'm the founder and
executive director of New Mexico
child first network dedicated to
improving the lives of children
in foster care we proudly stand
behind this bill as it is a
common sense clean up to the
existing children's code and
will provide immediate relief to
our child welfare system that
continues to be in current
crisis the primary purpose of
CYFD is to protect New Mexico
children for whom it receives
abuse and neglect referrals CYFD
stated mission is improve the
quality of life for children
recent data from the LFC shows
New Mexico's repeat right from
out treatment and child abuse is
among the worst in the country
and more than forty percent of
children in New Mexico who had a
substantiated serious injury
claim from physical abuse or
neglect in fiscal year twenty
twenty two came from families
who had a prior involvement with
the existing department within
the past twelve months just last
month as many of you might
remember second judicial court
justice judge Stan Whitaker
called CYFD out on a repeated
failures involving New Mexico
children and repeat maltreatment
judge Whitaker said we hear too
much of CYFD going in and seeing
folks and seeing children in
situations where probably kids
should have been taken out and
we just don't have that
happening and as a result we see
way too many children needlessly
being fertilized abuse and
ultimately killed it's time to
improve our child welfare system
SB one of seven as amended
addresses the time that which
these emergency removals without
a warrant to go before a judge
currently New Mexico ranks
second to last in terms of
timelines with right now it
being at ten days the only state
that has a longer time frame to
see a judge is Montana with
twenty days other bills have
been introduced this session and
attempted to address this issue
but we're not vetted and the
reserves became behind them
became problematic thank you yes
so what else thank you for
calling us and support us and
again keep it under.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Emily
Martin I'm the director
protective services at CYFD we
have worked very hard with the
Sanchez to address our concerns
within this bill we do very much
we do support the changes that
have been made particularly
around the higher level of care
in rural review for decision
making related to children that
have had
have been removed from their
home by law enforcement and
return to their families I just
I just want to know quickly but.
For everyone in into.
Excuse me and twenty twenty one
and twenty twenty two we had
roughly twenty one hundred from
entries into foster care roughly
of those the.
Five hundred more short stares
we do believe that that having
that higher level of review by a
manager will help with this with
this problem and also get
families in front of the court
much quicker and within that
five day period thank you.
Anyone else in support.
Anyone in opposition yes.
In opposition.
Hello my hello everybody members
committee chair members the
committee my name is Mike if
it's any time a policy manager
with full features I we we are
here in opposition will in
particular with the FIR report
that it was problematic with
cases involving the Indian child
regarding if passed and as you
know if it was a monumental and
collaborative undertaking what
the stakeholders impacted
families tribes pueblos tribal
it was social workers advocates
and partner organizations and so
we want to make sure that this
bill takes into account the
goals of if the and knowing that
we have used we have actively
sought representation and
expertise from our communities
so do we want to make sure that
Indian family protection act is
protected.
The committee we go.
Mr but if if I may just very
quickly.
As one of the sponsors of the
fund to put a lot of work into
it
the time lines and it put take
over if it involves an Indian
child and so and so this is not
in conflict with provisions
that.
Thank.
thank you so.
The committee so I haven't taken
the time to compare the
committees to the US but in
terms of days are you are you
largely days are short days from
what was originally introduced
as a bill Mr Chairman we are
interest we're and marginal days
okay.
is it evident to you as an issue
or concern for you want
throughout this bill or
providing deadlines for three
days five days for you and I
center familiar with the court
rules that count days in a
certain way pursuant to the rule
six which says you don't count
weekends or holidays when you're
coming days when it's less than
ten day deadline but that the
court ruled here this the
question I have for the millions
this is intended to calendar
days or business days in a cell
with word of it would be
calendar days the right Mr
Chairman actually pursuant to
the universe gestural
construction act chapter twelve
article to pay
time is calculated instructor
provisions adopted after
nineteen ninety three in the
same manner as the court caplets
right so in finance or business
days.
sort of a minute guess it would
be so we're gonna play the
Supreme Court rule for county
today so that so it's not really
three days it's going to be
three days not counting weekends
or court holidays that right Mr
chairman that is that is correct
and like I said that is that is
that is the sort of statute yes
well
It is unless unless you to a
seven it is unless we to provide
days differently in the statute
itself right now so so that
really is my question is whether
you're anticipating that one
senses of the last three days or
five business really good we
three days or five days not
counting weekends and holidays
is that right Mr chairman that
is for at the time okay
I'm not gonna ask myself the
question.
On top in the probably agree
with the governor this is see
whether the seem to be direct
user or somebody re uh she
describes the way for the last
week is this functional so then
then of a look at what the bill
does is it says once the
economic doesn't file a timely
petition the child shall be
released I know that's existing
language.
But then
yeah that's that should be
troubling all of us right this
and see if we have these CYFD is
not doing its job timely.
The result of that is the child
gets released back to the
parents from who they were
taken.
and it almost seems like there's
it seems each counter intuitive
to me you know those who send
rewarding CYFD of CYFD
By if they don't meet the
deadline if they don't meet the
deadline the consequences to the
to the negative consequences not
to see what the the negative
consequence to see whether the
not this job is to the potential
abuse child.
and trying to figure out I know
that's.
I know the consequences already
an existing statute but we're
potentially making that
consequence more likely when we
start putting these tighter
deadlines Mr Chairman self
that's the reason why we added
beginning about a page five top
of page six.
The one of child alleged to be
neglected or abused.
Have the placed in temporary
custody Department for the
petition for a.
No I'm sorry that's
That the.
But if a child has been taken
into custody released to the
child's parent guardian or
custodian and is taken into
custody again within six months.
the child shall not be released
from custody until Department
executive manager consultation
with the children's court
attorney reviews the child's
case.
in order to make the
determination and then we also
give them an extra two days to
ensure that they that they have
the time to do an adequate
review.
Of the child's situation.
Because Mr when you're you're
exactly right there we have
certain publications what we've
had children removed return
removed returned as many as
eighteen types.
And and so that's exactly what
we're trying to address.
Within the constraints under
which CYFD lips we are not able
we are not able by legislation.
To create the number of social
workers that we need for CYFD.
So what we're trying to do is
relieve some pressure on the
front end by moving it to date
deadline to three day deadline
and that if a child is removed.
Returned and removed again that
that has to have some
heightened.
hi an overview of that case and
has to be documented in terms of
what's going to happen on that
case and we give them a couple
extra days on those so that we
try to keep those situations
from happening when we see
reading the initial governor's
that's when you've got a second
case within the six month window
as preparation of financial so
help me Madam vision that that
language referring to a page for
I when the child is brought in
the state of New Mexico Smith's
second time.
This is a trial shall not be
released until certain things
have happened certain reviews.
Yes the Germans with the child
should be released for.
Through messages which are the
file petition so let's assume
that the review to the
conclusion that it's in the best
interest of the child a file a
petition to the child stay in
custody under those
circumstances committee chairman
hit us.
She.
So shall not be released until.
Mr when there is a third option
that is not articulated here it
is in other parts of the law
where during this period of time
the department also searching
for a fictive kin placement for
the child.
I think if I don't uncle
relative somebody else where the
child can be placed
Is is the third thing that
happens during this period of
time.
Senator had the chance to visit
with the governor and I
appreciate you the.
Thank you Mr issue very
seriously issued some executive
orders last week I don't know
whether if you had a chance to
look at any those executive
orders as they may relate to
this particular legislation Mr
Chairman we have as a matter of
fact and that was part of the
due diligence performed by the
department as we are working
with them on on this committee
sub.
and which is left for them for
their for them to support the so
how so how does this
legislation of it the progress
is how does it.
it does it all mean anyway
implicate any the executive
orders the governor described
last week I'm not sure if I
could defer to and only from the
department or also the attorney
that they have.
Mr chair I believe your I
believe your question is does
did the exact does the existing
executive.
Ordered that the governor signed
last week interfere with this
bill in anyway would limit to
interfered how does part of the
to relate in any way absolutely
Mr chair I I believe that these
the bill in the executive order
inter intersect in a way that
this this supports youth and
children coming into custody and
that we as a system are looking
at that
I I will say also.
The the department currently and
under this bill this bill allows
for that three day X. three days
which is one more day than what
we currently have to conduct an
investigation a thorough
investigation into that kit the
situation with the family right
now two days is a very short
period of time for us to really
conduct a thorough investigation
three days does assess because I
understand all that that
repeatedly so great what what my
question is very different which
is the executive orders the
governor came down with last
week do any of them address the
weight this this predominant two
or three days before a certain
consequences befall the child or
see where from the.
Mr chair now it does not work so
this would.
For attention we be in addition
to whatever the executive orders
may have been proposed by the
governors are right Mr chair yes
in New Mexico with this this
would be maybe addition to what
the governor's doing this with
the legislature's doing I guess
another way to save the right
correct Mr thank you very much.
Sen.
Thank you Mr chair there's I
have a question.
With placing a child what takes
precedence simply placement for
victims can.
So if it possible assuming place
but not in the same household.
And then you you basically work
work out from there.
So so Mister chair so if there
is a state would not place the
child with a sibling in the same
household or that would be
first.
First order that would be the
the ideal.
So measurement so when I say it
not in the same household.
A sibling not in the same
household from which the child
was removed.
So if I'm if I'm removed from
your household.
And and Senator Diamond.
Is is my sibling then and she
doesn't live with you then I
could be placed with our.
Because Mr chair and and
Senators there's there's been
multiple issues just within my
County that I know of where
there was a sibling within that
a household where that child is
thriving the sibling is removed
from of a horrible situation and
somehow it doesn't end up with
that child being placed in a
positive situation with their
siblings instead they're put
with the fictive kin which that
is just as bad of a situation
that they were in so I was just
want some clarification that's
how it's supposed to go they
should have gone with a sibling
that was in a thriving situation
Mr Chairman yes with the Asterix
of it depends upon also what the
situation that sibling is and
that household is whether not
they can accommodate another
shot and Mr chair Senator
doesn't take into account
whether their half sibling or
anything is a civil sibling
regardless of percentage of of
blood relation.
Siblings are siblings Mr
chairman center for thank you Mr
chair Senator I I will say you
know I think
we're we're in a crisis with
with regard to our children and
and and what's going on and I
would be remiss if I didn't you
know just say a big thank you I
know in my area just with what
the police officers are able to
do with a lot of these cases and
our teachers dealing with these
and of ensuring that the abuses
Founded and that kids are
treated the way that they should
be you know I think we take for
granted a lot of the work that
they do and I'm just very
appreciative of them and
unfortunately through COVID with
with kids not being in school a
lot of this was missed and we're
seeing a lot of that now
unfortunately but hopefully this
bill will fix a lot of the
issues we're seeing I plan on
supporting it I know business
days calendar days hours what
have you if you go over a
weekend of the holiday that puts
it six days a still better than
ten so I think that's it thank
you Mr chair.
Here's your.
Thank you Mr chairman.
On page five lines three.
talking about a department
executive manager.
What is that who is that is it
to find do we have people that
are called executive department
executive managers.
Mr chairman senator let me defer
to CYFD.
Mr chair this Senator we we
don't have it position
specifically called executive
manager but with this language
we would that would open it up
to
within the policy and procedural
Development who that manager
would be it would not at the
term Madam is used for anyone
that is at least one above a
supervisor so within our within
the policy and procedure
development we would determine
who the executive manager would
be rather than the exact title
being placed within the statute.
Also Mr chairman
What do you do now.
If you don't have Department
executive managers now to help
make this decision who'd who to
does.
Mr chair Senator Woods childhood
removed returned and removed it
would be
Right now that is not a
requirement within the statute
when we need a higher level of
staffing or oversight it would
be a county office manager
regional manager or deputy
director.
Or the director herself or
himself.
So so Mister chairman this this
will be a new process that you
go through is that what you're
saying and you'll have to
identify these department
executive managers take part in
this because it says you shall
not be released from custody
until late Department executive
manager in consultation with the
children's court attorney
reviews the child's case and
document so this is a new
procedure that you're trying to
put in place.
Mr chair Senator yes.
Thank you Senator Baca.
But thank you Mr chair of thank
you senators for bringing this
forward I think it's a really of
needed changes we've had some
concern I think in this
committee over making deadlines
so short in the past but if not
if not for these children and
CYFD than for who so I'd like to
see that it you know that it was
prioritized within your bill I
applaud the exact same concern
is the settlement pretended with
the department executive manager
and so I have a amendment I
would offer their on page five
line three after Department
executive manager I would insert
for acting department executive
manager that way we don't have a
specific of individual in case
there's a vacancy or something
to that effect you have somebody
there that can make a decision
right now and so anyway I would
offer that amendment thank you I
have a friendly amendment
Mr but if you to give us just a
moment.
Of this Mr Chairman the
actually.
Well I think the issue would be
resolved.
By striking the word executive
and we just simply said a
department manager.
which is as as service stores
questions brought up that that
is a position that exists
already and then they would they
would have people designated as
department managers that could
do that and so that would
And and because that's not a new
classification that would
actually allow for.
Different apartment managers to
be able to do it and I
appreciate that of Mr chair and
senator but it kind of throws
away the whole justification we
heard from before from the good
lady point of the matter pro tem
as the question she we explained
that there was gonna be this new
position so now from what I
understand there is not going to
be in your position we're just
using the same positions if I if
I understand correctly.
Mr but you know we can we.
Either way is fine actually we
could do it just by striking the
word executive orders we could
to your amendment the one I and
and Mr accepted as a family
member okay Mr chair yeah I just
I just want something that works
here so
and you know that she stated
that was the plan so I'm just
trying to work within the
framework of what she she
articulated so if that's okay
with you all move this man
expectation that we have and
then in for those.
We're.
When executive manager for
acting executive secretary
manager correct acting
department executive then acting
department as an administrative.
And then the other thing is.
The state to make sure that we
have the the right level
scrutiny on this would also be
the children's quarter managing
attorney if we could include
that.
Make sure that it's a supervisor
within the children's court sure
I would move that.
So at that too please do we have
that.
What was.
On line for after children's
court in certain managing
managing attorney.
So is there any opposition that.
Of our.
you see the the the the Senator
Stewart for a settlement for
tenants posing that then that
but you have but everybody else
thank you.
So back to the bill over the
committees
the investment I just what I
have this is simple question
okay early on I think it's for I
just think for sure what is the
current procedure of these
cases.
What what is the current
percentage of white person.
This is yes so Mr Chairman the
the current procedure is that
this tends to happen at the line
level the decision making on
this.
And
and so that's that's what we're
trying to avoid for the repeat
cases.
If I can Mr chairman Senator the
example that Services Senator
Ivey Soto mentioned earlier in
which a child is removed from
the home as many as eighteen
times that case file was never
seen before a judge under this
law that would never happen
again by the second time that
child was removed this would go
this would have eyes on that
case file they would be returned
without that I came child
holding that gentleman if
there's probable cause thank you
very helpful so.
So it was the will of the
committee.
Question question thank you
madam chair that is questions
get help disabuse me of the
concern I have Senator which is
Senators.
The this this process we all
support what you're trying to do
I think we also the need for
what you're trying to do
this is a from the notion that
CYFD can game the process so we
give you the game the game goes
to.
See why for the takes a child
into custody they have a
deadline of three days to take
certain actions right and if
they don't act within those
three days the child is released
back to the parents.
so there's so then the child is
released back to the parents and
then the child picked up a
second time which would be the
next week of them it's the
second custody of
Yvette I guess the within six
months so now you go to a
heightened level of the high
levels of scrutiny so to use the
wife and the and and one of the
sure this child doesn't go back
to the parents which is kind of
the default under existing law
right to the right of the
province of see whether the them
get their act together which
seems to be happening Joe goes
back to the parents so here
would seem like there's almost a
disincentive for CYFD to file a
timely petition right within the
thirty days because they don't
child gets kicked back to the
parents it's a simple matter
picking up a child the second
time and your bill up to the hi
six months two thousand six
month level of scrutiny review
so I don't know if it almost of
my mind seems like there's a
disincentive for C. revenue
there's an incentive for COS
the first one I left because now
you're putting a greater problem
part ability that child's going
to go to that high level of
review tell me why that would be
more that would never happen.
To the service I I don't know
that would never happen other
than what I can tell you is
today.
To the extent of that happens it
happens repeatedly with no
heightened scrutiny yeah and so
and so what we're trying to
solve here.
Is is.
Is making sure that we get eyes
on certain files and.
And I would like to think
without knowing.
That if I'm someone who gets
promoted to an executive manager
position.
And I keep seeing certain case
workers cases come in for the
site review.
That we're going to need to do
more training with that case
worker haven't understand what
the look at the second meeting
with the second is to correct.
Yes I get it and I hope you
understand my concern too
because it's kind of like you're
you're right we are high in high
review does it really take the
fiction because that's when it
could be the fictional Justin
into this is the first time
makes it more likely they're
gonna get that have review right
that seems pretty self evident
to me the radio what the greater
likelihood that child cases
gonna receive heightened
scrutiny is if the economic
doesn't do their job in the
first instance.
This is also why we're giving
them an extra day to do their
job in the first instance yeah I
get it which I'm sure you see
what I'm saying which is to see
whether the really that we have
it if they have a true concern
for express specific child a
specific case the best thing
CYFD might do would be just
missed first deadline have the
challenger the parents and then
very promptly taken back into
custody and and when you do that
then you get the hard reboot
because a second time in six
months sure and it almost seems
to me like that's the best thing
for the child is to and it and
it seems like that's not a good
experience right take a child in
the capacity miss the deadline
return the child to the parents
immediately take child back to
the custody and now that child
finally gets some very
meaningful scrutiny review it
it's it seems like the child of
that process is being used as a
pawn a little bit and our
process is kind of the
encouraging some gaming it would
seem to me as well to.
I don't have a good solution I
know you're you've got a
solution here this gets better
than we've got but I hope you
can understand to I if you're
pretty clever Office you use
very.
Do not worry about.
We can also go to Mr correct and
Mr chairman they're not doing a
thorough job now The New
Mexico's in Outland having some
of the highest
short term stays in the nation
being going back and forth so
pleased with this bill we could
say they would only be removed
twice I will answer me we
decided and pearls the
deplorable statistics some so we
but we know this is not working
really well I just want to give
you that scenario yes
Representative in the in that
scenario I don't families can be
avoided with the approach to
taking but I just in order to
think a little bit about that
right
is a way to maybe discourage
that the necessity of doing that
but that's what I just want to
what I do is I was at State
University and you got it child
with a particular concern to use
don't make the first deadline
right and and return the child
one of just one of the from what
it take to have them taken back
into custody on.
Diem and you know the answer
that was a date for next all up
there to the house is a big
call.
Well they could I mean they
they're responsible for thirty
five days after that check on
the family right so they don't
similarly to the cost of the so
you take a child in on Monday to
let you five days ago you don't
file your petition charges
returned back to the parents
that next weekend for the money
you bring the child back in
again because it the child still
under your seventy five days of
the forwarding right and you
know these allegations are still
out there is to bring back in
when I do that and now you phone
back to twice now it's all going
to get the screw you we really
almost half.
So Mr Chairman the.
I'll take part of part of it has
to do with.
The way in which the children's
code is written particularly in
abuse and neglect which is this
portion article for the
children's code and and so the
default.
And and it would all have to be
re written the default is the
child is returned to the home.
In fact if you look on page
three existing language.
The getting online eight a child
a person taking a child in the
custody shop with always will
speed one.
Release the child to the child's
parents and issue a verbal
counseling or warning as may be
appropriate right that's that's
the number one default number
two is deliver the child to the
Department.
right and and so the the the
entire article for his written.
With a with a default of
returning the child to the home.
And so and so that's where
that's where addressing the
issue that you're raising which
I think is a significant issue
is one that would require actual
actually an entire re write of
the dissident like statutes.
So that we we remove a
presumption either way.
In terms of where the child will
end up so that the investigation
could fairly take its own
course.
so without trying to rewrite all
of article four and and change
all those presumptions we're
we're simply providing for this
heightened level of a review in
the cases where a child has been
what we're within six months we
got a traveling back and forth.
I think what what I'm saying I
grew centers yeah you're taken
you Senator particular port
first stab yes or step in the
right direction but you know
nothing would the as scary to me
thinking that you center of this
on a particular could rewrite
all of article for the next
twenty four.
Yeah.
Six of the keeping busy right
now you know I I idle hands in.
Devil's workshop something like
that right.
But you know but you were making
light of this but we really need
back to the very serious nature
because you're right the the
entire existing law has a
presumption of returning the
child to the parents and maybe
were in session the crisis that
center Baca recognize them for
we're we're we're the worst in
the country.
This
and I keep saying this all
session long desperate times
call for desperate measures
maybe we go and throw the ball
deep into the end zone and say
we're we're doing a worse job
with this for the kids in our
state maybe we need to for a
while not.
In all cases the best result is
returned the child to their
parents in these cases until we
get it.
hard on the is the profanity
here so we get our act together
is the best in the state and so
I appreciate you taking a step
in the right direction I think
we should be taking big steps
and and that's not to that's not
to me again what you're doing
but I also don't want to use
this as a reason why we should
feel satisfied this this bill
this gentleman clearly does not
solve all the problems facing
our children for CYFD this
addresses one component.
Thank you what's the will of the
committee.
I do pass committees one sorry.
Yeah when I visited us on Senate
Judiciary Committee substance.
Seven four five.
Is there any opposition to.
Senator.
city might go to make sure
Senator we're already down to
work.
Senator Wirth yes okay Senator
Wirth close yes okay so all
right so I do have a due pass.
Thank you Mr Mr chair that was
the committee.
I.
Airing on still.
There have a lot in the back.
Thank you.
Coming back.
Then Senator which would be
ready for Senator date goes to
let me know so I can text if
he's in fact.
What we'll do
Senator because I guess the hard
stop at five thirty I think this
will pretty quickly this bill in
conservation.
What I would suggest Senator
Pirtle.
This nail still reading from ten
minutes fifteen.
Senator Hamblen Senate bill two
six.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the questions.
Of of.
Sanitizing the area Mr chair
committee Senate bill two of six
provides an exemption from the
procurement code for contracts
entered in by the forestry
division of the Energy minerals
and natural resources department
I'll just from this point on
refer to it as EMNRD to
distribute federal grants to non
governmental entities and
individuals selected by the
federal government programs
related to forestry Mr chair
this bill helps to remove some
of those restrictions because of
the procurement produce that are
hindering the efficacy of EMNRD
of the many areas that EMNRD
overseas this bill would allow
them to spend money on contracts
for maintenance of grounds and
facilities at highway rest stops
purchases a books periodicals
and training materials for
access to the public purchase of
livestock and option contracts
with businesses for public
school transportation services
and more but more importantly
what this bill will do is allow
EMNRD to distribute federal
grants to non governmental
agencies and entities and
individuals selected through an
application process process
sounded a little bit Canadian
their process for programs for
wildfire prevention and
protection urban forestry forest
and watershed restoration and
protection reforestation or
economic development projects to
advance the use of trees and
wood biomass for hazardous fuel
reduction is pretty much what
this bill does is remove the
handcuffs that are on EMNRD
right now to work with other
groups and agencies that have
the capacity to do the work that
EMNRD cannot do right now I do
have my expert Laura McCarthy
who was the force division
director of EMNRD and also in
their general counsel Dylan Fuzi
who is here to provide any
answers to questions regarding
this particular committee and we
look forward to the discussion
so I'll let Laura go ahead make
a few of brief statement and
then we can go ahead and move
forward with the discussion Mr
chair and committee the forestry
division is the fiscal agent for
a sweep of federal programs that
are authorized at USDA and DO.
These are grant programs mostly
created through the farm bill
that name non governmental
organizations as eligible
applicants at the previous
funding levels it didn't really
matter that we didn't have this
exemption however that changed
with the twenty twenty two
wildfires and the bipartisan
infrastructure law because now
there is one billion dollars in
community wildfire Defense
grants and four hundred and
fifty million in another kind of
requests for underserved
landowners these are very big
dollars that could come to New
Mexico for wildfire risk
reduction but NGO capacity is
needed to capture the
opportunities I'll give you a
specific example of the
community wildfire Defense
requests the federal notice of
opportunity came out in July
everybody was busy after the
wildfires and with the flooding
but these were grants of up to
ten million dollars per grant
and so we had twenty two
applications from New Mexico six
were non governmental
organizations they asked for a
total of forty one million
dollars the federal competitive
process has now concluded the
awards are to be announced soon
if Senate bill two oh six does
not pass and the NGO proposals
are selected through the federal
competition we will still have
to conduct a procurement to pass
in the funds even though we will
already know who the Feds
selected so it's a duplicate of
process that in itself is a
likely violation of the code
because will already know who
the funds need to go to so in
conclusion Senate bill two oh
six is a reasonable exemption
applies only when there is a
federal competitive process that
can substitute for state
competitive pressure.
Thank you very much we have no
registered opponents to the
legislation only proponents
recognize them but the courage
for them to not feel compelled
to repeat what's already been
presented on the same argument
so of of.
The situation is but also you
there is Jason so of of
registered speak with Jason
Espinoza.
At the you've got to
administrative.
Something new.
By chairman members chairman
members of the committee Jason
Espinoza research lobbyist with
the New Mexico coalition of
conservation districts and the
New Mexico forest industries
association we just in a strong
supporter legislation nothing
new to add.
Very much
Greg Peters distributors here.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Greg Peters senior
policy advocate for conservation
voters New Mexico here to stand
in strong support of Senate bill
two oh six the reasons already
mentioned by Senator Hamblen and
the expert witnesses we are to
do passcode respectfully thank
you Reese grow by zoom.
There is not not on Wesley
Allison by zoom activated all
right.
Okay I'm sorry your so much.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you we stand in
strong support I'm with I'm
Leslie Allison with the western
landowners alliance we do stand
in strong support of the
legislation for reasons
everybody else's mentioned thank
you.
The representative for New
Mexico coalition of conservation
districts in support New Mexico
force industry association
support I that's it for support
there's no opposition again
repeating members of the
committee questions.
Senator Mentzer every sort of.
I wouldn't pass.
No questions.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Questions that I ask for these
this is a
This is because.
Just as a.
Also.
my sense is that they should not
serve as an exemptions of care
of.
I should is that
the and that is the.
Of I have a contracts.
Because the rest of the.
This is of the area code was
still alive other than the
selection of the person the.
so that is the status.
The service so at the moment we
do not have a quorum present to
take a vote let me
So do not right now.
Of what we commencement let's
see if I can find out the
intentions of the other
committee members who just want
to know more about.
As part of all the.
The
holes of
activity like the.
Mr chair
Senator consistent with our
conversation I did go back
and can for of.
With my team and some lawyers
there and we still feel the way
that we would constructed and
insert it in because of the
nature of these agreements and
contracts if we inserted into
another part of the code would
most effectively function as a
procurement code exemption and
so you know.
Given the intent and structure
putting it in the exemption
provisions in the normal range.
It is on.
Full of all right thank you
I did go back and confirm with
my team and we look at it and
the way we felt like we would
need to structure it in
any of the other section say
thirteen dash one dash one
twenty nine or thirteen dash one
dash thirty or other pieces you
would effectively be structuring
it so broadly as to be an
exemption by any other name and
we felt that this was
on like maybe some of the other
broader exemptions in the code
and appropriate use of an
exemption it's targeted narrow
covers only one agency at two
federal programs and and in the
numerator list of programs that
we felt confident that that was
an appropriate vehicle to exempt
it from the procurement code.
Thank you so so we're back to a
quorum was senator Wirth on the.
line.
Is there any other discussion
where do passed motion we'll do
a roll call for this please roll
call.
Mmhm Senator Ivey Soto ****.
Senator Pirtle.
The yes.
Senator yes.
Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Yes.
A new path thank you Mr chair
thank you committee thank you
for coming this summer for a.
Sir gonna go Senate bill eleven.
Will conclude today with Senate
bill two forty seven computer
work for today we're all
scheduled for five thirty
alright stop somebody managed.
The staff.
That's what I just several
several years Senator level
years sent to forty seven.
The day I think we get to the
next hour.
The following is money leave on
the so Sir guy to Senate bill
three eleven you because
of because register will.
Our
goes we don't have anybody
registered.
For support or opposition leader
bill.
If your show Sir you have up to
ten minutes we need to.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
allowing me to have this bill
for you so we've seen this bill
multiple times last year I had
it in I only changed one cabbie
out this year Mr Chairman
centers is I've added a nine one
one
and on so that way thinking
through is everyone knows the
we've had
Of these saving bill started
Hispaniola was the first one
right after session last year
all right after session this
year Hobbs will have one Los
crucis looking for one of us
would Carlsbad already applied
so we do have the same payment
box going in across state last
year the governor gave us the
allocation for the install of
what this does is will give me
the opportunity to protect the
mother as they turn the children
over to us but the nine one one
aspect is for those rural rural
rural areas I look at if you
have one and
gallop in one in Farmington the
native Americans may not be able
to make that trip so what I've
added in there is to have a nine
one one a responsible that
whoever a first responder was
would come to pick up that child
they'd be able to receive that
child taken to hospital to the
safe haven box the fire station
and delivered to CYFD.
And that's and not show the
change from last year will stand
for questions.
Yes No registered supporter
opposition members the committee
would do pass.
just.
The.
The motion of I'm from noting
Senator the workers will
questions the there's a
substantial amount of new
material built on.
Good of the slow down just a
little bit.
Restrictions will grow.
Well I did notice that some
struggle again that's existing
language some of that
then you should maybe consider.
Striking the.
Some of the new material for
section four HRS and improvement
code section for this whole new
section for
Earlier you.
Section seven.
Well we're probably getting up
to speed on this I will say that
I do appreciate.
that they have.
Your face.
To.
With the addition.
Munity section.
That's existing.
In fairness Senator that in
unity evidently mostly you.
Good.
The the the Munich got bias
Mr Chairman given that the
effective date of this act one
one three I don't think the six
flights
have on or after.
That.
What was.
Mr it's six one four.
The story.
Six twenty four PM we were close
to comment capitalize the word a
person for.
Projections option motions look
that amendments adopted.
We're.
One of those to the
Purpose section the.
You're gonna take a little bit
more serving motions in the
state we can just say strike.
Hello.
That part of the bill so we're
just limited to that from it's
important we will strike the
existing statutory language
right.
That is correct Mr chairman it
would be it would be to strike
that for the bills and what
he'll.
Four forty two one point.
Mr resentment that's that's the
biggest ones because of that is
to it's our perception of the
bill.
Very objection about the moon
and we with this.
No so Senator this little injury
state the motion from the time.
And Mister chairman I'm being
told that there is a table.
If you.
Well I think the but of.
The repeal just before making
appropriation put in the title.
repealing.
Sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy.
On page one million twenty.
Before making that's correct.
And that location then we would
motion to consider peeling
sections of MSA nineteen.
And a semi colon and then making
appropriation.
Then along with that in the same
motion.
For in section one of the bill.
Session for those twenty to
twenty point one.
The same motion on page two one
nine.
Remember in section two of
section one.
When all the corresponding
sections of all right.
Correct.
COVID yes today mmhm the.
Something that you're motion
service so yes.
To
repeal we're we're second
section one correct
Representative will develop the
number of calls for them serving
over heels.
The existing lines fifteen and
sixteen.
That's a double repealing
section twenty four of twenty
two diff one point one.
Important for the.
What four dash twenty two dash
one point one.
Being lost two thousand five
chapter twenty six section two.
It's all on page one.
And then changed the title to
include repealing.
What.
I wish you open the hood and we
is our jobs.
Yeah is a great.
And then Mr chairman I have one
more thing in the process.
This is one motion no it seems
like it's a good time to in one
of your something around one
more sure well it's on page
eleven line six it's also the
journalist turned up with on or
after July one twenty.
You know if you were the.
Come up with from here is gonna
be a committee substitute.
We will because we're gonna do
this by minimal put it all
together for I'm sure that'll be
the Ivy Soto version and yes
both house and Senate so.
To page eleven million six
striking between on and.
The karma.
This is.
Capitalize the word in.
Right.
Before the committee the
objection adoption of those
amendments.
So the the committee so.
Closing the.
This is often.
The committee members.
Mr chair Senator and kind of
wondering about who's going to
pay for the server and safety
devices they seem like a very
particular device they can state
be oxygen is certain amount of
she meant the same expensive to
they have to be managed by
people and who's going to pay
for them to set the purpose of
the appropriation.
Cheers.
Mr chair and improved him so
it's really unique situation so
the organization of bills the
state paintbox they go out to
the public so last year the
governor gave a C. installment
with thirty three counties of
the the fire station has a two
hundred dollar fee that they do
to manage the cameras in the of.
All the technology to it but the
actual safe haven box is
basically a bassinet in a wall
was walking by concurrent in the
in the monitor control of all
that is provided to us free of
service by the community.
Mr Chairman what you mean the
community.
Mr chairman pro tem they will go
out to businesses and to
for instance in Hobbs we have
Mecca and and I know they do
some kind of child care service
I know they're participating
there's others in the community
they're paying for the actual
safe haven box so we as a state
provided last year Mr chairman
pro tem of the funding for the
install and then the city will
of pick up the cost of the
equipment and monitoring and
it's just a latest your of the
month service fee is what they
pay.
Also Mister chairman Senator so
the governor help to be
installed and where are they
install.
Mr chairman pro tem um Los
crucis.
She's just lost.
This manual was first last year
and got six communities are
interested the next one will be
after this session and it'll be
in the house fire station number
one.
Rules that is applied Los crucis
plied there's different areas
all over the state we've had
small towns apply but they
didn't qualify because is not
twenty four hour then station
even though it has it comes to
your cell phone once the doors
open the carriers
alert whoever's on staff and so
they know that there's been a
child place there but because
the way we have in statute
originally was it had to be a
twenty four hour then station so
we're getting a lot of requests
but really the only one close so
far is Hobbes.
And I believe that we show that
we are confident we can actually
repurposed election drop boxes
outside of elections for.
Just.
I don't think so.
People are listening it was a
joke.
Right thank you Mr chairman.
Other questions set the server
the structure was ready upon the
need Environment.
My emotional.
Should we we would appreciate
amending the motion of.
To see you smile all the more
there soon.
Full of beef is a really.
There's not there should be
about let's work together.
Number of heard.
Whether committee questions
comments.
Fox anyone.
Before we get to the committee
Senator I know you've of Richard
here's federal important.
I continue to have a lot of
concerns about the bill
And and don't think that it's
ready to be passed by this
committee but the support
without on.
The the concern I have of the
enrollment of one of the things
is always have trouble with
legislation when legislation has
mandatory mixed with permissive
language.
So and I know some of this is
really your kind of pulling from
existing other places but we
look at section four for
example.
What a page five beginning with
subsection ceases upon receiving
an input level the first
responder the first respond or
may that's permissive may find
the person leaving.
To the extent practicable with
the following so that's all the
to the two minor legal minds
very squishy thank you Sir
Stewart you're one step ahead of
me entirely squishy right is the
first responder may which means
it may not.
This is provided to the extent
practicable means you know.
I have it with me right I don't
the its way I don't want to go
get it so that those to me are
laws that's not the that small
bill or legislative language
when you tell somebody you might
do this you might not in order
to choose to remain out and to
the extent is preferable to the
risk so that's not a problem for
your convenience we want you to
do this those to me are
memorials those are statements
of of aspiration is to.
Not really laws so and then
there's a lot of good
information you want the person
to give the person leaving the
child up information about
adoption services and
availability of private adoption
services and grocers and
telephone numbers for agencies
adoption services and written
information about who to contact
to the currencies to the
reunification.
The service at our again I
really rather have a our lost of
people you got to do something
right
and this to me doesn't really
make a that very clear.
If you look at subsection do on
page six.
My same concerns this is the
first responders who receives a
child shall ask the person
leaving.
What with the infants whether
the in with the infant has a
parent who is a member of an
Indian tribes are eligible for
membership in any tribe we all
understand why that's important
to pass but that it goes of the
first responders show last but
the person leaving is not
required to provide the
information so it's going to
usual last but you know you have
to answer and again that'll
maybe triple the market of the
law you know why why bother
The
That's that's the important part
of that section of the cause me
some concern.
A real concern what what was
loans are you my general thought
center then we'll see where the
committee is going to go with
the CTE committed may decide
that we maybe want to work on
this a bit more with you.
or the committee maybe sits
ready for prime time despite my
concerns section five of the six
is all new material.
Every one of the goals of your
bill here is to be able to
leverage and for the inside of
what you call a surrender safety
device.
I I I don't know full of no not
yet convinced.
Whether that's a good idea
candidly I I think your goal is
is admirable you want to be able
to have a place where people can
safely leave their child.
Of when they don't feel they're
in a position motion we're
physically or financially or
otherwise to care for that child
but
When I look at.
Section a page eleven here this
is the section that.
Is new material it's the
requirements for the location of
monitoring of these devices.
And.
The this the operator was site
may install a safety device in
the the device show many goes on
to describe and show.
Have certain qualities and
characteristics of a read
through all of that in section
ten.
Your available page thirteen the
sort of page thirteen online of
fifteen.
To designate a surrender safety
device as a safe location the
department shall provide.
The the device adequately
provide for the safety of an
infant of the input is properly
secured within the device for at
least a period of three hours
Senator by is a quick with a
transparent door through which
the infant is visible maybe
retrieve that etcetera etcetera
is a yes to a fictional side the
staff by medical providers seven
days a week twenty four hours is
really concerned that we have a
situation where somebody.
Sounds to me like putting a
child in a box yes it has a
transfer window and yes it sure
how all these characteristics
but I just I'm not sure that
that's a good idea
I I like your bill we're we're
making it possible for of.
Distressed.
For an incompetent parents to be
able to leave a child a first
responder I like that part of
the building that's important in
addition to some of the same
having to the idea of being able
to put it put the campus in a
device of some kind sounds
really creepy to me.
One is the way to say about
and I as a transfer window and
it's going to be good people for
three hours.
Is it heated Senator condition
the trunk of the car is in the
backseat of a car in my part of
the state put a you have a child
in a car seat in the back of the
car for ten minutes that's a
hundred and five degrees that
child can be that.
is this a good idea.
Well to me far from Travis but
this is not going to be at the
tragedy they were not very very
careful with this you know and
once I was convinced that the
the procedure the process here
had all those assurances but I
can't imagine leaving a child in
a device
in particular that's a good idea
of temperatures being what they
are hot cold.
The child breaking it up
I'm guessing the special small
confined.
Base might be five minutes or
less
help help me feel comfortable
with this is not concerned about
things I should be concerned
about thank you for that Mr
chair Senators so the there's
only two companies buildings the
building statewide or nationally
so they've got all over the
country they do it in a way that
that it even though it feels
like a box it Moores a bassinet
also on the outside it's a once
it's opened it works them so
that way the timeline is thought
to be three hours it's actually
less than fifteen minutes
because the station building
then twenty four hours they're
already there the inside glass
gives them the visual of the
child already being in the
basket so it's it has a feel of
the bassinet but it is here and
he temperature controlled to the
surrounding they want that child
in in a comfortable temperature
but then it also not only does
the station now but whoever
their lead is in fits of health
someone in the fire department
or ambulance ten that someone
has it go to their phone so
right away they get notification
that someone has put a child in
once the doors locked from the
outside the mother person put
the child in can't retrieve it
in less to go through CYFD but
the whole physical position of
that box is made in a way that
is for the comfort of the child
in in the in the theory is that
they'll have their
for maximum of three hours but
in reality they wanted in a
minimum of a few minutes because
they still have to get that
child checked into a hospital to
make sure that that tells.
in good condition they don't
wanna leave it there long term
it's it's pretty rapid
situation wanted in Israel
when they install it I was
surprised because all the bells
and whistles that it has but
that's this company that does
that it's their technology and
they manage manage and monitor
even years to come when they
come back to upgraded they will
put in things and and the
department will have to
negotiate with them on that.
If they pay the whole point
community might have to to help
and it but it's all from the
comfort and care for the child
so like I say once a parent or
whoever the person put the child
in there close the door it's a
ten everything to let everyone
know the details there so that
the child can be retrieved.
There are working so I think
you're hard to the right place
to think you're intentions are
well motivated
you're putting a lot of.
Trusting in the technology and
and I'm of the year where I
watched the spatial mole on the
launch pad you know I mean I've
seen the best minds invest
scientist based health
technology we have failed us in
moments of crisis and so I'm
always a little cautious about
that I I like the idea of
requiring a parent.
Who surrendered a child to have
to put them in the arms of a
first responder.
I trust a human being to take
that child and and act
responsibly and appropriately I
gotta tell ya I don't trust the
idea of putting a child in the
past and that particular issue
saying once the parent push the
pace of the child in this device
they're no longer able to
retrieve the child.
All of this sounds to me like a
an opportunity for just a
tragedy and so I I can't support
your bill without without a
substantial amount of work
service.
Sort of a ghost do we know how
many.
If it's open.
Have been left with
At safe haven sites no Mr chair
and senator on the shuttle last
year I could have told you
I believe there's like twenty
three last year that it put in I
know thurs one recently and then
state Arkansas someone like that
just within the last two weeks
but I'm not kept up with the
numbers but I know that it works
you know through this
organization they put these
throughout the country and
they've they've been able to
retrieve I'm so in my thought Mr
and centers in if we're able to
position ourselves to save one
life it's worth working effort
that we've got three hundred
thousand that the governor has
already given us three hundred
thirty thousand.
To be able to help carry that
for so I I don't have the
correct numbers but all try to
get them to you Mr Secretary
aside so we.
I was posed early on a common
question so Mike my question was
not a surrender safety device my
question was a safe haven sect.
So under the existing law New
Mexico.
How many children have been left
not.
In New Mexico no children in the
in the safe haven box are not
safe have a box with the safe
haven sites which is a hospital
on percentage the fire station
just us as I staff on site.
At the time the infant is left
at subsect so that's existing
law in New Mexico how many
children have been left Mr chair
Senator I apologize I'm not
research that and all that I I
guess I I'm tending towards.
I'm headed towards
where Senator Cervantes says
that that that there are number
of changes in this bill.
That relate to the safe haven
sites what.
But that don't include a
surrender safety device.
And if and I think those are
helpful
I think those are helpful I
think the transfer of instituted
we location that you have an
section four provides an option
to meet at another location.
you know I don't I don't know
that we want in that situation
only that they would have to
find information about other
services etcetera I will say
that.
Subsection D. of that section
the film on page six.
Probably should go at the bottom
page for as part of section
three.
Because B. is asking.
About the name of the infants
biological father biological
mother the if it's name medical
history but the person is not
required to provide that
information.
And so that would be similar
language there.
I think we could tighten up for
and then.
And then frankly remove the
surrender safety device.
Provisions and I know that
that's that's what you wanted to
get out with the service writer
safety device but I don't know
that you have the votes to get
out of this committee with that
but I think we can do for the
rest of the bill the rest of the
process right now in terms of
the consent for medical services
and and including some of the
other.
So the other
provisions that you have here
that I think are helpful
and and certainly Mr chairman.
Senator Gallegos if if that is
something that that you would be
willing to.
To work on and recognizing it's
not what you initially wanted.
that the that is that is
something that that I think.
I think I would hope the the
chair would be willing to
schedule this bill again if we
came in with a suitable
substitute on that Mr center I
don't have a problem going back
to the drafters us to re look
those is it okay if he contacts
you make sure that he gets it
property this social absolutely
yes I'll probably have to.
committee members of service to
the chair look like this is a
bill where we should probably
postpone suspend action at this
time allow the sponsor to
regroup correct with all of our
input I encourage committee
members of the Senate offer any
additional input to have as much
guidance as you possibly can
Senator Wirth that we postpone
action on it the other day.
Their Buck.
Mr Chairman I agree with it but
let me just say that it you know
it just repeats itself over and
over
with the same language I don't
know that we need this much
repetition and to me and also
disorder needs basic language
I'll go I just don't like that
the first responder is required
to basically question and give
information to the parents.
Parents putting the child in a.
Box mean wire we've been sort of
like pestering them with what
they're doing and why and
adoption and all of that you
know to me that's kind of Big
Brother eight.
To me so.
I don't know where that noise is
coming from the talking.
The man Mr chairman pro tem all
written down here
Ideas that nope that's all of
course Mr chairman I will look
for a few more suggestions if I
come up and.
Not going through so that two
some thank you for the relief
and appointed to the Senate
about.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
have a couple brief comments a
you know I'd have to agree there
are there are significant issues
with within the bill the that we
see here but you know I want to
reiterate the fact that a lot of
those are in original language
in the language that that is
existing now and I want to point
that out a lot of that was not
the
not due to the drafting the
requests on this bill and I also
of I just want to point out you
know it is a it does seem
strange maybe Mr chair Senator
to put it into the box but I
wanted to point out the
alternatives to that the
alternatives to that are rather
dire I think and and I think
this poses a really good
alternative to what that if it
might be looking at should the
the parent not have have this at
their disposal additionally you
know I'd like to say that
That these boxes they have
proved useful in other states
there we we've only been a
we've only been talking about
New Mexico here and it's very
recent installation of some of
these and and I see a real a
real advantage to the box in a
way that there's some bit of
maybe Shane or something like
that that a parent might be
experiencing when they have the
infinite that they don't want to
give it to another human being
you know it it'll make a middle
of the park feelings on them a
certain way so in that way if
there you know if there's non a
non human interaction there it's
a little easier to to do that
sort of thing and I I think a I
think that situation exists in
many other circumstances and and
so I think this provides are
really good a alternative to not
having that human contact that
might.
Might give you some shame but
still keep in a baby safe and
avoiding that dire that Tyrrel
Turnitin that we talked about so
I appreciate you bringing this
for now I'll be here disposal as
well to look over some of the
changes that this committee
expressed that's all I have
Mister chair.
Recalling the roll over current
thank you thank you Mr thanks
we've got the thirty minutes for
the last item on our agenda for
licensing action to Senate bill
two forty seven center the sort
of those you know we had to go
Representative I know that you
are more than capable of
handling your own let me call
for senator Munoz we can just
for the sport of it all.
Can somebody from the north from
the router.
Mr we begin the bill while his
mother going to retrieve Center
meals for his bill please.
Up until the only item we over
the of business we have left.
I would like to you know
services I appreciate that but I
really like to have.
Mr chairman I'll remind you we
have a hard stop at five thirty
well we might have to just a
little bit just for the support
of but well as we would on some
euros we do have an amendment Mr
chair that would like for him to
explain that to.
You can hear the room disco in
the one about that
There is an opportunity for me
to recognize that today is
Senator only offers thank as I
understand it is the right.
And so.
This is that accurate Center.
will vote was glad to have you
sure the meeting for a little
bit tired.
Well it was
the have to have you call you
have the receipt to you want to
tell us which one Mrs all.
Is that since this.
Plus yeah.
Closer to sixty four seventy.
When sixty.
Mr Singh.
We do this to Senator Stewart
would you like to ask one of
the.
You have.
They
have.
Thank you very much.
Even legislature some review
House and Senate combine
fourteen fourteen years you've
given New Mexicans fourteen.
Sure that was.
So let me tell you how hard
senator Munoz avoiding comes is
committed.
I won't say who but will inform
our staff that he's locked in
his office and will not answer
the door.
The.
Think about who have sponsored
bills.
Interesting to see.
We try one more phone call then
we'll proceed center.
I I am mindful of the time.
We realize that we so rarely get
to see senator Munoz here.
The.
Call in I just started arms to
bring us a copy of the amendment
as well please.
Okay.
Here we present Judiciary
Committee built my west point
and we're sitting here waiting
for you.
Representative.
Do need them.
Okay everyone's in on the joke
is on his way.
For.
Once the whole.
You actually are for.
Okay.
I believe it is.
And our product with that and
are from.
It is as well.
Why the US.
The.
Yeah.
I.
Senator so let's get started
to sing you know so
I want to keep the whole
committee.
this.
the number changes to be
requested to have.
And so.
What we're doing with this is Mr
chairman.
is providing for what the
complete or incomplete
application
The
provided for a couple of minutes
for expedited licensure that's
required in light of
hospital women when we did last
year.
Not for permitting for virtual
remote hearings reporting by
just technology when they have
hearings
and we're also providing for and
that's where the substitutes are
the the amendment comes in
providing for suspension.
Summary suspension of somebody
who is a subject to disciplinary
procedures
we did want to add in that that
that that's considered a final
action.
Finally just the action for
purposes of appealing to
District Court if the person
would like to do so.
and and then Mr Chairman the
last section of this of this
bill but for going to propose to
strike but not discard.
Deals with licensure compacts.
And so the last section of this
bill.
Which is one that I hope all of
the members of this this
committee will take a close look
at.
Provides for provides I think in
answer to all of the.
Objections we've had to the
various.
Interstate compacts.
And and so what I would propose
the initial idea was that we
have this and this bill this
bill move.
I'm sorry Mr.
Can you finish your sponsor
first.
And that.
This bill moved and that then
when the compacts come over the
I think what the suggestion is
now that we have that.
This is a separate section each
of the compact when they come
over.
but at any rate I'll follow you
senator Munoz we've got started
center.
Four to thirty seven
I don't know what the question
was what even it was explain the
bill all.
The I'm sorry just so you know
to we have a proposed amendment.
Yes.
And and typically what we'll do
is we'll start with an
explanation of the amendment and
then we'll prepped up to move on
with the amended bill so well
you start with that uncertainty
was on the amendment provided.
Well first of all is this your
amendment it's got center and
for his name on it so.
At the rate of my coast to coast
Hey I miss co sponsor on the
bill and so this is Senator Ivey
Soto.
And then but it's under ten
understand my understanding that
allows for them to yield final
decision.
Well so following the only
member New Mexico that is is
there any opposition to propose
We support.
The questions on the proposed
any more.
So I just have a question I mean
I I understand the amendment
seven patients if folks in that
make it easy for me so you you
change the title of the bill
consistent with the amendment
and then.
On the second paragraph it says
the licensee may yield a summary
suspension for the final action
agency action as provided in
thirty nine dash three dash one
point one those so what what is
that sections of.
Section thirty nine point three
dash one yeah.
Appealing to the district
court's.
At options before final final
action by the agency's ability
to the District Court.
And you know is that a seven the
noble words that are review a
record review you the District
Court really.
Well there are different appeals
to District Court service.
My right there are there are
there are different.
Procedures for which she can
appeal HSD action to District
Court including.
It's up references to wonder
there are different Supreme
Court rules and procedures for
that the people right with the
seven stature this is this is
what will be referred to as a as
a rule seventy four yield novel
seven.
What was seventy six.
Some six yeah yeah.
Senator to those which rules for
some seventy six of the Supreme
Court rules that apply to this
appeal.
yes me question.
Your phone and turn it.
A real attorney.
On the amendment.
Some of the so is because the
goal here is it would be of the
appeal is to District Court.
With the statutory basis so you
sense rule seventy four yield.
And so additional going to be a
record review update this
terminal the record review at
that so it's here's the thing is
we're we're create a little bit
of a of a legal fiction here
because it's not really final
action they do a summary
suspension section the beginning
of the process.
But the but the thing is when
they do a summer suspension
right and there's and there's a
couple different options that we
could that we could do for
example in the judicial
standards commission decides to
somewhere eight suspend a judge
they start to go before the
Supreme Court to get them to
approve the order summary
suspension.
in advance of proceeding through
the process based upon the days
of the person may may cost to
the public in this particular
case then.
Not the bill as it was
originally written would allow
for up for the the board to do
the summary suspension if the
process continued activity in
discipline that's being
investigated poses the help of a
threat to the health and safety
of the public.
But the thing is.
That person is left with no
review of that decision that
could affect their livelihood so
but by deeming it for purposes
of of a review by District Court
final action it allows the
person then to do an immediate
appeal to the District Court.
To review the question the
summary suspension while the
rest of the of the
investigations take place.
Do that sentence in a group
that.
For the discussion proposed
amendment.
Is there any objection option.
The amendments adopted it back
back to the bill as Minnesota
meals.
That action Mr chairman of I
believe sentence was about to.
Let us know what he wants to
with the last section of the.
Is that really wants to what the
last section of the bill.
We want to do with it.
St.
At the center I think we want to
strike the last section of the.
By the bill and reinserted into
Yes I don't know yet.
Somewhere.
This is a section twenty seven
that's correct the sexual
contact center Markham thank
you.
That's kind of where.
My focus on section twenty
seven.
just briefly if I think section
twenty seven you could probably
do the we're doing all this
already and section G. do that
with every contact that comes in
your I think we could just
strike all of the equipment and
tired the section be out and
then make any contact
of forcible under subsection be
like it states their need and
that we could take out.
I think we can take out in its
entirety subsection B..
Yeah at seven Mr but I I think
that what we want.
But the suggestion is from the
superintendent.
Is that it may be best at this
point to remove that section
from this bill all together and
then maybe consider this as a
separate section with each the
compacts comes from one of.
Mr chair that that's fine
there's no compacts in front of
us so is it would be simply
striking at.
One of the contacts for the
committee right now yeah right
now we have some come in a way
correct yep that way when the
government side with some
contact this is the section to.
In each of those bills.
That.
So the tax will I if I may we we
still yeah we could maybe Emily
would save this language will
have it available when that time
comes yeah exactly.
At what things I was suggesting
is that this thing is that this
was my best shot at what I heard
from the committee members in
terms of problems the various
problems with compacts and if if
it could be raised to better
differently or if it or I.
Missed something that people
have as a concern contact us to
let perhaps Mr leader within of
so we can prepare those for
money to the contacts come
through.
But usually.
the Mr chair that that's fine so
are you suggesting Mr chair
Senator that we subject we we
would a strike the entire new
material section twenty seven in
its entirety I I I think that
would be fine two thousand when
you suggestions thank you
senator Munoz a brilliant.
Really it move that.
Well Mr chairman if we're going
to strike.
How did it make its way into
here to begin with.
I mean if that was a good idea
to put it in the bill to begin
with frappes I'm not quite sure
about what this bill does
because there's been no
explanation of.
Everybody else.
Well but I don't care who tells
me what the bill does but I want
someone to do that.
Back in America Salazar just be
sure certainly knows is been
really pushing for a hearing
this billing and I understand
he's a sponsor with sponsors do
they all line up in nasco built
for.
So we just question the point in
time to have this bill and I was
able to get it expeditiously
one of things I just was this
was a new interim committee this
is an interim committee bill.
Mr chairman members of the
committee this the legislation
was discussed in the LFC as part
of the sunset review the only
part that wasn't discussed was
the compact language and as the
senator said we tried to work
throughout the fall to try to
come up with some solutions so
that we could begin to move
compact language identifying
what this committee is set in
the past is a problem with
compacts and then trying to
address them through the uniform
licensing that because the U. LA
is applicable to all of the acts
under chapter sixty one which
each of those compacts would be
under chapter sixty one and so
there's some cleanup language in
here that absolutely had been
discussed and had been
recommended to be included not
as spent LFC bill but they did
it is a state agency bill you'll
notice at the end at the bottom
of the page Mrs SA that's a
state agency bill that's the
regulation licensing department
and and those other changes are
incredibly important this is
summarily suspension is
something that is going to be
important for us and this is a
discussion that I had with
senator Munoz if I may I'm sorry
to interrupt I I still have the
floor in the amendment maybe
it's appropriate at this time
for me to withdraw my amendment
go back to the bill so we can
get the explanation for madam
pro tem and she can discuss or
other portions of this bill and
I can bring it back or we can
dress amendment your when your
friend to your amendment your
amendment to strike that sex yes
yes so either way but I think it
be appropriated for expanding
the discussion to either go back
to it or to address the
amendment.
I'm getting pretty clear sense
that there's going to be support
to strike that section twenty
second bill because the question
was asked I think by many now
how did it end up in the
building really seem to be.
Designed for different purposes
at one of the memorandum centers
and walking back and I frankly
right now just to settle for
work today I'd encourage you to
make the motion will probably
adopted we could be split okay I
I do so move to remove section
twenty seven it's in its
entirety.
Mr Chairman you know I wanted
the explanation of how did it
arrive in here and why are we
not taking it out.
No so was it just a well let's
let's put in statute what are
what we try to do with these
compacts so just to how did this
happen.
Mister chairman Senator so that
happened just like I would have
just said which is we're trying
to clean up the U. LA we were
trying to make sure that we
could move forward compacts with
the concerns that this committee
had what has happened in the
course of the lasts a week or so
is that there's been
considerable concern on the part
of the compacts that this
language is beginning to go
through we have concerns that if
it's separated from the compacts
it's not going to be enforceable
and that moved taking it out of
here is probably the best
solution and potentially putting
it into compacts as they come
here whether the compacts agree
with it or not is another
question but having it in the U.
L. A. is probably not going to
be as enforceable as it is is
this committee were to put it
into each of the compacts thank
you very much news that I'm
dead.
Yeah this is the.
The section twenty seven is what
I call of article
which is a small little
attachment to the ocean liners
is going down through the ocean
right it's kind of a taxes on
goes along for the ride and so
so looks like to me looks like
but but.
Senator Baca were on a motion to
strike twenty seven your motion
is there any objection to
striking that section single
we've struck that section right
we've got the bill as it's
amended the only registered
speaker recommendation of the.
Sanchez is sure McCorkle.
For advocacy there are no
opponents this record called
about two minutes set do enough
for you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Mr Chairman.
Mr chairman members of the
committee the department of
defense at with the four
military installations in New
Mexico has been asking for us to
join the compacts for the last
three years and we strongly
support this bill thank you.
Which of challenges we district
that is to come.
so I hope we'll have your
support when it comes to come
backs a little later on or think
we've we've taken of that part
that really to compacts of right
help our one of the comment on
this bill because.
You know the challenge I have
with their Mr Mr Burke is that
you know we have rules and
procedures of the committee I.
Sure you read them carefully so
Mr chairman I believe he's going
to be an expert witness here
about.
Mr part about one minute.
Thank I just want to take a
minute like.
We are I
could afternoon Mister chairman
members want to thank both our
esteemed chairman when US for
his leadership on this
legislation and center Ivey Soto
I represent the hospital
association we've worked
extensively with superintendent
Trujillo on this issue it
actually is part and parcel for
the compacts we've
Representative we've worked with
Senator Ivy Soto on it they all
to inter twined I think this is
just part of the continued work
in progress so that we can
address some of the critical
health care needs and shortages
that are particularly having
rural New Mexico so thank you Mr
chairman and thank you for your
indulgence on waving to rural
forming.
Use the report.
Representative.
Madam.
All right so when the bill as
amended other committee
questions comments I I will if I
may before you serve as a just
as we struck out the section on
compacts with strict political
and sparked talk about the
importance of the bills relates
to compacts I think we I
understand this from taking the
compacts in implications this
bill out so then what is the
bill what what is the bill.
Bill has a
that
catch their Senator so we're
gonna have to.
Please so on page one.
In seventeen eighteen is going
to have to delete that that
clause right.
Legislative requirements through
the work contacts.
When we look any objection adopt
lemon struck that language is
struck.
The ceremony is back to with
with that section twenty seven
taken out what is what is the
impetus for this bill what what
what are we doing here.
Mr chairman members of the
committee so the clean up to the
U. LA is incredibly important
adding in the summarily
suspension is is a vital for us
to stop bad actors in their
tracks it does take three six
nine eighteen months sometimes
to stop bad actors this will
give us the opportunity
particularly for those who are
multiple actors Medical them
serial about actors and so this
very summarily suspension is
important language but there's
also a removal of the one
thousand dollar limitation for
unlicensed activity it raises
the the the the maximum up to
ten thousand dollars for
unlicensed activity in the event
that the for each activity this
unlicensed so those two
provisions along with just
general clean up to clarify
issues that staff have had in
the AG's office have have
brought to our attention over
the course of the years just to
clean up the you will lay those
two provisions are incredibly
important.
In the so I'm gonna recognize
center every sort of got a few
more questions myself Senator
Ivey Soto thank you so much and
I just started coming in in
terms of the issue with compacts
that actually last year we
adopted house bill one ninty
one.
which allowed four point thirty
licensure of your license in the
state.
what is wonderful about that is
that the Pentagon has reviewed
the New Mexico and is giving us
a for well green.
rating
for for professional licensure.
Our military deployed people as
a result.
Of house bill one ninty one.
So that it actually takes the
pressure off of us on the
compact right now although part
of the part about it is whether
of the topics compacts.
Work I think this report on
of those folks are working with
that
To try to see if we can I am
more hopeful of language for
that or not what the context
come to us it takes a little
different from what we also this
language news but I did want to
make sure that the people were
aware that the that actually
what we did last year.
But also one of the one.
Sako has really made having
differences in how long range
New Mexico.
so that now the you a late late.
How we manage people were
licensed in the state.
And what the process is.
We can do appropriate
disciplinary measures folks when
there's a complaint that comes
off as well as the department
will licensed people in a timely
manner for the.
Do hear.
The committee members Senator to
block in the ceremonial.
Thank you Mr chair so currently
the this is for example a doctor
that does a who who would
suspend license of a doctor
right now.
Mister chairman Senator the
medical board would be the one
who would have authority to
suspend that and they're an
independent agency they're not
connected to our LD so Mr chair
and and Senator Representative
David
under this those this this that
will from what I read here would
go to our of the they could
temporarily suspended is is that
correct now Mr Chairman
Representative Senator no it
remains with the board the board
remains having the authority
that doesn't change Mr chair
Senator.
RLD has no authority over the
medical board if you take a
contractor who is a bad actor in
is built one house I have a
license for all the goes after
him side to
build another house is we
definitely try this a couple
years ago and went after it and
built another housing continues
there was one down in Los crucis
I think it was his name serve on
dis chem building houses without
a license in the in finally the
state could not shut him down
because there's no way now the
now this will give the state the
ability to shut down those thank
you Mr chair maybe that was a
poor example let me think of
another example how about the
restaurant operating under
license right now of who who
currently would suspend that
licensed environment.
so if the environment department
would suspend their licences do
that with this affects state
restaurants could they go in and
temporary spend restaurant.
Miss Mister chairman Senator we
have no authority to do anything
with restaurants okay well it
gives some authority to them to
to make some suspensions in here
finds doesn't it I thought we
just we're talking about repeat
offenders can you maybe explain
that a little bit more for me
and I guess I I kind of miss the
big picture Mr chair Senator
they have to be under chapter
sixty your cosmetologist your
barbers massage therapist here
at Ted two guys here contractors
here
in general contracts and trading
of other constitutional Celeste
is.
That clarifies it thank you I I
understand that so
So this is kind of umbrellas
over all of these now is is
that essentially why do we want
to do that but what what's the
what's the problem right now
that we're trying to fix I don't
understand we have some method
I'm sure Mr chair Senator to to
suspend these licenses as it as
it is I I don't know why we
would want to give up or do that
kind of power.
Mr Chairman Senator it's not
giving RLD the power it's giving
the board the power so the board
is the one who would still have
to take the action and there's
very limited language in
authorizing statute the
psychology board has that
authority and I believe the
dental board has that authority
I don't I'm not sure about the
nursing in the medical but
there's other license types that
can still cause damage to people
physical therapy occupational
therapy massage therapy they
don't have that authority and so
putting it in the U. LA would
grant them of that thirty with a
high bar.
And it threat to public health
and safety and then a following
of due process thank you Mr
chair the reason I guess I
focused on our L. D. is because
when I look at the definition of
four here it you know that
they're one of the ones listed
in the rest of these kind of
look to be more geared towards
construction and construction
industries and so it seems like
they would be the logical choice
of these that that handle
licensing for these many other
occupations and I guess that's
why why focused on them but all
this and more debate thank you
for.
The committee members questions.
Senator thank you I just want to
state the obvious that all
compacts are not like yeah we're
talking about compacts is.
One entity and I know as the
Senate sponsor of the hopefully
forthcoming medical licensure
compact
you know it's just it's just
it's contact is different right.
How would this help the chances
of honestly my.
But compact licenses how does
this bill and anyway help that.
Mister chairman Senator but it
doesn't do anything anymore
because that you just that that
that that section just got
struck that was supposed to help
with the concerns that this
committee has expressed in years
past okay in that I as I
understand it people.
Because we're concerned about
section twenty seven one.
Mister chairman Senator the
compact agencies themselves
brought up some concerns about
the language in this bill that
it would nullify the con packs
okay.
No not an issue anymore okay.
Still not.
But but all of this into the
debate thank you.
Members question.
This gentleman just up I may
just very quickly that one of
the in terms of the first.
example that survive please in
terms of the Medical Board The
Medical Board is not under RLD
but the medical but but medical
licensure is under chapter sixty
one and so therefore they are
under the will lay.
So people late is a yes well
it's.
Who are the is not exclusively
managed through our of the
council have applications all
the occupation professionalise.
So.
Can you show me where in the
bill it talks about the.
The requiring licensing boards
to expedite licenses to
applicants holding a license in
good standing issued by another
jurisdiction.
You remember that the whole
issue K. just tell me where the
bill it's talked about so I can
read.
Mister chairman Senator all look
for real.
but the we're just amending some
of that language to make it
clear we implemented that for
seventeen boards under RLD and
the nursing board has to it's in
section.
Twenty two.
I thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
So I have a few questions to.
This one for the superintendent
give me we can you just give me
examples I hope you haven't been
asked this answer to try
desperately which of the
professions that are causing you
trouble.
Contractors Mister chairman
Senator competition center no
competition.
cut me as the superintendent
which professions are we talking
about really they're just
examples of some of the more
problematic Mr Chairman members
of the committee it is in fact
contractors and contractors are
not under chapter sixty one but
they they are by reference under
chapter sixty in their enabling
statute they are under the
provisions of the you know from
licensing act and so they're
they're they're moved into it
under the provisions of their
and it is the contractors being
unlicensed that is causing a
significant amount of heartburn
and the challenges to the
public.
do you see this in the of our
because I hear about it in my
own profession which is part
profession right New D. rather
that issue.
Very much also written Mr
chairman members of the
committee we are we don't have
authority over the architect
board so I could not answer that
question this will be outside of
that that's correct of this is
that it's still under this but I
can't answer that question for
you yeah right.
Yeah because the that that's a
frequent issue in the
architecture profession course
to.
Is on authorized by the practice
of architecture right people
will call themselves or
contextual designers to imply
that their license to
professionals when there's times
have no qualifications at all is
a we would only use the word
architectural to imply architect
so the question right now they
could the the architecture board
that these if they succeed in
going after somebody for foreign
architects without a license the
limited with thousand dollar
fine under this bill they would
be able to do up to ten thousand
dollars per.
Act of of false architecture is
sort of a me that's that's home
was one of my questions on page
seven Seaview increasing the
penalty ten dollars for each
violation questions was a
violation right so whatever the
architect's profession is you
have of draftsman or draughtsman
doing plans and then to give
them to a professional to stamp
inside the drawings in the rules
really nothing more than just to
process that and so.
What is what is each violation
as each project is the trolling
is each of signature and
stamping of a draw and that what
they did not do themselves but
some of those to do a that's
going to be a little bit unclear
to me but but
and then you know to to to be
able to impose a ten thousand
dollar for each violation to a
contractor this is a contractor
what is going to be a violations
going each project is going to
be every day they show up on a
job site and perform work at
some licensed is it every Tasker
trade they performed here in
general and our I don't know I
guess we'll have to leave that
to analytics it's it's no less
clear than it is already now
it's it's already unclear now
but it gives you some some
pretty T. I guess is really what
it would do on page eight.
For the maybe just for the
committee's consideration maybe
simplify though statutes a
little bit look for the chances
when I find them so section six
this is a with the new language
that describes what is
incomplete application the
sensually I reading that
beginning online turn the page
eight an incomplete application
is incomplete application.
it says in an application for a
license is considered a
completed submitted online
application for missing required
information.
that kind of says to me.
What I just said is an apple
is incomplete of it's it's
incomplete it's missing required
information or without providing
request reported required
supporting documentation is that
really necessary is that pretty
self evident that incomplete
application is an application
that doesn't have the required
documentation and doesn't have
the required information.
Mr chairman members of the
committee it has been a source
of great confusion and
frustration amongst the staff
and amongst the department and
amongst how how do we determine
that it's incomplete is it
incomplete because they didn't
find the supporting documents
that they were asked is it
incomplete because they didn't
fill out a section and then with
when do we just not moving
forward and when do we have to
issue an NCA and so we're just
trying to be really clear that
an incomplete application means
you haven't provided the
information requested including
supporting documentation.
I can give you some is that you
know your experience as you
needed in your.
You've been still a great deal
trust me you've heard me say
that many times over the years
you know so I I trust you in the
state needed I'm not gonna take
issue with it but it but we also
understand my objective which is
to not be putting unnecessary
language of the statute just for
the sake of doing so it it just.
It's.
No negative but you know give
you the Representative your
daughter moved back to New
Mexico wants to get The New
Mexico architectural license
fills out the application but
you don't have the supporting
documents for the number hours
required to get that license
then if she doesn't have that
then realized application be
incomplete I got it which is a
verification of qualification.
I gotta put this the language
you're just as an application is
incomplete if it's one of one
this missing information.
Okay that seems pretty self
evident to me as if I and and so
you have reviewed and it's
incomplete application is
missing required information or
without required documentation.
Okay I think we probably labor
the beat it to.
Staff the superintendents issue
needs it but but it's
instructors part of that
structure RLD whether or not
people are on the.
Work in the building are not
supervised by are the bears
provides important anymore.
Appreciate that so thank you so
page nine.
Five three three five.
Right now this is one of things
that always causes me should
always because any of us.
Concern is the authority of
subpoena a subpoena is the most
powerful.
Tool that I have is a lawyer and
I tell my office said over and
over again the subpoena means I
can get you to give me anything
I want to I can make any
plausible argument that it
relates to whatever I'm doing.
It's very broad authority right
now the so this law allows for
subpoenas.
From the board but this language
you have new and we share with
all out the subpoenas to be
issued.
If delegated by the board to the
staff and
That because a lot of concern
there so commits me
superintendent you know that you
don't have staff we're gonna go
there's at I'd like to Joe's tax
returns I'd like to see this
payroll records to make sure
it's complying with wage
requirements or minimum wage or
contract provisions that I want
want to subpoena your George
you're you're you're all the
financials right.
You do you really want to have
the staff have that kind of
authority that this will.
It's it's a big job for rates to
come from the board having that
four to the staff for the board
is who has to take a vote now to
do that to issue a subpoena.
and I think that's good
hopefully there's some process
there along a staff member to
issue subpoenas.
Cause us some concern how does
how does a person protected from
that question subpoena.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee the board would still
have to delegate that authority
to the staff and it would be my
interpretation of this that they
would have to delegate that
specific authority the reason
that sort of specific subpoena
by subpoena basis that would Mr
chairman that would be my
interpretation of this and that
it would have to be because the
board has to meet under the open
meetings act it would be in the
what kind of delegation was
given to the staff in order for
the staff to proceed on that and
I think it's support the idea of
the board saying we're
delegating you staff member to
subpoena George we notices tax
returns but but I could be
comfortable with.
the board saying we delegate to
the staff the show's of
subpoenas for all tax returns of
all contractors right something
that brought to your door that's
not gonna happen Mr chairman
members of the committee that
would not be that would not
happen under my watch I can tell
you that the board would have to
specifically delegate the
authority and I do believe that
in the in the case of the
attorney general's office to
provide that guidance to the
boards because that's their role
in overseeing boards I don't
believe that they would ever
recommend that a board just
Clarke one delegate over arching
subpoena because it is such of
important responsibility I think
they would require it to be
specific well I hope so and I I
would hope that we can do that
we we we read the paper every
day that's how they're taking
down the trump organization
Donald Trump right subpoena your
financial records and pour over
them with a fine tooth comb and
eventually it's not going to be
hard commission issued a barrel
kind of kind of sport.
Yeah.
We're with that goes.
I think I agree with that.
The work is yes I Mr chairman I
think it could read the the the
a forty to issue civil
investigative nine the authority
to issue specific civil
investigative subpoenas under
this section may be delegated to
the board by the board to the
staff.
Would you answer the word eight
so a specific Senator invests to
subpoena.
Mr Chairman yes take the
subpoenas from single from
plural to singular yes Mr
Chairman before you the
authority to issue a specific
civil investigative subpoena
under section maybe delegate
that work for you Mr Chairman
that works with minimal look
Senator gesture that option that
is a member.
Just give page not stage nine.
Four one four.
Senator.
Committee.
My for afterwards issue insert
the word a specific.
The change subpoenas on that
same Nibert from subpoenas to
subpoena and just explain the
reason for the amendment is that
the board can give you for the
staff to issue specific subpoena
for a specific purpose as
opposed to any kind of a cart
blusher blanket forty two so
center box of thank you Mr chair
I I just it sounds like that's
what they're doing right now I I
doubt that the board is actually
typing up the subpoena itself
and and that sort of thing
they're they're having their
staff essentially generate the
subpoena on their behalf which
which are far more comfortable
within the staff really having
any decision making ability on
the matter so also port the
amendment because it's it's
tighter than what it is for the
I think that language altogether
should be stricken issued and it
should be maintained by the
board itself thank you Mr.
What made the amendment a motion
for the amendment so any further
discussion on the motion senator
Jeff with option.
Seeing them that amendments
adopted.
I think that's all the only.
Well
almost page well what.
One nineteen twenty two talk
about a service or a license
person through other methods.
Including the twenty twelve as
well as shall be reasonably
accepted process by the board.
I don't know what that means
service even applicant or
licensee or an unlicensed person
has to do this actually gives
them a little more leeway it
actually gives the board the
opportunity to say look we got
this by email it didn't
necessarily have to be under the
rules of several civil procedure
it just it actually gives the
house the the individual not the
board to give the individual
more flexibility yeah I I see
the so I was concerned about the
opposite no with the board can
say we're service on you.
As best we could do you know
initial recently except what we
made okay this is this is for
the licensee or applicant.
All right that's something
called the questions I have.
Tobacco just quickly I'd like to
go to page eleven.
in this section G. a license
the consumer person show barrel
possibly say they're gonna
Verrall costs unless there
unless there excuse I work for
paying all or part of the fees
for state prevailed the hearing
but that we want to explain the
costs and what they may include
I don't know why that new
language Mr chair is is is
needed at all it sounds like it
was already covers they have to
bear the costs unless the board
says otherwise or if they
prevail and then it goes on to
tell us what the cost would be
possibly I I would argue that if
that and many other.
yes to your.
Mister chairman Senator Lee
amended out in the low.
Number two all have been caught
twice with the amendment so.
Okay that's all.
It amended updates to.
Many of the committees.
There's a do pass this.
Yes on that occasion.
Good work in corporate all these
in the committee so Sir Baca or
motion the server storage or
something else no show in
opposition.
Further discussion on the motion
scene
The motion those in opposition
the only center Baca any others
in opposition.
Senator Wirth you so with this.
Senator Wirth is yes all other
members Senator Ivy Soto center
stores are o'neill.
There's a one voting yes Senator
my nose welcome to Senate
Judiciary.
Thank you for being here of it
was Senator o'neal's birthday
tonight and he decided to stay
late for you and for you.
So we would just send you Happy
Birthday like.
Senator Steinborn and in finance
but it's not.
Where is the only ones to and.
All.
Yes.
Mr.
This
think she.
