In here, uh, on short notice, I
think most of you, we didn't get
into all of you yesterday, we
wanted to put together a
presentation, there's a number
of bills this session that
relate to fentanyl, the governor
spoke quite a bit about it and
some of her crime initiatives,
uh, we read about it in the
papers and the news I hear about
it all the time, so it seemed
like a good opportunity. We're
gonna take about an hour to
learn about fentanyl from the
perspective of some experts in
the area, so I'll leave it to
you all. Um, we've set aside an
hour for this and um I've
I've asked the uh staff to let
you know that we want to try and
keep your presentation about a
half an hour so that we allow at
least half an hour for
questions, all right? So what if
you all have decided what order
you want to go in, I'll, I'll
leave it up to you.
Great.
Well, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee, thank you for
having us here today. My name is
Miranda Durham. I'm the chief
medical officer for the
Department of Health, and with
me is Joshwatek, uh, the policy
manager, but
Former program manager for harm
reduction, um, and we also have
Commander Jeff Bernard with the.
Right. And we are here today to
talk about overdose and drug
use, um, in New Mexico.
So a brief overview of some
statistics to start with. In
2023, approximately 3 New
Mexican residents died from a
drug overdose every day. That
isn't specific to fentanyl, but
it is a stunning number. For
every drug overdose death, there
were approximately 2 non-fatal
emergency um room visits related
to drug overdoses. And while we
have seen a promising decrease
in
drug overdose, fentanyl
continues to drive trends in
drug overdose deaths in New
Mexico.
Um, having said that, the
majority of drug overdoses, so
65% of drug overdoses in 2023
involved more than one
substance, which
Just can make treatment more
challenging. So how did we get
here? How did we get to fentanyl
and the huge problem it has
caused with overdose. The stage
was really set decades ago, um,
in the 90s, um we started to see
increase in prescription, uh,
prescription opioid overdose
deaths in 95, 1995. The Food and
Drug Administration approved
OxyContin, and it's a story I
think we all know.
well. The first sustained
release opiate drug designed for
long-term pain management,
something we really hadn't done
before, um, and along with that
in 95, pain was suggested as the
fifth vital signs, which really
drew a lot of attention to pain
and pain management. OxyContin
was marketed as a non-addictive
opioid, which we now know is not
true.
Um
So then in 2010 is prescription
drugs, um, became harder to get,
people started to use heroin,
and we saw a second, a second
wave of overdose deaths, um,
around
Heroin
And then as um you know,
fentanyl came on the scene
cheaper, easier to produce. I
mean, heroin, you actually have
to grow poppies, um, that really
took off and you can see on the
graph the kind of maroon line is
the um overdose deaths from
synthetic opioids, the majority
of those are, um, fentanyl and
just, it
It's so much higher than, um,
heroin or prescription.
So fentanyl versus illicitly
manufactured fentanyl. So we
talk about fentanyl all the
time, um, and, and it is a
synthetic opioid manufactured
stronger than morphine or
heroin. It is an FDA approved
pain medication and many people
know it as a transdermal patch
that gives a small amount,
steady state, um, it was first
developed in 1959 and introduced
in the 60s as an intravenous
anesthetic for cancer treatment.
But we're talking about when
we're talking about fentanyl is
illicitly manufactured fentanyl,
and that's what's on the
streets. Um, and in New Mexico,
it really came on the scene in
2019, and you'll see that it
coincides with an increase in
overdose deaths.
Um, while it is a very um
powerful pain medication or
powerful opioid. Um, we do want
to note that incidental contexts
such as touching, um, touching
the drug or being in the same
room as someone smoking it. It
doesn't really cause a risk of
overdose.
So
How is the fentanyl experience?
Like, why is this such a much
bigger problem even than heroin
or prescription opiates, and it
really does go back to just it's
a much faster acting and more
potent.
Um, drug, it attaches onto those
receptors, um, and then pops off
quickly, and that basically, um,
Results in a quick high and um
Really bad withdrawal.
So withdrawal is really in some
ways at the crux of the problem,
you know, you sort of asked why
do most people use heroin,
oxycodone or fentanyl.
When, when the addictions are
causing problems. And the issue
is that it is really hard to
quit. When you stop using
fentanyl, it makes you feel as
bad as you can imagine feeling
so like the worst flu of your
life, terrible body aches,
vomiting, diarrhea, all
you know, it's, it's a horrible
experience, and you know, this
will all go away if you just use
a little more fentanyl, so
It becomes a huge challenge.
Switching now to meth, um, which
is also, um,
Alive and well in New Mexico,
um, methamphetamine is a lab
made stimulant, um, stimulants
have also been around for a long
time since the 1960s.
Um, it causes increased energy,
lowers inhibitions, increases
people's confidence. It can last
a long time, tolerance builds
quickly, but it also can result
in anxiety, paranoia, psychosis,
lack of attention to hygiene,
nutrition and sleep.
So one of the problems with both
of these drugs is um overdose,
so just to talk a little bit
about what that looks like, um,
they, they really are in two
different categories of
medications, the opioids are
depressants, they kind of slow
the body down and the kind of
hallmark um overdose sign is
Breathing slows and then stops.
On the other hand, the
methamphetamine is a stimulant.
It's really speeding everything
up off sometimes um overdose in
that arena is referred to as
over amping, um, and, uh, I
should point out some of the
symptoms do overlap the kind of
the cardinal sign here would be
things like stroke, heart
attack, bleeding to death.
And just a quick word about
Narcan, um, really a life saving
medication, um, and it is an
opioid antagonist, so it bumps
opioids out of the way, um, and
it's used to counter the effects
of any of any and all opioids.
So it works for all opioids, but
does not work for something like
methamphetamine.
Um, the opiate receptors, um.
If so naloxone or Narcan, if, if
someone is, um, has the
It isn't an overdose situation
in which the um the opioid is is
on all the receptors. Narcan
will come in and basically bump
them off and
It and it wakes the person back
up.
Um
Sometimes, uh Narcan only lasts
about 30 to 90 minutes and so
sometimes people will need a
second dose.
I'm gonna turn it over to Josh
for.
Some data.
Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. So if we look at
slide 10.
Oh yeah, sorry, Mr. Chair. um,
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, my name is Josh
Swaakk, I am the policy manager,
uh, with the Department of
Health, uh, you may be asking
yourself why as a policy manager
talking to me about overdose
data. Um, I was the harm
reduction program manager, uh,
throughout this entire period
when we're talking about
fentanyl and the increase. Um,
so I worked with the folks that
saw a lot of this directly, uh,
so I've been well versed in this
data.
Before I moved into my position
more recently, so.
Um, so if we look at page slide
10 here, this is a 12 month
running totals of overdose
mortality in New Mexico. So if
you're looking at this, it is
from, you know, August of 2024
to August of 2023, uh, September
of 2023 to September or 2024 to
September of 2023 and so on. So
those are those data points. So
it's just looking at a year over
year trend.
As you can see here, we saw an
increase in a future slide,
we'll show you by uh by the
substance, but we saw this
increase really start happening
in 2019. Uh, as Doctor Durham
said, that's when fentanyl came
on the scene. That's when it
started really infiltrating the
supply of substances in New
Mexico. I had been present in
other parts of the country, but
it hadn't really been present
here until then.
Um
And just as a note, the shaded
area is provisional data, it's
not final, but we wanted to give
you the most up to-date data
that we have, uh, that's
reliable, so that is subject to
change, that that might change
uh during this period of time
that might go up, it might go
down, but I just wanted to note
that that shaded area for you.
Moving on to slide 11, as we can
see, this closely matches the
overdose, you know, uh, increase
in the plateau that we saw in
the past few years. Uh, this is
overdose-related emergency room
visits. As Doctor Durham said,
we had about 2 of those for
every 1 mortality. So we see a
lot more incidents of people
visiting the emergency room
because of overdose, primarily
related to fentanyl but not
exclusively, uh, during the same
time period.
Moving on to slide 12. This is
just another way of looking at
overdose mortality. This is uh
rates. The first, the first
slides that we saw it showed you
were uh numbers, just raw
numbers, you know how many
individuals have passed away
from an overdose, uh, this is
age adjusted rates, which we
will primarily see when the
Department of Health or the CDC
puts out data, uh, so this is.
People per 100,000 of
population. Ah, so when you look
at that, uh, those numbers
there, you can see we peaked at
50.4 uh individuals per 100,000
and then we've had a slight
decrease to 46.3 individuals.
And again, uh, we saw that
really sharp increase happening
in 2019. Uh, moving on to slide
13, this is the data that's just
broken out, uh, by sex, as we
can see, uh.
Males have a much higher, um,
likelihood of overdosing due to,
uh, uh, fentanyl uh use or
overdosing in general, um, than
females, uh, the, the, the
trends are still increased and,
and plateaued sort of together,
but again, um, men experience
these issues and the higher
rates of substance use, uh, in
general, then uh.
Moving on to slide 14, I think
this is actually really
interesting slide to take a look
at because it breaks it out by
substance.
Uh, this, I just as a note,
these class categories of
substances are not mutually
exclusive. So someone could have
passed away, you know, and been
counted in multiple, uh, parts
of these lines, um, and as
you'll see here in a little bit,
polys substance use is a
significant issue in New Mexico.
Uh, but as you can see there
that that dark purple line that
represents fentanyl.
Uh, and that sort of maroonish
line that represents
methamphetamine.
Uh, so in 2019, about late 2019,
we saw that that maroon line
really shoot up.
Um, that, the, the supply of
substances changed quicker than
anything I've ever seen in my
professional career, um, and
with it tracked methamphetamine
as well.
We saw a lot of people that were
using methamphetamine together
with fentanyl, because the
intensity of fentanyl, um, was
so strong, right, it was, it
was.
Creating a much stronger high,
so people that were used to
taking other substances, had to
take methamphetamine to, to try
to counterbalance the depressing
effects of fentanyl. Um, so we,
we, we saw that's what folks
were trying to do on the street.
Obviously, you know, not a good
thing to do, but those kind of
track together and that's one of
those reasons why, as you can
see there, it plateaued in 2022,
and we've seen a
Or it's peaked in 2022, we saw a
sort of a plateau and we're
seeing a drop that we believe is
quite real there in the, you
know, starting in the area
that's not shaded, we know
that's real, and then going into
the shaded area of 2024, we
believe that is, um, that drop
is real, uh, that there's a
reduction in the number of um
mortality related to those
classes of substances.
Uh, just real quick on on slide
15, uh, these are the top 10
substances in uh involved in
overdose, uh, mortality, um,
just, you know, something to
look at, um.
to be aware of what's really
causing, uh, overdose mortality
in New Mexico.
Just another way of looking at
the other kind of graphs I want
to present with you with as many
ways as possible.
As you can see here on slide 16,
this shows a little bit
different. It shows the percent
of fentanyl involvement in drug
overdose death in New Mexico. So
in 2019, 21% of the overdoses,
um, involved.
Fan
Compare that to 2023, where it
was 65% of overdoses involved
fentanyl. That's a significant
increase, and it really just
goes to show how much the supply
changed and of itself. So even
though we saw this steady, this,
you know, sort of decrease in
plateau in 2022, the number of
folks or the number of involved
overdoses involving fentanyl.
Now, those were more likely to
be involved in.
Fentanyl, um,
During this time period, so.
Uh, here's another, you know,
interesting slide, it's sort of
a step down slide of of overdose
deaths counts by types, so we
had uh in 2023, 948 total
overdose deaths, um, opioid
overdose accounted for 688, so
that's fentanyl, heroin,
prescription pills, all of those
combined, uh, 63013 involved,
um, uh, fentanyl and 485 of
those had methamphetamine, uh,
involvement.
As well.
Moving on to the next slide here
on on on slide 18, uh, polys
substance use versus single
substance use, uh, as I alluded
to earlier in the presentation,
uh, polysubstance use accounted
for 65% of our uh overdose
mortality in New Mexico. And
that means that someone took
more than one drug, I was in
their system when they passed
away, as opposed to uh 35% where
it's just a single substance
use.
Uh, so that's, that that is an
issue, it complicates treatment,
um, you know, there's a wide
variety of things that that make
treating and addressing
polysubstance use more difficult
than if someone was just say
using one thing.
Uh, slide, uh, 19 shows you just
the substances involved in
fentanyl overdose deaths, uh, so
if we look at fentanyl alone,
was involved in 16% of deaths.
Fentanyl and methamphetamine was
involved in 40% of the overdose
overdose mortality and 44% was
fentanyl and some other
substance. Typically, alcohol or
benzodiazepines, things like,
uh, you know, Xanax or Ativan,
those sorts of things.
Um, moving on to slide 20. This
really this really shows us the
age of individuals, um, that are
impacted by this. Um, so if you
looked at the, uh, the first
slide again, um, men were more
impacted by overdose mortality.
This goes to show the age, so
it's really showing that uh
individuals and sort of working
age, um, that's who's most
impacted by overdose in New
Mexico.
Uh, we see those steep
increases, you know, we have the
the bar that's 15 to 24, and
that steep increase happens at
25 to 34, and you know stay sort
of steady all the way through
folks who are 64 years old,
that's when we start seeing that
drop. Uh, so we can see it
impacts a wide range of folks,
but primarily those folks of
working age.
Um, page 21, I, I know folks
like to see how their counties
specifically are impacted, um,
this shows sort of uh it's a
heat map of death related to um,
substance use, uh, by county,
um, so you could, you could see
there, you know, the the darker
the color, the the the higher
the rate of overdoses.
And then I think this, this last
slide, you know, I, I presented
some some information pretty
sobering information, um, but I
wanted to present this, we
wanted to present this last
slide as sort of that that ray
of hope, but substance use among
high school students, so this is
from the recent uh youth risk
and resiliency study, um, here
on slide 22, that shows
self-reported rates of substance
use, have declining across
All substances, um, you know,
all of these things, including
alcohol, um, have reduced over
this period of time. Um, so I
think, you know.
Um, we, we wanted you to be
aware of that trend among New
Mexico's youth, I think it's
really important uh context
here.
Um,
All right.
So we've seen some data about
Decreasing overdose death rates
and just wanted to run some, you
know, I think the question that
um gets asked is what's
accounting for that, and there
are many things, um, in the
Department of Health. So these
are
More Department of Health
focused, but, um, and, and
across the state, evident the
availability of evidence-based
treatments, um, the availability
of Narcan, which many community
partners have helped with that
distribution and education, um,
harm reduction.
As
Been helpful adulterant checking
programs. We can talk a little
more specifically about these,
the prescription monitoring
program provider education
around overdose and uh opioid
prescribing, monitoring trends,
which is the epidemiology work,
so we can really have focused
intervention, um, increasing
public awareness, um, you see
lots of those campaigns,
coordination of care and
Really focusing on stigma
reduction so we can talk about
this and address. Did you want
to talk about some of the
specific programs.
Uh, sure, so some some of these
specific programs, I think, you
know, looking at naloxone, so I,
you know, Doctor Durham
saidoxone versus an opioid
overdose.
New Mexico has been handing out
naloxone as a state, we're the
first state to actually pass a
law to do it. We've been handing
it out for a long, long time. If
we hadn't been doing that, those
numbers would have been
significantly higher, um,
than they are now, um, it's
without a doubt in my mind, uh,
we would have, you know, a lot
more deaths, uh, just, you know,
to give you an example, uh the
harm reduction program last year
reported something around 3000
successful overdose reversals,
uh, using naloxone.
Uh, so you're thinking about
programs that are successful,
that's one's time proven.
Uh harm reduction program, we've
had that for many years, it's
really an engagement point for
folks who use substances, um.
You know, generally, generally
speaking, folks who use
substances don't want to engage
with healthcare systems for a
variety of reasons, um,
frequently the harm reduction
program is their only engagement
harp and.
A healthcare system, um, so
that's where we can get, we can
do linkage to care, we can do
naloxone distribution, we can do
vaccines, the variety of things
that occur at harm reduction,
um, programs. Um, and we also
do, uh, monitoring for
adulterants. So in 2019, I'll
I'll admit it, we got caught
flat-footed with fentanyl,
right, it came into our drug
supply quick and it came in hard
faster than anything like I said
I've ever seen. Uh, we have the
ability now to monitor
adulterants and harm reduction
programs.
because the legislation passed a
couple of years ago, um, and
that really shows we can really
have a real time sense of what's
happening in our substances, so
we can take a quicker public
health approach. So if we do see
a change like we saw in 2019,
hopefully we can get out in
front of it a lot faster than a
recent success was understanding
Xylazine on the scene.
OK, quick, um, comment on
terminology because you hear
medication assisted treatment or
mat and or medications for
opioid use disorder, MOUD. They
get used interchangeably a lot,
there's just maybe a subtle
difference between these two
terms, um, I think that is the
broader, um, broader, uh.
Um
Used used to refer to
medications, um.
Uh, I'm sorry, but um.
It's a term that's been used for
many years, um, by addiction
professionals talking about
addictions to many medications,
so it it's used um to talk about
medications to treat alcohol use
disorder, um,
And opioid use disorder and even
nicotine sometimes. Um, it is a
treatment approach that often is
talked about, um, combining
counseling with behavioral
therapies.
And then more recently people
have been using MOUD, um, which
is medications for opioid use
disorder, so specific to
opioids, but also, um,
I think it really acknowledges
that the evidence shows that
medications alone are treatment
can be used for treatment. The
counseling, you know, I think
lots of us intuitively feel like
counseling is important. A lot
of times people do have, um,
other behavioral health.
Diagnoses that need to be
addressed and a lot of times
people have other physical um
diseases that need to be
addressed like diabetes and
hypertension. So I think there's
always that I on a, you know,
the best treatment is always a
whole person treatment or, and
even a whole system treatment.
We need to remember that people
need.
Housing and um.
And transportation.
But bottom line for treating
opioid use disorder medications
alone is an evidence-based
treatment or is evidence-based.
Um, there's tons of evidence
that shows that methadone
buprenorphine, and naltrexone
all reduce opioid use. Um, they
increase the likelihood that a
person will remain in treatment.
They lower the risk of overdose
mortality, reduce the risk of
infectious disease transmission,
reduce
Criminal justice system
involvement and increase the
likelihood of employment.
And it really is important to
remember opioid use disorder as
a medical condition.
Um
Then treatments for stimulant
use disorder, more difficult in
that there isn't um a medication
that treats stimulant use
disorder that's more
psychosocial treatments,
including contingency
management, community
reinforcement approaches,
motivational interviewing, and
cognitive behavioral therapy. I
mean, I think there are some
interesting studies that are
being done looking at um.
Psychedelics in the treatment of
both opioid use disorder and,
um, and stimulant use disorder,
but not evidence-based yet.
So, and that is the end of our
presentation. I'll turn it over.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for
allowing me to speak today. My
name is Jeff Bernard. I'm the
commander of the Investigative
Services Division that oversees
our narcotics unit and our gangs
unit. I also serve as the
commander of Region One for the
high intensity drug trafficking
area, um, it's part of a federal
program that we receive funding
for. So just to give you some
preliminary stats for what we're
seeing in that. So Haida, we, we
submit, that's what we call the
high intensity drug trafficking
is Haida. So we submit our
seizures there throughout the
year and multiple agencies do.
Um, I can tell you preliminary
numbers for 2024, we had over.
I want to say 3 million pills
that we recovered and 22 kg of
fentanyl powder, um, and that
gives you a perspective, that's
just what we recovered, not all
agencies are reporting to hide
it, even my own agency, we don't
report everything. That's
basically what our narcotics
unit is reporting that our gangs
unit that's part of my division.
Additionally to that, I can tell
you that talking with our crime
lab personnel, we had over
300 incidents of where at least
5000 fentanyl pills were tagged
into evidence on different cases
throughout the year. So that
tells you the quantity that
we're seeing out there on a day
to day basis.
Um
With what the Department of
Health has done, we've had the
utilize some of those things
ourselves. So all of our
officers just due to exposures
themselves or things that they
come into contact with carry
Narcan, so we're prepared to
deal with that assist the
community as needed. And if we
unfortunately come into any of
that ourselves, we can
administer that, which has had
to happen on a couple of rare
occasions, but one is too many
and that kind of instance, um.
One of the other trends that
we're seeing with.
and all it's kind of unique is
we're seeing a lot more drug
trafficking, so to speak, I'll
call it low level drug
trafficking in instances where I
would say that the idea is not
necessarily to make money off of
it, but to support one's habit,
and it, it tends to affect our
most vulnerable communities. So
you can go along certain areas
and people will be selling 5,
1015 pills at a time to other
people in that area, trying to
support their own habit for the
things that are going on. Um.
We also tend to see these things
escalate in more violence
probably because there's more
trafficking and a lot more
unknown, so some of the ways
this has changed is we see the
People will go online, not have
any idea who they're dealing
with, they'll meet with people,
um, to buy these drugs through
different social media apps, and
that's unfortunately turned into
some bad instances with um
called drug reps, things of that
nature that have been, we've had
homicides resolve that way.
We've had several shootings
result that way, so the impact
is more than just drug usage. We
definitely see it affecting our
violent crime as a whole.
Um
In addition to that,
fortunately, we're not seeing a
lot of youth using it, but we
are seeing trends that they're
trying to involve more youth, so
one of the recent trends we've
seen is having multicolored
fentanyl pills, hoping that that
will attract different youth and
things like that. So, we've
actually had drug dealers tell
us that that's the intent behind
utilizing those kind of things.
So they're really trying to
market this out there to
everybody. I don't have anything
further I can talk about
multiple um
Statistics that you guys may be
aware of or some anecdotal
things that we see on a day to
day basis with our things, but
I'm open for any questions.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. So just on
that last point, um, you
described this high intensity
area that I think you're
responsible for, what part, what
is this uh part of Albuquerque,
what part of Albuquerque are we
talking? So consists of
Albuquerque and some other areas
in that. There's part of
Sandoval County, there's some
small areas in there. There's
multiple regions throughout the
state. So Haida is a statewide
initiative. Um, we have members
from basically every agency. So
from Las Cruces example, Chief
Story sits on the board and
represents that region.
Thank you very much. All right,
many members, questions? Anyone
begin?
Uh, Senator, Senator O'Malley,
is that a him?
Stewart, yes.
my sister and then Senator
Stewart, and then Senator
O'Malley, you'll think about it,
right? Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, presenters.
the education, the um.
In terms of the the prosecution
of
Fentanyl pills went up.
You have a policy, when do you,
when do you turn it over to the
federal prosecutors or when you
go with the local prosecutors.
an amount or a circumstance.
Yeah, so there there's an amount
that we use that makes it, um,
or we turn it over to federal
prosecutors, but in all honesty,
the truth is that we often have
a rest greater than that I'm out
very often in the federal
prosecutors just don't have
enough resources to take all
those cases, so many of those
are ended up being charged at
the state level, including
issues where, so the federal
prosecutors, they have a statute
that magnifies it if they're
armed while they're dealing
drugs. We don't have anything
like that here. So even a lot of
those cases we can't turn over
to the federal prosecutors, even
though we're seeing them, uh,
utilizing
firearms in the trafficking.
And, and then as far as you
know, I was spending all
trafficked in the.
In the homeless community, like.
Someone would give
Homeless person, say 100 pills
and they keep 10 and sell 90 or
how does that, how, how have
you, what have you learned about
that? So, so we'll see multiple
things on that, like, we'll see
some um unsheltered population
that have like 2025 pills on
them, they'll go sell 5, 1015,
you know, to anyone in that
area, we'll see it a lot of the
bus stops, things of that
nature, um, and then we'll have
like another kind of still low
level drug trafficking
incidents, but you'll have
people that stay in hotels off
that area, so we'll make
arrangements to go buy narcotics
from some people, they'll.
They'll accept the money,
they'll go to a hotel real
quick, they'll get the purchase
from them, and they'll bring
that back and sell it to us at
that point in time, so there's
multiple ways that it goes on,
but we, we do see, um, it's very
prevalent in that community.
Thank you and and uh.
And the pills themselves, what
is the range of dosage? Are they
all the same or they're they're
different?
So what I can say is I know that
recently, um, the DEA did a
study on that, and I'm sorry,
Mr. Chan represented myestus, I
apologize for not doing that in
the first place. Um, so from
studies that they've seen,
they've seen fentanyl pills with
as low of a dosages like 0.04 mg
and as high as like 5.2 mg, and
0.2 mg is basically when you're
looking at the possibility of a
lethal dose. So you see a huge
range of that, which can affect
withdrawals and other things all
the way to overdose on the other
end of the spectrum. So because
the process is so inconsistent,
and you have people making these
pills themselves.
The amount of fentanyl in the
pills is, is very much up in the
air.
Lastly, Mr. Chairman, gentlemen,
what, almost just 10 roughly the
market value of 10 pills.
Mr.
Charis, so when we, when you're
buying low quantities, you're
probably seeing the pills
depending on how much influx
there's in the community going
for, uh, $3 to $4 a pill, and
then if you're looking at more
wholesale, you can get down to
in the range of probably 75
cents a pill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
gentlemen. Thank you.
Yeah
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Mention some of the um
In the responses when you take
these, these, this drug, well,
several drugs actually, um.
So in terms of behavior,
You mentioned incidences where
You know, someone would call or,
you know, they get in trouble
because
Um, in or get killed or shot or
whatever because they um, you
know, a deal went bad or
whatever, but does fentanyl, is
that one of the, is, does it
cause I do people become violent
as a result of taking fentanyl.
I don't know if I would say it
makes them any more violent than
any other narcotics that we've
seen, um, in my own personal
experiences, people that are
affected by methamphetamine are
probably the most violent that I
tend to deal with on a normal
basis, but I think that um one
thing I can say from the
experiences I've seen is people
on fentanyl seem to be in that
state more often. So I think
that they don't have time to
recover and think properly, and
they get more desperate, the
more withdrawals they go
through.
OK. And then
Sorry.
OK, I'm sorry.
And, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Malley, I think something that's
also relevant to that is that
the difference between fentanyl
and other substances, that all
has to be taken more frequently
than Blackjar, so you know,
black jar heroin, you see people
inject 3 to 4 times, 5 times a
day.
The fentanyl, you're seeing
folks that are needing to dose
every 30 minutes, hour, so we
might be, you know, that might
um have some what officers, the
commander here said folks might
be experiencing more withdrawals
that shorter half life.
OK.
Uh, what, what is the, what are
you seeing is the long term
effects of, of, of, well, let's
say fentanyl, for example.
Um, in terms of like, um, so I'm
looking at recovery and I think
sometimes we think, well, people
can quit and then, you know,
everything's fine, and they go
on with their lives. Is there
some long term damage in terms
of like their ability to make
decisions. I mean in terms of, I
guess, neurological pathways.
What, what are we talking?
So
Chairman, uh, Senator O'Malley,
it, it is a good question. Um,
and I think the answer is yes.
I'm, I'm not an addiction
medicine expert. Um, I've been
fortunate to mostly uh see
people in primary care, um, who
have recovered well.
But yes.
There there can be
Long-term effects. And I asked
that question because we, a lot
of times we
We want to put a lot of effort
and resources into recovery
programs.
And um
And, and then we, we, I think
it's just generally like, you
know, public, we think, oh,
somebody will go through a
program and then they're, you
know, there's you take, they're
treated and off, you know, they
ride off into the sunset or
something like, and it's not
that way, right? So, um, I just
think it's important that folks
have to remember that, for
example, folks who have uh an
alcohol addiction that takes
many times for them, sometimes
to, to stop drinking alcohol or
smoke.
thinks it's many times,
sometimes, so, um, I think that
My concern a lot of times is
when we think about treatment
that we really have the right
information, um, and, and
realistic about what the
outcomes would be.
Mr. Chairman, Senator O'Malley,
I think it's a good point that
you bring up that, you know,
Having multiple different
options also for people so that
we can really meet people where
they're at, so many open doors
so that we meet people in the
moment that they're ready and
You know, that's gonna look
different for people with
different addictions using
different substances and, um,
at, at different.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for presenting this
data. There's a lot of good
information here and appreciate
you guys pulling that together
and probably a short amount of
time, so we appreciate that.
My first question is with
regards to page 11, um, we
talked about total drug overdose
related visits.
And, uh, I just noticed there
was a little stub note here, uh,
that after 2021, things started
going back down, but slowly, but
that does not include veterans
hospitals or Indian Health
services in this data, so I was
curious as to whether or not.
How that would change the curve,
do we have any information on
Veteran's Hospital data or
Indian Health Service
facilities.
You see the sub note, the 2nd
subnote underneath there.
Oh,
Mr. Chairman, Senator Thornton,
I'd have to get back to you on
that. I don't think we have, um.
Data from the VA or Indian
Health Service.
And the reason I asked the
question, uh, Mr. Chair, is, is
because I just.
looked up some, some data here
that basically
suggested that in 2024.
Certain communities have been
disproportionately affected by
fentanyl, and in fact, it says
here the Alamo Navajo
reservation.
Experience an overdose death
rate of 199 per 100,000.
So
So these numbers might be low.
Compared to what's actually
going on in the state, and so I
was just curious about, uh, that
was one of the reasons why I was
asking about these numbers. The
second question, um, with
respect to page 2.
To, uh, you showed that the high
school students, the amount of
uh
The percentage of, I guess,
substance abuse among high
schools is going down, which is
a good thing. Glad to, glad to
see that. And I was wondering
is, is this through uh public
service announcements, education
at the school, what's happening
to?
Cause it seems to be a dramatic
drop here, fairly, which is in a
short amount of time, which is
good. I'm just curious as to
what's causing that.
At the high school level.
Uh, sure, thank you, Mr. Chair,
uh, Senator Thornton, uh, for
that question. I think it's a
multitude of things, it's not
just one thing it's it's public
messaging. It's people having
family members who they have
seen, uh, you know, go through
uh the cycle. It's, uh, you
know, the investments and
things, um, you know, and, in,
in positive childhood
experiences, so there's, you
know, some really great.
Research that's showing that,
you know, we, we know that
negative childhood experiences
have a really significant impact
on people, but there's a way to
counter that, which is by having
positive childhood experiences.
So if someone has a trusted
adult, you know, good things
happening in their life, um,
maybe.
They can counterbalance that if
we, if we're increasing that,
that could decrease substance
use rates. So, uh, it's not just
one thing, it's, it's all the
things that we're trying to do,
um, in combination that have
that sort of synergistic effect
that, you know, probably is
leading to this deal.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, one
last question, and
for the law enforcement, um.
Do we know where all this
fentanyl is coming from? Do we
have any idea how it's getting
into New Mexico.
Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton, uh,
from the experience that we're
seeing and the seizures that
we're making, we probably see
the largest amounts coming
through Arizona through here and
then the other side, um, through
El Paso through here, those are
probably the two biggest avenues
that we see where we make most
of our seizures.
Thank you for that.
I thought you were gonna say our
southern border.
But you, you did not, so Arizona
and Texas.
Probably gonna they their
southern borders probably coming
from there, so, OK. Thank you
very much. That's all I have,
Mr. J.
I'm sure it does.
Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you guys
both for your time. Commander,
will you just briefly describe
to us what
These traffickers look like
generally speaking, like where,
where are they from? Are you,
are they repeat?
Track of offenders are these the
same guys you're arresting again
and again.
Mr. Chair, Senator Brantly, I
think that the disturbing thing
about this is that it's a wide
range of things, so I mean we,
we have traffickers that will be
young adults, maybe even
teenagers, that we'll see that
are using social media to
traffic through people on there
using different apps like
Telegram or um Instagram,
Facebook, even different groups
in that, and then we're going to
have unsheltered population that
are trafficking through there,
will have
People related to cartels that
are trafficking through it, and
then you'll have lower levels
throughout that, which just
people they know. So it's, it's
really a wide array of people.
There's no one demographic that
we're seeing it from, that's the
probably the most dangerous
thing about it is it's so
prevalent everywhere.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Are
many of these traffickers users
themselves?
Mr. Chair, Senator Brantly, yes,
we, we see a lot of them that
are users, so our lower level
traffickers that I was
describing, a lot of that
trafficking from what we're
seeing is probably to support
their own usage. We do have
higher level traffickers that
probably aren't using through
the cartels and things like that
from some of our larger seizures
that aren't using that, but I
would say there's a large influx
of traffickers that are using it
and using trafficking to support
their habit.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I wanted to follow
up a little bit on what Senator
Thornton was saying. Nationally,
it looks like we're having a
decrease in deaths that New
Mexico trend seems to also be
following that, but there, there
isn't a decrease when it comes
to tribal lands and and also
within uh not just Native
American communities, but
African American communities.
Why do you think that is?
Uh,
yeah, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Brantley, good question. Um, I
think there's probably a a lot
to do with access to treatment,
um, um, you know, the, the rural
nature of many of our tribal
communities in New Mexico, um,
that could be uh involved in
that, um, you know, I, I, I
think it really does have to do
with really that that access to
care and treatment from the
public health standpoint at
least. Uh, that's.
That's where I can feel
comfortable speaking to. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I that sounds
like a good answer, but the
reality is we don't have enough
access to treatment.
Throughout New Mexico, certainly
not in all of rural New Mexico.
So it seems like an outlier that
that is interesting when I look
at these.
Statistics, um.
I think this last election
cycle.
It was clear that that fentanyl
and the fentanyl crisis that's
taking over New Mexico, um, is
Concerning and it's a top.
Top priority for New Mexicans.
In fact, I would argue that the
voters sent a mandate to
lawmakers, um, and, and I think
we saw that Mr. Chairman, and
the results of the election. I
think there were a lot of
pre-election promises that were
made specifically on the
presidential campaign that they
were gonna stop fentanyl at the
border, and that message became
very important to New Mexicans
as well, and in fact, I will
tell you in my area and
County
The president won by, you know,
a 3 point margin in an area that
has never, these are far
Democrat voters. In fact, a
majority of them are controlled
by, by Democrat-controlled
tribal lands that voted for a
president, first time in 36
years a Republican that promised
to start cracking down on
Bentanol is to stop this flow at
the border. This is clearly a
crisis that has captured the
attention of a lot of New
Mexicans as it should,
regardless of what our.
Political affiliation is.
But then it falls down to
lawmakers. What are we gonna do?
I had a really good conversation
with um Congressman Ga Vasquez
when he was here, he spent a
little time in my office and we
talked about the technology that
at a federal level they need to
bring in along the port of
entries, and I agree, I think
that's a great bipartisan effort
that they're doing at a federal
level. The question is, what can
we do?
At a state level and, and that
is a question I'm posing for
you, as you come before us.
What can we do? There was a
number of
of bills that we've seen before
us, I mean, we know that, you
know, some of these states have
gone really hard on fentanyl.
Distribution specifically,
Virginia's declared fentanyl is
a weapon of terrorism.
Should we, they've increased
sentencing penalties. We've seen
a lot of proposals to do that. I
think we cannot talk about
increasing penalties without
talking about the need to
increase access.
To treatment facilities in New
Mexico to the credit of the
legislator, I think we're trying
to do that in a rapid late this,
this session.
Texas and Arkansas specifically
Mr. Chairman.
Have included
Uh, laws that require that that
mandate that.
Fentanyl distribution.
That results in death.
Capital murder charges. That's
innovative.
Mr. Chairman
I also think that there's New
Mexico bill floating around here
because one of the most alarming
statistics that you, you went
over was actually on page 20
that is the deaths from fentanyl
overdose.
Not just from the ages of 5 to
14, but 0 to 4.
0 to 4 year olds are dying from
fentanyl exposure. There is a
bill circulating this session.
That would make it exposure to
fentanyl.
Grounds for child abuse.
Wholeheartedly agree with that
because looking at that 0 to 4.
Those are either, you know,
negligent at least.
I would argue that's murder.
Negligent parents who res result
in the murder of their child by
exposing them to fentanyl. I,
I'll wrap up by saying where if
you hadn't ask of legislators,
this session, both from the
Department of Health perspective
and how we make the investments.
And from law enforcement.
What do lawmakers need to do?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Brantly,
I think that question is above
my pay grade, uh, unfortunately,
um, you know, we we're here to
present the sort of the data,
um, and, and what we're doing as
far as um you know, what, what,
what's been working for public
health. I, I think it's really
up.
So you all make those hard
decisions, um, you know, and and
take this data that we provided,
um, and, and, you know, look at
the different approaches,
because I think there's, you
know, there's no one, there's no
one single answer. I think it's
a lot of different areas working
together, um, and I, you know,
I, I don't want to, you know,
give specific asks or anything
like that, uh, given the
complexity of the issue.
Mr. Chairman, before we go to
the lawmakers to be clear to the
appropriators, you don't have an
ass.
Ah,
Uh,
mister, uh, Chair, Senator
Brantly, I am not involved in
the appropriation process at the
Department of Health, so I can't
intelligently answer that
question. That's, that's a fair
enough answer. They're over in
the finance room, I'm sure with
plenty,
Mr. Cha, Senator Brantley. From
my perspective, I think that we
need to attack this on multiple
fronts, um, you know, from a law
enforcement perspective, we have
to understand there's a
difference between people that
are trafficking amounts to
support their own habit and are
themselves addicted to victims,
but then.
Also understand that there's
people that are out there making
a lot of money trafficking this
drug and harming a lot of
people. Um.
And then I think that we have to
understand the violence that
comes along with this. There's
an element of danger that people
bring into this when they bring
a firearm to them, to a drug
deal, right, that brings it a
recipe for disaster. You just
need a small argument and then
all of a sudden people are
getting shot over those
instances. So I think that
Almost like with the federal
side, especially since they
can't take many of our cases, we
should strongly consider um
utilizing a firearm and sort of
trafficking incident, um, as
A separate charge or an
amplification of current
charges. Uh, in, in addition to
that, I think on our side of
things we see a lot of options
that have become available for
short-term treatment with
people. Um, a lot of our low
level users when they get
arrested for something like
possession or a small amount of
trafficking will divert them to
a Leeds program where they can
get help, they're not
necessarily going to go to jail
as long as they follow through
with that program. A lot of
these things are short term, uh,
detox centers we send people to,
they're very short term, so
ultimately we end up having to
deal with the same person in the
same situation.
multiple times. I don't think
there's a lot of long-term
options available for people
right now in this community, and
coming from Albuquerque, I'm
sure we have more resources than
most of the communities in the
state. So I think as a whole we
need to do better on that front.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate this panel. I think
you guys brought a very good
balance of addressing the
criminal activity and, and where
we need to target really our
worst offenders, especially when
it comes to to those who are
distributing fentanyl and
hurting others by the thousands
and also a very important piece
of that, and that is determining
the root cause of this of use
and how we help those that are
dependent upon the substance
that's killing New Mexicans, but
I, I very much appreciate your
time.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
putting the panel together. Uh,
thank you Mr. Chairman and
We spent 2 hours this morning in
the Senate Finance Committee
talking about.
3 bills that are incredibly
important that I think are.
Moving in a direction that
you're asking for Senator
Brantly. Senate bills 12, and 3.
The funding piece, but it's also
a whole new behavioral health
framework.
Uh, and the courts have stepped
up in a big way, it's kind of
all three branches talking
together, but it's a $200
million immediate investments
and a billion dollar trust fund.
And I just think
Access to treatment as Senator
Brantly says is critical,
because we're not going to
incarcerate our way out of an
addiction problem. I think
commander, you're saying exactly
that. Yet there's a distinction
between those that are addicted
and in this cycle who need to
get help, and those that are
trafficking and are elevating
and, and again, I'm open to
looking at
Different potential penalties
for, you know, those that are
the worst that are exposing
folks and we've heard stories, I
think up in the, in Espanola,
the court's Corrections
Committee, you know, cartel
using 12 year olds.
to distribute these pills. It's
just horrific.
Uh
But I guess I just wanted to
respond cause I think Sander
Brantley is spot on. I mean, the
treatment piece is a huge part
of it, but it integrates in with
the public safety piece and
we're going to see that coming
over from, from the house in
terms of the criminal competency
bill, it's getting diversion.
places where they can get into
the treatment, not just short
term, but work their way out of
the system, so.
I'm encouraged that that's
happening and we're doing it
kind of on expedited.
basis, but it's super helpful
just to hear.
Kind of what it looks like.
Both from the statistics, but
also you're living it day to
day. We're all living it, quite
frankly, because we're seeing it
everywhere.
Uh, so, again, I think it is as
policymakers.
We're the ones that need to come
forward with solutions and I'm
just encouraged, it feels like
there's actually bipartisan
effort here.
To deal with this access to
treatment, but also to deal with
the public safety piece, because
you can't, you also can't just
pass a whole bunch of bills if
there's no place to get these
folks.
Into treatment, so it kind of
works hand in hand. So just a
couple of thoughts. Yeah, thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
to our our leader ever the
diplomat, and I appreciate that,
but um I do want to thank um uh
Senator Brantley for helping me
with my argument for reducing
gun violence. That's my bill
coming up. Thank you.
Thanks, everyone. Uh, there are
9 bills now pending before the
legislature this session to deal
with fentanyl. So this is an
opportunity for this committee
to maybe get our arms around
this. The one thing that it's
been pretty clear as we begun to
put more and more focus on
public safety and crime over the
last year in the interim is the
answer to me always seems to lie
in the data, and we have ample
amounts of data, and I
appreciate you all sharing that
with us today, the, the answers
and the solutions almost become
self-evident to me once we start
looking at that that data.
and that's to your point on my
colleagues over here to my
right, of the recognition that a
lot of this is about resources
and treatment and making sure
that those resources exist. I
wanted to just with the data
that you've given us, take a
little bit of time to emphasize
just briefly.
few of things that stood out to
me. First of all, I think at the
beginning of the presentation, I
believe you said there were 3
deaths on average a day that
you're attributing to uh
fentanyl overdose.
That was that, did I hear that
correctly?
Mr. Chairman, um, that's total
drug overdoses, so not just
unique to fentanyl. Understood,
but that's, that's statewide in
on a daily basis.
So you do some quick math. I
mean, we should recognize the
crisis that we're dealing with
here, particularly when we, we
rightfully are concerned with
homicide rates and any number of
other crime rates, but, but
those kind of overdose deaths on
a daily basis and the response
that requires from law
enforcement, um, medical
examiners,
hospitals, doctors are the
resources that we're committing
to this problem, maybe quietly,
that we're not maybe always
aware of, I think it's important
to emphasize that. The, if you
look at your slide on page 17, I
just, I'm gonna go through this
real quickly. You've got this,
the top 10 substances and drug
overdose deaths. What's not
listed, um, but, but sort of
here is I see you've got acute
alcohol, which is important, I
think, cause it's important for
us, I think always to recognize
the alcohol component in.
Drug abuse, um, and I see that
there. I don't see any
identification for marijuana,
and, and I, when I was looking
through the slides and other uh
what you described, I think as
Polysubstance use, um, I, I, in
looking at the statistics, I
don't see marijuana anywhere in
here. Do you, do you all just
not track marijuana as a
polysubstance, I realized that
marijuana is not going to be the
cause of an overdose death, but
it's relationship to some to
somebody who's using multiple
substances at a time.
Uh, yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair.
That's a pretty good point. Um,
when it comes to how the data
comes to us. We're talking about
we're involved in the mortality
itself. So that the actual, um,
the actual drug itself was.
it was a causative factor in
that reason we don't see
cannabis in that is because
cannabis mortality, um, you
know, I, I, I, I'm, I'm not
sure. I can't believe to speak
to that specifically, uh, but it
would not be in that top 10
substances of overdose death
maybe Doctor Durham, No, I, I
was just gonna say that this is
the top 10, we can certainly ask
the team whether where cannabis
falls on that list. I'm assuming
that you get this data by an
autopsy.
Um, and a drug screen, right,
that's performed at the time of
autopsy and so I guess my
question, right, and well, I
realized you're never going to
have a death due to marijuana
use, I'm trying to understand to
what degree it contributes as a
polys substance abuse, uh, and
so if there's an autopsy, are
you screening for marijuana, uh
presence at the time of the
autopsy.
Yeah, Mr. Chairman, we'll get
back to you with that. Thank
you. And then, um, let's see,
the
Slide 19 interested me some.
Uh, particularly because if you
just do some quick math, if you
look at the substances involved
in fentanyl drug overdose
deaths, I guess, um, it make, it
makes sense that if you're
combining the fentanyl plus plus
meth or fentanyl plus other. You
got about 84% of the deaths are
going to involve fentanyl, uh,
as opposed to just fentanyl
alone. That's why I'm getting to
really curious about this
polysubstance notion, right?
What, what are they using with
the fentanyl, because um it
seems that if we're trying to
combat fentanyl use, we try and
also combat the poly.
Substances, right? So that means
alcohol, uh, abuses or or
marijuana abuses or other things
too, so maybe, maybe doing those
things in in conjunction. Um,
the slide 21 which interests me
a little bit, uh, it gets to
Senator Brantley's point. This
is a pretty interesting slide to
look at the geographic
distribution of drug overdose
deaths.
Um
It's not, it's, it's hard for me
and I I don't want to go out too
far on a limb here, but it's
hard to not see that slide as
somewhat correlative to uh
political, um, and, um, other
maybe factors. And that's hard
to not, uh, maybe it's, maybe
it's not a fair thing to
associate the two, but if I look
at the
Uh, southern parts of the state,
which presumably are supposed to
be where we're supposed to
seeing these uh uh substances
coming through, right, or or
even from the western part of
the state, you said coming from
Arizona. That's not where you
have the overdose deaths. Now, I
assume that uh you're not,
you're adjusting these and these
are just in raw numbers, then,
is that right? So they're not,
they're not, they're not
adjusted for population.
Uh, Mr. Chair, the, this map is
actually rates, so this is
adjusted for population, OK, so
that's, that's important for me
to understand. So, um, that,
that, that's pretty interesting
to me is that even when you're
adjusting for population, you're
seeing much less overdose death
on frankly, the southern and
eastern parts of the state just
generally speaking, right, and
you're saying, uh, the highest
incidence of the deaths in uh
San Miguel, Torrance Rio Riba
and then uh more so maybe in
Bernalillo Santa.
Taosmora Socorro Sierra, that
corridor, I guess is what we
would probably think about it
as, um, and, and the rural parts
of the state, um, much less so
and.
And even Donana County somewhat
unusually to me, a low rate, uh,
again, adjusted for population,
so that that map uh interested
me quite a bit, particularly
with the point Senator Brantley
was making with regard to the
Navajo Nation. I think if
you're, you were seeing that
part of the state, McKinleyebola
County, some, some pretty high
adjusted rates too.
Uh, slide 22 was interesting, I
think the point was made, but I
think it's worth bearing again
the decline.
Uh, if you look at cannabis use
for
High school students
Pretty interesting to me, you've
got that almost going from about
30% in 2019 to getting close to
maybe half that, uh, so it's a
very substantial decline in
marijuana use, right, by high
schoolers. I'm surprised by
that.
And and um I I appreciate the
thinking that, well, maybe
that's based on any number of
different factors in my mind,
I'm wondering whether um the
saturation that we have of
marijuana accessibility,
availability, dispensaries in
the state, is maybe a, a
counter, uh, to use, and that
may seem I I may be way out
there, uh, in, into some
uncharted territory or just my
imagination, but I've got to
tell you, um, when I was young
and uh in college.
and I'll not go into too much
detail, but, but part of the
part of the part of the part of
the interest was the uh the
Unavailability, right? The
thrill of getting away with
something that was illegal at
the time, and now there's a
dispensary on every street
corner everywhere, and in my
mind, that may, in some
respects, make it less of a
thrill for, uh, you, but for
whatever reasons we're seeing a
really marked decrease in
marijuana use in a 30 day period
of her high schoolers and I'd
love to know what the reason for
that is and then we're seeing
kind of a similar, but not, not
so sharp decline in cocaine use.
Um, and, or actually, I should
say pain medications. The others
all seem to be on a decline, but
it's pretty marginal, right? You
went from about 5% use.
In a 30 day period among high
schoolers to maybe 1 or 2 or 3%.
But um in terms of prescription
medications, you're going from
about 10% in a 30 day use to
maybe half that or getting close
to half that, so that's, that's
pretty interesting, and I, it'd
be good for us to figure out why
and how that's happening and if
that's a good thing, how, you
know, we're accomplishing that,
whether it's a public
information or not.
Uh, I, the one thing that we
haven't really touched on more
than just a little bit is the
one of the targets, of course,
has been violent crime and crime
in New Mexico and I think that's
why this presentation was
important. I want to thank you,
commander, and all of you for
doing this on short notice, you
because you're on the front
lines and um and that's very
meaningful to us, and we
appreciate that, that when we're
combating crime that you're,
that you're taking this
component into consideration. It
sounds like very thoughtfully,
so thank you for that.
Anyone else? Committee members,
Nurse Stewart, you had a
question or two. We're down to
you if you want to follow up on
anything.
Like
You've already asked
But I'll just, I'll just say the
three questions. How is it
manufactured? Where is it
manufactured? Uh, how do we stop
it? There was something else.
Where is it coming from?
Fentanyl. Did you answer all of
those? Nope. Try it again.
Um, chairman, Senator Stewart.
Um
I think at this point, the
majority of methamphetamine is
manufactured in Mexico.
Um, as is fentanyl.
But how, how is it manufactured?
I mean, I, I've heard that it's
easy to manufacture, um, that it
doesn't take very much
substances. I don't know what's
in it, um, but so is it really
that easy and can anybody throw
together a bunch of fentanyl
pills.
And where did they get the stuff
from and what's in it?
Sorry, I've just talked to all
these law students and I'm very
blabby.
Um, the, the precursors do come
from uh and I think some of this
is changing, but, um, have come
from China to Mexico,
manufactured in Mexico and then
imported into the US.
Uh, and Mr. Chair, Senator, I, I
also want to add that there is
an effort to for folks to
manufacture those precursor
chemicals on their own.
Um, that's that that cartels are
trying to do.
Um, you know, I think some of
the
Uh I I'm not a chemist, so I
can't answer exactly
specifically what chemicals and
everything, um, but the
manufacturing process is
It's pretty simple. I mean, you
don't have to be a PhD, uh, you
know, organic chemist to um to
manufacture these things. If you
have the right ingredients, it's
easy to put together.
And it's my last question, Mr.
Chairman, and is it coming
mostly through?
Uh, the normal.
truck truck cars, etc. from
Mexico. Isn't it just coming
through the borders.
Mr. Cha, Senator Stewart, so
Like I explained earlier for us,
most of the fin all that comes
directly to New Mexico, we see
coming through Arizona or Texas,
however, um, our understanding
is most of that is coming
through cartels through Mexico
that goes through other borders,
and then we just see it from
here and then we, it gets
distributed through multiple
areas there. So like even within
the state, you know, we'll see
um large amounts come to
Albuquerque and then from there,
you'll see it get distributed to
other communities in that area.
You'll have people that will
come down here frequently from
different areas, they'll
Buy wholesale versions from
people here, and then they'll
take it back to their
communities, or we'll see large
amounts that get trafficked
throughout the rest of the
country. Probably, I don't know,
I wanna say 3 months ago we had
An incident where someone was
coming through, they're coming
from.
Arizona, they came to a bus stop
up here in Albuquerque. They
were having suitcases delivered
to a place in Colorado, um, and
this turns out to be related to
a cartel investigation that was
going on. Basically in these
suitcases, there was about
300,000 fentanyl pills, um, and
we just got fortunate that the
person that was delivering that
was a little bit uneasy and the
clerk at the bus station scared
him off and he left the
suitcases there, which recovered
that, so it just goes to show
you how it really comes in and
then goes.
throughout the entire country.
Wow, that's a lot of pills.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
said it brightly.
Mr. Chairman, to follow up on
your point, I too was kind of
scratching my head when it came
to the figures on 21 and 22. I
looked at the New Mexico youth
and resilience survey, it says
on here that participation in
the survey is voluntary and so
many parents or students may
not, may elect not to take this
survey at all, I would say then
that probably skepticism of
government may have geographic
concentrations, uh, uh, you
know, our information is only as
great as the data, but that may
also be in
you yourself as a skeptic?
CR County had a high return
rate.
Um, just one last question for
the commander. What, what in, in
your experience, what level of
seizure results in a prosecution
all the way through a
conviction.
Mr. Chair it really just depends
on, on the quantity. I would say
that a lot of the possession use
never gets prosecuted, um, for
one reason or the other, they
get into some sort of substance
abuse program or leads or they
get diverted through some other
way. Um, and then as far as the
trafficking goes.
That will get prosecuted on the
state level at a high rate on
the federal level, I would say
that they just don't have the
ability to take very many of our
cases, so it's not very
prevalent at all. So mostly, um,
and with regard to personal
possession, are there instances
just as a matter of practice in
your experience, is there a
personal possession amount that
just doesn't even result in an
arrest.
So as, as a whole for our
department, we believe in
getting people the resources
they need. So, um, that doesn't
necessarily mean an arrest, like
I said, so that they could get
um
detained, and then if they're
willing to go through a lead
program, which is what we
generally use for us, then they
won't be arrested. They'll be
given contact information to go
through that program. Um, in
general, we're probably talking
about like less than 15 pills on
that, once we start seeing an
excess of that, we generally
charge traffic, you know on our
end. But when you're seeing, say
up to 15 pills, you're seeing
that as a personal use that does
not resulting in a in a criminal
charge.
It depends on their willingness
to, um, go on to some of the
diversion programs. So if
they're willing to go into a
diversion program that at times
it will result in an arrest for
us.
Thank you.
All right. Anyone else? Last
questions. Thank you again. I
appreciate we did give you a
short notice, but I thought it
was important with the
legislation that's coming up in
front of us to hear from you
today. So thank you for that.
Thanks, um, to the committee
putting it together.
We'll turn our attention to
Senate Bill 21, 22 together.
Underworth.
Senator Worth, take us down
memory lane to our last meeting
where we left things off where
we're picking up and how you
expect to guide us through uh
the two bills together, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that with me today,
um.
Jonas Armstrong from New
Mexicovironment Department and
Shelley Lamon, who's the bureau
chief.
Uh, so on Monday, we kind of
went through the Senate bill.
21 so.
Just as a reminder, that's the
primacy.
Uh, Bill, we also gave an
overview of Senate Bill 22, but
because that sub was delivered.
Um, Monday morning, we wanted to
wait to go through the specifics
in that sub before.
Uh, we then considered putting
the two of them together and
there is a combined sub. It's a
little bit.
Complicated, but I think it's
important to go through the 22
sub first, uh, because again,
that's the separate.
That's the separate bill and
Emily's making copies of that 22
sub. Uh it's 0.230459.3. So let
me just give a quick
Kind of reminder of where we are
and then.
Walk through the substitute
changes from the original 22, so
you can get a sense of.
What we're doing here and then I
think what, what I'd like to do
is
The actual vote to be taken on a
combined bill that's 21 and 22,
uh, the two bills put together,
they both are related to the
same area primarily.
So, um, again in 22, there's two
prongs to the bill to the Senate
Bill 22, 1 that protects surface
water and the other protecting
groundwater on the surface water
protections are for the gaps
that are created as a result of
the Sacket decision, about 95%
of the water in New Mexico.
Uh, on the groundwater
provision, the bill provides
authority to enemy to hold
polluters responsible for
groundwater pollution and soil
contamination that threatens
groundwater but does not rise to
the level where federal law
kicks in and and we have federal
super fund.
So, what I'd like to do, Mr.
Chair, is just walk through the
changes in the substitute and
then certainly I think probably
makes sense to have public
comment again on the specifics
of 22.
Um, if that's how you'd like to
proceed.
I think there senator is going
to be that we don't have the
committee set for 22 yet, I know
we're out making copies of it
right now.
But, um, in the absence of being
able to have that in front of
us, are you able to I think we
do have the combined bill. And
so if you could maybe use the
combined bill as your reference
for 22, maybe point us to what
pages that we see the beginning
of 22, that's if that works, um,
and, and that I, I know your
goal was to have us look at the
committee itself for 22 in
isolation and thinking that
might be easier, but we don't
have it, um, so I think it'd be
easier for us to work from what
we do have. I that, is that
gonna work? the only problem is
that I, I've got all the page.
is to the sub for 22 because it
got definitions and things all
got put together the 2020, the
21 and 22 sub is basically the
two pieces put together, uh,
mechanically, and so I, I
probably should have explained
that better to to your staff,
but I know Emily's making
copies. Now, why don't I just,
why don't I go through the list
of changes, and then we can
reference the specific pages
once that comes back. Uh, so the
first change in the substitute
for 22.
Yes Mr. Chair, if I may, this is
59.3.
Yes, uh, 230459.3 exactly.
And that's the
substitute for Senate Bill 22.
Correct, that's right. And we
have good, good. So that's
perfect timing. Thank you. Thank
you, Emily.
That's probably good for me to
have one too.
Uh, so the first change was to
amend a few of the defined terms
in section one. The definitions
are on page 2 and go through
page 11, uh, the purpose of
those changes was to align the
federal Clean Water Act and the
Comprehensive Environmental
Response Compensation and
Liability Act, CERCLA, which is
known as the Superfund law. So
that's the definitional changes
are, uh, in pages 2 through 11.
Uh, the next change is a
separation of powers concern
that was raised by some
stakeholders, including the
cattle growers about giving too
much legislative authority to a
rule-making body.
So in section 2e, page 12, line
9.
Uh, we removed the language
regarding responsible party
liability.
Rather than directing the water
quality control commission to
adopt rules that are in line
with the Federal Superfund law,
the substitute includes a new
section 9 laying out these
provisions in statute.
And Mr. Chair, one other thing
in terms of process I should
just note is that Senator
O'Malley's request, we did hand
out a markup, a copy that
explains both sides and, and
that shows what came in and what
came out of both subs.
Um, the next changes are in
section 3.
First, the proposed sub removes
the existing language in section
3F, page 22, line 22 regarding
public notice and replaces it
with new subsections F and G
that deal with public notice
provisions for ground and
surface water separately. Uh,
this is on pages 23 line.
24 through 26. I'm sorry.
Page 23 starting on line 24
through a line 14 on page 26.
The next change, Mr. Chair, is
in section 3L, as we discussed
on Monday, there's a significant
concern about surface water
discharge fees, uh, on page 28,
line 10.
Uh, the substitute bill like the
substitute on on Senate Bill 21
uses the word support rather
than pay to indicate that the
legislature does not intend the
state surface water permitting
program to be fully funded with
fees and plans to provide some
general fund support. Of course,
that's the discussion in Senate
Finance.
Uh, on page 32 through page 34,
Section 3U and 3V, we've made
the exemptions in the bill
mirror the Clean Water Act
exemptions.
Uh, on page 34, lines 21 through
23.
In section 4, we added language
to the water quality management
fund statute to allow the fund
to receive appropriations and
other sources of revenue.
Last year we appropriated $7
million to this fund or NMED to
start building this surface
water permitting program.
We knew it was a multi-year
process.
The concern is that without the
change in the fun language, the
money would revert. And so we
want to make sure that that
money we've appropriated is
there to help build out this
this program.
On page 36, lines 3 through 4,
section 5 of the substitute did
not appear in the original bill.
We added this section to amend
the Water Quality Act to clearly
state that NMED has authority to
respond to, investigate, and
remediate groundwater pollution.
Uh, also in section 5,
subsection K has been amended.
This is on page 40, lines 9
through 13 to direct penalties
and other money collected from
surface water violations to the
water quality management fund,
uh, penalties currently go to
the general fund. I think we
discussed that also in Senate
Bill 21 on Monday.
And the final thing, Mr. Chairs
in section 8, section 80, the
original bill has been deleted,
uh,
We remove the appropriation and
severability sections from the
bill, the original bill included
a $50 million appropriation to
get started on cleaning up
groundwater and soil water
contamination, uh, the the
governor has included this
amount in her budget, um,
And the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee chair recently
announced his support for the
funding, but this is a funding
issue that's got to be worked
out and House Bill 2. It doesn't
need to be in Senate Bill 2. I
think that would be stripped
anyway if we came over to Senate
Finance. So those are the
changes to the substitute in
Senate Bill 22. Again, there's
been a lot of.
Input as the bill has moved
along, I think there's certainly
going to be a lot more chance
for input, um.
And so really that's what 22
does and we're happy to stand
for.
Questions.
Indicated to you, I thought it
would be useful to give again an
opportunity with regard because
the uh sub for 22 was delivered
very shortly before our last
meeting, so I thought it would
be a fair to have another
opportunity for, for uh
supporters and opponents to be
heard on the specifics of 22.
Uh, I have, in terms of, do we
have a support.
Support here.
OK, and opposition.
Also, right.
Is the um so in support centeror
we have speaking and support,
um.
Uh, Governor Harry Antonio
Junior with the Pueblo of
Laguna, by Zoom, I believe, and
then Cisco, uh Gura with Los
Rios runners also by Zoom, I
believe, and then, uh, Adrian
Angulo.
And Carlos Matutes, I believe,
are, are these all part of your
organized presentation?
Mr. Chair, that's correct. All
right, good. And before we get
to that, then on the uh those
who've registered to speak in
opposition, is there an
organized, is there a
coordinated spokesperson?
On that.
Right, see down, then we'll,
we'll go through those who've
signed up in opposition. The
organizations who has to be
recognized and support, I'll
just read through those Alianza
Agritura that house,
American rivers, amigos Bravos,
Audubon Southwest Communities
for Clean Water Conservation
voters of New Mexico, farm to
table.
Resource information project.
Green Latinos, Hispanics
enjoying camping, hunting and
outdoors.
Interfaith, power and light, New
Mexico Ase Association, New
Mexico Food and Agriculture
Policy Council, New Mexico Wild,
protecting Mexico waters, Rocky
Mountain Farmers Union,
sovereign Energy, Sierra Club,
the Samia Project, Trout
Unlimited, Western Environmental
Law Center and Western Resource
advocates, those are the groups
who support the uh Senate Bill
22. Senator Werth, I'll turn to
you with the recognized speakers
and we'll recognize you for a
total of 10 minutes for you to.
as you wish, I think there's 4
that are there, so we, and I
think we're starting with the
guy who's on Zoom.
We don't have audio.
Governor, can you hear me?
Go ahead.
Governor
Uh, this is a hell of Laguna
Governor Harry Antonio Junior.
Yes, Governor, we can hear you,
but you're gonna need to speak
up just a little bit as best you
can so we can hear you faintly.
OK, can you hear me now? Better,
yes, sir. Thank you. OK, thank
you. Uh, Chairman Cervantes, uh,
majority Leader Wirth, and
senators. I am Governor Harry
Antonio Junior from the Pueblo
of Laguna.
Uh, passing SB 21 and SB 22 is a
top legislative priority for
Laguna, achieving this goal is
essential to begin to
re-establish surface water
protections that have ensured
clean water for generations.
Since the US Supreme Court
eliminated federal protection of
intermittent intermittent
surface waters over 93% of our
streams, and now unprotected
against pollution. Uh, the bill
does not impose new regulation
of industry, agriculture, or
municipal users. It simply
restores protections that have
existed for over 50 years for
the benefit of all New Mexicans.
We strongly urge you to approve
these bills and move them
forward to ensure clean water
for our ceremonies, agriculture,
and use for future generations
of the Laguna people.
And Asacus and all of our
neighbors. Thank you.
Thank you, Governor. Thank you,
uh, for honoring us today, uh,
yes, we do. I didn't realize we
had the secretary here,
Secretary Kenny, so I'd like to
yield to him next if I could and
keep track of our time because
we'll certainly work within that
time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, members of the committee, I
appreciate being in front of
you, appreciate the hard work of
the leaderworth and the the team
here that's been in the
committee multiple times. Um,
Mr. Chair, one of the things
that I just wanted to highlight
for you, something that hasn't
been discussed a lot in watching
these hearings, which is that
Currently, the way the Supreme
Court has decided what waters of
the US are or mostly aren't.
Leaves New Mexico, dischargers
vulnerable, meaning there's been
a uh institutional handoff.
Between the Clean Water Act and
the Resource Conservation
Recovery Act, known as the
Hazardous Waste Act.
To the extent that a permit is
not required because the waters
are not protected, those
dischargers that we know today
that are truly wastewater
dischargers.
are potentially subject to the
hazardous waste Act
requirements. By adopting and
passing this bill, we can, as a
state put those requirements
back in place, but in theory,
any citizens who could be
brought today saying that these
discharges are putting hazardous
waste into non-waters of the US.
So I think there's certainty
that we can bring through this
bill, and I appreciate your
consideration of uh 21 and 22.
Thank you.
Mm
Uh, you had next to Cisco
Guerrera.
Los Rios River runners, I think
by zoom, is that right?
Yes, yes. Can you hear me.
Mr. Chairman and committee
members, I'm here to speak in
support of Senate Bill 22.
My name is Francisco Antonio
Guevara.
I'm a multi-generational native
northern New Mexican.
I'm president of New Mexico
River Outfitter Association and
owner and operator of Los Rios
River Runners, New Mexico's
oldest, most experienced rafting
company. We are entering our
fifty-third year of offering
rafting adventures.
The rafting industry as a whole
brings in
Approximately $20 million in
revenue each season.
We are one of the largest
employers in Taos County.
The economic backbone of New
Mexico is tied directly to our
water.
Outdoor recreation businesses
like my river rafting company.
Agriculture and drinking water
supply all rely on healthy,
clean waterways.
Our natural resources are vital
economic assets.
But they are also fragile.
With no state permitting program
our rivers and streams are open
to pollution from industrial
runoff, sewage, and chemicals,
endangering everything from
local businesses to our homes.
Clean water is essential to my
business. Without it, I don't
have a viable product to sell.
Colorado irrigators can take
over 90% of the Rio Grande.
If we don't protect what's left,
we are risking our livelihoods,
health, and happiness.
Our precious water must be
protected, not only for reasons
previously stated, but also for
the other aspects of our rivers
and streams.
They are important places of
ceremony and spiritual
connection and rejuvenation.
Please do the right thing and
protect our threatened
waterways.
Senate Bill 22 will establish a
permitting program for the many
waterways that are no longer
federally protected. Please pass
this important piece of
legislation that will protect
businesses like mine.
Um
Are you still guiding on the
charma?
I don't know if you can hear me.
Cisco's taking me down to Chama
a couple of times with the
family and watching him make a
cake on a riverbed in a campsite
is pretty impressive, so he
makes, makes a pretty good,
pretty good cake dessert. I
can't remember what it is, uh,
Adrian Angulo.
Tierra.
Look,
uh, when I start this, uh, Senor
Cervantes, a chair, senators.
Uh, my name is Adrian Angulo
from Nota Tierra Conservation
Project,
a standing and proud support of
Senate Bill 22.
Um, I live in the South Valley
in Albuquerque. Um, I go to work
every day to ensure that
historically and deliberately
excluded communities, not only
have access to the outdoors, the
rivers, uh, but that our voices,
stories, values are reflected in
public land and water, uh
decisions.
With rising food costs, many
Mexicans across the state, um,
are turning to
Local solutions like farm share
programs, local agriculture,
community agriculture that rely
heavily on clean water or Ase
communities also rely uh
increasingly more and more
unclean water, um, so we need
clean water and clean rivers,
over 90% of our state waters are
at risk after federal rollbacks
of the Clean Water Act, this
legislation will create an
oversight program to create to
protect and ensure quality for
those same waters.
That are no longer federally
protected.
Uh, New Mexico waters are
critical to our lives, culture,
but also to our economic way of
life, so there's a lot of return
on investment for that too.
Uh, that's more your language.
So please uh ask this piece of
legislation and uh thank you so
much for giving me the
opportunity to.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
committee members. My name is
Carlos Matutes. I am the New
Mexico Community advocate for
green Latinos. We are a national
organization dedicated to
fighting for environmental
justice for Latina communities,
our indigenous neighbors, all
communities of color.
I am also a homeowner who lives
in Senator Thornton's district
in Sundia Park.
We are here to support New
Mexico's protection of our
waters.
They are unprotected.
The federal government has left
us.
Abandoned us.
And allowed
Private interests.
To pollute our waters that we
require for our families, for
our communities, for our
children.
We do see.
That there are economic
repercussions. However,
That is nothing compared to the
importance of protecting our
waters.
Thank you very much and we do
hope that you pass.
Senate Bill 21 and 22.
Uh, so Worth is still about a
couple of minutes left in the 10
minute time allotted to you, so
I'm gonna recognize let's see,
who do we have just the one?
Um, Eric Schlenker, you're on
Zoom, you're recognized for up
to a minute and a half, sir.
Senator Cervantes, this is Eric
Schlinker Goodrich. I had just
raised my hand to support the
bill. I am not speaking today.
Thank you very much though. We
do support Senate Bill 22.
Very, very good. And uh also
registered in support was uh
Leron Johnson and Annie Hannah,
we don't see them on the zoom
call.
See a hand is that?
Uh, for Lavin Johnson.
Um, all right, so if you're here
for, for that, you, you, you'll
all recognize you for a minute,
go ahead.
So within the 10 minutes, sir.
Thank you, Chair. Senators. My
name is Colin Cox with the
Center for Biological Diversity,
uh, Laron Johnson is my
colleague.
Um, we center supports, um SB 21
and 22. We have a dysfunctional,
um, federal executive right now.
S21 is gonna help with that.
Um, and we have a dysfunctional
federal judiciary, and SB 22.
Help with that and uh that's it,
so I think that's all I'm
showing uh in uh.
wishing to be heard.
In opposition to the bill.
I've got 7 individuals.
So I'm gonna recognize each of
you for up to 2 minutes in this
order, please, so TJ Trujillo,
Liz Taylor, Kelly Fajardo,
that's the 1st 3.
And then behind you, Dal
Muhlenberg, Terry Cole, Alison
Riley and Jason Espinoza, so
we'll start with you, Mr.
Trujillo, TJ Trujillo, please.
Up to 2 minutes.
Mr. Mr. Chairman.
get.
It
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is TJ
Trujillo. I'm a registered
lobbyist on behalf of the dairy
producers of New Mexico, um.
I have a few quick points, but I
guess the overall central theme
is uh when I spoke on 21, asked
for 21, I requested the 21 not
be combined with 22, and
unfortunately now looks like
we're gonna vote on a joint bill
that contains both of them. The
reason why is I think 2021 was a
lot.
It was getting close to being a
better bill.
Uh, unfortunately, Senate Bill
22 has a lot of problems in 2
minutes, uh, it's too difficult
to encapsulate. I will give you
a high level.
issue that I, I would really
like for you to think about and
that's this, that um.
Senate Bill 22.
Uh, what duplicate regulation
under existing groundwater
discharge permits.
Surface water discharges.
Not covered by the federal NPDES
program do it.
As we're calling it.
Already are regulated.
In New Mexico under the WQCC
rules.
A separate
biggest overall issue is a
separate surface water discharge
permit.
Potentially and likely will
duplicate existing permit
requirements with respect to
groundwater. I think that's the
central takeaway that needs to
be explored. The problem is in
this bill kicks it essentially
to rulemaking and leaves a lot
of authority vested there, but I
think it's important for the
legislature to opine on exactly
what needs to, what the
interplay is between surface
water and groundwater.
Other industries have mining
permits, dairies have
groundwater discharge permits.
There's a lot of duplication,
uh, not to mention practical
problems in terms of the
issuance timing of issuance of
permits, and so when uh the
dairy say that they're
concerned, they're very
concerned. We've had some
hard-fought battles dealing with
issues like the dairy rules, uh,
over the years that some of you
might remember when we finally
got some stability and now we're
looking at opening up uh a lot
of problems that uh the dairies
are concerned about. Thank you.
Good afternoon, chair and
commission uh committee members.
Again, I'm Lizuland Taylor. I'm
a water lawyer in New Mexico and
I'm also an elected director of
MAFCA, which is the flood
control authority in
Albuquerque that serves about
60, uh, about 30% of the
population in Mexico and MAFCA
agrees with the need for
regulation, but it must be
reasonable regulation. The
definition of waters in SB 22
now is overbroad and causes
problems.
problems for AFCA and for the
city of Albuquerque.
The definition should go back to
what was set out by the Supreme
Court in the Rapanos decision,
which was the governing law
before Sackett came in, and
that, that law or that decision
rather by Justice Kennedy
required a significant nexus of
the water to water the United
States, and so that would
resolve the jurisdictional
problem that Senator Wirth has
raised, but it would be a
reasonable, um, regulation in
order to define
waters of the state.
Um, so the current definition
under the Senate Bill 22 would,
would include dry arroyos, and
those are not regulated under
Rapanos. Um, we're not we're not
regulating Rapanos. Also for AAA
specifically and for the city, I
believe, although I don't speak
for them, the dredge and fill
provision will create real
problems in maintenance of their
flood control, uh, facilities
where they need to take um
materials out to make the flood
control.
pond's work, um, and if they
have to get a permit for that
every time, that's gonna slow
that down and, and could create
more flood damage.
And as I do appreciate that the
bill has been amended so that
fees do not pay all of the
program, uh, the cost of the
program, but they still pay part
of the program and there is no
limit in this legislation to the
amount of fees, and there should
be an upper limit or else um by
rule, they could just keep
increasing the fees and increase
the burden on taxpayers.
The other issue that I've
mentioned before is that the law
says that a, a permit shall be
denied if it would, um, violate
the water quality standards for
the pueblo oflata and the enemy
he tells me that that won't
happen, but it's not in the law,
and it needs to be in the law
that um existing permits will
roll over or some other kind of
guarantee that, that the
existing permits that um, um,
the flood control authority
MAFCA has and that the city has.
We will prevail. Thank you, Ms.
Taylor. Your time has expired.
Thank you.
Sujado.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Kelly Fajardo, on
behalf of the New Mexico uh farm
and Livestock Bureau. Why we
appreciate a lot of the
exemptions that that have been
put in the bill for um the
farming and ranching operations,
we still have some concerns,
it's mainly that has to do with
the ambiguity of the language as
far and as and also the
rulemaking authority that
exists, um, the term normal
farming.
Um, there's a concern regarding
that, like who determines that
that will make an authority. The
perfect example is a lot of our
smaller farmers use um spray to
control mesquite and salt cedar
to control the health of the
watersheds. Is that considered
normal farming within the
definition, and is that gonna be
relied on on um the commission
that is set up. So why we
appreciate everything, we are
really concerned about the
unintended consequences if the
language is not tied up. Thank
you.
Thank you. I hadn't Molenberg
for the mining association, is
that off, you're on the, you're,
you're in the order of the list,
so.
Mr. Chair, we have our
executive.
OK
Very good. I'm out.
Afternoon chair members Matt
Thompson, executive director of
the New Mexico Mining
Association. Just want to touch
on a couple of key points and
respectful opposition to Senate
Bill 22.
Um
First is exactly what Mr.
Trujillo said that uh New point
source surface water permit
program does.
Create a duplicative nature for
uh
Uh, for many of our current
permits, um, also ephemeral
waters are already regulated
through these permits regardless
of whether they were under the
waters of the United States.
To touch on a little bit on what
Miss Taylor just addressed with
the dredging fill discharge
permit program, um, Bill 22
currently lacks a definition of
surface waters, and we feel like
that needs to be addressed. Um,
the bill could really regulate
all road crossing, crossings,
pipeline projects or any other
project requiring earthmoving
activities where there is any
type of water channel that could
be pretty extensive for a for a
lot of just different, very
importantly, we need to talk
about the liability provisions.
currently in Senate Bill 22.
Mining operations in New Mexico
already are subject to broad
liability for cleanup of
contamination under state and
federal laws.
Some of our miners have invested
tens of millions of dollars in
cleanup on reclamation.
The liability provisions
incentive Bill 22 are extremely
broad, much broader than
existing law. Although modeled
after the Federal circirA
program, also known as the
Superfund program. They lack
many limitations, uh, the, the
provisions in 22.
Uh, like many limitations,
procedural requirements, and
other protections given under
federal law.
The liability provision imposed
liability for any quote water
contaminant, which is a change
from current federal regulation,
which um regulates hazardous
substances. So that's a very, uh
very broad change.
The liability provisions create
potential liability for any
person in the chain of title to
a contaminated property, even if
that contamination occurred
prior to ownership.
So, anybody in the chain of
title to contaminate property
and allows any person who is
conducted a cleanup of any type
to sue anyone in the chain of
title.
So those are a few of our
concerns. We obviously stand in
opposition and thank you for the
time.
Thompson.
Uh, I saw Terry Cole, she, I, I
can take you all in a different
order, but I'm just going in the
order where you signed up. So I
had Miss Col next for the
Albuquerque Chamber, if you all
don't mind. you're followed by
Ms. Riley. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Terry
Cole. I'm the president CEO for
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce. Mr. Chair, I have
not had an opportunity yet to
review the substitute, so the
comments I'm making today relate
to the original SB 22 bill, and
we have two points.
First of all, we want to
acknowledge what the good
senator Wirth is trying to do,
and we don't dispute the goal,
the goal is an important goal to
shoot for, and we're not arguing
about that one bit. We are
concerned about two elements in
SB 22. The first deals with the
fact that it's enacting new
rules and permitting regs. We're
concerned, um, honestly about
what looks like increased
regulatory burden to us. We are
concerned.
it could be complicated and
unnecessarily punitive. We don't
want to drive producers to Texas
or federal lands, so that's one
of our concerns with SB 22. The
second is the shifting
responsibility, Mr. Chair, from
energy to New Mexico
environment. We think
fragmenting oil field operations
and permits, um, could create
inconsistency and even delay,
um, we feel.
that OCD, uh, seems to have the
experience and expertise, and we
don't see any reason for that
change. So thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you.
Riley, you recognized up to 2
minutes.
Good afternoon, Chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, here to express our
opposition to Senate Bill 22.
Now, we do appreciate the intent
and the sponsor and what the
bill is trying to do and also
the changes that have been made.
However, we still have a few
issues, um, state waters to
include ephemeral streams and
drier arroyos. The reason with
that is these features rarely
hold water and therefore do not
consistently contribute to water
systems, regulating these as
waters of the state creates
overreach.
And it adds costly and
time-consuming permitting
requirements.
Another issue we have with the
bill, we feel it would make it
harder for municipalities and
flood control authorities to
remove sediment.
And protecting communities,
including agricultural lands.
This creates avoidable risks to
crops, infrastructure, and
livelihoods.
We know that our agriculture and
small business owners are proud
stewards of New Mexico's water
and land resources, but at this
time we feel the legislation
still creates uncertainty for a
critical sector of this economy
and you to vote no. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Espinoza.
Chairman, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza
speaking on behalf of the
Associated General Contractors
in New Mexico and the San Juan
Water Commission. Uh, we do
appreciate some of the sponsors
amendments, uh, in the bill and
made in the cups many
substitute, but we still do
stand in opposition to the
legislation, uh, specifically
for the construction industries,
we're still really unclear how
this will impact our operations.
If we will need a permit for
accidental soil movement into a
water system under the dredge
and fill provision, or if every
new every action with the
possibility for
Discharge, we'll need a new
permit.
any construction to be completed
in Albuquerque, we need approval
by MAFCA if they're, they are
delayed due to the permitting
process and increased cost of
this legislation that will
further delay any construction
projects as well. And that's a
big concern too, we've heard
over the years with this
legislature, the increased cost
of construction, especially on
public projects, is a concern as
well as delays. This will add to
that, we believe.
Um
Uh, for the San Juan Water
Commission again as testified
earlier, we are concerned about
the, the fees, increased costs
to our budgets as a government
entity. Uh, we just do believe
this needs more work and more
stakeholder input before moving
forward. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. It completes those
who had signed up in opposition.
Everyone felt they had been
signed up and I didn't get
recognized yet.
Right.
Uh, so worth, uh, we reserved a
3 or 4 minutes for you to close
out if there's anything else,
we're happy to stand for
questions. All right, very good
committee members.
You know, Senator Brantley, your
first step.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senators. Thank you
guys for presenting. I want to
follow up on um really where we
were discussing where I left off
last time we were talking about
21.
And that's really the concern of
this agency if they have the
capacity to manage.
Such
A, a program.
I refer to.
A notice that was sent out just
in late January of this year, by
New Mexico Environment
Department, providing notice
that due to inadequate budget
funding to fund the air quality
bureau and review and issuance
of all air quality permits will
be delayed, effective
immediately and will issue
letters to all businesses that
are seeking air quality permits
or an air quality permit
modification as such
applications will be delayed.
We know that this announcement.
Resulted in a harsh reply from
our Senate Finance chair who was
calling on the agency.
To do what is required of them
in statute already.
And so I still expressed great
concern that we have an agency
that is not not issuing permits
at all, which is what they are
statutorily required to do right
now.
Because they don't have the
staffing and they don't have the
funding and then here we are
discussing.
Putting even more requirements
and responsibility by giving in
completely new
Permitting
Requirement to an agency that's
already already met its its
bandwidth, so I don't want to
beat a dead horse. I said this
in the last.
The the last committee hearing,
but that has not been addressed.
I would expect that it won't be
too long before the environment
department is issuing notices.
That, that all, all water
permits, these permits are not
being.
issued, and that's a concern to
people who are who are here.
Today.
Today I want to focus still
without even properly addressing
that concern from last time.
Really the overreach of the
program.
And I see here right, right in
front of our.
Our pink shoots again, it's
saying that SB 22 simply
authorizes the state to
reimplement protections that had
already been in place federally
until the removal of sacket.
But then I read this, and this
is concerning.
In the opinion written by
Justice Kennedy.
He cited a need for significant
nexus to be present for the
waters to be protected under the
Clean Water Act. This was
essentially the definition
definition used by both in the
courts under Bush and Obama
administrations up until 2.
Under that significant nexus
language, Arroyos, intermittent
streams were not subjective to
the regulation.
But they will be regulated as
water or a source.
Under this proposed legislation.
Senator Wirth, that seems like
an overreach from what was
required by feds. Can you
address that?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Brantly, I can.
So for 50 years.
The Federal Clean Water Act was
interpreted to apply to exactly
these waters that are in Senate
Bill 22.
You're absolutely correct.
The US Supreme Court in the
Sackett decision.
Put in place a nexus test.
That had the effect of
deregulating.
Taking away the former federal
oversight.
Over all these waters, 21 Senate
Bill 21.
Deals with about 5% of the water
in New Mexico. That's what's
left.
After Sackett
As a result, the reason this
bill is necessary is for exactly
the reason you said, because the
US Supreme Court made the
decision, and again, that's.
Interpretation of the federal
law that under the Federal Clean
Water Act, despite how it had
been applied for 50 years, they
were going to require this nexus
and they adopted. I know my
former law school classmate,
Miss Taylor referred to the
Rapanos decision, which was a
minority before but became the
majority and that's where that
test is there, but that's
exactly why we need Senate Bill
22, because after Sackett, 95%
of our water is no longer
regulated.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, I, I heard it said before and
I think it's interesting maybe
cause 95% of New Mexico is a
desert, and so a lot of this is
addressing waterways, it doesn't
even have water.
In it, but I'm gonna push back a
little bit.
On that statement that we were
having to protect 95% of New
Mexico waters and without this,
they become vulnerable because
one, we would default to status
quo of what the federal program
already provides, and then
there's numerous water
protection acts. We have the
Groundwater Act. We have a
mining act that protects water,
the water water quality control
commission regulations. There
are many acts and many statutes
that would come in and protect
those waters.
Regardless, and so the question
goes back to.
Why
Is this program needed? What
specific waters in New Mexico.
would go completely unregulated
because there's many many.
Umbrella acts that would protect
those waters would go
unregulated without this.
So Mr. Chair, I'm going to yield
to
Environment to folks on that
specific issue. And then I also
just, I think it's important
because again, you brought up
the issue of the air permitting,
and that dispute since we have
Secretary Kenny here. I, I do
think there's a response and he
needs to do that response, but
let's get a specific on.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Brantley,
thanks for the question.
I just want to point out that
You're right that the water
quality control commission does
have regulatory authority in
Mexico in a number of places.
This bill actually amends
existing regulatory authority
that the water quality Control
Commission has right now.
statute
Provides authority for the water
quality control commission to
promulgate rules regulating the
discharge of surface waters.
That's it.
This bill puts a lot of
guardrails on what direction the
legislature is giving WQCC in
how to do that.
I think that's really important
for us that we are seeking more
legislative direction rather
than petitioning WQCC to do.
Whatever the department thinks
is best.
And Shelly can answer your
question, uh, sorry, Ms. Lemon
can answer your question about
specific waterways.
Could you elaborate, Mr.
Chairman, on how, how you
believe that this gives the
legislators more authority and
not the agency more authority.
Absolutely.
Um, let me find the statutory
provision.
Thank you. Um, on
a,
yeah, sorry, I'm looking at the,
the compined version, Senator,
Mr. Chairman, um, but in
existing law, 74-6-4, where it
lays out
What rulemaking authorities,
water quality control commission
has.
There is subsection.
you
Which provides
The water quality control
commission.
May adopt rule adopt regulations
to be administered by the
department for surface water
discharge.
That's it.
We are adding language to that
that says,
Including discharges of re or
film material, uh, protecting
wetlands, we are including
specific exemptions in here that
might not be included in a water
quality control commission
rulemaking if this bill does not
get passed.
Those are the types of places
where I'm speaking of where we
are seeking direction from the
legislature.
Mr. Chairman, I'm gonna have you
clarify, in addition to the
water quality control
regulations in addition to the
Mining Act, in addition to the
Groundwater Act, can you name a
single water source that goes
unprotected.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Brantly, there are many waters
that go unprotected. There are
many intermittent waters there
are perennial waters that are
interrupted, so they go dry and
then they pop up again later.
And then there are ephemeral
channels which you've been
talking about. So there are, I
mean, the Santa Fe River is a
river that flows only a certain
distance from the mountains to
the city of Santa Fe, and then
it goes dry.
Um, that is something that if
it, if
The federal government doesn't
interpret.
That dry patch as needing
regulation and protections, then
the city of Santa Fe's
wastewater treatment plant would
not need a discharge permit from
the federal government.
OK, thank you. So I'm gonna
clarify real quick, so.
Mr. Chairman, I, I want to
clarify what you just told me.
The Santa Fe River.
If this was not implemented at a
state level.
would have zero protection.
Mr. Chair and Senator Brantly,
there are state water quality
protections already for the surf
for surface water and
groundwater, so those
protections exist. It's the
discharge of pollutants into the
surface water that would not be
regulated so they could
discharge whatever they want,
however they want without a
permit. Again, it depends on how
the federal government, which is
still to be
determined, but based on the
socket ruling, which says
permanent waters with a
continuous surface connection.
Santa Fe River does not have a
continuous surface connection to
the Rio Grande. OK.
Alternatively, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, as Secretary Kenny
described, if there is not
something like Senate Bill 22 in
place.
Then the federal law, RCRA
applies through the Mexico
Hazardous Waste Act, that is
much more restrictive and much
more demanding in terms of what
a primedy would be required to
do.
There are also provisions in
those laws that allow for a
citizen to bring a suit in
violation of that federal law.
This would protect those perms
from that path.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
also want to follow up on that
line of thought right there is
if a citizen were to bring a
suit.
Um
Right now, if I direct your
attention to page 45.
I'm not an attorney.
But it does seem like big
government has the ability in
this to outspend, to outlast a
farmer or any water user in
this, can, can you clarify for
me to make sure that I'm
understanding this.
Why would the prevailing party,
or perhaps they are, are they
entitled to attorney fees,
our general counsel Zacho Gas
will address.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, my name
is Zach Ogos. I'm the enemy
general counsel to answer
questions, Senator, uh, yes, the
prevailing party could be
entitled to attorneys' fees, uh,
but generally speaking, when you
go to court, you have to move,
you have to make a motion before
the court requesting attorneys'
fees. At the end of the day,
there will be
Expression involved, uh, you
know, we set a couple of
guardrails in there, you know,
seeing.
Under certain circumstances, you
know, some things may be
entitled, uh, but generally
speaking, it will be a decision
made by the judge after a
motion.
interrupt you for a second,
Senator Branley. Do you agree
with that, Senator Worth? I
don't agree with that.
Neither does Senator Doig. I
think that's wrong.
I your information you just
that's wrong, but it's work.
Soaking it typically if there's
a prevailing
Party provision. It's, it's a
reasonable this this
determination and the judge is
going to make that determination
as to whether or not it's
Reasonable or not, uh, Senator
Bradley's question was in regard
to attorneys' fees, you're
talking about costs that are
worth, right? I think you're
talking about prevailing party.
Is there a prevailing party
attorneys' fees provision in
here. So there's not. OK, that's
what I thought. So I, I, I don't
think there's a way to recover
attorneys' fees, is there?
So there was in the original
bill, and there was a private
right of action that caused all
kinds of heartburn that's out.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator Wirth, wouldn't you
agree that a prevailing party
should have their attorney fees.
Covered, especially if we're
talking about big government and
I'm a small farmer who wins in
court, you could outspend me,
outlast me, go broke. You've
weaponized a state agency
against someone who in court.
One
Or should have won if they get
that far. Mr. Chair, let me give
you the other side of the
argument. If they lose, that
means they're paying the state's
attorneys' fees too.
Prevailing party means can be
either side, so typically we
follow what's called the
American rule, which does not
have an attorney's fee provision
or prevailing party. So
basically, unless it's in a
statute or in a contract,
Attorneys' fees are not awarded.
OK, Mr. Chair and and Senator
Worth, and I am gonna defer to
you. It's, it's my understanding
that there should not be that
this is not common practice and
I could be wrong, but this
should not be a reference to
plainists and defendants and
certainly no allowance for the
safe, uh, for the state to get
reimbursed for attorney fees.
Is that not common practice
where we could, we could include
that in there so that the small
farmer who's being taken to
court or takes the state to
court.
Who prevails, doesn't go broke
in the meantime.
So again remember it goes both
ways.
So, so again, the small farmer
that goes in on a case and
loses.
And end up paying the
on the other side.
So again, and it's a policy
decision and we've had this
discussion many times and I've
actually carried some bills.
There were times when
You know, I, I'll, I'll give an
example of mechanics and
materialmen's liens.
You know, putting in a
prevailing party.
Kind of leveled the playing
field a little bit, but it also
increases the risk too.
Because if you bring a suit and
you lose, you're paying the
other side, so it works both
ways, but it's a policy
decision. And again, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Wirth, could
we exclude the state from being
a prevailing party?
I mean, Mr. President, again, I
think we probably could suggest
that, but typically prevailing
party applies to to both sides.
I don't disagree. I think that
this is a dangerous cause it
gives a very powerful agency.
A very easy way to just outspend
out last. Anyone who is actually
standing.
In the right, and that a court
would determine.
is as well.
Let me ask you just a couple of
questions that I had had written
down here.
To the sponsors or maybe to the
agency on here.
Well, flood control authority or
municipality, be able to remove
sediment from flood control
basins on a regular basis, or
will they have to get a new
permit every time they do that.
Mr. Chair and Senator Brantly,
we added into the language of
this bill, um, authority for
general permits, what's known as
a general permit. So it's a
permit that covers a whole bunch
of different discharges, um,
similar types of discharges like
dredge and fill and um has the
requirements in the permit, so
when somebody wants to use that
permit, they submit a notice of
intent.
and get coverage under the
permit and are allowed to go
forth with their, um,
activities, so it creates some
efficiency. It's less
burdensome, they can see the
requirements before it's not a
mystery until the individual
permit is issued, it's published
in um public noticed and all of
that prior to getting coverage
so they can understand the
requirements of the permit
before they, um, actually do
that, so.
There are different types of,
um,
General permits for the dredge
and fill.
And those can be there are
individual permits for really
big projects, but what I've seen
from the federal program is
there are very few individual
permits and the vast majority,
like 95% of the permits in New
Mexico are under general permits
or like the core, Army Corps of
Engineers calls nationwide
permits.
OK, so Mr. Chairman, if I'm
following you, I can get one
general permit and that would
allow our municipalities to do
routine maintenance, correct?
Mr. Chair, Senator Brantly, yes.
OK, thank you. We started this
conversation highlighting.
The
Underfunding, underfunded
agency, they're understaffed.
We're not issuing air quality
permits right now.
Could the same municipalities or
any kind of a control
authorities remove sediment.
In an emergency situation, or do
we fall victim? Could they fall
victim if the answer is no to an
understaffed agency who's not
quick enough to respond in
emergencies.
Mr. Chair and Senator Brantly,
there are emergency provisions,
so yes, they would be able to.
OK, thank you.
The
OK.
OK, I'm sorry, has this bill,
Senator Wirth gone to
conservation?
Mr. Chair, Senator Bradley, yes,
it has I'm not trying to, I'm
not trying to mirror your
experience there, so I will, I
will rush my comments
a shot at the conservation.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I, I
would say this, I want to push
back a little bit the comments
saying that these waters go
unprotected. I think there are a
lot of statutes, a lot of
provisions, and a lot of acts in
New Mexico that that protect our
waters. I also think it's
important that we, we push back
on this idea that our water
users.
don't want clean waters.
Or somehow abuse a water system
or a natural resources that many
are, it's, it's not their, just
their life, but it's their
livelihood.
And so I would hope, and I, I
hope you do that most New
Mexicans want clean water and
are abiding by acts that are in
place and are happy to do so,
and so I just, I, I just wonder
on this, who were those bad, who
are those bad apples that we're
targeting.
So
Hedley-handedly on here. I think
that this program is costly. I
think it's timely. I think in
very many cases there are
already acts where it's
duplicative, I think, um,
there's no cap on a fee
structure in the short time I've
been on judiciary, that seems to
be pretty common in some
statutes.
I think that the part about
accessing federal, I mean a
private property is extremely
concerning, and I would hope
that you would stop and give
thought to that that it at a
minimum, the agency should have
to schedule in advance to enter
private property that's
extremely concerning for for a
lot of New Mexicans, but I just
sit here and I look at all of
this. This is a great, great
overreach in my opinion. We
don't have the capacity. We
certainly don't have the money.
The federal government does and
is already doing this, is that
This is a
Very extensive.
Attempt to solve a problem that
just doesn't seem to exist.
And I guess if we're trying to,
if this is an effort to trump
proof New Mexico.
In case the feds do something
and claw back.
And can't we come in there?
Can't we come in and solve that
void when that time happens and,
and not address this now when
it's just not necessary. So, Mr.
Chair and Senator Brantly after
the Sackett decision, the
federal government is only
dealing with about 5% of our
water.
That's the result of the Sackett
decision. Is it basically
95% is no longer considered
based on the test that you cited
in that in that decision, that
nexus that's required, then the
significant narrowing, so for 50
years.
Everyone here in this room lived
with the federal government
dealing with all these same
waters.
After Sackett, it shrunk that
down dramatically, so regardless
of what the federal government
does, that's going to apply only
to the 5%.
And again, under 20, under 21,
that's the primacy piece, but
the other 95%.
I mean, again, if we don't do
this, then you've got this.
Talk about regulatory
uncertainty. I mean, I, it
concerns me to hear, you know,
with Secretary Kenny and, and
the experts here saying that all
of a sudden, federal hazardous
waste act starts to come into
play. I mean, it's just things
are uncertain. There is no
question about that, and we're
trying to
tighten it up and I realized
that it's, we're, we're going
from a situation now where that
water's been deregulated to
trying to reimpose a system on
here. And, and I, and I, your
questions make sense to me. I
mean, I hear what you're saying.
It's just
When we're looking at this and
trying to figure out what's left
after Sacket.
I think this is critical to have
that regulatory overlay.
Thank you, um
Mr. Chairman and Senator, and,
and while they I would push back
and say, well, they may be
deregulated federally, they are
still quite regulated at the
state level.
But
With that, Mr. uh Mr. Chair,
Senator Worth, I'm probably
gonna vote no on this bill.
And then I think Senator Doick,
you were gonna get this, no, not
right now. Senator O'Malley, I
can recognize you for up to 10
minutes to
start, thank you,
Mr. Chair, and I agree that
Most New Mexicans do want clean
water. They want clean air and
they want to raise their kids in
a healthy environment, but there
are bad actors and I've had
direct experience, and that's
how I became engaged in my
community. Many years ago, we
had a particle board
manufacturing company, small
business.
Um, dumped, contaminated water.
From their processes containing
benzene and thine, all kinds of
nasty things and contaminated
the groundwater for a quarter
mile.
It was because of our engagement
and getting together with other
um
Environmental groups that we
were able to get, you know,
require them, force them to
clean up. Not only that, they
were also contaminating all the
air uh by emitting all these
particulates in the night.
This was damaging to our
community. There were
settlements regarding um that,
you know, we were heard about,
um, having to do with liver
damage in the community. This is
an old community, this is my old
town. This is the sawmill
community. Unfortunately, we do
need protection, and it is from
those bad actors and um.
So I, I think we need to do what
we do, what we need to do if we
don't have a clean environment
to raise our families.
What do we have? You know,
what's the point?
And um, so, um, I'm glad that
this is moving forward and in my
mind, I think, and I know that
this can't go beyond what we,
what the mirrors the better, you
know, government, but we still,
I believe we still even need
stronger regulations when it
comes to our water. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Others questions.
What?
And
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Word.
just appreciate all the work,
all the work, um, but it's a
lot, I mean the.
I didn't realize that the 0.3.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for 22 was actually rolled into
the
Was it, was what was going to be
presented today cause I had it
for the past day, but I didn't
go over it, but on the 22 side.
You know, you're amending
current statutes on the 21 side,
I appreciate you explaining the
difference between the original
21, the
The subsequent and the final,
but it
It doesn't matter cause it's all
new language, so, so I needed to
read the, the final version to
kind of get a feel for it.
So I'm trying to, trying to play
catch up, but my question is,
Chairman Senator Worth, did this
the the the Supreme Court
decision was on May 25th of
2023. I don't know how long it
was anticipated.
Um, but it, but what work is,
and you know, everyone's
executive is, is working hard.
Was this brought to the interim
in 23 or 24, has this discussion
been had in in.
And other committees.
So, Mr. Chair and Senator, my
ask is certainly we had this
conversation in the water
resources Committee this summer
and talked about the need to
have this, and I think I
specifically talked about.
Situation in my
District with Tasuki Creek and
Bishop's Lodge, wanting to
discharge into Tasuki Creek and.
EPA was involved in that, uh,
because again, that, that is a
free falling creek.
Um
And so again, it just brought
this home.
To me, the importance of doing
this, um.
And then again, this is the this
is the, the fallout from the
Sacket decision. And, and it's a
policy decision, you know, do we
want to leave this?
95% that was covered.
For 50 years from 1972 until
2022. Do we want to leave that?
And not touch it and then try
and figure out what overlays and
do we have the, you know, does
hazardous ways act kicked in,
kick in, what are we doing? or
do we try and go back and and
just recreate the status quo,
that's what we're really trying
to do here. No, thank you, and
that's um I, I.
Understand that and also
appreciate the advocates who are
making that point. We just want
to
Go back to the same regulatory
scheme prior to the Supreme
Court, but this is actually
different than the past
regulatory scheme. I have a
couple of questions with regards
to that. The, as I see this as
just a major regulatory
overhaul, major, major, major.
So let me just learn about how
our reality was in the past if,
if someone, uh, a public entity
or a private entity did
discharge in a river 5 years
ago.
Who, who did they get permission
from?
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator
Maestas, uh, if, if it was into
a water of the United States,
then they would get a discharge
permit from the EPA or the Army
Corps of Engineer, depending on
the type of discharge to that
surface water if it was to a
water of the state.
They would not need a permit.
Possibly a groundwater discharge
permit if it was, um, to an
arroyo or
Um, impacted groundwater
quality, but they, we don't have
a permitting program right now
for surface water quality, so
that's what we are asking for
and making amendments in SB 22
is to provide that authority to
develop a surface water
permitting program for those
state waters. Thank you
and could I just add to that,
um, and to your previous
question, this is a conversation
that we actually started with
the legislature before.
Uh, going into the 2022 session,
uh, we requested funding to
start building a state surface
water permitting.
Program
Uh, we received.
A $600,000 I think two separate
appropriations 600,000 and 680,
uh, we received additional
funding.
In 2023.
We received another $7 million
appropriation last year, where
the legislature, I think through
those three appropriations has
signaled their support for our
building of this program. Uh,
over the past few interims in
lead up to these sessions, we
have presented to the Water
Natural Resources Committee.
On our program. Thank you. Thank
you for that, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Wor the uh and prior,
prior to the Supreme Court
decision, what percentage was
waters of the United States and
what percentage of our
Streams and rivers was
Waters of the state.
Mr. Chair and Senator Mata, um,
that's a very
Good question. Um, I think
that's part of why the Clean
Water Act has been litigated so
many times in recent years is
figuring out where that fine
definitive line is, um, if you
talk about, uh,
Perennial waters in New Mexico
and intermittent, which flow
seasonally. It's around 90%. I
mean reverse 10%, 90% are, are
ephemeral.
Um, so it's
The ephemeral streams are only
flowing when there is rainfall
events or storm water. Um, so
it's, it's
Before then, there weren't that
many waters protected that were
perennial. You know, we, we've
never had many perennial
streams, uh, as you all know,
um, but some of those
intermittent and ephemerals were
protected.
And were permitted by both EPA
and the Army Corps of Engineer
to protect surface water quality
under the Clean Water Act. OK,
thank you. So I don't know what
percentage that is, um, that was
my question, like what
percentage because
This is, we wanna go to
pre-hackett can regulatory
conditions, but this is like pre
hack plus, and that's fine,
that's if that's what we wanna
do, um, just a couple because
the concerns I'm hearing aren't
from private, the private
sector.
They're from the, the public
sector. There's um.
Uh, I, I
The water authority is the water
utility company there in
Albuquerque, Borno County, they
do a great job, they, they have
a water treatment plant. I try
not to think about it cause it
might gross you out, but, but
they discharge water that's
super, super, super clean in the
Rio Grande, and you, if you go
there, they're doing a poster
restoration project, so I got to
visit and literally stand over
where the discharge occurs and
the fish love it and it's kinda
neat, uh, what, what?
How would this bill affect that
discharge?
Mr. Chair and Senator Maestas,
it does not affect that permit,
that permit will still be under
the NPDES program or the
National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System that falls
under 21 SB 21. So instead of
EPA administering that permit
and issuing the permit, it would
be the state of New Mexico.
But it would be the same permit,
just different administrative,
um, agency.
Chairman Senator, when you say
same
same permanent one.
Mr. Chairman Senator asked us,
the existing permit under the
that the EPA has issued under
their permanent program would
transfer to the state under our
primacy application, uh, to take
over implementation of that
federal law in New Mexico, like
4547 other states have done
already. So it's, it's literally
them uh no longer being the ones
who ensure compliance, uh, who
handle any permit renewals or
modifications, those
applications would.
to the Environment department at
the state level instead, you
wouldn't be dealing with
bureaucrats in Dallas, you'd be
dealing with a lot of Mexicans
in Albuquerque or Santa Fe.
Sherman, what, um.
There's a lot of rulemaking
coming out of this bill, lot of
rulemaking and so sometimes.
Believe or not, legislators, we
don't read all the rules, but
when we do it, I freak out on
the rules as it relates to the
statutory construction that we,
that we do.
Refresh our memory, who, who,
who's gonna write the rules.
If this bill becomes law, Mr.
Chairman, Senator Matas.
The environment department would
petition the water quality
control commission. So we would
propose rules, we would write
proposed rules, water quality
control commission would hold a
hearing, uh, your input from us
and other interested parties
deliberate and then issue a
final rule. And a couple last
questions, uh, we got about a
minute left. The um.
One of the public entities in,
in my neck of the woods talked
about the definition of water.
The definition was actually
different. Once again, it's
And it's not a criticism, but
this isn't just going pre
hacking, this is a brand new
regulatory scheme, uh.
But you know, theoretically is
better than what what existed in
the 50 years, but what, what
about the definition of water,
are you amenable to looking at
that? So, I think she was asking
for the definition in the
Sackett decision.
Which is basically the case that
was cited was Rapios, that was a
it was a minority position until
2022. And then that's the new
test that Senator Brantly was
reveraging the nexus test. So
that basically would narrow this
down dramatically and not deal
with what we need to do, which
is fill in the gap. And I just
want to talk about the municipal
systems, because I think the one
that brings true to me, and you
heard the example is the city of
Santa Fe.
Because it's one that's not on a
free-flowing river.
And so without this bill,
Basically, it creates a real
tricky situation.
I did speak with folks from the
city of Santa Fe, they were
concerned about the private
right of action.
Same arguments we heard from a
lot of folks. We took that out,
um, but again, I think that's an
example of a system that without
this bill is in this kind of
limbo.
Mr. Chairman Senator, I would
just add the definition you see
of water in Senate Bill 22 on
page 10, starting on line 14,
that's existing law. Uh, that's
in the state Water Quality Act,
our state regulations that Ms.
Lemon has referred to also
include an existing definition
of waters of the state. We're
happy to provide that reference
to you if you want to see that.
We are not looking to change
those definitions. Thank you Mr.
Chairman Senator We thank once
again, thanks for the work. It's
a big.
Like, um,
And, you know, to vote on cause
it's.
Been like 6 iterations, but I'm
glad we at least had this time
to talk about the existing
iteration, which is totally
different than the bill they
heard in conservation to your
credit. So I just, I'd ask you
to just keep working with the,
with those folks that have
concerns, take a look at the,
the maybe consider a limit on
fees.
And uh and uh
And I appreciate you. Thank you.
All right, so I'd like to clear
up a few things and we'll go
through a little more detail
that I'd like to ask. Um,
there's in reference to fees.
There's no fees provision in
here, am I right center worth
and you pointed out, um, under
our law, unless there's a
contract, which there wouldn't
be, and unless there's a statute
that expressly provides for
recovery of attorneys' fees. The
new members of the committee we
follow what's called the
American Rule, which means that
each parties bear their own
attorneys' fees, regardless of
outcome, um, and that the
reasons for that are the ones
pointed out by Senor, English
rule used to be that um you know
My, oh permit fees, but I'm
talking about legal fees, yeah,
I'm sorry, I'm sorry I
misunderstood what you were
saying, but there was discussion
about legal fees and so we have
a number of new members in the
committee, so the English rule
is, uh, was to, was intended to
discourage suing the king,
right? So the prevailing party
would get their attorneys' fees,
which meant that little guys
would never sue the king cause
the king would come after you
and bankrupt you and put you in
jail. So we adopted what's
called the American rule, which
is each side bears their own
attorneys' fees. The idea behind
that was that you'd have
Greater accessibility to the
court system by everyone
regardless of resources and and
means, and that's the thinking
behind that. In general we
follow that, but we frequently
see bills in this committee that
try to shift us out of the
American rule, and you'll see
people like me and others on
this committee, I think, pretty
consistently revert, including
side worth revert back to the
American rule to try and, and
preserve that, and I think
that's an important thing to do,
and there was some back and
forth here, but I just want to
make sure abundantly, there's
nothing in here that would
provide for an
recovery of attorneys' fees by
statute here, is that right,
Mr. Chair in Senate Bill 21.
With the private right of action
all out right so answer my
question, it's not in here
anymore, correct? All right, so,
so the concerns about attorneys'
fees, there's some suggestion
there's attorneys' fees in here,
it's just not there anymore.
Of the, um, your bill has on
Senate 22 has a number of
definitions and changes are all
of those tracking federal law.
All those definitions.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Most of
22 are existing. What council
service has done is they've
reordered them to alphabetize
them. Where we have added
definitions, those are
consistent with federal law.
OK.
Mr. just, just a reference, we
did provide everyone with this
crosswalk so that you can, cause
again, it is some language we're
not used to seeing, but it's
something that's required.
Yeah, and you, and I appreciate
that, so we've got this side by
side and a lot of this language,
I think is pretty inartful and
and maybe poorly done, but
that's my own, I see nodding of
the heads, but it's also my
chance to armchair quarterback,
the feds, right, who have some
of this language that you're
tracking all the way along and
I'm not going to try and mess
with that. Uh, I, I would like
to, um, turn.
Oh, I guess, before we get to
specifics, there was, there was
some concern about combining
Senate Bill 21 and 22. Um, I
know the couple of things. One,
there was a suggestion earlier
that there's not enough time in
2 minutes to voice opposition, I
agree, uh, which is why I've
adopted rules for this committee
that allow a coordinated
opposition to have up to 10 or
15 minutes if they want to come
take, take 10 or 15 minutes to
oppose it, um, but still allow
me to manage the time of the
committee, so that's, that's why
that rule exists, but I do agree
with you.
Hill, 2 minutes to go through
this for opponents or opponents
is, is hard to do. I'm gonna,
I'm gonna have a little bit more
time and and take it, but um,
the decision to combine this
bill Senate 121 and 22 is
entirely up to the sponsor, and
the sponsors elected to do that,
and that's his prerogative to
substitute any bill for his,
much less substitute to bills
and combine them into one, so
that's his, that's his um.
Discretion and he may pick up
opponents or he may pick up
opponents in doing so, but
that's his judgment and I, I
respect the, the leader's
decision there.
The, um, if you, if you turn
with me to page 32 for a second
members. This is, there's some
real meat to this section. It's
kind of interesting to me, this
is uh section you.
Which is where there's
exceptions.
Uh, so if you look on page 32,
line 6.
This is the kind of interesting
it says except as provided in
section V, the only exceptions
are the following, and then
there's a list that begins 1
through 34 on that page, we'll
come to V in a moment, but
here's the exceptions and.
Um
I'm, I'm curious whether this
language is from some other
source or whether it can be
cleaned up, so the exception
from a surface water permit is
normal farming.
I don't know what normal farming
is, um, I think everything we do
is normal farming, but various
other agencies of the state or
others sometimes think what
we're doing is abnormal farming,
um, and, and if the definition
here says you're exempted from a
permit as long as you're doing
normal farming, we have a
definition of what is normal
farming. Mr. Chair, these
exemptions come directly from
the Federal Clean Water Act,
Section 404F, and part of the
concern that was raised in the
prior committee, there was a
tweak to some language and it
was.
there was a lot of pushback
because it wasn't what people
were used to. So again, I can't
tell you what the CFR regs.
Deal with, but that is the
language that everyone's been
used to and it's this tracks
exactly what's in the federal
law. And I appreciate talking
with you about that, Senator,
cause yeah, I, um, that's why I
was saying earlier, I, I may not
think the feds did such a great
job of drafting this thing, but
we'll we'll find that out in
courts, I guess eventually down
the road. And I, I respect the
fact that you're doing the best
you can do, which is following
the federal law directly, but I,
I'm just beginning to give some
examples of what that may be in
terms of a fight, right down the
road, which is, you, you're not
required to have a surface water
permit if you're engaged in
normal farming, um, and who's
gonna decide what normal farming
is. I can see you're maybe ready
to jump into that question. I
just,
uh, the language that we had
drafted or that we have in the
bill is.
Directly with the in line with
the Clean Water Act.
In our initial proposed bill, we
said normal farming has to be
determined by the water quality
Control Commission and cattle
growers Association told us they
didn't like that. We took that
out, didn't want to leave, you
know, it up to to them, but I
totally understand your point
that somebody's going to have to
decide that.
Yeah, and so the, so the cat the
cattle growers were the ones
oppoing to that, yeah, so they
won that uh battle, but they
probably lost the war in doing
so, they may not have figured
that out yet, but, I mean, they,
so they took out the reference
to the agency determination of
what is normal farming, but by
default in the absence of any
other uh language, it's gonna go
back to them anyway, right, in
the rulemaking process, I
presume that's what the Feds do,
and I see you nodding your
heads, yes, so, uh, uh, like I
said, I'm, I'm just curious by
some of the terminology because
and and I think you probably.
I imagine I'm amused by that
terminology, it's like, you
know, again, I've spent my whole
lifetime and my parents and
grandparents' generation farming
and I was just curious what
normal farming is uh.
I sometimes look at my neighbors
and think what they're doing is
not very normal for me and, and
I'm fortunate to have my brother
and sister running the farm and,
and I think they're probably
normal. Uh, um, same thing with,
uh, the exemption to a service
water permit in that same
section would be exemption for
minor drainage, I don't know
what minor drainage is gonna be,
that's gonna be a fight right
down the road. Um,
Uh, also exempted from surface
water permits would be water
conservation practices. That's
pretty broad too. We don't know
what that was gonna be, that
anybody doing water conservation
practices is exempt, but again,
I'm, I'm, I'm not gonna belabor
this too much underworth. I
think I'm simply trying to
confirm that you're using
existing federal language,
you're tracking it, uh,
precisely, but I think that
inevitably, we're gonna see a
lot of litigation over what uh
these regulations mean and
that's been I think a concern
expressed.
Earlier today, and I, I see more
and more of it of this session,
which is we're leaving a lot of
things to rulemaking and uh and
regulations by agencies and my
concern with that is always that
that that may change with
administrations. So you and I've
served with 4 governors. Senator
Worth, we've seen some, uh,
governor who I've seen two of
them Republican, two of them
Democrat, and the the people who
had the agencies, uh, swing,
right? I mean that in a
different way, but they they
they they they.
I should say the pendulum swings
the heads of agencies sometimes
more conservative, sometimes
more liberal.
Oh, sometimes I really step into
it, don't I? Uh, so, um, um, so,
you know, another example of
exemptions if you look at the
bottom of page 32 in
subparagraph 4, you know,
exempted from a permit would be
maintenance, um, maintenance is
exempted from a permit, right?
And I don't know what
maintenance is gonna be and then
it goes on to say, including,
and then it provides a list of
what it includes, but that's not
an exclusive list. So it's, it
says including reconstruction of
recently damaged parts.
Of currently serviceable
structures. I don't know what
currently serviceable structures
is, I have no idea what that
could or would mean, so we'll
put that in rules and we'll
fight about that, I guess
someday down the road, but if
you're if you're maintaining
currently ser serviceable
structures, and then we do such
as, and we list dikes and dams
and other things, but again,
that's not exclusive. It's not
an all-inclusive list either,
so, uh, we'll see what comes up
with what is a currently
serviceable structure because if
you're maintaining that, you're
exempt.
Right from this, um.
Same thing with uh subparagraph
6 on line 33. This is a, an
issue that Senator Wirth and I
talked about in conservation and
we'll always talk about which is
return flows, and it says
composed entirely of irrigated
agriculture.
Um
So
Return flows composed entirely
of irrigated, I again, I assume
that again federal language
wording again? Yeah, yeah, I
can't imagine there's any such
thing as a return flow that is
composed entirely of aggregated
agriculture would be water from
irrigated agriculture, but it
wouldn't, you don't have
irrigated agriculture is not in
the return flow, right? So
that's pretty, you know,
artfully written.
Uh, the, um, paragraph 7 is
gonna be a fight for all the
mining and oil and gas folks
here today.
Exempted from a permit is any
storm water runoff from oil and
gas exploration or production or
processing or treatment. Again,
that says that it's composed
entirely of flows that are from
conveyance or systems of
conveyance.
On and on, you can see where
that's all gonna go, um, and
it's conveying precipitation
runoff. It's not contaminated by
contact with or did not come
into any contact with any
overburden. Uh, what's going to
be an overburden? We'll fight
about that. What is uh any
contact with raw material, we'll
fight about what that means, I
think probably.
Uh, you, you're exempted if
you're not contaminated by
intermediate products. I don't
think intermediate products is
probably defined either, so
we'll fight about what that
means.
We fight about what it means
it's not contaminated by a
byproduct or waste product
located on the site. So I think
you can get where I'm going.
We're, I think we're gonna be
looking at a lot of litigation
coming on that
We fight about what it means
it's not contaminated by a
byproduct or waste product
located on the site. So I think
you can get where I'm going.
We're, I think we're gonna be
looking at a lot of litigation
coming on
for 50 years, these terms have
existed. Everyone's lived with
these terms, the courts have
already had all these fights
now, yeah, it's at the federal
level. We're incorporating them
here, so it's not like this is
brand new language. I mean, it's
something, and again, I think
the point Ms. Lemon made is is
valid. The minute we tried to
tweak something.
It was, oh, don't touch that
cause that changes what we're
used to.
And so I think that's really why
we're trying to stick to what's
There versus trying to start a
new definition and then again,
boy, we can really spend some
time trying to noodle it down
and, and I assume the rulemaking
process will try and do some of
that, but, but you're right, I
respect what you're doing.
You're following this 50 year
precedent. The difference in my
mind is that, that we use the
federal language and we relied
on the EPA to interpret that at
the federal level. Now that
we're using these terms at the
statewide level, the battle
comes into our state court
system as opposed, you know, if
if I'm Joe Cervantes and we're a
farm, I'm not going to take on
the EPA. I'm gonna get squad.
washed, right, um, and, and I'm
not gonna take on the EPA in
their interpretation of federal
law, but Joe Cervantes farmer or
servant's family, uh, you know,
we might take on the state
Department of Environment,
right? Or we might take on a
state agency and take him on a
state court, as we might have a
shot there and and we might get
an injunction we might get uh
some successful results at a
state level where frankly, the
EPA would never even take on the
fight, but here I think oil and
gas will probably fight this,
uh.
at a state level and um and may
even find themselves a way to
get into federal court, maybe,
uh, I would certainly try if I
was them. The, I said we come
back to a paragraph of the, I'm
sorry, on page 34. Here's where
it's all pretty entertaining
too, it says all of those
exemptions that I just barely
touched on and started to go
through, says all the exemptions
shall not apply, uh, if the
discharge contains any toxic
pollutant set forth in rules by
the commission.
Uh, so the commission can decide
pretty broadly what a toxic
pollutant is and essentially
wipe out all those exemptions.
So when we say ags exempted or
mining or else exempted. No,
they're really not, uh, all
those exemptions are pretty
weak, frankly, because uh
there's that, and then it gets
really interesting, so we, uh,
because the exemptions here
don't apply and then I'm really
interested in that language on
13 through 15 you have any idea
what that means, I'd be really
curious. The exemptions don't
don't apply if any new activity
brings a surface water of the
state into.
farm production where the area
of the surface water is not
previously been used for
farming. Do you have any idea
what any of that's about?
Uh, Mr. Chair, that means if, if
you were, um, bringing a surface
water of the state and to farm
production where there hasn't
been farming historically.
Or currently, then you would
need a permit under the program.
Yeah, I think that's a terrible
mistake. Uh, so, because again
we follow farms and we rotate
crops and we do various things.
And, and sometimes we uh open
new farmland, right? And so what
you're telling me is I think
that's what this reads is if if
any new activity,
Brings the surface water of the
state, that's going to be water
from the rivers, right? If you
bring any water from the Rio
Grande onto an area where
service water has not previously
been used for farming, you need
a surface water permit, is that
that's what this reads, isn't
it?
Um
I'm not sure if you're talking
about diversions or if you're
talking about
The surface water of the state,
but this is direct language
again from the Clean Water Act,
so it's been in existence for 50
years, we were going with what
has been around for 50 years and
trying to align so it's not
anything new.
I, I get it, and I'm, I'm
smiling at centeror cause center
Worth and I've done some cases
where I, I, I do a little my, a
lot of my legal work and have
quite a bit of success while
doing things that nobody's ever
done before, uh, and, uh, and I
enjoy doing that quite a bit,
and that's part of being the fun
of being a lawyer is to litigate
things that nobody else has ever
thought of litigating before and
trying theories and strategies
that nobody's ever seen before,
and yeah, they, uh, yeah, I,
there there's a lot of nicknames
for me out there, I think, uh,
because of that, but
Yeah, you know, that's what a
creative lawyer I think does is
right is trying to find all of
these things and, and again, if
I'm reading that language very
literally in any farmer who puts
water on land that has not been
previously farmed before, we
have to have a permit, right,
um here by this language, it
would not be entitled to the
farm exemption, and that's gonna
be a pretty big issue for the
people that, uh, that I
generally represent my part of
the, part of the state farming
community, so, uh, I guess
we'll, we'll come to, we'll
cross all these bridges when we
come to it, um.
Again, I appreciate the, what
you're trying to do and and
you're, and I think that if I
was doing what you're trying to
do, I'd probably do the same
thing I'd follow them better
language to hopefully anchor
myself to something.
Which is probably the wisest
thing you can do, but, um,
again, I, I think I've given you
some examples of where some of
this stuff just really is pretty
nonsensical. Um, all due respect
to 50 years of federal precedent
and not meaning to sound too
arrogant in doing so, so, uh,
thank you, the sponsor. Anyone
else?
Questions, comments, motions?
you
Right, so, so we close, yep. I
don't need to. I can, I can make
a motion or a deal to send or
do. I mean, I think this has
been a good discussion.
Again, I do think both bills.
Work better together.
And again, what we've proposed
as the Senate sub.230690.1 puts
the bills together, so we just
need a motion for a do not pass
on 21 and 22 and then a
substitute.
Motion to pass the substitute,
so I'll take that, that's your
motion, so that's the motion.
Yeah, we have your motion.
Uh, er my for a point.
Do we want to call the
substitute Cenvie 21, and take
the lowest number as opposed to
multiple numbers. I think it's
referred to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bills, 21 and 22, and that it
does get reported under Senate
Bill 21. And so when you go on
online under 22, it'll reference
you back to 21, so 21 will be
the number that governs. Thank
you.
Alright, thank you, so we're on
a motion. There's a do not pass
and a pass as stated by the
sponsor. Uh, is there any
objection to the DuP pass
motion.
Singing Senator Bradley, Senator
Paul, Senator Thornton, is that,
yes, objection.
You're, you're objecting to the
Du pass motion, yes.
All right. Uh,
That's, yep, there you go. Thank
you. All right. So all of the
members of the committee voting
in the affirmative who were
present. Senator Worth do pass
on the motion as presented.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, the next matter for Senate
Bill 17, just for the, anyone
who's here, Senate Bill 36.
36, if you're here for that bill
to sponsor has asked that bill
not be heard tonight.
That's the sensitive personal
information and nondisclosure,
and I'm here. OK, Senator Sindo
parole and parole board changes.
Uh, do we have Senator Adam, we
do.
All right.
So my answer is is gonna chair
for a little bit.
Which one are we doing first? 17
and then 13.
So let's take a moment to to
clear out the room, please take
your conversations outside and
thank you for your patience and
So you have one person.
Oh
About 10 minutes. It's late. So
thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, we're bringing
forward Senate Bill 17, which is
modernizing the parole board,
and this hasn't been looked at
since the 1980s, and times have
changed, and so it's time that
we look at the parole board and
making the necessary changes and
put it into statute on what is
working. If you look at the
bill, section one is a cleanup,
and it takes the best practices
that have been happening and
it's adding them into the bill
and it looks at what
s have been doing since they've
been incarcerated. What have
they been doing to grow uh to be
rehabilitated while they're in
prison. That's the main focus of
section one, while Section 2 is
just a quick fix of the short
title, and if you look at
section 3, we go into the bill
at looking about compensation on
ensuring the board is
compensated for the work that
they're doing. And it talks
about the removal of the board.
So it's not just um
compensation, but how the board
can also be removed.
And then section 4 looks into
the introduction of scheduling
and making sure that we're
considerate when we're
scheduling this, and with that
I'm gonna yield to my
co-sponsors representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you members of the committee,
um, as he stated, this is
something that has been really
needing to be fixed for a long
time and I just want to go into
section 4 a little bit when you
talk about introduction, um,
into scheduling practices. I've
been working, um, with the board
for probably almost a little,
almost a year now, and
What we've been looking at is
currently discretionary parole
hearings, life sentences,
juvenile parole hearings.
Hearings often get aligned with
the anniversary of the offense,
so when you look at victims,
that's the death, that's the
date of death. So that's our
anniversary of death. So they
are asking victims and families
to look at parole hearings or to
be at parole hearings when we
are really on
that day trying to balance the
loss of life from a family
member, um, having to live
through that and really
considering even um the parole
dates when they're paroled out,
um, a lot of times, sorry, it's
cutting in and out. And this
time we can just place an
additional and unnecessary
emotional strain on those
affected by crime, so I would
really like to point out that as
a victim of crime myself, I
really think that's important.
To look at victims' rights in
addition to um the rights of the
parole. Mr. Chairman joining us
but who aren't going to speak,
but here are two expert
witnesses in case we need to
lean to them for some assistance
with answering questions you
might have to our writers Denali
Wilson, who is a staff attorney
for ACLU New Mexico and to our
left is Roberta Cohen, the
director of the New Mexico Adult
and parole board, and with that,
we'd like to hear who's in
support or opposition, and then
we'll take.
your questions. Thank you, thank
you, Senator Harrami. So I've
been handed a.
An amendment you want to talk
about this in the middle of your
presentation, or you want to do
it now? Sure, we can talk about
the amendment without I'm gonna
yield to, then I'll move up,
then I'll move uh amendment.
230583.1, I'll move it for
discussion purposes, uh, just,
if you could touch on the
amendment, yeah, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you so much, um.
As, uh, the sponsors said
section 3 of this bill makes
really important changes to the
removal process for parole board
members. Right now we have a 15
member at will parole board, um,
so that means, um,
That's a new governor who came
in could wipe the parole board
clean, um.
It's really quite rare, you
know, our everything from our
lottery commission to our
optometrists and our architects,
they all have um protective
language, uh.
The legislature exercises power
um to, to.
Restrict the terms under which a
governor can remove an appointee
under Article.
5 section 5, to protect the
political independence of our
boards, um, and make sure that
members are protected from from
arbitrary or politically
motivated removal.
As I said, this is a standard
board and commission language,
uh, the amended has to deal with
portions of the administrative
office of the courts and the uh
attorney general and their FIRs
they rightfully pointed out
that, um, you know, it's not
proper for us to be referring to
um jurisdiction, that the
Supreme Court's original
jurisdiction or impeachment
authority that's driving we
don't need to say, um, so they
also made recommendations about
clarifying
How the, the hearing will take
place. So this is something that
we made in discussion with the
administrative office of the
courts and to satisfy their
concerns. I know it's sometimes
hard to read the amendment in
context. So what this section,
um, 3. C will read now is that
members of the parole board may
be removed only for
incompetence, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office after
reasonable notice.
that
Uh
The reasonable notice and a
public hearing unless the notice
and hearing are expressly waived
in writing by the member.
Thank you. We'll take up that a
moment during the hearing, uh.
I'll go to the audience, how
many folks are in the audience
are in favor of this pill.
Please raise your hand.
You wish to speak anyone wish to
speak on the road, please come
forward.
which is say a few words or or
your.
You're good. I wish to speak in
favor of the bill. Does anyone
wish to speak in opposition of
the bill.
Members of the committee.
Senator Bradley. Mr. Chairman,
Senator Representative, good to
see you in here. I, I understand
the um removal process from the
board and I certainly understand
the request to make sure that
release dates or hearings do not
coincide with um
dates or birthdays.
Explain to me what it says that
this is addressing um language
of the parole board should
consider risk and readiness is
determined by a number of, of
what, education, vocational
training, compliance.
Is that, is that new or what are
they considering now?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, good
question, so that's already what
they're doing now, this would
put it in statute to ensure that
they continue to look at the
growth of the inmate while
they're behind bars. So it's the
best practice that's happening,
we just want to make sure that
it's captured in the bill. OK.
Thank you, Senator DeWitt.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator and Representative for
bringing this bill. I think this
is a good bill. I think this,
uh,
This is common sense, and it
makes a lot more sense to look
at.
How someone
At the
I think, uh,
At in the CCJ meeting.
Is that the, the, the dynamic
factors that can actually be
impacted rather than, uh, things
that, that cannot change. Um,
and the static.
Uh, issues.
And so I'm glad I like your
amendment.
Uh, we keep on seeing this issue
pop up and builds this session
with people trying to give
The Supreme Court original
jurisdictions for stuff and uh
They're being constitutional
challenges with that, um, so
rather than us having a
bajillion.
Constitutional amendments on
our ballot Supreme Court jud
jurisdictional things. Um, I
think your approach is, is a
good one.
But yes, no, I support this bill
and
Look forward to seeing it move
on.
Uh, Senator
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I,
I support the in the amendment
too, but I'm just, I, I don't
think the amendment.
Struggling over this period
after the word office, and you
know you've got after reasonable
notice has to be before that
period, so I, I can't tell if
what we've done takes care of
that.
OK, let's take a look. It says
after office.
So it would move the period
after the word member.
Right.
So you think that doing this it
leaves the period and then you
stick this in. It's not as
precise as
What we've been used to, but I
think.
I think it does it. All right.
Did you wish to move amendment.
OK.
Oh, Senator, 2nd time. I'll,
I'll move the amendment for
adoption.
We have a motion to move the
amendment for adoption.
Uh, any debate on the amendment.
Any objection to the amendment.
Seeing no objection, please show
all those present voting in the
affirmative. You have an amended
bill.
The Members of the committee.
Couple of questions, um.
First of all, thank you for
bringing this forward. Parole is
just an obscure.
Part of state government that uh
That only a very few.
Folks have to endure, um.
So it's good to refresh our
memory with regards to this, so
like first degree murder is 30
years to life, they're eligible
for parole after 30 years.
And, you know,
Technically parole the decision
to let someone out is how have
they acted from the day they
walked in until the day of the
parole hearing.
But what we're doing is we're
Continuing to codify uh.
The, you know, circumstances of
the offense, whether a deadly
weapon was involved.
How is that relevant to
determining
What a person's done in those 30
years.
So Mr. President, that's, I
mean, Mr. Chairman and members
of the committee, that's where
you see that growth plan that
they've done and what we don't
want to do is retry the inmate
for the crime that's already
being served. What we want to do
is we want to make sure that the
board evaluates the individuals
interest in their own growth and
the rehabilitation while they're
in there, and so it's not
looking at their crime and
retrying them, but what have
they done to see themselves grow
since the time they went behind
bars until the time they go up
to see the parole board.
Thank you, Senator Armi
Representative Chavez, and then
also the, this locks in the uh.
The ability for the victim to
say a few words at the hearing.
Is
Are we being a little
disingenuous.
With regards to that, if, if the
determination is how they've
been doing the last 30 years.
Or do you think the victim would
be informed.
That that they don't, that
they're not the decider
necessarily.
Um, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, it is a very
important factor, I believe for
the family of the representative
of the victim to give their
thoughts on what they think.
Should be down at the parole
hearing, they are still the
victim of the crime, and we are
putting in all of those
reasonable risk and readiness of
release, but I think it's also a
very important factor for the
parole board to hear from the
victim because a lot of times
they are ultimately the ones
that are truly paying the life
sentence.
Thank you for that,
Representative Chavez. The, um,
also
We have to be reminded of what
that person's capable of doing.
You know, and what, and what.
You know, it's the same person,
although maybe a different
person 30 years later, the, um,
And then lastly, on the section
4.
Um
It says you shall not schedule a
hearing.
But it doesn't say anything
about the person getting out,
you know, DOC has a really good
system where they notify victims
of release dates and and things
of that nature.
Could you imagine getting a text
3 days from the
From the anniversary of
And that the person's getting
out on that day. So what I would
suggest is
Maybe not now, but after on on
page 9, line 7.
After the word hearing.
There may be a man that they
shall not schedule a hearing.
Uh, nor shall the department
release the inmate.
On the anniversary.
Of the birth or death.
Mr. Chairman
So Senator Maestas chairman and
members of the committee, um, I,
I want to make it very clear in
regards to the New Mexico Parole
Board, we, we do not have the
function of the release
authority for inmates, so we
create the conditions
specifically for those inmates
and then the Department of
Corrections is the one that sets
the release date, so in regards
to this, if we're looking
specifically for the parole Act,
um, this would be specific to
the parole board, not to the
Department of Corrections.
Thank you for that. So you're
suggesting if that amendment
were to be made, it should be
made in a different section of
law.
OK, I think it should be made,
so I'll work with you on that,
Senator. And then just lastly,
the, when, when it comes to a
homicide, the decedent.
is not just the victim, but the,
but the family, the immediate
family members in law and.
And the family and friends and
community in in fact, so thank
you.
Members of the committee.
We have a motion for a do pass
as amended in a second by
Senator Thornton.
Um
the opposition to a Du Pas
motion.
Please raise your hand if you
have an opposition to a Du Past
motion, seeing none, you have a
uh a do pass as amended. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
And now we'll go to Senate Bill
13. Senator Shindo, welcome.
You're
Your 2 minutes starts now. No.
Don't take it away, have as much
time as you need to. I, I make a
motion for do pass.
Oh, I'm not gonna be sorry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
Uh, in front of us, we have the,
uh,
Senate bill 3.
Uh, which is, uh,
State tribal education Compact
Act, uh, this, uh.
Bill, as it's presented is
identical to the Senate
Judiciary Substitute that passed
out of here.
So what, uh,
Two years ago in 2023, 60 day
session.
We just ran out of time in the
house, so what you have is what
was passed, uh, in this
committee, uh, two years ago. So
that's the starting point for
this bill. So the chairman was
asking me about, were there any
changes to the bill as it
Passed out of here and said, no,
this is the identical bill that
was passed by this committee.
Uh, so, anyway, uh,
Uh
What the bill does is um.
Really allows a tribes.
To negotiate with the PED.
To develop language and culture
schools.
Uh, as, as many of you know, we
have 8 different languages that
are spoken in the state of
Mexico, by our 23 tribes.
You know, wawahamazuni, Navajo
Muscular Apache, and Hickory
Apache. Those are the languages
that are here. All of them,
according to uh linguists are
are threatened languages.
Uh, I believe there's some
statistics that uh 50% of the
languages that are spoken in the
US.
may be gone within the next, you
know, generation.
Uh, there's tribes that have
maybe a handful of fluent
speakers, so I think the whole
idea of language, uh,
revitalization is now happening
across the country, uh, I have
with me here, uh, tonight, the
governor of the Pueblo of Hema.
Some of you know that have been
in the Senate for a long time,
probably recognize, uh, our
former deputy sergeant at arms,
for those of you that are not
aware, in, in some of the Pueblo
villages, we don't have
elections.
Or religious and our our our
clan mothers of the various
societies appoint leadership.
So
December 28th, our deputy
secretary our deputy uh uh uh
our, our deputy, uh, sergeant at
Arms, life's changed.
And
when they came knocking through
his door and so forth, so at
this time I like to uh I turn
over to our governor for the
Pueblo of Hamish Georgeendo and
then to write I mean Taran, he's
here as my expert witness, my
brother who is the education
director, is in Washington DC
for NCAI, so he's on Zoom, if
there's any technical questions
that I'll be asked. Welcome,
Governor,
good evening. Um.
committee
Uh, like to.
Uh cent already opened the, uh,
The session here.
Yes, I like to open it in.
In my language, if I may.
I thought you should
We all
is 30 months.
With the.
Lu.
Oh.
Well
Although.
all the
Yeah.
in.
Well.
And the more.
A wheat.
The whole
I'm.
I'll do the.
Be.
always one.
I'll tell you,
I was
on and they walk on with him.
leaning for someone.
a lot.
And with the uojun.
no
no no
no, not
no.
The, uh,
where I have sent uh opening
session here.
evening.
Addresses
Each one of you spirit first.
And the governorship that I
hold.
It addresses
Those cause, cause they are
always first.
Then I address each of you
individually.
Of the person that you are that
uh see that you hold.
It is the uh that we give.
Oh, you
The, uh
Uh, leaders of the state of New
Mexico.
The senators
So I opened up with with the.
Oh,
addressing you in that manner.
I appreciate that, thank you.
No.
Um
As, as the uh senator here has
stated, uh,
My name is George Shindel, uh,
better known to you, uh.
The centers that have been here
before.
Um, I will see, uh,
Uh, Deputy Sergeant in Arms down
in the Senate chamber, uh,
before I, uh, I was appointed
this position as governor.
Um, so today,
Come
Of this way uh to the uh.
the capital.
Oh
You better know know know us as
the heinous people, but we call
ourselves the the he hemish.
We are the h
And this, and for uh
A conversation purpose or just
us as the Haus.
The Hemus has always prioritized
language.
In education for our children,
having established the first two
native.
Language and cultural based
charter schools in 1999 and
2001, respectively.
We have always looked at
innovative approaches to evolve
and improve the education system
serving our children and youth.
In 2012, the tribal council
approved a formal conversation
of our Head Start program to
full immersion in our hemous
language. This transition was
fully realized in 2016.
In 2021, Haman's formalized our
relationship with the university
of Hawaii at Hilo.
To develop a pilot.
To develop and pilot a heinous
language immersion teacher
licensure program.
In 2022, Hamus with the support
of Governor uh Grisham.
And the state and federal
agencies.
Open our new world to early
childhood learning center,
dedicated to teaching Haus who
are infants, colors, and has
started age children.
In that same year, the tribal
council formally established a
Hamish.
K through 6 immersion pilot to
grow by 10 children a year as a
means to further strengthen the
hemus language immersion
program.
In 2022, the legislative
education Study Committee.
L E S L E S C visited our
emergency school to learn more
about the efforts and to see
firsthand the instructions and
learning happenings with our
children.
Following this visit,
The LESC legal team worked with
Hamus to draft and develop
Senate bill 482 tribal state
tribal education compact School
Act.
First introduced
In 2023 by Senator Shendo yeah,
center Shao in 2023, Senate Bill
482 was supported by the
legislation if education study
committee.
The New Mexico public education
department, New Mexico Center
for Law and Poverty and all
public councils of governors.
Now,
we are here in 2025 once again
promoting.
And supporting the passage of
Senate Bill 13.
The state
Tribal education complex School
Act as a means to prioritize our
native language and further
strengthen.
true tribal ownership over the
education of our children.
All right, thank you.
Judiciary Committee.
Or allow me to address
And
And I look forward
A favorable to pass on Senate
Bill 13.
Thank you. Thank you, Governor.
We miss you this session, you
want to say a few words briefly
or or just answer questions.
Well, well, we'll get the
technical stuff and there's
things that we don't address.
Thank you, Senator. We, uh,
let's go to the, let's go to the
public. Uh, there's 3 folks
signed up.
Who, uh, wishes to speak in
favor of this bill.
I have Alyssa Cori, Rachel
Chavez.
Answer Chavez, just please step
forward. You got on the mic for
the folks listening at home.
Yeah, just introduce yourself.
Thank you. Everyone has a couple
of minutes.
I see him at all hope, Alicia
Chris Mica,
New Mexico native Eanch, the
sexipanita to pass Senate Bill
13, uh, you was, um, not that's
whack, I mean.
Greetings, good evening, uh,
vice chair, it's Senate
committee members and
thoughtful. Um, my name is
Alicia Creese, and I'm a tribal
member of the Pablo Santo
Domingo and I'm a lobbyist with
New Mexico Native vote, and I'm
here today speaking of support
for Senate Bill 13. I'm grateful
for my Pueblo for their
investment in my language and
cultural education that allows
me to translate my support for
this bill, um, back to my people
and to my family. As we look to
the future of the health and
vital
quality of the languages and
cultures that color our great
state, we need further support,
uh, from not only within the
home, but also within the
classroom.
Our cultural languages continue
to hold deep concepts and
philosophies enriching our
understanding of the world
around us, allowing us to apply
this view and help us with
translating and sharing
knowledge gain back to our
communities for our people to
understand. I urge your support
in investing in the languages
and cultures that stand behind
our great Z sun symbol. Thank
you so much.
Thank you
Anyone else for 2 minutes. Good,
good evening committee members
don't teach her, um, my name is
Bernadette Hardy. I'm Haus and
Dena. Greetings, um, I'm here to
support SB 13 as a mother and at
as a a person from and I need to
vote, um, this is our first step
toward educational justice for
native students, the Yazi
Martinez uh versus the state of
New Mexico decision made it
clear native students have been
denied a sufficient equitable
education.
SB 13 is a response to this
lawsuit. It authorizes state
tribal education compact STEC
schools allowing tribes to
establish publicly funded
tribally governed schools to
reflect their languages,
cultures, and ways of learning.
This bill will empower tribal
sovereignty and education,
giving tribes full control over
curriculum assessments and
learning standards. This bill
ensures equitable funding and
grantings.
STEC schools access to New
Mexico's public school funding
formula. This bill centers
native languages and culture
reversing the systematic
exclusion of indigenous
knowledge from classrooms.
Please, we urge your due past SB
13. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else wish to
speak in favor anyone?
Please.
Good evening.
members of the committee.
My name is Mark Mitchell.
Former governor from the Pueblo
of Suzuki.
And former chairman of the All
Pueblo Council Governors.
And during that time, we did
support this bill and I here
supporting this bill for all the
statements that were made
earlier, which is critical at
this point in time, as we always
say, our people have already
paid it for in perpetuity.
So now we have to
Come here and make sure that.
Those behind this do the same.
So I urge this.
Mr. Sutter, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Drew Sutter, registered lobbyist
for the Pueblos of Ita San
Felipe
Santa Clarino came strongly
support the leg.
Oscar
Thank you. Anyone in the
audience, uh, wish to speak in
opposition. Is there anyone?
In the Zoom world.
Thank, thank you, Senator. Um,
we'll go to the committee,
members of the committee.
Senator Stewart, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So I had the privilege of being
at the schools with ESC.
Uh, seeing these wonderful
little students so unafraid,
standing up, speaking in their
language, saying their name,
their plan, where they're from,
um, it was just very impressive.
So, um,
I, I fully support this. I have
a question, and I have a worry.
So my, my first question.
Of the eight native languages,
how many of them are written.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator, I think uh I know
Navajo Nation, uh, I think their
language is written, it's taught
at the university as well as
some of the schools, but I, I
believe the rest of them are are
unwritten.
So, Mr. Chairman and Senator. So
what amazing thing that happened
last year after uh we have been
training teachers on teaching
reading. Native American
students increased their reading
proficiency by 5 points. That's
an unheard of amount.
So my worry.
Is that
You know, I, I fully support
the.
Language
Letting those students really
become uh.
bilingual, but
But so you've, you're exempting
yourself though, from all
curriculum.
Assessment and evaluation.
So are you gonna teach how to
read.
Are you gonna teach math?
Uh
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Stewart, it's really fascinating
because.
All three of us sitting here,
Hamus was our primary language.
And you've told me stories about
that work. We went to the room
where you were there as head
start. You were 5 years old, you
didn't speak a word of English,
and now you have a professor
from Stanford's
Is that if our children
are fluent in Hamus.
For the first
89 years of their life.
They're never gonna forget it.
But we're finding out from Head
Start right now is that when our
kids go through our, our, our
early childhood Head Start,
which is fully immersed Toa in
kindergarten, they go to the
charter school or BIE school or
the public school.
We're realizing that within a
year, those kids that have gone
through our total immersion in
in hip start or losing it.
So that's why the council passed
a resolution to establish a K
through 6.
A school, so that if we can keep
these kids, at least during that
time.
But we also know that, you know,
English is everywhere.
I mean, you can't get away from
it.
But our own life experiences, I
think it's important that if my
kids are immersed in that.
You'll have two languages,
perhaps 3 languages.
Uh, and so forth. So I think
they're gonna accelerate. I
mean, I think there's studies
that have shown that if students
have multiple languages at some
point.
You know, English may not be,
but at some point,
The curve is going to go like
this.
Because that's how it was for
us.
I look back in, in, in, in, in,
in, in, in at least my
generation.
Those of us that were fluent in
Hamas and went to Head Start or
there was a little earlier on.
I think we produce probably a
lot of highly educated.
Books
And I don't have a a
longitudinal study, but I know
pretty much everyone in our
community.
And I see
Our doctors, our PhDs, are
veterinarians, our engineers.
And, and now we're having
difficulty.
You know, because
A lot of our kids aren't rooted
solidly in in in.
In, in their own language, and I
think that sometimes, you know,
when you go to college, you get
challenged.
who you are.
And what you believe in.
Sometimes I think that's a
difficult.
Transition, but both of us, we
knew exactly who we are.
And I think that's the strength
and the courage that, that, that
we want to instill in our young
people so that they can go out
and be who they want to be.
And without the fear and so
forth. So and I think that's
what we want to go back to
because we know that's
successful for us.
And I, I, I want you to succeed,
and I know you're going to
because I've seen those
students. I've seen your school
and I've seen what you're doing.
But
I mean, we're having trouble
teaching kids how to read when
they only know English.
You know, so, um,
I'm, I don't see K 6 in here
anywhere.
Are you just doing this for K 6?
Well, no, this is allowed the
tribe to basically decide what's
where they're at. And, and so
we're not prescriptive. I mean,
it's really up to each of the
individual tribes of where
they're at, what they want to
do, and allows them to negotiate
with PED what that compact will
all entail, which great and so
forth, so that's just all I'm
saying is that.
You're gonna have to figure this
out. You're gonna have to watch
these kids because, yeah, we
want them to be 89, 1011, 12,
and fully uh.
Not bilingual, fully immersed in
their own language.
But
If, if they don't start to learn
to read.
Um, English, uh, by the time
they're middle and high. I just
think they're kind of in
trouble, so I'm just, just
cautioning you as my 30 years as
a teacher, it's costing you to
do that. I love visiting that
school and I, I look forward to
coming back there when you're up
and running. I, I do remember
when I asked about reading when
I visited what I was shown was
little pictures that kids put
the pictures together cause your
language is not written.
Uh, so it's just fascinating to
me, um, how you're gonna do
that. So I'm gonna come visit.
So thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator.
Members
Pleasure of the committee. Oh,
Senator, Senator Worth.
No Miss Josh is gonna say this,
so this bill, uh, I, I looked at
the former, I think.
Governor Shendo.
Referenced 482 from two years
ago, and this is basically
there's a couple little tweaks
that are different, but this is
the same bill we passed. I
think, my guess is the council
service.
We a few things that weren't
substantive.
So I just wanted to flag that. I
think it passed the Senate with
one vote in opposition, and then
just didn't get hurt on the
house side, so we did hear this
and.
I agree, it's an interesting
concept and Senator Brantley and
I were just talking about.
You know, for example,
Will you all set up graduation.
Threshold, so.
As you go through are the
requirements that you're gonna
put in place.
That your specific students that
are once one of these is set up,
will be required to meet to, to,
to graduate.
I answer that and I'll turn it
over to as well, you know, we'll
work with the University of
Hawaii.
OK. And, you know, the Maoris
really brought back the
language.
The Hawaiian language.
And they have professors, they
have so, so we're working with
them.
So that we can develop our own
evaluation plans and so forth.
So, uh, they're really the
leaders in this work and, and
hopefully through that process,
we can work with our local
universities to build that
expertise here, because it's not
just Toa now, it could be Carris
tomorrow, it could be Tawaiwa,
all these other languages, and I
think we want to also build that
uh that expertise and capacity
within our own respective
universities in this state
working with other you know.
ities from uh Hawaii to perhaps
New Zealand or the places that
have really revitalized their
language they didn't native
languages and I'll turn it over
to uh Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and Senator Wirth, um,
just wanted to respond to some
of the comments that have been
made and we appreciate your
thoughtfulness in this entire
process. I want to turn your
attention to the legislative
education Study Committee's
analysis on the bill, where they
uh provided that their sound
research and evidence that
native students' educational
outcomes improve.
when schools fully integrate
native languages and culture.
Today, native students still
face significant outcome gaps.
That's because only 25% of
native students are proficient
in reading.
Only 13% are proficient in math,
and only 24% are proficient in
science. So we've acknowledged
in the state of New Mexico in
Yazi B Martinez, the versus
state of New Mexico, that there
is a shortage of teachers.
And there's a shortage of really
uh needs to address the
educational gaps of of many um
at-risk students. Here with
Senate Bill 13, we are looking
to
Authorized really and provide
tribes, their governing
authority and their
self-determination to establish
their own assessments,
curriculum and to negotiate with
the public education department
to understand the philosophy of
tribes is really that we live in
two worlds. We have a world that
we have in our own ways of life
as tribal people, but we also
acknowledge that outside of our
reservation, there may not be
other people who speak the same
language as us as us and the and
and tribes of
Fully cognizant of that reality,
and they, and they deeply
understand in their pedagogy and
epistemologies and our ways of
being, that we have to be able
to go in and throughout these
two worlds. So one, there are 4,
I want to point you to, um, the
polls of Haus and Kocheti who
have language-based schools and
there's other tribes that are
looking to establish a
foundation of language-based
schools. The reason that um
there is this initiative in the
first place is
Because federally there have
been common core standards. We
probably all are aware of that
every student succeeds Act that
requires states to establish a
set of standards of education.
All those are based in English.
Right? And what are, what are
the outcomes of our students as
a result of those processes
over, I would say the last um 60
years.
Because the real the outcomes
are one while our languages
suffer, they're not even getting
the best education in English in
the first place.
So we're we're requesting to
Senate Bill 13 that we
revitalize and restrengthen our
own language base.
To, uh, inform our community
members and from our youngest
ages through high school, and
there's primary, early
childhood, primary and secondary
educations that they are
grounded in language, grounded
in culture, and through that
foundation, that they understand
and are are are engaged and
taught in their, um, and in
English principles that can also
help them thrive.
In their native communities and
also in the state of New Mexico
and the and the rest of the
world.
Thank you, chair.
Mr. Chair, I appreciate that
response. I just think one thing
for Governor Shindo, I think you
need to travel to the University
of Maui, do a little research
there.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. We'll,
we'll, we'll put that in the
hospital appropriation, yeah,
yeah, yeah, what do you call it?
uh, public service project.
Senate, Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Is it OK
to move a do pass now, or do we
still, I'd like to move it too
fast.
We have a Du pass motion uh to
be uh there's no more debate,
just quick comment uh.
Thank you for bringing this
forward at the um.
The, uh, the, the
The dialect of northern New
Mexico is is is set to die like
in.
2042 or 2044, it's a mixture of
17th century Castilian Spanish
and made up words when things
get invented, uh, like roke and
stuff like that, so, um, so, so
that's, but that's cool cause
that way at least all the
Latinos in New Mexico will be
speaking the same language
someday, but um, I just wanna
take a moment to, to reflect on
the, on the, the boarding
schools that this country.
Created 100 years ago and the
forced assimilation and and the
and the atrocities that we're
learning about now and then the
dreams of these schools.
That are going to come to
fruition under your leadership.
It's it's such a beautiful
thing, so um.
So anyway, uh, one question
though of concern is is there
are all the 6 spoken languages.
Is there a reluctance amongst
the elders to record those
languages or they are they all?
Is there a a library record of
recordings.
I know for us, you know, it's
all oral, it's not written, and
I think there's some discussions
in the past about not recording,
but you know, things are
changing, I I don't know. I
mean, that's really up to each
individual tribe to decide
what's in their best interest,
uh, and so forth, so I, you
know.
But yeah, but, but, uh, as when
you mentioned boarding school,
let me just read this paragraph
because uh you, you, uh, you
heard about the boarding school
experience, and this is a, uh,
the boarding school, uh, federal
Indian boarding school
initiative that Secretary in
Holland.
Really initiated it and and this
is just the first paragraph uh
from from that uh initiatives
between 1819 to the 1970s, the
United States implemented
policies establishing.
And supporting Indian boarding
schools across the nation. The
purpose of federally Indian
boarding school was to
culturally assimilate American
Indian, Alaskan native, and
native Hawaiian children by
forcibly moving them from their
families, communities,
languages, religions, and
cultural beliefs, while children
intended federal boarding
schools, many endure physical
and emotional abuse, and in some
cases died.
So that those are huge reports
that are, are now available and
that covers, you know, what
happened in this country, and I
think what we're trying to do is
reverse that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committees.
Oh, no, I'm just thanking you.
I think right now
All right.
