If the legal counsel for the
department of information
technology talk bear with me
essentially we needed to come
forward to
Clarify quite a few of the
definitions when we passed the
legislation to create the office
originally we also needed to do
a little bit of work and clean
up in several places that allow
the department to find them more
of the middle mile with
broadband delivery so that on
the other end companies could
come in or other regions or
groups to come in to actually
provide the last mile and an
actual delivery to the consumer
and we did include some
amendments along the way one of
them was to for consistency sake
we wanted to find a definition
of HSD and so we we defined that
agency means executive cabinet
agencies in their
administratively attached
agencies offices boards and
commissions because there is a
board involved the the
connecting Mexico council it as
is what this is called here we
also want to strike of the last
sentence
From from that section and then
the third thing was to amend the
final sentence of that actual
second section and include all
information reported by a
facilities based provider would
be available to the office so
that they could compile that and
we can have a he she meant if
you will to understand where
broadband is Word isn't speeds
uploads downloads all of that so
that we can begin to plow away
getting that up and running the
way it needs to that's
essentially what the legislation
does there is
In the FIR there's some of a few
dollars here.
Upwards of seven hundred ninety
two thousand three years down
the road which essentially moves
some of the F. T. E. that is an
add to the budget or or require
additional Representative cost
of the budget but it moves it
being directly and the do
department of information
technology places it directly in
the office of broadband access
and expansion and so that's
essentially what the legislation
does when asked the director to
say a few words because I know
that one a little bit of a
crunch time cruncher okay yes
thank you for having me here
committee and chairman of thank
you so much for for the agency
in and this bill is so important
for us to get our work done and
allows us to take our public
funds and do our of peas with
private companies to build the
middle mile and then we create a
framework across the state to be
able to for our internet service
providers to get their services
to the home in the last mile.
So I'd also like to have tried
bearing state what happens if we
don't get this bill passed.
Chair Senators the dinners from
significant consequences of this
law doesn't pass we currently
have a grant application pending
and he had a for middle mile
infrastructure construction
funds and as part of that
application we committed to
standing up a public agency
process for administering that
middle file I can activity and
the the federal government wants
to award those grants to states
that are going to be
participants in the middle mile
market place what they're
looking for for the states to be
able to subsidize and support
the I. S. piece that we need to
connect the last mile rural
communities without this bill we
may not be able to make our.
We are committed to the federal
government.
And that is.
So that so those are opening
statements thank you Mr chairman
thank you.
No Sir we have not been
registered in support or
opposition so will write to
members the committee for fifty
two committee members questions.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman local
timing.
a shared system the house will
this.
Mr chairman and and Senator I I
don't ever right now the gambler
I don't you know any that I and.
I think I do I feel very good
that it's going to get done.
So Mr chairman certificate fill.
There is not.
Okay.
It.
Chairman of the past.
Senator o'neill chips Senator
Senator Ivey Soto in.
I thank you Mr chairman.
So I see a definition.
Of HSD.
On thanks to.
And.
So first of all.
Unless otherwise specified means
executive branch cabinet
agencies.
So we have a floral executive in
New Mexico this gentleman.
And the separately
So the services of the
department are not available the
the poor executive.
As I understand.
Thank you Mr chairman or the
secretary designate this this
office is administratively
attached to this to the
Department of information
technology as well as the ask
the secretary does need to be
here but does is appointed by
the governor in the governor's
office.
Mr chair still Senators and
Senator Ivey Soto if I
understand the question is it's
what other agencies do we do
provide services optionally to
these non executive agencies who
may participate and and fire
services
however they are not obligated
to do so.
When they do they are obligated
to follow the rules associated
with that service and not
necessarily any other rules
promulgated by do it or it's
attached agencies because that
is your question Senator.
So Mr Chairman seperti Act and
start so it's the.
So under this then.
When you use the term agency.
Using about those who are who
are compelled to use your
services for lack of better
term.
Mr chair Senator that is
correct.
And
And then.
Just out of curiosity what does
it say that other.
Other public bodies including
other parts of the federal
Executive are.
Other parts of government are
able to subscribe to your
services.
Chair Senator I see Mr Barron
looking it up right now I'm sure
it's in there.
Okay and
The Sherman I I noticed that
although you.
The final word agency as agency.
As I go through the bills.
Their part their places where
you referred to executive
agency.
Of the other places we refer to.
Of state agencies.
and.
And then other places.
We just have a state agency is
it.
The chairman
is it your intent that they all
mean the same thing.
Mr chair Senator no that is not
the intent where you see the
term agency it means
just what you think of as.
For the executive for cabinet
level agencies for example that
might exclude elected officials
such as the attorney general's
office the state land office of
the secretary of state takes
several those people are not
obligated to by any of the
services.
Correctly we go to your Council
real quick and we'll go back to
thank you Mr chairman yes the
secretary at Senators if we look
at age seventeen section five
subsection the that is the
provision that allows the
department after the obligations
to the executive branch agencies
offer and its services to other
public yes Sir.
Got okay very good so then let's
go back to.
We could.
Right so so your the definition
is agency which is.
Executive branch cabinet
agencies the the compelled once.
But then for example on page
seven.
You know and when you say that
that.
The secretary shall review
executive agency plans.
Is that.
Is that intended to be.
Capt Representative a cabinet
level can agencies.
Mr chair Senator although it is
true that we
review there the state plans it
is true that we look at the
other agency plans as well but I
don't think that was necessarily
intended to distinguish between
the two okay.
And.
And likewise on throughout page
seven you can do in order to use
the word phrase executive
agency.
And then.
That I find on.
It is on the page eight.
Executive agency.
And then.
That's a.
And then we have on page eleven.
The state agency.
That received an invoice from
the department for services
rendered to the agency.
Again I'm.
Yes please go ahead and would
you take the microphone over
here is that this.
Mr chair committee members
Senator yes in the state agency
may include either the executive
cabinet level agencies or any
other state agency the
distinction there if we're
billing them there are customers
who is either compelled or as
elected to use a service.
Representative that this
gentleman
and the secretary.
Where you.
We have that distinct what do
you.
Have that subsection do.
On
The bottom page seventeen topics
eighteen.
You referred to.
Maybe catalog is a services to
non HSD customers.
And so.
So the.
HSD that.
Seems to be.
HSD would I would infer.
The above use of agency to be
the cap of agencies.
Mr chair Senator.
No not necessarily for example
the secretary of state could
elect to purchase let's just say
email instead of a broadband
line turned up from the
department of I. T. they would
be one of the agencies who would
receive a bill under the term
state agents.
Right and and I guess what I'm
trying to put up to this
gentleman in the secretaries
that.
Is that where you bring them in
in terms of being able to offer
services to them for their
efforts was a non agency.
Mr chair Senator I'm gonna be
for
into my council thank you.
Mr chair Senator of a lot of the
provisions that we're looking
at.
Context of these questions are
currently provisions of the to
act in an active the change
pursuant to this statute the the
statues with added definition of
agency specifically what it
stands alone to refer only to
executive branch agencies and
the ministry of labour Task
Force and commissions and there
are are are provisions in the
new act.
He's standing alone with the.
It would make clear that when
those mandatory obligations are
imposed by the do it act only
he's only those entities that
fall within that new definition
of agency are mandatory
compliance.
The other provisions can broader
and apply to additional not
executive branch agencies.
And we can also have customers
were not agencies at all for
example right now we have State
Land Office that is the HSD is
not affected branch that will
get invoices faster.
and we also have some non HSD
customers in the public sector
that fire radio services
that are subject to the
provisions because we we can't
by the statute regulate
municipalities survivors
services as far as as state
agencies how we build them how
we collect from them I can be in
statute but we don't have for
here's how how we build select.
Not states that for such as the
city dollars.
Cracked you Mr chairman.
Secretary council I.
I understand that I appreciate
that this is that you define
those as non agency.
And then you want to have them
refer to as agency and that's
where the problem lies I think.
So Mister chairman if I could
attempt to something with what.
So we can move on yes Senator
Ivey Soto were the last forty
eight hours of the sixty day
session this as of this bill was
referred to this committee on
the forty eighth day of the
sixty day session.
I expect to move quickly with a
lot of folks through a lot of
bills that so this gentleman on
page twenty one line one strike
to work state.
On.
H..
Back to where I was.
We have some work.
Yeah on.
Okay let's let's start here page
seven line one right the word
executive.
Eight seven line six strike the
word executive.
Eight seven one seven strike
toward executive.
A seven line twelve strike the
word executive.
Eight seven one twenty four
strike toward executive.
Page eight line to strike toward
executive.
For
page.
Eight.
Line sixteen strike toward
executive.
Page eight.
What are the okay Page
ten.
Line nineteen strike the word
executive.
Page ten line twenty one strike
toward executive.
Angel
Eleven line one strict what
state.
Page.
twenty one line one strike
toward state.
Page twenty one line twenty one.
Strike the word agency.
Thanks twenty four line twenty
three.
Right to work state.
At that.
Motion will call vote please
twenty minutes Senator.
Are these friendly I need to
have the council tell me this
there was an awful lot of that
and I appreciate it thank you
but I I do.
I think we believe it's going to
matter.
Chairman said that a lot of
these.
Language is constructed as
current language is correct for
Mr correct that's the it's
because before they did not have
a definition HSD.
And we needed one for these
purposes so this is helpful yeah
what aligns at all but let me
just if I can please just get
one quick comment.
That is in on.
Okay so we want one small
revision to the Senate Mr
chairman the Senators page
eleven line one.
right after at a.
In.
In the state agency.
And and and I'm sorry and.
Hi yeah thank you.
Yes of course we change the
eight AM.
The.
And we're friendly at current
girlfriend to the for the
discussion will call on the
proposed amendment please
Senator Baca.
No.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores yes.
Federal yes.
Senator Stewart to get.
Senator Duhigg yes.
Senator yes six one that
amendments adopted service of I
just simply finished by saying.
This is a big job it's easy to
if there's a lot of these things
you have done a fantastic job on
the rest of this and I really
congratulate you and thank you
very much thank.
The committee discussion
questions we have to do past
Marshall.
This correction and to pass it
is Mr chairman further
discussion is there any
objection seeing no so Senator
Moores Baca serve on to is to
have a meal Stewart and Ivey
Soto you able to pass the line.
Thank you for letting us be
heard.
Up we've got a lot of you hear a
lot of you have been very busy
work in the house and the Senate
I'll just let you know that
right now the plan is to go
pretty much to the agenda in the
order we've got it hi you score
no brownie points by being here
sitting around on your hunches
Alicia relief and what we're
doing here but you can probably
do that from your office or
elsewhere so will call for you
let us know where you're at but
if you're tensions together on
your more than welcome with
someone to think that you're
gonna miss me opportunity widely
out of the room.
Representative Nibert most of
one sixty five.
The committee no to of course
today the other one knows is not
a day that we usually meet in
this committee of course for the
last couple of days so we're
squeezing and sometimes we get
time to me after the floor
tonight we'll try and do that
again and we'll certainly look
for every opportunity again
tomorrow early and late
necessary.
Thank you Mr chair for years
house bill one sixty five it is
a uniform law commission act it
would did receive one slide
amendment
In the house yet the basically
revises.
The uniform unclaimed property
act which this stated opted in
nineteen ninety it was revised
in two thousand three and since
that time there's been a lot of
Different types of accounts that
one may establish which requires
an update to that two thousand
three statute that we have on
the books I'm happy to go and
tell you section by section
maybe what some of the updates
are for I can simply
stand for questions and try to
address your questions to my
left is my experts Mr Jack
Burton with roti law firm here
in Santa Fe and a uniform law
commissioners.
So how over the the chair would
like me to proceed we have
nobody registered in opposition
to the bill so.
Mr Burton maybe was just one or
two minutes of your input
please.
Hello Mister chair I have
nothing further to add I think
the.
Representative already
displaying the bill thank you so
both of you to our uniform law
commissioners thank you for that
most the committee members are
familiar with what the work does
the curious thing for me is
always have the uniform laws are
different than compacts this
committee has a difficult time
struggling with contacts or with
your relationships between us
and other states through a
through and private.
Nonprofit typically and even
we're here looking at.
The uniform law product house
bill one sixty five members the
committee with a question
Senator.
Chairman always try to learn a
new thing and Judiciary what the
hell this and keep that.
Mr chair and and.
Senator the the word I see means
that it's a mechanism by which
property
when it is abandoned for cannot
be returned to its rightful
owner it goes to the state and
so it's just cheated to the
state and then the state can
then.
Deal with that piece of property
either by selling it or making
some use of it so a lot of money
gets deposited that the rightful
owners cannot be found and
ultimately after a period of
time the state can
Receive that property and put it
in the in the treasure in fact I
think in New Mexico our
retirement is dependent upon
issued money's.
I have a lot of information for
a very familiar were.
All right thank you.
Senator Moores.
Jack my understanding is that we
work to supposed through.
Practices for students Wilder
should.
Uniformed.
Corporate fulfill come to us so.
What's happening with this road
disappears with future wives
also.
Chair representative.
Mr chairman and senator
The Senator cross from you
amended to uniform act this
morning and house the judiciary
so we do
We have and I'd save many of the
uniform acts do have some
specific amendments to deal with
peculiarities and New Mexico are
to deal with an issue Mr Burton
my explain this particular
amendment was proposed by the
community bankers so
Mr bird if you'd like to explain
the amendment be glad to.
The this was brought to us by
the community bankers just
recognizes that the community
bankers in this state their
primary regulator is not the
regulator that deals with a
claim property the regulator
that deals with unclaimed
property is the state taxation
and revenue department the
regulator that deals with state
banks is the financial
institution division of the
regulations and licensing
department they examined by
banks community banks state
Banks and the all this does is
recognize that fact can say that
if the.
A financial institution division
has exam of the State Bank for
undeclared property the last
five years the instead of the.
Instead of the
Taxation revenue by a department
coming in and examine them again
they get the working papers and.
And.
That's about what it does and so
so.
Those jobs so these are all the
amendment published by tax or of
those that public disclosure
every now we also.
Those are all these are all the
do that separately for the
banks.
There is there is there
examinations confidential the
what the state sent over to the
transaction Representative is
also confident.
Law office of the public
disclosure for tax and road yes.
The committee members questions.
the M. straight ahead so I'll
start with what you're saying
about FID because my
understanding is that if IT does
not have enough bank examiners
and that we're actually about to
lose our making accreditation
for our state chartered banks
because of that how how much of
this is.
It's going to be dependent on us
having twelve community and
state banks and having access
functioning
T.
the act can actually do the
baking laminations because we
don't have that now.
Well maybe I didn't explain it
clearly enough.
Thank.
The work of west of if I do has
examined that within the last
five years.
Only then.
To this day do they differ to
FID if not then.
Texas Rep gets to examine the
okay and even if.
Or if IT has examined the if the
tax rate of has reason to
believe that they got unclaimed
property thank Nico planning to
have a I'm again if they want to
so it's a fail safe proposition.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'll
be honest this is not an area of
law I'm familiar with in any way
whatsoever and it's a long bills
that I would be lying if I said
I examined it it was a great
deal of detail
but I am seen on our our
analysis Mr chair concerns
about.
Constitutionality and violating
federal common law rules
limiting states jurisdiction to
achieve unclaimed property
Hi.
I'm not really sure what to do
this I also had a question
about.
One section.
And it might be that I'm just
not understanding that.
But I'm looking at section
nineteen eight thirty six.
Which is saying that if proceeds
payable pursuant to a life for
now mentors policy have been
deposited into an account.
Where there's I need of draft
writing privileges for the
beneficiary.
If those funds have been
deposited into an account for
the beneficiary why are they
claimed funds if they are in it
beneficiaries account that they
are have check writing
privileges on how's this how's
that going to be unclaimed
property.
Mr chair and senator
The becomes unclaimed property
when I can't find the owner if
that account stays dormant for
many years and and
the mail comes back
undeliverable I don't know how
to get hold of them then after
so many.
Well there's different dormancy
periods provided in the statute
but after a certain period of
time it's deemed to be abandoned
and then they go through these
measures to try to get it to the
right person and ultimately
taxed read of the administrator
would would cause a publication
of these properties to be
claimed by the individuals and
there's a period of time for
them to climb on alternately if
no response then that actually
becomes operative cheats to the
state
and that's where my question
because it says the proceeds are
retained by the insurance
company or the financial
organization where they kind of
health so that is so it's always
going to go back to the state
it's not the insurance company
or the bank isn't going to to
get the benefit of that
economically profit right all
all accounts and all property.
If if it does not belong if it's
not property of the insurance
company and they're holding it
for someone else.
If the owner of that property
can't be found this this this
bill and actually our existing
law.
Which by the way would be
subject to the same arguments
that are in your analysis
If they can't find the right for
the this is a process by which
it goes through to alternately
either finding your right phone
and give them the opportunity
climate so you'll see in the
newspaper the long list of
people.
No response after so many years
that will just need to the
state.
Thank you at.
I I I don't.
Know that I understand the
analysis enough to make have any
intelligent questions about it
but not because the analysis
provided reddit.
but that that's all I have
Mister chair thank you committee
members of the questions.
So Representative.
A motive just.
The motion for the past any
other discussion.
So Sir Moores ask you the
question I'd like to expand on
additional that we we've had
that discussion of films we will
we can amend compacts and we can
then uniform laws there some
take that position I don't think
this committees ever taken that
position because New Mexico has
its own unique priorities
perhaps policies we have our own
culture some of the some of the
things we can all be very proud
of one of the things that I'm
very proud of in our state is
access to courts in right to a
jury in Courts to provide
redress this bill has immunity
provision trying to find it
again
in a section forty five.
Twenty four sep two.
Yeah that's committee members to
look at less committee members
to look at it.
Years past we might have
attorneys here in opposition to
community funds are legislation
we've seen seems like for
both of whom are reading the
bills much anymore.
Of my experience is a hundred
thirty seven page bill so it's
not easy but we do have an
immunity from liability that I'd
like to give some attention to.
In I think I think it's probably
worth expand on center Moores
perspective uniform law
commission kind of issue thing I
think it's worth agree to
discuss COVID both Mr burden Mr
Representative Nibert on that
commission to survive Ortiz on
it I served on Senator Ivey Soto
served on it before every state
sens representation every
territory the state says
representation of the most of
folks are there are law school
deans.
Very the steam.
Members of the bar.
Pretty good group with a lot of
committee process over very many
years to arrive at a result.
And then the other thing that I
think is a little different is
that the you're from law this
really kind of part of our legal
training from law school days we
all grew up during the inform
commercial code.
wilderness you learn if you have
your phone probate code will
learning the uniform property
code the little laws that are
adopted by you from location
kind of become part of our basic
law school education training
compacts in the building more
creature of the flavor of the
month from my perspective you
know they're created by
nonprofit some I don't know who
they are the charge fees they
make money they.
Paid using the executive
directors they have the to me
it's of the businessman not to
be negative on it but it seems
like a very different models
In any event despite despite
some commonalities.
I see no harm in a striking
section forty five of the bill
limits in immunity that would
immunize.
actions against the state.
Minimize actions against
agencies of the state
administrators officers
employees or agents of the state
except for intentional
misconduct or malfeasance.
Not really accustomed to
malfeasance and common law here
in New Mexico that much with
intention was kind of a test Mr
Burton timing about section
forty five.
Yes Mr chairman of.
But I would point out that is
existing law and spend fifty.
Virtually word for word section
seven eighteen of the existing
unclaimed property at spending a
law in New Mexico since.
Nineteen ninety seven.
Mr chair online thirteen this
section only applies to
property that has no substantial
commercial value it's not most
of the property that occurs yes
property that has low or no
commercial value or that the
cost of disposing property work
see the value of the property so
I'm less and less very
intentionally
make that determination and
that's incorrect they're they're
purposely.
Undervaluing that property I
don't think that and unity
provision really insulates
anybody with respect to most of
the accounts is this is just
dealing with the small
insignificant accounts and and
trying to keep from having to
deal with lawsuits involving
that issues so I think if
somewhat limited in scope.
And I understand that and so old
lotus ask you directly a moment
whether it's the amendment that
you would find find acceptable
and will take your advice.
however I want to look at
section forty five which session
referring to is one make sure
I'm.
More role in understanding
things well Mr into this
existing language I'm seeing
this identified in the bill of
I'm reading it correctly as new
material Mr chairman that's
because this whole.
Statute that's being
revised is a replacement of the
entire section in fact in the.
The nineteen ninety the statue
was seven dash eight dash one it
was replaced in full in two
thousand three with seven dash
eight eight dash one that said
and what this proposal is is a
complete rewrites.
But incorporating many of the
provisions from prior years but
it will be codified in the
seven dash A. B. dash one SF so
it is a complete rewrite it's
not just simply amending the
existing language better it has
it's supersede CSR statute and
with many of the provisions are
carried over so soon so I
appreciate that a of.
Mr Mr Burton
Representative.
I often times here in in this
committee the the explanation
for why there's an immunity or
something in a in a particular
law that I find objectionable
the argument is usually that's
the way it's always been a that
so it's it is an existing law
and I think part of our job is
to tidy up clean up or stay with
the times times change so I'm
gonna propose amendment here in
a moment but I want to before I
go to that effort morning get an
idea of the committees.
Cleanings on that issue so
Senator do exist you recognize
and so is the Senate Ivey Soto
on this issue focusing on
section forty five at this time
Senator do in the navy so so Mr
chair I'll just note that this
immunity question isn't and
things of the seven eight a one
at sac
I'm looking at it now I don't
see any immunity sections and
all run a search real quick but
I'm pretty sure this would be
completely new language from
what we have.
This.
I just gave my section by
section to the chairman so I
don't have citation the state.
The.
Sixteen and nineteen as you know
Mr chair there is a different
the use of immunity seven eight
A. eighteen.
But it is not.
The if the administrators terms
after an investigation of
properly delivered under the
uniform rental property act
substantial commercial value the
Mr mates destroyer of the wise
as far as the property at any
time they would have a community
for that that that's at which is
the same language here in a
so be here is a little bit New I
just I I take it back Mr chair
this is a different different
versions of immunity to that
that was in there.
Senator.
Thank you Mr actually.
Call this for some of the
conversations back housing for
like a short.
And the thing is we read the
definition property.
That includes the.
Section twelve of the bill which
of final page twenty seven.
when contents of safe deposit
box.
Soon to be abandoned what is
deposit box is property under
the you know from a grand
property at and this was this
immunity provision actually was
intended to deal with things
like someone I might have some
pictures.
I might have other things of
great sentimental value to me.
But which has no substantial
commercial value.
As is referred to in section
forty five of the bill.
And that if it then gets
destroyed.
Then hi my to because I've lost.
Might just family pictures.
That I can never get back in the
days of.
Usually of a film at least.
And and this is simply saying.
That if it was presumed
abandoned has taken and if it's
something of a sentimental value
but not of a substantial
commercial value.
that then I should not be
allowed to take action against
the state for doing that.
In.
Mr chair Senator it does look
like seven dash eight eight dash
eighteen is current law and it
does it's not as lengthy as this
provision but it does provide
for
some limited liability against
the state for that type of
property that the senator talked
about.
I was so I appreciate the
explanation the input I think
there's an important
consideration for masonry so the
response which is and in your
fax scenario is probably what
this is a tentative communities
the commission the difficulty
for me is that it immunize is an
administrator other actions
against the state or state
agency based on what the
administrator later determines
the property having no
substantial commercial value so
relying upon the administrator
to determine whether had no
commercial value as well your
example yes family photos maybe
Santo would be difficult to
value.
The the commissioner made
understand we had a.
I hope I'm not gonna get my
facts wrong here we had a
painting discovered last year of
that I guess have been stolen
and was it to Kooning that have
been stolen what's stolen from
Arizona state museum it was
sitting in somebody's house and
Arizona border for what a few
decades and somebody from the
flea market I'm getting all my
facts and making him up some
somewhere along the way to
lawyers intended balance the
stories but generally that's
that's the kind of what happened
you know a priceless piece of
our workgroup worth millions
but many people fail to
recognize what it was so these
are more words so my concern is
this immunize is that property.
Senator mission as no
substantial value as determined
by the administrators of the
administrative with the
administrative terms it has no
value let's say it's a stamp
collection it's a it's a post
point question that mocks the
administrator determines that it
had no value.
These immunize or she's
immunized even though they're
all and and I I don't think that
that really should be so that I
try to I want to check your
facts and are you and and go a
little bit further because again
I what bothers me is is the it's
a commission it's administration
termination whether has portion
of your life and while I agree
with the the photo example you
gave photos may not having
commercial values with that no
piece of artwork for that stamp
collection complexion my in the.
I have no idea that it does so I
think that that would be a good
question to judge jury or two
are fact finders not immunize
them automatically for that
purpose of with that said a home
move to strike section forty
five it'll take the.
Judgment of the committee on
these arguments any further
discussion.
Of Senator Stewart you're
looking at the Sanchez like is
if you want to I want to answer
from them more directly yeah
right
Representative.
Mr chair
For me.
Your scenario is exactly what
that's intended to do as long as
the administrator which is a
state employee is exercising
reasonable judgment may not
intentionally
you know committing misconduct
or malfeasance and hi I can tell
you personally with the stamp
collection you think it may be
valuable we got one appraised
and it turned out it cost us
more for the appraisal but there
could be that one stamp in that
collection that they make it all
worthwhile but as long as of
ministrations acting recently I
R. I would think that we would
want to and so like that because
the alternative is the
administrators going to either
do one of two things it's going
to hang on to the property which
means we're gonna have to store
all the stuff.
For the return to the holder
once older going to do with it
they're gonna have to store the
stuff.
If if the well the holder
happens to be the.
Institution that had the
property in the first place of
the bank that has a content of
the state deposit box or what
have you so.
The you know that's the
alternative you strike it and.
It may encourage people not to
do anything with that then we
have another problem on our
hands so.
I think that may be one.
They have that standard.
But again nobody unless you get
a stamp stamp collection
appraise your not gonna know
whether it's cost more to deal
with it or whether there's that
one stamp that makes it all
worthwhile.
And that's that's the quandary I
think you would be put into a
plan Mr chair Senator answer
to this is a disfavored
Environment.
I'm not going to die on the hill
over to tell you the truth but I
I just I see the merit in having
this standard and the standard
that was in the current law but
the hi I understand your issue
but this is really limited to
that.
Property that
A reasonable person would would
do to be of little value
although I concede there could
be at one stamp for that one
point or that one painting that.
Has substantial.
Sure.
That answers that answer the
question.
Chairman even though you
internees liked up in circles
what I heard was for and.
The.
Lawyers used used to get paid by
the word right no that's not a
joke.
And the leadership in writing
yeah and I think the the the two
three days when you get paid by
the word of riding in a right
thank you so.
I I appreciate your argument in
your position Representative you
know when you use the word
repeatedly reasonable funding
and if it was reasonable conduct
I might agree with you but this
doesn't this immunize is unless
you can show intentional
misconduct or malfeasance those
are very high standards
of the intentional misconduct is
is not reasonable and
malfeasance is not reasonable to
see there so I'm going to stay
with my
My motion to strike section
forty five a page forty six will
do is a roll call vote I see no
other discussion family please
call the roll Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Moores.
Center yes.
Senator Pirtle no.
Senator Stewart
Senator Duhigg yes.
Yes that amendment fails all
right committee members of the
questions or comments.
We want.
Motion.
Do you pass.
The for the discussion wanted to
pass motion detection to do fast
motion.
Seeing none Senator Ivy Soto
Stuart o'neill to serve on to
this Pirtle Morris in the
affirmative we have a due pass.
Committee.
C. ng Representative Chasey.
Okay.
So for sixty two okay.
You Mr chair.
So this is a bill that would
make it so that municipalities
with populations of two hundred
thousand or more can offer a
mailing important alternative to
an in person hearing when they
when folks want to contact
contest citations for speeding
under the current nuisance
statute.
and for municipalities that have
populations of less than two
hundred thousand they they will
then have.
Let me correct myself over two
hundred thousand there to be
required to offer this as an
option less than two hundred
thousand.
In their discretion they can
offer that as an option
and it will be an alternative to
a full hearing
and often where we often see
this is for us like speeding.
Speed camera tickets.
so this provides a simplified
and efficient option for
respondents and municipalities
receiving provide due process
with regard to challenges to
legislative violations detected
by speed cameras it also makes
clear that the agency
municipality has the burden of
proof to to prove a violation by
a preponderance of evidence it
also clarifies that no fees or
costs can be imposed pursuant to
the the speeding subsection
and only fines of no more than a
hundred dollar that's limited in
current law all and also it
changes the recipient portion of
fines that currently goes to the
to AOC and instead makes it go
to the state general fund.
And with that I'll stand for
questions I there is an expert
available on to the city clerk
for the city of Albuquerque even
want.
If you'd like to hear from them
I don't have anyone Russian
opposition or in support of this
bill so we'll proceed to the
committee committee with
questions service total for six
to.
I have actually had a chance to
review this before the hearing
today.
And I'm actually very impressed
for the various provisions in
here.
And that might my one concern.
That I have is is with regard
to.
The the violations.
referred to.
The nuisance violations.
that they be that it's clear
that they be civil violations.
And some it is about is they get
passed as a as a criminal
violation.
But but outside of that one
concern.
And I'm sure I could be
disabused of that I
I actually I I really commend
the work that was done for this
to.
Thank you senator o'neill yes
thank you thank you what Mr
chair what problem does this
address I am not clear on.
So Mr chair Senator
I don't know if you've ever
gotten one of the the speeding
Like the red light cameras the
speed cameras that get you and
you get it in the mail
so right now they're required
under the statute to offer a
full in person hearing if anyone
wants to contest that this would
allow folks to essentially.
Hi it's described as a male an
option but what it really is is
it's a form online at where you
would put in every you know
here's one contesting this
here's my evidence that wasn't
me that was in my car and you
could just deal with it that way
instead of having a full in
person here.
Senator Senator I'm at.
The service to for the past will
center pirtle on the bill.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
I'm guessing this only applies
to one Municipal.
Really applies to to Mr chair
Senator of Rio Rancho in
Albuquerque will be the the main
ones impacted by so Mr chairman
and senator are there no other
municipalities under two hundred
thousand that would need
something like this.
Mr chair Senator there's no
other no other municipalities
over two hundred thousand that
are doing this kind of a program
the way that would like to speak
to guests and that the red like
you.
So Mr chair Senator Woods at
behoove us to.
strike the two hundred thousand
language to insure as technology
advances it'll be easier and
easier for state municipalities
like hobbies or some of the
others to do this and then they
would then be bound by the the
same
restraints is Albuquerque N.
and.
Rio Rancho Mr chair Senator I
think that's dealt with by
offered making it a may for now
for smaller municipalities and
and a shall for the larger ones
so I think that as the larger
ones as more larger ones that
office they will automatically
be under the shall but I think
we want to keep it as of may for
the smaller municipalities who
adopt a program like this
because they might be in a much
better position to to offered in
person hearings and and
accommodate that we don't want
to give leave that leave them
that flexibility to Mr chair
Senator is this coming from
these municipalities as as what
they they want they requested
this my name is the that this
that the City of Albuquerque
wants to be able to offer this
as an option to folks if and if
and and let me make clear Mr
chair if you still want to have
your in person hearing you
absolutely will have that
wrapped and you'll be bound by
the rules of evidence the rules
civil procedure they just want
to be able to offer this as a as
an alternative to folks if they
choose to to take that
opportunity and Mister chairman
Senator is this allowed for
counties.
You know I think Mr chair
Senator I think the existing
statute applies only to
municipalities it does so the
the existing nuisance after
three eighteen seventeen is only
talking about municipalities.
Thank you Mr chair.
Others.
Thank thank Mister thank you
senator I know so your bill
which is on a job presented so
obviously this is our neck of
the woods that we're talking
about and I've been searching
Sliq you have on all Mr chair
vice chair how many of these
tickets have you done.
Me personally Mr chair model or
a we are not going either so but
I do hear from our.
So but I I was to I mean those
of us from our career this is
probably more directly to in our
constituents hated but they have
city councillors like Dustin
their elected into so.
So that I know our city council
is here about this also my
concern about this it I just
walked and walked me through it
so I understand from my
constituents are conceptual is
you.
Yet you're going on recovery you
get pop by that that camera
that's there the vendor send you
a mail sent the send you a
ticket in the mail you can then
say I can I can go down and
protesters say my.
Daughter was the callers on with
that so what you're saying is
that are you can just fill out a
lot website that goes and says
some additional says I was not
and recovery my daughter was
driving a car that day so it's
suppose we use here for our
constituents can operate Mr
chair Senator yes exactly they
want to be able to offer that
convenience to their citizens
and right now with the way that
that statute is drafted they
they can they have to do as
members walking through one of
the things I personally hate
about is the vendors making a
lot of money off of this I can't
remember what the last hour
virtual article seven something
like fifty ofpercent that the
vendor is making off with this
program so is this really a cost
saver Mr chair Senator for the
vendor so they don't have to pay
a hearing officers are we us as
Albuquerque to constituents
going to get more of that money
or or the vendor just protecting
and reducing the cost and Mr
chair Senator no so so when I
was the city clerk in
Albuquerque we we were
responsible for putting doing
those administrative hearings so
it's the city that's actually
putting on here we have to hire
the R. we we had to hire but as
far that we that hearing
officers we paid all those costs
as a city the vendor to set this
will cost this will save
municipalities some money but I
don't think it will affect the
the vendors bottom line I do
realize that we will be stuck
with that cost not the vendor so
they really are make out like
bandits that's why one of the
many reasons are I don't like
that propped on the program
there.
I talked to my city council
entry to.
About bringing that back our
workers strike find us a place
in your eyes so to where we
could get rid of the program
altogether
so okay I think I understand
what you're talking about in the
movie refund Center Stewart's
money while we're on.
Thank you Senator.
Others.
To the best
of the best.
Thank you there any objections
to do best motion.
I see none show we Soto so
Stewart Neil Services Baca
Pirtle and Morris to pass.
SO Representative small
cell previous years there are.
Thank you for doing this to
twenty eight thank you very much
Mr chair committee for having us
I'm joined here by
Representative Serrato Mr chair
and committee.
House Bill to to a is the
product of long conversations
with our counties with the
assessors and others Mr chair
committee this creates a
powerful economic development in
energy efficiency tool it is
only available Mr chair for
commercial property owners it
actually rich peels Mr chair and
committee previous residential
statutes it is one hundred
percent voluntary and after a
number of different changes in I
just compliments to
Association of counties and it
will you put us on par with
surrounding states to offer
again this voluntary financing
to Mr chair and committee
members at no cost to counties
were in commercial property
owners can take advantage for
various sorts of of building
improvements Mr chair we do have
some experts on the line if they
should become necessary Mr
Michael yaki and miss Genevieve
Sherman.
and if they're not there that's
okay I'll turn over to
representative about the again
and Mr chair committee really
appreciate you all taken the
time to hear us today Mr chair
Senator is I feel that the
chairman has given a great
explanation I think we stand for
questions.
Right we don't have anyone
registered in support or
opposition so go directly to
members of the committee
questions.
One zero zero center Moores and
I'm so.
Mr chair representative
What is this.
Yes so.
good to ensure the sameness of
million this is what this is a
program that counties can
volunteer to be part of that
allows commercial property
owners to get low finance of the
financing for energy efficient
permanent fixtures on to the
property this to be collected
through the assessors which is
why to special assessment that
goes through them which is why
we had to make sure they were on
board with the
those collections can be just
read over thirty years which is
much longer than what these
loans typically are and allows
it so that it's typically cash
positive interaction which is
very rare for this type of
financing and so what that
allows is that businesses are
commercial property owners that
may not have a lot of cash on
hand or than allowed to upgrade
to more energy efficient pieces
and should they sell the
property that special assistant
remains on the property and it
doesn't follow that individual
property owners it's in the
thirty three other states we
feel very confident there
hundreds of banks that
participate in this program.
So Mister Representative are you
a commercial property owner or
you guys are propping or your
are you a realtor and on top
thank you Mr chair Senator now
and Mr chair Senator I I am not
either now.
The new thing for the question
did may opt is in support of
this piece of legislation so Mr
chair so you on a factory or a
large commercial.
Workouts or whatever or office
building you wanna put solar
panels on it.
Change it out.
Your amendment to take that cost
six hundred thousand dollars to
getting billed by the county
assessors and out to the county
assessors of the building the
building billing you every year
as part property tax on this
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator effectively yes that you
would go and get approved for a
loan just like you would any
other one and then you would go
through the commercial source
from a commercial bank and then
you would then go through that
process and as you can see
towards the end of the bill we
lay out the handbook that needs
to be provided the oversight the
need to get in that way it is
consistent and the pop the
ordinances are in place support
this the objectives of this bill
Mr representatives why can't you
just do this and go get a loan
from.
Misia valley bank record a lien
on your property why we have to
involve the government on this
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I'll be brief but I'm
happy to hand it over to my
cause us to thanks.
It's because it's far cheaper
and it's more efficient they can
offer lower rates and again it's
test positive for these of these
property owners too many to add
anything to that how is it
cheaper than going to a private
bank house getting the
government involved anywhere
cheaper than just going to a
private
market to that hello
Mr chair Senator Moores the the
the government at this is
the government is not collecting
these chair and Senator
and our expert is on Mr chair
Senator it has to do with sort
of the the duration of the lien
Mr chair and sort of how that
works so it in Mr chair there's
been critiques in the past and
I'm getting text here Mister
chair these are fun Genevieve
sermon that counties are not
billing or collecting under the
bill Mr chair the impose the
assessment but then ongoing
collection enforcement are done
privately this Mr chair Senator
was done at the behest of the
counties and also the assessors.
And Mr chair Senator the longer
terms lead to the lower cost of
financing and the fact that the.
Mister chairman Senator so
instead of the thirty years.
Yes Mr chair Senator so I do in
this financing schemes up to
thirty years verses.
Thank you Mr chairman to oversee
about thank if there's an issue.
And
Get the same terms thank you Mr
chair thank you senator it would
be well first of all if you can
get on this type of installation
they're very difficult to get in
there is a it isn't often that
you can you're able to do this
at this point the terms that we
discussed in the in the past
Mister chairman Senator for more
on the time in a decade it is
not the longer term once the for
the most part it's it's very
difficult to find this in the
first place so so if you get a
hundred thousand dollars which
as an example when the property
is not worth that much you for
close on it what happens.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator it's the same and we
laid out in here as well it's
the same process it would be
closed request for closed on
other lines this lean does not
take precedent over any other
liens unless someone gave up
that that president before but
it's the same process.
Hello.
I stand this so makes me nervous
thank you.
Thank you.
Q. service.
Thank you Mr before I ask my
questions I do note that Mrs
person executive director New
Mexicans is in the audience can
just check with her real quick
the kind of position on the
screen.
Thank you Mr chair Senator this
is the first time I've actually
been able to support the bill
because it does remove the
tractors from being that middle
man three truckloads in the past
especially with the residential
service for that we're very
happy to support.
Okay and so as a Mr Chairman
representative is as I
understand this and.
I'm a commercial property owner.
I'm looking to get financing
basically they want
securitization of the
repayments.
And so I enter into a voluntary
agreement through the county of
the municipality for voluntary
assessment level and that
assessment level then we'll go
will be the repayment of the of
the financing that I received is
that correct.
Mr chair Center yes.
And and so really what this does
is it's kind of like.
When I do with my with my
mortgage.
what I say instead of writing a
check every month I just simply
set up to do it a direct draft
out of my checking account.
That would be kind of analogy to
what I'm doing here in a way.
Mr chair Senator yes I mean that
go to the regular payment to
ensure that you could afford
this you know energy efficient
piece that could and very likely
increase the value of your
property and hopefully and as
we've seen in other places
increase the likelihood that
someone would rent your
commercial property and and I do
know that you have in here that
it's a voluntary agreement and
that these are voluntary
assessments that the property
owner is a green to on their
behalf to do it's not imposed
upon them that is correct Mr
chairman okay and so I do not on
page thirteen the you know and
I.
Account is not liable in any way
for the death of the property
owner is not a third party
public or.
Has not pleasure limits credit
to the property owner or the
capital provider correct that is
correct Mr told my question
then.
is about sixteen why do we need
the equipment section.
That says nothing Shelly
interpreted the pledge offered
Cumber the full faith and credit
of the county we've already said
we're not pledge your lending
its credit the property owner
Capitol providers and thank you
Mr chair thank you senator I
believe we're actually
discussing this earlier I
believe that was at the request
of the counties to make that
clear.
Mr chair Senator that's a yes
the this was again the the that
counties and as sensors
affiliate have been
I have seen challenges with this
and so we wanted to work closely
with them in order to clarify in
to the sways their concerns okay
Mr chairman I'd like to propose
an amendment.
And that is to take.
The tax and that's on page
sixteen eight thirteen through
sixteen.
Begin with nothing ending with
the period.
And make that a new subsection
C..
On page thirteen between lines
eight and nine.
And then strike section ten and
remember.
So that way the language will
remain in but it will not remain
in under the title immunity.
In.
Thank you Mr chair we're we're
sort of we're getting feedback
Mr chair Senator deeply
appreciate the suggestion I
think our our concern would
would simply be timing Mr
Chairman and Senator given that
we're a very late stage of the
process.
Mr chair I think it probably
what we're sort of online with
our expert Mr chair Senator I
think just for for timing safely
would ask because we would have
to go back for concurrence if if
if that's okay not that is at
this point that would probably
be a preference but thank you
very much for the very for the
suggestion Mr Terence and.
Up.
I heard denture on Federal.
In the friendly as we Mr chair
Senator.
From no lawyer yes exactly
I.
somebody else may revisit this.
I'll back off on this moment on
that but but that I think that's
probably the quickest way to do
it well see what the what the
resolution the rest of the
committees thank you thank you
Mr thank their new.
Mr chair Senator Ivy Soto is not
making that motion that will
speak to.
Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative still struggling.
Representative way.
Out exactly what we're doing and
why the one does need to be
involved if it's going to be a
private loan.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator so there I think there's
two pieces of this so one this
is an economic development tool
that should County decide to
utilize they can use it for is
tracking businesses and and
things like that
How.
Mr chair thank you Senator
Pirtle Mr chair Senator Pirtle
the through the structure of the
special assessment district
again that's voluntary Mr chair
Senator the structure of which
has to be agreed to by any other
commercial lenders that are
connected to that property but
through the structure of the
special assessment district
that's the the advantage that
gives that lower cost financing
Mr chairman and so that's that's
the reason.
Okay so Mr Chairman
representative would that put
this special assessment lean
ahead of property tax needs.
Mister chairman Senator no.
So I'm I'm reading page eleven
subsection C..
And.
Special assessment million shall
be affected during free agency
the special session as opposed
it shall have priority superior
to all liens claims entitles
acceptably for general ad
valorem property taxes are
improvement district eight that
is co equal to property taxes
can you explain that last
sentence thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator and Mr chair
Senator again I'm getting some
feedback from our expert Mr
chair Senator this is it puts it
behind taxes Mr chair and
senator
the state.
That means that we're the this
assessment is behind all and
valorem Mr speaker Mr chair
Senator.
And any other assessment that
equals the priority of taxes.
and then.
So the county isn't somehow your
tier or co signer or anything
like that
and so forth we're talking about
solar that's kind of manage the
idea maybe spray foam insulation
or just those types things what
what is the lifespan of the
solar.
Voting system.
On average Mr chair Mr chair
Senator I I don't know the exact
action to that Mr chair Senator
I know those can be twenty plus
years Mr chair Senator these are
some great examples though are
more efficient natural gas
heating would qualify for this
so this is not focused on any
one Mr chair Senator technology
it can include water efficiency
in different parts of the state
it could include other things Mr
chair Senator probably the
including things like fire
resilience or what have you
depending upon where that
commercial property is located
so it's a bit it's a pretty wide
net Mr chair and senator and and
Mr chair representative so it's
a thirty year note.
and I think what concerns me is
you have a thirty year note and.
If we're doing is safe for
heating systems I don't know
what the lifespan of of that
would be I think it would be.
Asking a lot for to be a thirty
year lifespan so I do have some
concerns that some of these
capital improvements may not
last as long as the loan which I
think is is a little concerned
Mr chair Senator great question
Mr chair Senator
it would the the the length of
life term for whatever
improvement that would be the
long term and so the thirty year
simple Mr chair Senator that
would have to be the length of
whatever capital improvement the
business was making the length
of the term would fit on the
life of the improvement Mr chair
and senator and Mr chair
representative what about
depreciation of the most of
these capital improvements are
they on a like a seven year
depreciation schedule are the
longer depreciation and homes I
think this is thirty years which
kind of makes sense for thirty
year note for it to be that way
but I know usually.
as far equipment some of those
are are on percent depreciable
in one year so I'm just curious
is that have anything to do with
the calculation of the loan or
is there some kind of guarantee
or some language that requires
any money received back to go to
payment with depreciation
monies.
Mr chair Senator I'm I don't
know the answer to to all of
those but we're looking for Mr
chair Senator I if I may on that
again that would be determined
with the bank and it's making
the decision on this so the
digit depreciation does come
into play and I believe that
would impact the note that you
end up coming to an agreement
with with today.
Thank you Mr.
So about a.
Thank you Mr chairman of just
remind here real quick on
something Senator Pirtle touched
on earlier that's page eleven.
first paragraph at the top.
Basically talking about the
eight again so in there it says
online three shall have priority
and superior priority superior
to all eight so except for
property taxes and those are co
we called to property taxes so
if you enter one of the in into
one of these agreements and you
have us a mortgage on the
property already and now you
enter into this agreement to
borrow additional monies for
some project Mr chair and
Representative
and you get you into this
agreement you borrow the money
you make the improvement of
whatever it is safe I guess it
could be a solar system what
have you so that we now has
priority over the mortgage so
you already had in place.
Mr chair and and minority leader
Baca thank thank you for the
questions fair Senator there is
As that that is correct Mr chair
Senator
The more mortgage holder would
have to agree to that if that
mortgage holder Mr chair Senator
does not agree to this special
assessment district then then
that special assessment
districts
district infrastructure excuse
me cannot proceed Mr chair
Senator on page nine lines
fifteen and sixteen that makes
it very clear that they requires
written consent from any holder
lien mortgage or security
interest in real property
consider.
Paticipate and so also just to
ask you frankly Mr chair
representative so well I'll tell
you a little bit about what I've
seen in the last question of
what I've seen at times
is that a person Mr chair gets
one of these and Representative
gets a solar system state puts
it on their house they put it on
their house and then for some
reason they have some
financially should
and so they have some financial
issue and they can make the
payment on their solar system
and so typically what we see is
their security held and
intangible property of the solar
system rather than the real
property itself and so the solar
this of the solar system
providers and or the credit
loans the money to install that
system then of their only method
of collection is is to
essentially requests repossess
the intangible property solar
panels electrical whatever they
put in that's what they get to
take back and we know that the
rate of return for something
like that as far diminished
compared to for a.
They're usually so we've
installed solar system of on my
house that is fifty thousand
dollars and I go about on the
payments and I prepare for the
repossess the solar system
toward multiple slaves is that a
low pass that is that the goal
of this bill is to provide an
attachment to secure the right
property to systems not just
that but systems like this is
after goal of this bill Mr chair
Senator and and since that I
took him add additional bonus
shares Senator this repeals a
residential program that's been
on implementable and as Mr chair
Senator I think in large part
because of the concern about
consumer protections in
implementing it a residential
level so Mr chair Senator by
limiting this to commercial
properties requiring consent for
these other
the mortgage holders or other
lien holders that that Mr chair
Senator I think helps us get a
better program and avoid these
sorts of of
consequences that maybe animal
in a residential setting Mr
chair Senator it because it is
tied to the property this
assessment those concerns about
you know.
Peeling off these elements are
are listed because as the
property gets sold to new owners
that would be an assessment the
remains as part of it.
And I thank you Mr chair
representative I I do understand
that if I guess I have I have
some concerns with that and I
understand this is just for
commercial properties I I think
I have a little bit of concern
with that though allowing to
detachment of that sort created
in statute rather than a
creditor securing it into
another way that this could be
done and is done now Mr chair
and representative says you
simply go get a second mortgage
in which one building this seems
to in effect a kind of bypass
that
and and now we have a we're
we're stab wishing a system
where we're attaching this
equipment which which really
isn't isn't done.
Typically I would say on the
other types of improvements so a
lot of those are just a few of
my concerns I.
I think there there is some kind
of consumer protection
issues with this that I see even
though it is commercial business
a lot of times the businesses
around five hundred to just
individuals you know and so
anyway I see a little bit of
issue with that but I appreciate
you bringing the four thank you
Mr thank you senator research is
my second time sort of forging
them into that that I got a
better understanding of what's
going on I do wanna go back to
that page though to issues of
age eleven that same sense we've
been talking about with all the
this proprietor superior liens
except for the property tax but
the rest of that sends also have
all superior this would be
secure that all claims and
titles.
With no exceptions.
So to give me an example of what
the claims would be.
Mr chair and Senator Moores I
don't have that example off the
top of my head but Mr chair
Senator Moores
all the these previous creditors
have to agree to this structure
Mr chair and senator and that's
a thing that's that's something
that we sort of hang our hat on
here as it were.
This site it's not we're going
to lead to the property taxes
thank all of everything.
During the
claims and hi this that might be
on this property is not in at
the center of our property tax
I'm not really sure that's
pretty that's pretty expensive
also the work.
And thank you Mr chair Senator
again any of those previous
liens that are held those would
have to agree to this new
structure and Mr chair Senator.
One of the reasons they may
choose to do so again this is a
voluntary program they can be
instituted one of the reasons
that they may choose to do so
that this will increase the
value of that property
Over time and also so but again
it it remains voluntary and that
sort of affirmative consent that
has to be given by folks who are
already there is is sort of an
important safeguards.
Appreciate those job would be
that our progressive deaf right
now the other main concerns of
about this for our preferred
customers on page thirteen
started on twenty twelve the
work may dealing with financial
principal mouse what the cost
how the app capitalize the cost
this is a this was a reward
Committee schools shall we go
through that that list of the
things they may
Charge one of things that jumped
out at me was the capital
providers the program
administration fees
at the capitol provider fees
what is that I can be pretty
much everything under the sun.
The following year yes Senator
that's page of thirteen cover
water page so subsection work on
plans thank you Mr chair thank
you senator on page one section
a couple of IDR means that
private entity or its designees
successor signs that finances
refinances eligible improvement
pursuant to this so that is
definition Mr chair.
Senator at the taxes that's
standard for the closing cost to
the included Mr chair and
senator jurors are
Representative solutions caps no
regulations fees actually Mr Mr
chair Senator me but I believe
those are still under the same
closing costs the guidelines
that we would have.
No residential properties Mr
chair there there are guidelines
this is commercial so I'm not
sure I think I think that's
pretty much whatever they want
to be and then it goes on on
page fourteen.
Nine one seven yeah that's a may
any other fees or costs that may
be.
so it's a double major in the
section
Sorry no wire listed all these
fees if they do anything pretty
much you may the the program
religious rights right the
capitalize into any special
assessment financially pre
principles they want Mr chair
Senator elsewhere in the state.
Thank you Mr thank you senator
it it's whatever the commercial
owner thanking the property
owner would agree to Mr chair
Senator but to get the lowest
cost of financing
Those would have to be
agreed to by all those parties
and if yeah Mr chair Senator.
The state has to.
Basically this that that section
you may do with anything you
want you may be submitted to the
committee that four hundred and
you may do whatever else
properties you want to which is
Center tidy tidy and I don't see
any sense of protection on that
Mr chair Senator so I I
appreciate that that the this is
pretty switch.
This committee
and
Hello Representative that Mr
chair thank you for money go
towards.
Thank you Mr chairman
I really like this bill I'm very
impressed that the counties have
worked with you mate this bill
that will work
you know I have central running
down the middle of my district
and if you look at the buildings
and every third building is not
being used as closed up I see
this as a good economic
development for the counties to
use at and I'm not thinking
solar I'm thinking window
replacement at insulation
lighting up more energy
efficient products inside we've
just built a new a library on
center we took care of an east
anybody remember that.
I think it's their few times to
like twenty some thirties and
turned it into an international
district library have no library
in that district and the energy
efficiency that they've done
with that they've they've
created windows with trom walls
which will sort of energy it's
just a beautiful facility it was
done with products that don't
have as odors that seven new
energy efficiency products so I
just think this will be a great
a great thing for our counties I
want I want early accounted to
start using it to Morrow in my
district it's not gonna happen
but but the fact that this is
for commercial property for them
to get along to do this I just
think this is fantastic if I
could I would move to pass but
I'll pass it off and do it
later.
Senator thank you Mr chair
and also the fact that this is
researchers commercial
properties that is what makes me
comfortable with that and and
I'm glad that we're repealing
that other programs because it
wasn't a good one
and I.
I.
In some of the consumer
protection issues that have
popped up around especially
solar
When I was first rate in this
but but it is restricts not on
residential properties it is
restricted to commercial
properties and I think and and
and bring with one of the things
that are more said about those
capital providers fees I mean
this could this could get very
broad and so I think that if we
see that happening we should
come back and revisit that and
maybe to fund some limits around
what those might be
but as someone who's practiced I
consumer protection law for a
long time is had a whole lot of
heartburn over source if it is
in the context of of some other
bills
I'm I'm comfortable with this hi
and look forward to for.
Thank you Mr chair thank you you
will search through.
Yes.
So yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator.
For.
All of this.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you very much committed.
Senate.
The.
Bill two fifty five.
Senator.
Most of the.
Sorry my life.
Hi.
You too bye.
It was the second representative
to fifty five we saw a Senate
version of this bill earlier in
the session and then.
Disappeared on us and remember
questions about it so we have
some familiarity with the issue.
When looking for.
Everybody alike Committee LFC
no.
No okay and we registered in
support or opposition so we'll
give you about five or six
minutes to present bill then
we'll go to committee members so
Representative thank you Mr
chair I have with me my experts
Scott Scanlon as you mentioned
you've seen this bill before two
of four in this bill allows
employing leasing companies
which provide HR services to
small companies in need of
support it allows them to count
all the employees towards their
health care plans that may
encourage better rates and we
worked extensively with yet
yellows these employee leasing
companies and also the OSI to
come to an agreement so that
that's worked out very well
however we also we're talking
with folks in the committee as
well we want to make sure we
address some of those so we do
have an amendment Mr chair that
we would like to bring that
would then additional and
specifically if I may add a
eight in particular struck the
strike subsection do on page
twenty two lines twenty through
twenty five and overall just
makes it very clear that the
rules applicable to a large
group markets in the in the
federal patient protection and
affordable Care Act are followed
through the big changes in there
that we would request.
And with that we stand for
questions.
Senator do.
Thank you Mr and all all of this
then I I really appreciate the
sponsor bringing this moment
this was this was all the stuff
that I was raising when we heard
the Senate version of the spell
this amendment addresses all the
concerns that I raised on that
bill
so I'll go ahead and and move
this amendment and this ensures
that mandated coverages provided
for these folks as well.
Our motion is to adopt amendment
which is zero three one point.
I put err.
That's your equipment to thanks
interest all right.
Any questions or objections the
man Center mortal nemesis with
with just.
To the surprise exactly like
this twenty five percent.
At so some numbers we didn't
make this amendment in the
Senate that bill ended up
getting rolled and then I've
been having I've had a number of
discussions with Senator Hickey
he kind of took it upon himself
to to figure out how to address
my the issues that I had raised
before that bill was roled and
then worked with the the sponsor
tend to get amendment drawn up
the withdrawals are still here.
Thank you Mr.
When the moment any other
questions any objection to
adoption amendment.
None show some remorse officer
wanted to do is go Neil Stewart
and every Soto on the adoption
of the amendment numbers
committee bill some as it up
towards amended stimulate.
For the motion.
For the past with the amendment
on house bill two fifty five any
further questions or debate
Senator Ivey Soto that Mr
Chairman I you know I have an
issue with the double drop
bills.
What not however as I recall.
When this bill was presented
Senator version.
No motion was ever made and the
committee was my recollection.
And that's what's on the
committee so we never actually
voted on anything.
We just basically got a
presentation.
And so in that regard and I'm
willing to consider this one
because we never actually voted
on the.
So thank you.
Thank you.
We're all getting very principle
here the.
Somewhat somewhat situational
but nonetheless risible so
that's good.
It's good to hear situational
principles from time to time so.
According to the court as we
are recording the day come I
have sure yeah right.
Keep in mind the.
Your available to which I was
amended what you're there for
for this.
That's.
Mr chair Senator I would also if
I may also recognize senator
Munoz who really carry this
through on the side and helped
us we're looking at with the
line really.
You have to have so much to
learn about the Senate.
The.
Good news Representative Romero
is here to serve you not to
New York as as a resource
Representative staff.
All right despite the support of
senator Munoz.
Notwithstanding.
This.
Chair of the committee we have
we already have an investigation
isn't objections in the past
month.
Show Senator Ivy Soto Stuart
o'neill Duhigg serve on this
Baca and Moores in the
affirmative you have in the
past.
Two fifty five.
Seven news well.
What is that way
Senate bill five of.
Thank you Mr chair.
I'm gonna give you some
references in in Gallup New
Mexico there is native American
people are aging pick.
An outside company that takes
them for treatment in Phoenix.
They're not giving any
notification to anybody there
holding the treatment and then
at some point in their used for
Medicaid dollars in Phoenix and
then they're released and no one
knows where they went.
There's no family notification
they start looking for them and
then sooner or later they're
there and my wife happened to
see this at the DMV one day we
call the state police about it
but there is no way really to
reporter for them to follow up
because we don't have knowledge
and then talking to the Navajo
Nation presents wife she said
that they're running a similar
bill in Arizona we worked hard
with your staff today to figure
out how we get some notification
to the family and so we bring
a substitute bill today and it.
It's really just a notification
bill says a resident behavioural
health solution on the
invitation for Resul treatment
without providing evidence of
facility has attempted eighteen
contact information of a family
member.
In the in the next session shall
not be transported bureau have
selling point blank so the
unless the patient has been
referred by a prove tribal
health care program and that the
sales complies there's hundred
fifty dollar penalty so in
section these the purpose.
With that and the job window
stand for questions.
Well I mean Senator.
Chairman.
So do you have any valuation of
this bill It cares Senator I
just have one question in the Mr
chair because reading this I was
thinking so Presbyterian.
They do some we have some
impatient.
Treatment
Yep an inpatient treatment set
up I believe they own
Albuquerque ambulance.
Now and I just wanna make sure
that this would not.
With the do and like the
employer.
Could this make us of
Albuquerque ambulance can't take
patients to press that
Presbyterian facility
it says my persons employed by
the facility I just I don't know
how the employment contracts
working with it I'm assuming
that those folks are going
directly by New Mexico
Albuquerque ambulance even
that's owned by Presbyterian
will
I just wanna make sure that it's
not gonna happen unintended
clearly this is a real issue Mr
chair that needs to be addressed
I just wanna make sure there's
no.
Other and it has been
unanticipated impacts these
people are not taken ambulances
an ambulance to the emergency
situation so at some point a
hospice patient is in and at
some point they try to attempt
to provide notification of
family if they could notify
family in case something
happened is just really it is a
**** and grab which is
kidnapping and
nobody really knows and you know
in Gallup people want streets
all the time.
and drinking in their family
members sometimes are always
looking for them.
In the state that's why we have
missed messing and and reduce
the just people and it's really
become a problem.
When intoxicated person is taken
in they don't know where they're
taking too intoxicated to
consent.
And the whole legislative.
and maybe we could curb some of
this.
And Mr chair it's a as I live I
have two questions in an out of
state organization take someone
who has been Mexico Medicaid
take them out of state in charge
New Mexico Medicaid for that
treatment I thought that you
couldn't charge Medicaid across
state lines senator bill
medication from their needs
their native Americans of the of
the federal government under
under their health care system
okay thank you thank you Mr.
Forgive me for the payment
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm.
Hundreds of page two.
The general and nine.
We should.
More that.
They should not be transported
residential behavior health
facility outside of the state.
Which would avoid the situation
that the vice chair was
referring to in terms of some of
the urban situations.
You know if somebody's taking
our story some help if you're
picked up on a detox.
And something but picked up
every day.
Me to be able to go two hundred
fifty times a year they know
those people are because they
register as they come in in
people know where to go look for
them out of state is that is our
big issue because they're just
disappear so I I don't see a
problem that I.
We struggled with this struggled
with this and then Senator staff
has worked hard on helping us
get figured out in and I don't
see a problem with that out of
state because really that's it
would not be an issue really is
a kidnapping issue but when
they're intoxicated.
School may not know for four or
five hours that they're even in
Phoenix in the building Phoenix
and for our but also in their
discussion and then they may
keep them for a day or two in
the NMAA sober up and decide
they don't want to but they've
already entered into the
Medicaid system and they just
drove out of the street.
Yes it was shown I would I would
do a page to plant and have
lower facility.
What's are the words outside of
the state.
Windows.
Okay.
Junction.
Others on the proposed source
for.
Mr chairman of he Senator
amendments but.
I think it would be better to
say page two line nine.
Patients on up transported to an
out of state residential
behavior health facility.
At.
That way it's describing the
whole facility.
I don't really care the.
One of three things the exact
form of your amendment.
Mr chairman I'm happy to take
the edits for the protest.
Yes of the page two line nine.
Strike toward a.
At the end.
And make it an out of state.
The state is.
The state upstate Act with tax.
With that said.
But that's the motion with the
amendment.
To the original motion for more
than that proposed in all states
of Joe used to say in the
Judiciary Committee and the
House we say an elegance with
more elegance.
In terms of the amendment with I
would potentially pose with
there are many health care
providers outside of the state.
Our contract to.
Senator.
The
you'll see the logs to the on
the side of the state to go to
Lubbock for health care
this is to.
Since Mursi's are all providers
service.
These kind of situations are
with this this would affect our
offices closed places like that
that have to provide services by
documents not providers but if
you contract.
W. for this.
Mr chairman and I could act.
Have all the and.
So and the first part but we're
saying you can't be transported
from out of state residents The
for health facilities etcetera.
But at the end
unless the patient is.
For fun approved tribal health
program so we we really are
focusing on the health issue
that the east side of the state
issue and not that I don't know
if that language is too
restrictive for yes restrictive
enough.
Plus tracks of service to the
floor of things which is
directly questions are more
Center doing once a.
Just I know you're talking about
your limit but I with the
assuming window rock would have
some kind of services that might
be out of state
right on the border I know we're
talking about in this particular
instance of a dollar to.
He was spectacular the Phoenix
or Tucson right there also but I
with the there might be services
rock or fly flag that this
population goes to also I'm more
Senator thank you on that point
I just be careful with to a
certain out of state because
that that service population
might be wrong.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
wonder the language level sales
I persons employed by the
facilities I think so those out
of state one's but folks can
still go there we just don't
want employees of the facility
being the ones taking them to
the out of state facility is
that is that right.
Mr chair.
I think that's correct I mean
the employees are actually now
having them and taking them.
So Mister chair I think for the
Human but senator Morris the
same but I I think it's it's
we're getting that more who's
taking them more even more than
than the where they're being
taken so I I.
Unless those out of state ones
that it other in other areas of
the state there's They Might Be
depend on them for services as
long as the employees are Madam
and taking them I think if you
look at thank.
Education course.
yeah I just I I guess what we're
talking about is that we're
trying to prevent to use the new
term Shanghai Shanghai.
Without a resolution about that
so the I. I see what you're
saying but take more stable
would on Shanghai and we don't
want to come out of the way I
want to live there will want to
disappear to a clinic in and
Shiprock
those are unnecessary matter for
the beach and I to that's what
we're trying to that is that the
family's notified get back to
the bill money out all right
we'll spend some time which
statutes that deal with this so
we'll talk about that.
All right.
Search search for.
So if I could ask Senator we
knows are.
It is the problem just totally
out of state or are there in
state facilities to.
Mr chair Senator most in state
facilities or something when
bill notify right these are
people that are picked up in the
ditches in the alleys and then
hold off it's a single maybe a
single issue prompting in Gallup
right but when we when we wanted
to we there's two ways of doing
help there picked up off the
streets every night and they're
taken to detox facility then
there by if they if they want to
get treatment I think can go to
four corners recovery which is a
treatment.
It's not that there then people
need more personal the kind of
no and gal the they know that
they're.
Network tells more relatives
here when they just flat out
disappears.
We didn't know this right and
then talking to the Navajo
nation's president's wife and my
wife seeing them in the DMV.
And catching on some house
caught on that they were nabbing
these people and and turn it in
and so it's just when they take
them and they're just gone.
So we haven't is chairman.
Senator so we haven't done
damage by saying out of state
your health is I don't think so.
I remember was so yeah at the
risk of complicated things for.
Probably actually getting us
where we need to be.
When I read the whole sentence
as as we may want to do it
you're looking at some
Representative B. that's right.
Representative shopping
transported to an out of state
presidential behavior health
facility Representative supplied
by facility unless the patient's
family is notified before the
transport or the patient is
referred by approved travel
health care program.
So if you're on the eastern side
of the state Las families
notified.
Beforehand.
Then I.
I'm I'm opened up to the but
feedback from the vice chair
with the chair recognize the
first so thank you little bit
slower please so you have a
proposed amendment and let's see
we didn't have an amendment
pending so that'll and we kind
of did have amendments pending
so.
It was it was yours I think so
yeah modifying your own math so
right okay want to step over
somebody else's and.
Senator.
And Mr chair that so seven a
seems like it is are fully
drafted to avoid any Hebbe
issues because you're just
giving the patient the
opportunity to.
To contact the family.
I think if we put that
requirement and be I wonder
about have a issues because if
the.
At a diner just raise that the
specter of have a in my mind
because where it's not
necessarily with the patient's
consent form in the family
that's just.
Family.
Mr chairman and in center what
we just struck being tired.
I'm not a lawyer but.
That that serve us all the added
problems Senator do expose
Floridian will connect service
and I have some I do as well.
You Mr I would I would urge
against tracking the because I
think you want you want the in
there so that they can't that
people I think the is important.
And and I'm feeling bad for even
raising this the issue with the
the ambulance and Presbyterian
because the more I think about
it the more I think it's really
says persons employed by the
facility this is someone who
works for Albuquerque ambulance
employed by Presbyterian and I
just thought I'd I tend to doubt
it
I just noticed those two
entities were are connected and
so that's what we raise the
question in the first place but
now it's been around a whole
but.
Mr Chairman but if you're taking
an ambulance there some record
of where you went.
There's some log that the priest
can say or that they can call
the hospital these people are
are just disappearing so I think
if you're taken by ambulance
they're going to sit there and
know who you are at some point
say we took a.
Joseph Hernandez to the hospital
of the New Mexico in the legal
tracking down this.
There's some track ability in
here there's there's no track
ability in the other situation.
I.
There is more than seven point
nine coming to me sorry so the
more right now.
Some more so I understand Mr
Senator your bank your amendment
was that they have to be
notified the family before
taking them.
We are also aware of any mental
health experts in here well I
would assume most of these folks
are in crisis.
There in mental health crisis
intoxication and if you're going
to wait to try to hunt down
folks specially in the neck of
the woods or talk about with
very limited.
Communications and some of these
areas I could potentially life
threatening if you're sitting
there waiting on the side of the
road before Transbaikal water
crisis.
Mr chair Senator but what that
only come into play when you're
on the side of the road or in
the situation don't they meeting
taken to the hospital they don't
take a treatment facility first
thank you usually taken to
hospital for sometime evaluation
to see what's going on and then.
Chairman to there if the person
wants treatment what the issue
is then the referred to to a
program I don't think just then
you see you're going to go to a
treatment program and that's it
I think there's some of
isolation done the other way.
Leave it to with the the the
simple.
As I understood that you were
given is that they were just
picking people up taken straight
to the treatment center without
going through that medical
evaluation first.
Mr chair Senator at the the
scenario you gave me is a cop
shows up at the senior somebody
shows up C. and and there's a
log in and they're saying oh we
the state and the kids self the
situation or something and then
he's referred to the hospital or
the jail or something or some.
Law enforcement.
Tracking entity that does that
but there's none that goes with
their.
And that's the problem we run
into.
So o'neill I personally.
Princeton Tigers the Wildcats
big of seven at first it way but
I have my fingers.
These are just very.
what were your thoughts are.
Yeah hi yeah you're buying
dinner.
I I urge the committee think
about striking subsection B. let
me give you some scenarios first
of all.
Is an occupational hazard of
having practiced law for thirty
years so whenever we passed the
law here I always as a lawyer
the maximum with the how do I
get around this law.
It's it's a good exercise
because it helps right tire
built very frankly we transfer
our is going away so when we say
well the person who's transport
this can be employed by the
facility and that's easy to get
around right to hire an
independent contractor who's not
an employee of the facility and
that is independent contractors
one to propose the picking up
transportation right and we do
that and you completely of void
your prohibition here by simply
creating a fictional entity and
having that be the person who
picks them up and transports and
so they're not an employee of
the facility and thereby you've
not violate your life easy.
Mr chairman that point though is
in the contract when you say I'm
contracting you to go get these
people they become an employee
of the company the company under
their contractual liability
depend on the contract may have
some liability under that
contract we spend much of our
lives in the law.
Arguing in litigating whether
somebody is an employee or an
independent contractor but the
language using here is that they
can be this this pick up
transportation can be a five
person employed by the facility
so you have to have somebody
who's not an employee of the
facility doing that.
And and that would be pretty
easy to do so that's that's how
I get around here your
prohibition and and as I set up
my goals not to tell people how
to avoid the laws we make sure
it's the right to loss that
people can't avoid.
The s'mores raises a good point
which is where the way I'm
everything be even with the
amendment.
The patient can be transported
to an out of state facility
unless referred by an approved
tribal health care program so.
What I'm I'm a patient in of
good example would be hello.
Eccentric so we have a number of
we have some.
Facilities that are there right
next to the committee right on
the New Mexico one but let's
let's say that I'm in New Mexico
residents in Los crucis and I
want to be transported to el
Paso.
As it is for behavioral health
facilities.
Time the patient and I want to
be transported there this
language would say I can't do
that.
Dissipation shall not be
transported to a facility by
persons employed by the facility
I was referred by a tribal
health care program I don't
have.
And I want to one basis so but I
want them to come pick me up and
take me to the treatment
facility this this language here
with the amendments would mean I
can't do that.
Says I can only be transported
by referred by tribal health
care for children.
Missing something here.
I live Senator Ivey Soto.
That the state must patients
families I for the.
I.
At that location.
That is all.
For off.
In a research to exhibit still
doesn't address the scenario I
just present which is our I'm in
Los crucis timing prices IPO
I've got suicidal ideations and
I want to be transported to the
residential behavior health
facility of the phone call an
eight hundred number they agreed
to see me to bring me in and to
transform and I I can't do that
by this bill.
Patient cannot be transported to
a facility out of state.
By anybody employed by facility
unless even people with the
amount of less my family is
notified or less I'm referred by
tribal health care program I
don't have a travel healthcare
program this as I said and what
I don't.
Maybe maybe I do maybe I don't.
and and why would I why would be
my family's business for me one
suicidal to be there have to
require require that facility to
get my family's notification or
permission for me to want to
check myself in.
And maybe and and give the
lawyers but at after reading
this couple times if we just get
notification.
We don't need transportation
because it with if that requires
them to notify our keep
attempting to notify them the
violate the law on the matter
what.
And even in any scenario.
If you have a child with mental
health issues and runs off to
Farmington New Mexico and you
live in Los crucis.
When we children are and if they
just give some family
notification that's probably the
best scenario that I can think
of because.
If we restricted I mean they
just need somebody to notify
them that that they're missing
maybe they notify the police
department at least part makes a
list maybe don't restrict the
transportation because that's
the stick is part of this issue
but notification of some point.
Would would be more reasonable
than anything.
I think in some ways I think
you've handled in subparagraph
faces separate base actually a
pretty nice solution to
something when I wrestle around
with the last couple days we try
to to figure this out.
Senator faces the facility has
to make efforts to obtain the
contact information they have to
make every effort to have the
patient be able to contact their
family
and I think that those are all
good things but.
Of even with the proposed
settlement we have right now I
hope the committee will play my
scenario out and and figure out
how even with those amendments
were not pre press we're not.
In some way interfere with my
ability to.
I myself transported have myself
checked into a facility out of
state and again your scenario
Gallup Phoenix mice are very
easy because as you know my
district is across the street
from of us so if you're in
crisis and someone parking I'm
gonna go to Los crucis where we
have mental health facilities
you're gonna go across retail
Paso if you're in prices and I'd
like to be able to say people
can call up ask
Miss we transported and and I
guess the other question you
would be well I guess this is
persons employed by the
facility.
So this would include this would
include somebody perhaps in.
emergency transportation process
but I'm so I'm still not.
very good would be at all and we
keep yeah we keep playing with
scenarios but that's that's
where I've been out as I think
we had a strike the in its
entirety.
John service and personally
withdraw the prism of animated.
But.
just because of the us out
there.
And if it doesn't resonate with
folks that I.
A prisoner transports a patient.
Who lacks capacity.
The state residential behavioral
facility is guilty of
kidnapping.
For.
So I think if we strike
subsection B. that applies a
hundred percent and if the
families not notified then they
can proceed with the kidnapping
charges when state finance.
And I think that and and this
just to get notification is the
most important thing that we can
do I mean if we we're not gonna
figure out subsection it sounds
like it sounds like B. is is a
sticking point and I don't think
we're gonna figure it out
because there's too many
questionnaires in there
especially with tribal health
care program but if we just
strike the I don't know if we
need to see with the penalty
maybe
C. K..
And then
I think that's it.
Notifications more important
than anything I mean they've
been running groups and so if
ten people know that they
haven't seen somebody in five
days pretty soon one more
disappears this pry out came
about to make sure they got and
then Senator or disappear and
then they come back in the order
they hold me off we don't know
where you and.
They just require notification
that may that that's good for
everybody when they pick
somebody up on the side of the
road and say okay we'll we take
you in but surely the police
ambulance or some type of law
enforcement that.
Satisfies that and that may be
as good as we can get to start
first to start solving this
problem and we're going to do
the.
So
I move to strike subsection B..
The motion.
Thanks right.
It's considered favorable by the
sponsor any further discussion
that proposal strict view that's
very three letters or Morse.
I guess that's what I'm
struggling with the whole bill
is what Senator Ivey Soto con
came up with what you're
describing really is kidnapping
or lease false imprisonment
which is already a fourth degree
felony you Madam have checked
the real if they're doing us
that's criminal charges so doing
what we're doing doesn't match
the prosecutors actually going
after them for false
imprisonment that that would
really put into this.
That's what struggling with what
we're talking about this whole
time no but if if we get
notification then they know
where they're at but you're
still senator to kidnap in
Shanghai and false present
someone's long to notify the
next of kin I don't think so I
think then they still have the
kidnapping charge but at least
we got notification when the
person's overs up and say Hey
have just taken the I will I was
trying I didn't know I was which
is a male issue.
That law will still apply this
maybe even Stephan that penalty
as same hold me up because I was
incapacitated I didn't know what
I was doing in nobody notified
anybody.
Probably for not obeying us.
Seven fifty.
Starfish dollars first support
group on it.
Senator thousand four thousand
yes Representative of the
kidnapping false imprisonment
supported re phone emits a
felt as well as a payment
property you're gonna make over
a thousand dollars and
residential.
Which are charges all items of
One of the Phoenix just
transportation alone fifty from
there for ten days to make a
whole heck of a lot more money
but if you're facing a fortitude
phone you probably not going to
do it.
A thousand dollars just price of
doing business.
Dr are is our topic stop what
you're talking about happening
it's it's a criminal act.
As of this so I think we're
still on the proposed amendment
to strike the think that's were
it procedurally so further
discussion on that the proposed
amendment Sanchez said it's
favorable answer any objection
to adoption of the amendment.
Seeing none show center Moores
Baca serve on is too big Neil
Stewart and and so on that
amendment.
So I have some sense three pass
point four version of Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
the Senate bill five of three.
We take out the.
That's mostly for the committee
to any objection to that
amendment.
That motion toward thank you
Services social favor Senator
Ivy Soto Stuart o'neill due to
on tests Baca and Moores it
would be passed center.
All right of the centers for has
been delayed for half an hour
but at waffle house seven.
So if we can
get.
Representative I I'm familiar
with the other bills that are
remaining on the schedule really
don't think we can get to any of
them half an hour
how covered my my goal would be
to come back here after the
floor session and I.
I I've tried reaching the
senator Wirth to get an idea of
how long before.
Using okay try to get an idea
maybe you know that are present
along the floor session maybe.
Share drive.
No.
Thirty minutes.
The general price leading of the
wall Senator talks there's
there's any number of different
scenarios to again we're meeting
out of sequence on Thursday.
Of the committee should know
we're looking at meeting
tomorrow morning.
Which I think is most people and
so I'll try to coordinate that
with the president Majority
Leader the minority leader we
may of of course we have our
usual time twelve noon I know
that seems late to many of you
are here in the room I can
assure you hello just a second
please Representative
Leading pleading jesters won't
do you any good here.
but what we of I think most of
us know that that tomorrow's not
too late for around here with
Senator so estimating so source
of.
Yeah that's good so rules and
this was a reserve the morning
as an option but let me let me
try this Center do believe she
could present.
Three forty five for
Representative Gallegos and do
so in thirty minutes I've been
told our delayed thirty minutes
so let's take a shot at it but
if we can get it done.
Senate Bill.
I will do so if there's.
Language to be face to Sanchez.
Leave your opposition
all right well let's do this
let's let's go to the floor
them it seems like there's
disagreement so we'll come back
and then we'll be planning to
meet for the committee this
evening and we look at these
bills along with.
I'm fine to try something else I
just think that it's this is not
to have the bill unanimous that
we think is going to take this
longer than a half an hour.
Is Senator so it's not my favor
for any one of the two bills I
was looking for one that I
thought we could slide in easily
within the time frames are doing
thought that she can get hers
she could get that in on hearing
the other committee members what
we want something other than
that bill slide it in and so
because we have competing
interests in getting those the
staff that time I think the
committee could probably use a
break and look for a chance to
come back again we have tomorrow
morning at four of them so the
complaint and I'll just I'll
hotels of the committee members
you can be pretty happy about
this we've heard just about
every house bill that's been
referred to.
There are I don't know we've got
I've got the list and so I can
assure you that the there are
very few fills still left.
In the committee
but we're gonna work real hard
to to hear the number then we've
been moving pretty quickly all
too so I just I just think it's
very good for us to get that
