Senator Risotto for a Do pass.
Thank you any further discussion
or debate?
2% of 15 Sorry.
Again. I appreciate the patience
of our house. Guests were just
moving some bills pretty quick
hope you can appreciate
That we're doing that and we'll
get to them quickly. Senate bill
Crease Up 15 Thank you, mr
Chair. So this the committee
substitute for Senate Bill 15.
Uh, is a short term solution to
a long term issue.
Ah, Mexico has the highest
percentage of private hospitals
in the nation that are owned by
private equity firms. There are
Multiple transact more
transactions that are coming
over the next year, and this
bill will allow the
superintendent of insurance to
review those transactions.
Ah, when appropriate place
conditions on them so that there
is not any reduction in
essential services or
affordability, accessibility or
quality of services.
Medical services to new
Mexicans, and in a very rare
exception, she would have the
ability to to actually block
that transaction over the
interim. All the stakeholders
are going to be getting together
to come up with a comprehensive
approach to this issue. This is
just to cover the next year
because we believe that
transactions are coming.
Um
My experts are running here
right now, but we have a couple
of folks from the medical
community who
Have, uh, state wanted to, uh,
speaking support and so
McEnaney.
If you wanted
Hello, doctor.
Hello, Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee I'm Barbara Mackin and
um, a past president of New
Mexico Medical Society and the
CEO of New Mexico Oncology
hematology consultants
practicing in Albuquerque and
Gallop. I also served for 20
years and the leadership of the
American Medical Association,
including his president.
And I used that podium to speak
extensively on the damages
caused by consolidation.
healthcare, especially hospitals
and insurance, testified before
Congress and opposition to the
anthem, Cigna merger and the
Aetna Humana ER make it the
Humana merger in 2015 and CBS at
in 2018.
There's a growing body of
literature that shows that
merging hospitals into health
systems causes an average of a
14% increase in price.
And a decrease in access and
quality. Profitable portions of
hospitals are often sold and
then the rest of the services
become underfunded as a cost
efficiency process.
Physician practices cannot
compete because they do not have
the market leverage that these
hospital systems have cannot
command the prices and cannot
offer salaries commensurate with
those prices, and therefore
often they end up being acquired
by the hospital system once
practices are acquired the price
for the same physician service
Doubles for Medicare and
Medicaid and goes up 3 to 5%
from 3 to 5 Times for commercial
players.
When a private equity firm
rescues a struggling hospital.
It comes with an exit strategy
and within 5 to 7 years that
exit strategy means that private
equity firm leaves with five
times their investment money and
leaves that hospital worse off
than it was before.
Senate Bill 15 as amended is not
going to stop acquisitions, but
it will allow the superintendent
to play some guardrails to
protect vulnerable new Mexicans.
The committee has the ability to
decide if we wish to continue
having a healthcare system that
is designed to profit large
corporation.
Or one that works to deliver
health care to our people.
I urge to do pass.
You know if damage our Larry
Haram Thank you, Doctor and
Jason Weeks would, however, and
just state the positions of
their clients on this bill, and
then we just have a secretary
Alan Um and Deputy Secretary
Castillo Smith, who will speak
very briefly.
Mr Chairman Members Committee
Larry Harun registered lobbyists
for Presbyterian Healthcare
services. We worked extensively
with the sponsors and the
superintendent to come up with a
compromise piece of legislation
so we can do address this
comprehensively in the interim,
So we appreciate your support of
this bill. We stand in support
of the bill. Um and look forward
to continuing continuing to work
on this in the thank you, Mr
Chair.
Hmm. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Members of the committee, Jason
weeks registered lobbyists from
Mexico Hospital Association.
I want to thank the sponsors and
folks from the administration.
The secretary, Um, our
superintendent. I apologize for
working on with this working
with us on the bill came to a
point of compromise. We're in a
position where we can stand up
and voice support for the
legislation and hope this
committee moves it forward so
that it can continue to be
considered. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. Patrick Allen,
secretary of the Department of
Health. This bill will help
preserve stability and the
health care system as well as
access to care across New Mexico
and the Department of Health
supports the bill.
Chair vice chair. Members of the
committee. Um my name is Alex
Castillo Smith, and I'm a deputy
secretary with the future
Healthcare authority. Currently
the Human Services Department
and I stand in support of this
bill. Uh, New Mexico is only one
of 11 states that has no
statutory process for tracking
or challenging healthcare
provider, merger and
consolidation transactions.
As healthcare markets become
increasingly consolidated state
regulators need tools to protect
competition and consumers from
the possible negative outcomes
of these types of transactions,
including downstream impacts on
health care, access, quality,
affordability and equity. For
this reason, the healthcare
authority stands in strong
support of Sanibel, 15 and
things to sponsor
Thank you, Mr Chair, and Oh, I'm
sorry, Mr.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. Damage
are representing loveless health
systems. We appreciate the
sponsor and the proponents for
working with us on this bill. We
do now support the bill and look
forward to working with them.
And and Mr
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Chelsea,
Canada, and I'm, the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce.
We opposed the bill and have
concerns that it will impact not
only access to care, but also
set precedent where state
government has final approval
and control over private
business transactions in any
industry in the state. We
believe in supporting health
care providers and entities
which in turn will improve
access to care and health
outcomes in the state.
We have concerns that as we're
in the bill would discourage
investments in New Mexico that
could expand access to care.
For example, should have. New
Mexico system wish to contract
with a large out of state
telehealth provider.
Or expand primary care coverage
by partnering with the national
chain of primary care clinics.
In fact, the American Hospital
Association shares that health
system integration
May offer financial stability
for struggling hospitals provide
access to health system
resources and provide equipment
and facility upgrades, adding
continued burdens and fees onto
our hospitals works counter to
making us competitive and
growing health care services.
This is, um, essential services.
You're talking about and Mr
Chair, Senator, So I have here
with me. Superintendent Alice
Cane and Jane Wishner. I think
Super the superintendent
response.
But her her Mike
We're trying King of, uh, Thank
you, Mr Chair. Senator Morris.
Uh, thank you for the question.
We're looking at essential
health care services such as,
uh, upstairs upstairs. I could
say it just strict surgical and
other, you know, services along
those lines, Pathology
laboratories.
If they're in the hospital, I
would imagine they needed
pathology Ecology Laboratory.
We're just looking at the
hospitals. Where can you to show
me in the statute private
practices.
That was our intention and the
in our compromise to eliminate
private practices. That's we've
we've this is just covering
hospitals, but I'll turn to my
drafter.
Um
Mr Chair and Senator Morris.
Good to see you, Um in Section
three. A. It says that the
oversight power of the office
under this act applies to
proposed transactions that
involved a New Mexico hospital.
So all the other types of
providers that were in the
original bill or no longer in
the substitute Senator.
Um why are you excluding vast
network of private the reason
that both the state
State hospitals. I'm sorry, Mr
Chair, and Senator Moore is the
reason that the state hospitals
and the teaching hospitals you
and M is excluded is that there
are other provisions of state
law that provides oversight for
any kinds of transactions that
would be similar to that, Mr
Chair, Senator, Um, you and M
owns a lot of healthcare. I'm
going to say trick or for one.
Laboratory.
Why would they not be included
in this when they are owned by a
state agent.
Mr Chair and Senator Moore's
Under the original version of
the bill. There may have been
those kinds of transactions that
might have been covered. But
right now it's only involves an
acquisition merger or a change
of control of a hospital itself.
Mr. Chair Senator the U. And M
Hospital owns this huge number.
For profit.
Health care providers.
We use trick or they have others
that you're well aware of that
they own and they control but
they fall under the U. N m
umbrella. So again, they have
this monopoly around around
central New Mexico.
Uh, why would we exclude them
from this when they act as a for
profit entity are very
aggressive in the marketplace
against private practice. Why
would we exclude them from this
And Mr Chair, Senator? Uh,
I am sad that you won't be here
next year to help vote for a
comprehensive bill that that
that will address all of that,
But But the reason they're there
were not including them here is
because this was a compromise
with the medical community just
to address uh, hospital
transactions over the next year,
but the intent is over the
interim to develop a
comprehensive bill that does
address exactly what you're
talking about. Mr. Chair,
Senator, I think you know where
I'm going on this. There is an
entity in central New Mexico
that there
Populistic and
To exclude them just because
they under the umbrella. Do you
think of them as a good nature
State agency, and they're not
They're very aggressive. Um,
predatory ALS market place
player.
And just because they have that
umbrella, and we all love you
and them. No one loves you and
amber more than me, but I see
what they do on the business
side of it, and they're very,
very aggressive in the
marketplace, and they just get
this is good for private
practice, and private hospitals
have a lot of grave concern
about this, and we can talk
about a leader, Senator as you
work forward to it and what I'm
a private citizen.
About excluding such a here, fel
huge, powerful player in the
market place that is incredibly
aggressive driving private
practice out of the state, and
so I'm very, very concerned
about you guys. Just if this is
good for President Loveless
everyone else this is damn well,
good for you and M because
someone's got to control that
beast.
And and Mr Chair, Senator, I
think you're absolutely right.
That's something we need to look
at over the interim, when when
we're addressing a comprehensive
approach to this issue. Thank
you and I look forward to having
more conversations and I see
where you're going for this, But
don't let them off the hook. And
don't let them off the please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Um so I'm
First I do appreciate that. You
all continue to work.
On this. I do note.
Mr Chairman, that, uh
Page five length. Four.
The term entity.
I note
Offhand that on page 11
Line nine. You also used the
word entity. In that context,
you say entity. When I look at
the definitions, I don't see a
definition for entity.
When I look at the definition
person, it says.
An individual association.
Organizational partnership from
syndicate financing.
Trust corporation or other legal
entity.
That entity seems to be subsumed
within.
Uh, person.
But entity by itself does not
seem to be defined.
And so I'm wondering, Mr
Chairman if sponsor uh
If if perhaps some page page
five line or
Instead of entity.
Use of the word person.
And the act would would be more
appropriate than
Page 11 instead of entity.
Which is a form of person or
other person, which includes an
entity
Should just simply say.
The person that acquired
control.
Instead of the entity.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Senator
will we will change it according
to your recommendation very
well.
Mr Chairman, the it would be on
page five.
Line four strike the word
entity.
Insert the word person in this
place.
On page 11.
Straight. Simply strike the
words entity or other
There's no need to insert and
loop because we have the word
person right there.
So that's that's the man.
Mr Chair that's friendly
Amendment.
Certainly page five.
Line four strike the word
entity.
Insert in lieu thereof person.
On page 11.
Line nine.
Simply
Thank you. That's all.
Incredulous that we find
ourselves where we're at, Um, on
this bill have spoken with the
sponsor. I spoke with the
superintendent. I'm incredulous
because I cannot believe
privately owned hospitals are
agreeing to let the
superintendent decide whether
they could be sold or merged. Um
and I appreciate that Mexico
Chamber of commerce being here
today. I see my good friend Dr
McEneaney here.
Dr McEneaney. My understanding
is you've got a private
businesses in practices was
incredulous to me that you would
ever want the superintendent to
decide whether you can sell your
business to anyone else or
merge.
Um And but again, I respect the
fact that all the hospitals are
here saying they want the state
to have that level of control.
Um and that's really hard for me
to reconcile. So I feel like I'm
in a very strange world in the
almost like the Twilight Zone,
Man. I appreciate the comments
of center Moore's I never
thought I'd see this candidly
and all due respect to you,
Superintendent. I know you're
new and appreciate you taking on
the task and job new
Those of us that in law practice
have had a lot of challenges
with the superintendent
insurance in the past with
regard to patient compensation
fund and transparency. I know
you're gonna do it differently.
I hope you will. But I'll just
point out some things in this
bill that should be really,
really challenging All of us.
First of all, that the
confidentiality provisions here
so section forces at all
documents, materials that are
presented to you for
consideration and conception and
that connect
Connection with a merger remain
confidential.
I understand why the entities
would want that if they're going
to just be discussing a merger,
But they're sending them to you
and your we're giving you
authority to keep those of
confidential That should trouble
all of us. I think I don't know
how to evaluate your review, or
what influences your review or
influences superintendents after
you in evaluating into this
without being able to look at
your email.
And know what was exchanged what
was agreed upon what may have
been traded.
That should be really troubling
to us again. I'm not drawing a
an inference on you or your
integrity. But I've been here
for 23 years. I've seen lots of
people before. You don't know
how much longer I'll be here,
but I'll see people after you
and the notion that a person in
your position can gather all of
this information and solely veto
merger.
You don't literally on your own,
based on materials that you're
able to keep confidential should
be really troubling to all of
us. I think
Um, if I look at the if I look
at the language and subsection
of Section four, subsection C.
This section talks about the
control of a hospital. It says
Control is presumed if a person
holds 15% or more of the power
to vote.
Um, no surprise anybody. I
litigate a lot against very
large hospitals, Very large
corporations. They are masterful
at creating shell and subsidiary
corporations. Um, I've deposed
doctors and C E O s of hospitals
and I asked them who owns the
hospital, and they cannot answer
that question.
They don't know, because there
are so many layers of subsidiary
corporations. Um in these,
multi, sometimes hundreds of of
subsidiary hospital
corporations. They share the
same officers. They all have the
same. You're not in your head.
They all have the same vice
presidents. Hundreds of
hospitals have the same
corporate officers see Dr
McEneaney. You're not in your
head where you all know the
game.
And it's an enormous game and
they do it so that I can't
figure out who owns the
hospital. They do it so that I
can't get jurisdiction over the
parent corporation in New Mexico
so that they can say they don't
do business in New Mexico.
That's what they do. They'll say
LifePoint will say they don't do
business in New Mexico point
healthy.
While they own two hospitals
effectively here in New Mexico.
Um, so the notion that we're
going to put a paragraph in here
that control is presumed to
exist, I think probably would be
challenged and probably have a
hard time to stand up.
Um and and it's certainly not,
um, it says it's based on the
voting power with the hospitals
do is they create these local
community boards of directors
right which look like they're in
control of something that really
in control of nothing because
the hospital has another
corporation that's doing the
management and the executive
team of the hospital is actually
employed by another corporation
that has nothing to do with the
hospital itself are employed by
the parent corporation.
You're smiling and you're
nodding. I'm giving you an idea.
And I look I'm looking at Dr
McEneaney, President of the M A,
um You all know exactly what I'm
talking about.
You're nodding your head
affirmatively. It's an
incredible, exciting thing that
I get to do as a lawyer to try
and get to the bottom of these
things on behalf of somebody
who's been injured, Um and and
it's a David versus Goliath
undertaking and I love it. You
can probably tell
But that that experience leads
me to really wonder what we're
doing here by trying to suggest
that you will decide whether
hospital can be bought sold
merged with somebody else, but
the hospital seems to be okay
with that.
God bless America, so
That's my Tom pontification. For
the moment we have guns to go.
Uh so we're on a do path We have
to pass motion. Senator Stewart
really do pass motion. What's
that?
It is. It is, uh, it's Senate
Public Affairs Committee.
Substance, So yeah.
Right. We're on past motion for
Senegal. Substitute motion to
table.
Uh, substitute motion tables in
order to take it will take the
tabling motion. We'll do it by a
roll call.
Senator Boxer.
No.
You still have a pass? Yes, The
tabling motion fails 5 to 4.
Alright, We're back on the do
pass motion, Senator Stewart.
As mentally. Thank you. Thank
you for I know Long day already.
Alright Objection to do past
motion as amended show their
Moore's Baca Center brutal
Cervantes.
All the members voting
Affirmative. You have to pass.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
Members.
Presented Romero House Bill 129
committee sub
Mended. You've had some fun in
the house.
Welcome to the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
We have
We have a number of opponents
and proponents tonight lot of
them.
We also have some
Amendments to deal with here,
too.
Representative, I trust perhaps
you've been become familiar with
the way that I conduct a
meeting, which is dividing an
equal amount of time for
proponents and opponents on a
given bill, asking them whether
they organize themselves behind
one or more speakers.
If not, then I tried to buy the
time equally between all of
those who are proponents and
opponents on the bill, so I'll
begin by asking you whether you
organize that time and just
against so for you and those in
the audience understand this
If you don't do this, then
everybody gets an equal amount
of time, which maybe if you have
2030 people speaking, everybody
can speak for 30 seconds or a
minute. That's not a meaningful,
uh, examination of a build, so I
allow the opponents are
proponents of
Organize themselves behind one
person and consolidate that time
for a good presentation and a
good dialogue. It also avoids
redundancy and hearing the same
testimony over and over from
opponents and thank you for
letting me know that I'll try
and be more clear. Slow down.
Be more clear about that. So
First of all, Let me start with
you. Representative. Is there Is
there an organized
Group of proponents behind a
common speaker. Or shall I
divide all the time?
For advocacy among all the
proponents would do the ladder,
please. Okay by the time just a
moment, and I'll let the
proponents know that
Alright. I've got registered six
proponents
We'll divide their time equally.
Each of the proponent. Speakers
will have up to three minutes.
Um, for advocacy that's going to
include and Maxwell Miranda
Ascoli, Pamela Campbell.
MEREDITH Ross, Janet Williams
and Kathy mostly.
For proponents.
Opponents.
Hmm. Quickly. Is there anyone
here to speak as a spokesperson
for the opponents?
Uh, have you My question really
is whether you organize yourself
behind a common speaker. In
other words, I've got 13
opponents to allow equal time if
you haven't consolidated
yourselves behind one or two
people, each one of you will
have two minutes to speak in
opposition, and that's that's
fine that you'll get an equal
time of advocacy and opposition
that way.
Um as opposed to saying one
person speaking for 20 minutes,
So there being no organized
opposition or advocacy will will
do it will just by the time
equally so representative
recognize you for five minutes
per presentation, and then we'll
hear from the proponents and
opponents.
Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Members. Um
This before you is house Bill
129. It's a waiting periods bill
for the purchase of a firearm.
the bill itself. I know you've
seen something similar, Um,
which is the chairman's bill, so
I won't get too far into the
weeds. From what I know you've
already deliberated upon.
Um, our bill differs in a few
ways. One is that we have
lowered the waiting period
number from 14 days to seven
days. We also close a critical
loophole that is currently in
New Mexico law where, after
three days and you haven't
received our mandatory
background check
A firearms seller can now hand
over that firearm.
Waiting period in our bill is a
mandatory waiting period also to
ensure that a background check
gets returned. Um and if it
hasn't been returned in that
seven days, that seller cannot
hand that firearm over. They
have to wait for that background
check to come back.
Um, we are
Proposing this bill for many
other reasons, I'm sure you've
heard prior We are in an
epidemic of gun violence. We
have seen gun violence rise 80%
in the past decade.
We are also, um, one of the most
terrified have one of the most
terrifying rates of suicide in
the nation.
That critical waiting period
will help. We know, um lower the
numbers. 17 states have instated
a waiting period and they've
seen about a 17% decrease in
firearm homicides each year.
Um, Additionally we want to be
sure that our background checks
are working.
And that we've closed that
critical loophole right now.
That exists where someone could
receive a firearm. We have lots
of data for you. I'm sure if we
get good questions, which I'm
absolutely sure we will receive.
Um, but we'll talk more about
that in the bill.
I'm sorry. We have registered
proponents. I went through your
names quickly. Each one of you
please line up. You'll be
recognized for three minutes.
Please make sure there's at
least two people waiting to
speak no more.
Miss Maxwell, followed by Ms Ms
Coley. Coley. Are you here?
See you.
Here.
No.
Yes, Maxwell. Um then Miss
Campbell behind you. All right,
Miss Maxwell, you're recognized
for up to three minutes.
And and Maxwell Yes.
Um, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee and Maxwell New
Mexicans to prevent gun
violence.
Um, gun violence is a
multifaceted problem. As you
know that demands of a multi
pronged approach, which is
exactly what this legislation
would do. It addresses suicide
crimes of passion. Help close
the Tour Charleston loophole and
give law enforcement more terms
of domestic violence. Thank you
very much.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Pam
Campbell and I'm a member of the
Alliance for Gun Violence
Solutions.
I urge you to pass this bill to
protect our Children and others
at risk from gun violence. This
bill does not interfere with
lawful firearm, purchase or
ownership.
But ask only for a seven day
delay between gun purchase and
acquisition.
To prevent impulsive acts of
violence.
Studies suggest that a waiting
period can reduce firearm
suicides and homicides. Thank
you for working together to
protect our communities.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Can you hear me? Yes,
ma'am. Sorry. You're recognized
for up to three minutes. Okay?
Yes. My name is actually
MEREDITH Ross match in. Um and
I'm speaking on behalf of legal
women voters and the American
Association of University Women
and we stand in strong support
of this bill.
Even though I wish that it had
stayed at 14 days I have had
students commit suicide. Um, you
know the and I can't tell you
how what it's like when you know
that somebody who they had only
had time to think about what
they've
You know, we're contemplating if
they'd only had some prevention
they might not have done with
what they were desperate to do
at the at the time. We need to
reduce the suicides. We need to
have the firearms dealers have
enough time to do the background
checks. Um, this is a really
important
Provision, you know that needs
to be in law in New Mexico,
Minnesota just passed Bill. Um I
mean, there's an act of 30 Day
waiting period and I so seven
days is very, very modest. And I
urge you to support this bill.
Thank you. Thank you, Miss
Minchin. Janet Williams by Zoom
and then Cathy, mostly with the
last proponent.
Miss Williams. Are you present
by zoom
Miss Williams.
Do we have this Muslim?
What happened to Miss Williams?
Miss Williams very present. Your
time's a wasting.
And ours.
Nope. Alright. Kathy Mosley
Mosley.
Yes, Thank you. That was mostly
is that you?
Yes, Yes. Okay. Thank you.
You're appearing by zoom
recognize you for up to three
minutes.
Okay, Senator Cervantes, members
of the committee. I'm speaking
in support of HB 129 on behalf
of moms demand action for gun
sense as a public health nurse
for indivisible Albuquerque and
the State Democratic Party
passed a firearm safety
resolution this year, which
includes waiting periods and was
approved by 88% of the State
Central Committee.
Waiting periods decreased
suicides, homicides and improve
effectiveness, background checks
preventing access by prohibited
persons and closing the
Charleston loophole.
In 2022 over 372,000 checks
remained unresolved in three
days. Persons unresolved are
four times more likely to be
denied than those approved
quickly, and it was almost
double
The amount before the pandemic.
It's in 2018 Supreme Court
actually chose not to review
California's 10 Day waiting
period and then November of this
last year, a federal District
Judge Kane allowed our
neighboring states Colorado
waiting period to stand. This
policy has precedent.
Performance and broad public
support.
Thank you to sponsor Romero for
bringing it forward and for the
committee working on this,
please do pass.
Thank you and thank you for
staying within your time
Limitation That is
All that I have registered for
proponents, we have a number of
opponents.
I'll read through the names
quickly so you can get the
order. Each one of you will be
recognized up to two minutes
that will be essentially
equivalent of the proponents
times.
Um Eric Rasmussen, followed by
Tom K.
Bye, Bill.
Appearance and Dr appearance,
and I think we've heard from
you, Farrington. So the three of
you all will line up each one of
you is recognized for up to two
minutes.
First, Eric
Rasmussen.
Thank you.
Good afternoon chair. Senators.
My name is Eric Rasmussen. I own
right to bear arms, which was a
gun store in Albuquerque. And
I'm the president of the New
Mexico Farms Industry
Association, and we stand in
opposition to this bill. We have
several issues with it that we
feel are important to address.
Um, one is this bill does not
take into effect.
Um, anything that has to do with
the National Firearms Act, these
suppressor, short barreled
rifles. Whatever they maybe have
already gone through a very
rigorous test or background.
Check 6 to 9 months long and
have already been checked by the
A. T F, including the next
system. Um, and after speaking
to the ATF the other day.
Reaffirmed. What we already knew
is it's in their words. It's an
inappropriate use of the next
system to re running another
next check on something that's
already been done and had a next
check done to it.
Uh Secondly, HB 129 will not
provide a cooling off period for
gun buyers and will not prevent
the impulsive actions. No data
to support this, Uh, two thirds
of gun owners have more than one
firearm, so cooling off period
would not have an effect on
them.
80 F traces found at crime
scenes, including suicides from
2017 to 21, only 9% of the Trace
Farms had a time to crime of
less than three months. The
impulse purchase of farm for NFL
and immediately being used to
harm themselves or somebody else
is just anecdotal. We actually
participate in NSSF Suicide
prevention program.
And have had actual
interventions in the store,
preventing people from have
suicide.
This also it approach
appropriately if impacts wrote
Uh, gun buyers, which may also,
uh be marginalized as far as
their incomes go, and if they
let's say they are 100 and 50
miles away from the store. This
could potentially cost them 600
miles rather than 300. Miles.
Pick up a fire very much. Tom
Kane.
You're recognized for up to two
minutes.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Thank you. My name is
Tom K. I'm also with New Mexico
Firearms Industry Association.
This bill is written as if all
firearms sales are done between
an F F L, federal firearms
licensee and
Better. Okay. Alright, Written
as if it was between all all
sales are between an F F l in an
individual, And that's not the
case. There are many times where
an F F L is just a transfer
agent and not the actual seller
of the firearm.
Under this bill, Also F F L s
will not be able to receive
firearms from distributors.
There's no way for a distributor
to conduct a background check on
the F F l when they're selling
us the firearms.
Um, Also, there's no exemption
for concealed carrier law
enforcement like there is in the
universal background Check law
that was passed a couple of
years ago.
This will also eliminate online
sales. The customer orders a
firearm online from a third
party vendor. It gets shipped to
the F F l for the transfer. The
F F L is not the seller is just
the transfer agent, so the
seller is not going to be able
to maintain possession of the
firearm, as the bill says.
And then the last thing is, what
is the definition of a complete
And then the last thing is, what
is the definition of a completed
background? Check the 80. F has
their definition, But the bill
doesn't say for the A T F
definition or
Any other definition for the
background Check. Thank you.
Your time. Bill. Fear Aaronson.
Parents, um
Mr Chair members of the
committee representative.
I'm Dr William Fire eyes and
retired computer scientists here
in Santa Fe. I'm representing
only myself.
A standard oppose this bill. I
must thank the house for
amending the original 14 Day
period seven days, But this is
now in your hands.
Amended bills at least closer to
three day limit for federal
background check and eliminates
that arbitrary period in the
original bill. However, waiting
periods are designed to prevent
impulsive violence by hindering
firearms purchases, but they are
meaningless for those who
already own guns as our own
senator Samantha's has said
multiple times.
I ask you to. Please consider
some relief in this bill for the
46% of new Mexicans who are
already legally owned guns and
please consider including an
exemption for concealed carry
licenses, the most vetted and
trained gun owners in our state.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the Committee representative.
Thank you for being succinct.
Uh, Darren Law sort, followed by
Nancy Bennett.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. I'm Daryn list sort
with the National shooting
Sports Foundation. We represent
the firearm industry, Um, in
order not to duplicate what's
already been said. I just want
to touch on a couple of issues.
Um, Eric did talk about our our
suicide prevention program. That
is something that we partner
with the foundation for suicide
Prevention and Department of
Veterans Affairs.
And we provide materials, Train
F F L s how to recognize
potential problems related to
suicide. The program is working.
Um this is similar to our other
programs that we partner with a
T F, for instance, trying to
prevent straw purchases and
securing the store so there are
not thefts.
Um, you know, Eric did talk
about the drive going from that
from 300 miles today to exercise
their right to purchase a
firearm to 600 miles because of
this bill, because they're going
to have to do the return trip
after the weight, I would
suggest that no one here would
support someone having to drive
600 Miles to exercise the right
to vote. Um, but right to keep
and bear arms seems to be
treated.
Like a second class right here
in that regard. Um, you know,
someone did say earlier that
this does not burden the
exercise of the right to bear
arms. I would say that a victim
of domestic violence or stalking
victim would seriously disagree
with that. We are the ones at
the end of the day who have to
look across the counter at those
victims.
And tell them no. When they know
law enforcement isn't gonna be
able to help them and they're
looking for the one means of
self protection, and we have to
tell them that they have to wait
seven days or longer.
Um and, uh
The the other point I wanted to
raise Is that well, actually
just mention of appreciation to
you all for, um, addressing the
issues that were raised related
to the technical aspects of the
bill, Um and I believe that's
going to happen with an
amendment. So thank you very
much. Thank you, Mr. Service.
Thank you for staying timely.
Nancy Bennett, followed by Jake
Mel Adonis. I believe
Nancy Bennett.
Yes, ma'am. You're recognized
for two minutes.
Thank you. I am Nancy Bennett.
Mr Chair and members of the
committee. I am a 45 year
resident of Santa Fe.
I'm speaking to
Ask the, um, committee to
Exempt, concealed carry
licenses.
I appreciate the reduction from
14 days to seven, but you I'm
hoping that you will understand
when I earned a current license
to carry a concealed handgun
from the New Mexico Department
of Public Safety for 12 years
ago. Here's how that works to
earn it. I gain past 15 hours of
required training, including
laws, safety, ensuring accuracy.
I was fingerprinted and passed a
bedroom, background check.
All this information is always
on record with the state
Department of Public Safety and
the state police.
I paid the state $100 for the
license fee and $75 more every
four years to shoot again and
renew it.
Obviously this means I own at
least one firearm.
And I could have used that fire
time firearm anytime in those 12
years for any purpose.
In the last decade.
When I buy a gun, the dealer
does an immediate national
background check with no
disqualifying incidents in my
background federal clearance to
proceed with the sale usually
arrives in 15 or 20 minutes.
Everything the governor
government needs to know is
verified within less than one
hour. Love won't change that. At
the very least, we should be
exempt from the additional weeks
of waiting. There are tens of
thousands of concealed carry
licenses in New Mexico. If
you're surprised it's because
you don't know us. We almost
never break laws or kill
ourselves and you never see our
gun.
Licenses must be citizens or
legal residents and many of us
are local like me. Why are you
requiring us to wait a week and
make two trips for clearly
constitutional? Right? Thank
you, Miss Bennett.
Jake Miller, Don't Millie, Mel
Adonis and then Tara Mitchell.
Mr Chair and Committee. My name
is Jake Mel Adonis, and I'm the
vice president.
I'm the vice president of the
New Mexico Firearms Industry
Association. We represent 20
businesses and approximately
65,000.
Customers. I oppose this bill.
This bill does nothing to
enhance the background. Check
90% of background checks run
through the national instant
criminal background Check system
or proceed immediately. This
bill also has no exemption for
the concealed carry holders. It
has no exemption for federal
firearms licenses, and it won't
prevent crime or suicides in the
state.
It actually puts many new
Mexicans lives at risk the
victims of domestic violence and
stalking.
And the rural new Mexicans who
don't have a gun shop in their
local community.
We also we always hear that if
it saves just one life, it was
worth it.
My question is why is one life
worth more than another? And why
does the government get to
decide whose life is worth more?
This will cost lives. I oppose
this bill. Thank you, sir. Tara
Mitchem.
Mr Chin.
Mr Chairman, Committee members,
Tara Mitchell with the National
Rifle Rifle Association and
opposition to this bill.
If the goal is to keep firearms
out of the hands of criminals.
Then it makes no sense to apply
the provisions of this bill. The
seven day wait to people who
clear an FBI background check
instantly when they go to buy a
gun.
If the goal is to prevent
suicides. That's the goal of
this bill. Then it makes no
sense to apply. It's provisions
to people who already own
firearms.
I think the spill was described
as what was primarily laid out
as closing a so called loophole
for people who are delayed a
firearm purchase.
Clearly, the bill does far more
than that it delays by seven
days of purchase for everybody,
People who clear background
checks people who already own
firearms.
For those reasons. We oppose
this, bill. Thank you. Thank you
on zoom. We have Nate Esky.
Goodbye, Larry Santiago, do we
have
Mr Stu recognized for up to two
minutes, sir.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee Noveski here again
on behalf of over 1700 members
of the A rifle and Pistol club
here in the Albuquerque area, so
as to not be duplicative and out
of respect for the near
certainty that this committee
will address exemptions or pound
the lawn brewing some more.
Um, the Bruins standard is not
some wild outlier as we've heard
previously this session. It's in
fact, quite similar to the
standards laid out before it in
2020 in Espinosa versus Montana,
where time period used to
analyze the First Amendment in
much the same way the identical
time period.
And 2012 with US versus Jones on
the Fourth Amendment, harkening
back to the respiratory test and
more originalist. Look at it
there as part of the direction
the court's been going at this
point for well over a decade or
remind the committee that the
first waiting period law was
enacted in California in 1923.
that was a one day wait for
handgun sales per brewing that
is far too late about 80 years,
too late to bear on the either
original public meaning of the
Second Amendment.
For the case of 80 years on the
meaning at the time of
incorporation of the states.
Thank you. Thank you.
Larry Sonntag, followed by David
Venus. Mr. Sonntag, you're
recognized for up to two
minutes.
It's not all right. Son takes
not on David Venus.
Not on
Zack Ford.
That Fort
But, yeah, yes, Mr Chair members
of the committee. My name is
actually thank you.
Good. Thank you. Mr Chair, Mr
Chair. Members of the committee.
My name is Zak Report the
legislative affairs officer for
New Mexico Shooting Sports
Association and I don't want to
get to duplicative here. So you
know we share a lot of the
sediments that were expressed
here today. What I do in
emphasizes that this talk about
impacting rule in the Mexico
This is not a theoretical
argument. Adam and an M s s a as
we call ourselves. We have
members in places like Tyrone,
New Mexico in Kolkata in New
Mexico. For them the ability to
go to an F F L. It.
Requires them to drive for an
hour or even more to go visit an
F F l oftentimes it could be
even more, You know, 23 hours,
So this is not just a
theoretical thing that you know
these people who live in rural
New Mexico who worked there.
They had the same rights as
somebody in Albuquerque, who you
know, may only have to drive a
mile to go to an F F l So you
just want to emphasize that this
is not just theoretical. Um, I
also want to address really
quickly. I know it's been talked
about several times. There's a
study by the National Academy of
Sciences about the effectiveness
of the waiting periods, but I
also want
To point out in this study
really quickly that that same
study found there was an
increase in homicides resulting
from the implementation of the
next system, which I think you
know that might give people
pause. You know, because if
we're going to follow all the
recommendations of the study to
reduce homicides, we should
actually be getting rid of the
next system. So I think there
that study may need a little bit
more digging into in terms of
you know the cause and effect of
these various different
policies. Thank you for your
time.
Sorry, Mr Fleming. Are you on
the phone with us? Assume.
Yes. I am recognized for two
minutes, sir. Okay. Thank you
very much. Mr Chairman. I would
like to point out that this
issue about stalking and
domestic violence is not just
some sort of made up thing about
a year ago. Uh, the neighborhood
of Ventana Ranch and Seville was
basically attacked by car
burglars who got mad because
somebody came out and yelled at
him and they shot up the whole
neighborhood and we're talking
about shooting in cars.
We're talking about shooting
into the houses and the people
there. Some of them maybe aren't
but maybe they aren't if they
needed to get a weapon for the
return visit of the burglars and
the gangs.
They would have to wait seven
days.
That's not really going to be
healthy for them. So the other
point is the fact that the
excuse me the next system
background check of three days
was put into effect by Congress
because there were too many
delays, and so they had to give
them an incentive to get the
quick to get the background
check done. So thank you very
much. I appreciate the time.
Mister Mayes eager. Anthony
Anthony. Um I disagree. I hope
you can get your name closer.
Cherish tomatoes and senators.
Everybody assuming you're
recognized for two minutes.
Thank you, but it's It's a
massacre. Um
I just basically I want to
reinforce everything that was
said before I I agree with
everything to this point. Uh,
One of my biggest concerns is
actually the domestic violence
aspect of it. I mean,
We had a case recently in New
Jersey, where Miss Carol Brown.
Or bowling. I apologize. She had
issues with her boyfriend who's
deranged. He was stalking her.
She went to the gun store to
attempt to buy a gun to protect
herself, and, uh
Was denied purchase because she
had awaiting career that she had
to go through.
And he ended up killing her and
chopping her up into pieces. I
would submit to the to the
committee. That restraining
order is just a piece of paper
and we are responsible for our
own self defense. The police
will be arriving to take a
report after your murder, but
doubtful they'll be there in
time to save you. Thanks for
your consideration, and please
oppose this film.
Thank you, sir. We've completed
the registered opponents and
proponents on the bill.
Members of the committee. Um I'm
gonna propose to
Make things more efficient that
we first consider the amendments
at least several amendments. The
first is 87.4.
Proposed amendments.
For which on the sponsor
Well, we make sure everyone has
these.
And as you receiving these these
address number of things. First
of all this puts the house build
much closer to looking like the
Senate bill that we've already
heard and passed on this
committee. It addresses some of
the concerns that were raised
about concealed carry.
And the exemptions of this
committee considered
I expect one of the issues that
will be talking quite a bit
about on this amendment, and
you've heard something about
before.
Relates. You'll see this in
paragraphs two and three of the
proposed amendment.
The House build.
Very fundamentally, the sponsor
acknowledged differs from the
Senate bill and the fact that
this house bill
Would provide that. Where
There is not an immediate
When there's not an immediate
approval when a background check
is run.
Um, the House bill would require
ultimately approval.
Of a background check before the
gun sale could ever be
completed, and I see the sponsor
nodding affirmatively. So that
is the house version of the
bill.
And this would mean that if
there is never a background
check completed
There would never be a gun sale
completed the sponsors nodding
to affirm that as well to the
concern that that, um, that I
have and what I'm trying to
address this amendment about,
among other things, is that
If you if you don't get a
completed background check in 30
days. My understanding is the
background check process and
procedures essentially abandoned
and it never completed and so
Effectively. You'd have, um,
these those circumstances and
individual never being able to
purchase a gun because of an
incomplete background check is
tied directly to the federal
procedure.
I'm very confident. We've spent
a lot of times this last year in
the interim committee hours
meetings after meetings,
reviewing the status of the
federal law, the circuit courts
and trying to have a very good
understanding of the
Second Amendment under this
Supreme Court. I've got to tell
you. I am very confident this
committee
And the interim committee and
our staff probably knows federal
law on the Second Amendment as
well as anybody in the country.
I think I can say that with a
lot of confidence.
I was looking for an expert and
gun law on the Second Amendment.
I'd be looking to the Senate
Judiciary Committee staff.
I'm confident based on the
interim committee work and are
reviewable all the federal cases
that that if we did not change
that provision, the House bill
would be unconstitutional.
The House bill would essentially
create a circumstance where an
individual may never be able to
acquire a gun.
Um, simply because the federal
government was not completing a
background check.
And that would effectively be a
deprivation. I think of the
ability to, um, guaranteed in
the Second Amendment. I think a
court would strike down this law
entirely venture to call this
even a poison pill. I know
that's not your intention,
representative. But I think it
would be a effectively that
Um, and would lead to the House
bill being deemed
unconstitutional. So I had to
attempt to address that in
paragraphs two and three by this
amendment, and then on the back
page of this, you'll see the
exemptions that were adopted in
the Senate version.
Which is paragraph five of the
amendment.
And these exemptions include
The as we talked about
concealed carry law enforcement.
Exchanges between law
enforcement and between
immediate family members as
being exempted from from the
waiting period. We also in
paragraph six of this trying to
address the issues that were
raised by N m f A. I'm sorry and
F A and the muffler in silence
or issues and then we also in
this amendment.
Address. I think another issue
that was made.
About one of the issues was made
about the online sales when a
gun is purchased online and then
Made through.
Um, a licensed dealer here in
the state of New Mexico and the
complications that might create,
So that's that's addressed in
paragraph three of the proposed
amendments, so
With the with the committee's
permission on May return to
Brandon.
Who helped on on some of these
amendments as well. There are
specific questions, but there's
represented. That's the goal of
these. I think you've had a
chance to meet with us several
times the last couple of days to
understand that I would be
proposing these amendments.
This amendment very specifically
does not address the number of
days on the waiting period
because I propose to do that by
a separate amendment just
because I think some members are
gonna be good about this
particular amendment, and not
about the days and so have
separated those if you will.
So on this one particular
amendment. I think I broadly
covered what we're attempting to
do in this amendment, which is
effectively make your house Bill
look a lot more like our our
Senate version that we've been
through so represent first of
all, Let me let you address the
amendment.
Um and and any opposition you
have or support you have and
then we'll go to questions on
the amendment.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I do
appreciate the conversation with
your staff regarding you know,
some of the constitutional sort
of questions about how we really
close this loophole. Um, and
make it effective where we're
not open to challenge. Um, so we
are in agreement with the, um
First I guess Item number two is
as to your, um
Basically, if a of sale, um so
it will be essentially a tiered
system.
First everyone is subject to a
universal waiting period seven
days.
Then if you have not received a
background check within that
seven days, you have 30 days
essentially to receive notice.
Um, if you have not received
notice from the background check
system that sale can continue in
the transfer can go through the
one concern that we have, and we
have an amendment to just merely
suggest to that cellar.
Um, that while they may be able
to transfer this firearm to the
buyer, um they may also want to
potentially contact law
enforcement that this background
check has not gone through.
And you are allowed to, you
know, make that call. Um And so
we do have a bit of an addition
to that in our amendment.
Um
And just just agree that would
be a separate amendment.
Correct. So what we do agree in
fact that, um
And we do it a little bit
differently, but that that
transfer needs to take place. Do
you agree with representative
that if we were to enact this in
the House version
And I saw a lot of nods in the
audience behind you, including
many of the opponents of the
bill and those that are
representing the gun dealers and
manufacturers nodding. My
interpretation is represented as
accurate, which is that the
house version of this bill? You
you did not receive a background
check. You would never be able
to receive a purchase completed
purchase and you're not in your
head affirmatively. So you agree
with that interpretation?
Agreed. Would you agree
representative that that under
that circumstance
This bill could be struck down
as unconstitutional after having
conferred and sort of thinking
and hoping that that you know
That our background check system
was tighter. To be fair. I think
the feds have a lot of work to
do, but in order for us to be
able to have a stronger piece of
legislation, I agree that we
have to have this provision in
there.
Thank you, representative right
members the committee with
questions on the member
Anyone.
I move adoption of the
amendment, Mr Chair One moment.
Um, I don't agree. However, with
the exceptions, um following
item number two. Okay, so if we
want to go through the
exceptions that you provide, um
the only exception that we had
conferred upon was for concealed
carry
Um, subject to the idea that we
are actually trying to prevent
suicide. Law enforcement is not
in that category when it comes
to those who might do harm to
themselves, same as those with
federal firearms licenses. Um,
so the only exemption that we
had really agreed to was the
concealed carry exemption.
Everything else other than
immediate family members, which
is already in our bill, um would
be unfriendly.
So let's let's focus on that,
for just a moment represents so
we're looking at the
Again. The amendment paragraph
five. Is that right?
Which yes, Paragraph five.
Correct.
And as the sponsor of this bill
has been the house build you
Um oh. Consider the second or
sub paragraph two in parentheses
in sub paragraph five and
brothers. Those are agreeable.
Yes, amendments. But is your
position that
13 and four are not correct.
You want to say anything more
about your opposition to those
exemptions, then we'll go to the
to the amendment. Overall, Mr
Chair when we've looked at some
of the data and in particular
what we're trying to do with
that critical waiting period is
really look at, um, suicide
rates in our state. We know that
law enforcement in their line of
duty may be subject to that.
Um, unfortunate situation where
they may do harm to himself. Um,
the same thing goes between two
law enforcement officers that
becomes a nuance that again when
we're looking at the bigger
picture becomes too difficult to
sort of get our hands wrapped
around.
Um, and same thing with federal
firearms licenses were just why
Why is the exemption needed?
You know, we haven't really
conferenced about that. We agree
with the concealed
Um, Handgun carry act and what
it is that the state sort of
overseas as far as continuing to
have to update a license,
continuing to have to, um,
understand that they have an
interaction with that, whereas
some of these other bits um,
Senator, we just We don't really
have a good grasp on thank you.
Members of the Committee on the
Amendment.
Curdle.
First and only so far.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I think the
question I have is, um on the
first page of your amendment
number three.
Versus the farm shall remain in
the custody of the seller, the
federal firearms licensee
performing the federal instant
background check during the
entirety of the waiting period
was distracted. What were you
out again on Page one of your
amendment? It's item three.
Okay. Okay, where it says the
firearm shall remain in the
custody of the cellar or the
federal firearms licensee
performing the federal instant
background check during the
entirety of the waiting period.
I know something That's pretty
common now is so you order it
from a gun store in Albuquerque
and your shipping it down to Las
Cruces to your F F. L and
Cruces.
So you're saying it cannot be
shipped until seven days. So
then we're gonna add in another
additional time for for it to
get there.
Or does it? Um, Can it be
shipped? And then once it
arrives at the F F L now the
seven day period starts. I think
the confusion is where And when
does the seventh
Uh,
Mr Chair. Um, Senator, So the
seven days starts when the
transaction takes place. It's in
the bill as proposed not in the
amendment.
Um, Mr Chair.
It. I may It's it's
It is in the amendment. Those,
uh, item three. It says farm
shall remain in the custody of
the seller. The federal firearms
licensee performing
The federal instant background
check. So my question is. When
does When does the clock start?
Is it when it arrives at the F F
L
Or does it stay with the person
who sold the firearm?
And then seven days goes by and
then you have to wait to ship
it.
When would that occur?
Senator. What? The back panel
that you gave
The firearm would be sent to the
F F l, the waiting period. The
background check would be run by
the F F. L Wright and the
waiting period would begin by
the F F L
Once the once the farms with the
FL
Same thing with we. We've talked
about this before I bought a
Online.
Had to wait for the firearm to
be shipped into the state of New
Mexico from out of state and
then begin the background check
with the F F L once it's
received her potentially this.
This could be more than just
seven days.
Could be under the circumstance
You gave you time for shipping,
I guess time for the shipping
and further order to be
processed right. In other words,
the no firearms that I purchased
online that had to wait for it
was frankly back ordered for two
months. Uh And so, yeah, that
that wouldn't be counted as part
of the seven day wait period.
And
Then I think the only other
question I have is under item
five. It's on page two.
Um and it says between immediate
family members under the, uh
Subsection five of that item
with that also apply if the
family member is a gun store
owner.
Mhm, Mr. Chair Senator, So we
define immediate family member
in the bill, So it's about just
family familial relationship. We
don't look to whether or not
they own a gun store or anything
like that.
So
Mr Chair, if if that's the case
with this amendment again, I'm
asking on the amendment.
Um, if a family member owned a
gun store, I would get treated
differently.
Then blow off the street.
Senator Byrd. I'm not sure I
fully understand your question.
But but the exemption would
exempt.
Transfer between family members,
which is think that's what
you're asking, and that
exemption would swallow if you
will, the other restrictions and
limitations, and it was that
that once more broad
In the example you give where
you said.
Europe, NFL yourself and
Don't have an exemption, or you
have another circumstances don't
have the exemption. The
immediate family member
exemption would apply to you.
Under that, Okay. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
On the amendment Anyone else?
Alright? I had moved to do pass
on the amendment will do that as
a roll call.
This is again 087.4.
The sponsors indicated partly
acceptable partly little, please
Yes,
Yes. That amendment is adopted.
Of the Second Amendment will be
245.1.
As indicated committee earlier.
This is a proposed amendment
that I have
To the bill. I wanted to have
this as a separate amendment.
This deals exclusively with the
number of days on the wait
period.
The committees have has heard
this issue before. At least once
or twice. I've advocated for a
14 Day Wait, period of explained
it before why I had when I first
introduced this bill last year
proposed 14 days, the house um
and its action took this to
seven days. This bill would
change the House bill back to 14
days. The last Amendment. We
adopted, the bill still
maintains the seven days of the
house.
Uh, waiting period.
So that's all of what 245.1
does.
My reason for winning a 14 Day
Wait period is
Two fold. Really? First of all,
when I tried to come up with
what a reasonable wait period
would be, I looked at other
states to see what they had done
and tried to determine what
federal courts had done with
those wait periods. Think I
heard one of the speakers
earlier talked about the
earliest enacted wait period,
but we spent once again thanks
to exceptional staff work. We
went back and looked at all of
the states that have enacted
waiting periods and it's
interesting to me because we
heard a lot of opponents.
Throughout the processing. This
is unconstitutional or or this
doesn't work or on and on a lot
of obstacles to await period,
But I'll note that the earliest
wait period was enacted by New
Jersey in 1966. This is hardly a
novel idea. Um New Jersey
enacted a wait period in 1966 or
seven days. A number of other
states California 1996 Colorado
in 2023, Florida in 2018,
Hawaii.
In 1994 11.
Yes, I didn't do anything.
1968.
Maryland in 2013, Minnesota. In
1977, Rhode Island in 1991,
Vermont, in 2018, Wash. State of
Washington. 2019. There's
hardly ground breaking on the
edge of frontier legislating.
So, um, the 14 Day waiting
period.
That I initially proposed last
session was based on the fact
that Hawaii had adopted a 14 day
waiting period in 1994.
That's um almost a quarter
century ago.
That Hawaii law that waiting
period of 40 days has not been
struck down.
By any federal court in 1994.
It's not been enjoying by a
federal court in 1994 that
suggests pretty strongly to me
that there's not been a
successful second Amendment
challenge to a 14 Day Wait
period in Hawaiian. That's why I
thought that would be a good
place for us to start in a
discussion of a constitutional
waiting period.
Also add to my advocacy for this
particular amendment that you
know all the work that I've done
on gun safety issues. Red red
flags so called red flag or
background checks.
And this committee had to hear
it from me represent many times
as a gun owner. I feel
responsible to be part of a good
gun ownership and I really
appreciate it. I think Ms
Maxwell spoke about the fact
that she has got a concealed
carry permit. I've made no
secret that I have a concealed
carry permit. I appreciate the
training the whole weekend the
hours of training, demonstrating
proficiency. I think all of
those are good things.
And so
The waiting period seems to be
something that's constitutional.
One thing that I have not been
an advocate for is theater.
And and a lot of the gun.
Laws, gun safety, whatever we
want to call them gun control,
depending on which side of the
aisle you're on. Use whatever
terms you want to use, never
wanted to be part of the theater
of enacting things that are
going to be enjoying immediately
by the court were struck down by
the court, and I've been pretty
public about that even recently
with so called executive orders
in Albuquerque, where again I
think that undermines our
credibility.
And and it interferes with our
ability to have an intelligent
discussion on these things. So I
believe that a 14 Day wait
Period is constitutional. I
don't know of any court that has
struck down something of a wait
period is unconstitutional. And
so this seems to be something
that would
Actually meet Second Amendment
mustard, So that's the That's my
thinking on the amendment. The
amendment would change the house
from 7 to 14 days, and I'll
stand for questions on the
amendment.
I should ask you Sponsor. What?
What do you What do you think
about that? Thank you, Mr Chair
While I do not disagree with
anything that you've stated, Um,
the
Palatability of the house was
that the reason ability of
having a seven day waiting
period was something that
Um, challenges the convenience
of that 14 day. Um, and
certainly something that I think
had bipartisan support. And, um
you know something that we could
have a starting point within our
state that we agreed with to get
to that waiting period that we
can start taking in information
and data and, um and then see
how it goes. If we need to
extend it. We can always come
back. Um
But, you know, uh, focus
somebody sitting right behind
you recommended that this was a
good idea, and many House
members agreed. So we, uh we
are, You know, we're in
agreement with that. It's
palatable for us. And while I
don't disagree with anything
you've said, um or arguments
that you've made. Um this is
something that we know can get
passed through both chambers.
And represented. I misunderstood
what you said. Did you say you
had bipartisan support for this
bill in the house?
Did we
Maybe I misspoke, Mr Gerald, Go
back and read those about that
vote count again. Um, maybe I'm
just wishful thinking. Still.
All right.
You would consider the amendment
to be not favorable as the
sponsor.
This point? No, it's not
favorable right committee
members on the amendment.
Seven days back to 14 on this
committee center poodle.
Thank you.
Mr Chair, and I think this is
just a opinion of mine. Um, 7 to
14. I mean, I don't think it's
it's really gonna matter. Each
one is pretty egregious. Um
Each one is going to have the
same result.
Am I gonna wait seven days? 14
days, I can drive an hour and a
half to Texas.
And instantly purchased the
rifle that I want to. So if it
was one day
I would probably do the same
thing.
Um so I don't I don't know that
it matters whether you made it
two days, 21 days or a year.
The result is going to be the
same. You're going to put the
gun stores out of business in
New Mexico and people are just
going to go purchase them in
Arizona or
Texas. I'm not sure about
Colorado. I don't know what
their their rules are with with
regard to out of state
purchases, but
Um, I think people go to
Colorado for other reasons, but,
um I do have a question in the
state of New Mexico.
Um, how many instances of
domestic violence were reported,
Um
Last year.
Yeah.
Hmm. Mr Chair, members of the
committee and senator Portal.
It's wildly speculative, but
hundreds of thousands in terms
of the the full breadth of
criminality from
The most minor misdemeanor to
the most significant criminal
offense. Domestic violence is
obviously broad umbrella and so
hundreds of thousands would be
my best estimate.
And
How many, Uh, t r O s were
issued.
Mm hmm. Mr. Chair member of the
committee Senator Pirtle again,
difficult to understand. Each of
those are issued from the
judicial districts with which
they are petition for. Um, it's
going to be a high number that I
won't be able to deliver with
specificity.
And I think that's the biggest
thing that's most concerning to
me is we're here. We're talking
almost, um, jokingly, you know 7
to 14 days, but the reality is
There are people
That find themselves in
situations.
Where the government is not
gonna be able to help on the T R
O s a piece of paper.
Um, domestic violence is real.
And we want to make it where
somebody is then going to be
forced to go to Texas to buy a
firearm or is going to
Find one from somewhere that we
don't really want them to be
purchasing or getting a firearm
from
It's almost like we're ignoring
this as if you know. Oh,
You know, seven days or 14 days.
That's a magic number that we
pulled out of a hat with a
rabbit.
And it just seems
A little disingenuous.
To me, Um, having been through
Something very personal and
emotional.
And not really feeling quite as
certain. As I imagine some other
people do.
When they have a weapon pulled
on them.
We have to stop.
And think about what we're doing
here.
I mean, this body passed
Legal suicide, legal assisted
suicide.
And now we're talking about days
of a waiting period for suicide.
You can't make this up.
So I'm just trying to wrap my
mind around.
The the days and the issues
whether it's seven or 14. I
mean, at this point, I don't
think it matters. Both. Both are
too long.
Author Ridiculous in my opinion,
and it doesn't seem like we're
really talking about what we
should be talking about with
regard to the waiting period and
that is the safety of citizens
of people that find themselves
in situations that they were not
expecting.
They need to find a way to
protect themselves. Now go on
the hunt.
Not go out and find somebody to
harm
But just to be able to protect
themselves.
So
I don't know. You know where we
go from here, But to me, it
doesn't matter whether it's
seven or 14. It's not. It's not
workable. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you Other members on the
amendment.
We're ready for a vote on the
amendment. The amendment again
would take the wait period from
seven days to 14 days.
Vote in favor would do that
about an opposition would keep
it at seven days. Senator Bucko
Just to be clear, Mr Chair, so
this isn't sure.
That's correct. Um, Mr Church
Senator back up any other
discussion?
Um as the proponents of the
amendment. Um well, we'll go
ahead and take a look.
No.
Yes, And I'd like to explain my
vote.
I mean, I know we've debated the
issue quite a bit. Um, I said
earlier. I'm not an advocate of
theater. When it comes to these
issues. Let me be clear. I don't
believe this bill is going to be
meaningful way address crime.
Uh, or gun violence.
The wait period to center
portals point.
Um
Do you think the real solution
To gun violence. Someone real
solution to gun violence is a
greater emphasis on background
checks.
The one thing that seems telling
to me whether it's really you
take about any of these mass
killings just about without
exception.
The one that that most
Most close to me, is they'll
Paso
Where
A shooter for evidently weeks.
Expresses intentions online and
social media his intention his
hate for Hispanics is
Very clear objective to drive
hundreds of miles to El Paso
specifically to go into a
WalMart and killed Hispanics.
Some states have background
checks. New Mexico does not
Independently.
I've spoken to the governor's
staff, her Cabinet secretary,
New Mexico should be
Look into an act its own
background check procedure.
And do a better job. I think
that can save lives and and that
can prevent mass murders I
believe, and allowing 14 days
would give us a greater
opportunities of state to do a
more thorough job background
checks, and that's the reason
that I
Support 14. A big wait period is
to begin moving in the direction
where will really make a
difference here? Anyone else?
Alright Representative had
another amendment.
Ah, yes, Mr Tear, so we have
amendment. Uh, 2 to 8202.1.
We're getting that passed out,
Go ahead and explain to your
proposed amendment. So are we
already amended the bill to talk
about some of the
constitutionality with how the
federal background check system
works? Um
You know, it's disheartening to
think that if someone couldn't
pass pass a background check
within the 30 Day period that
you would be handing over a
firearm to somebody who could be
potentially dangerous.
Um, the only difference between
what we've already adopted and
what this states is that, um
The firearm buyer, Um, that the
I'm sorry. The firearms seller
may report the incomplete
federal instant background check
to a law enforcement agency.
This is just a suggestion in law
For those that were. It's
obvious that these are flags. It
will be a very minority small
minority of people who can't,
um, received that firearm within
that 30 day period, but just as
a good faith effort to our law
enforcement agency to let them
know what's going on.
That's the only difference from
that. From what we've already
adopted and on this suggestion
Thank you. Representative
Questions. Committee members on
202.1 is an amendment.
Senator Baca.
Thank you, Mr Chair, So my
question would be
Is there anything stopping them
from reporting this incomplete
Federal incident back, mister.
Go ahead. Go ahead. Sure this is
my expert Elizabeth.
To weigh in.
It's
Excuse me, Mr Chair. Who is
this? Elizabeth Johnson. She's
general counsel for the
Department of Public Safety.
Public safety. Okay, That must
be a new position. I thought you
were Republican analyst at some
point.
We're all very confused What my
role is at any time. I think
we're clear now,
um
Mr Chair and Senator Bacon. No,
there's nothing preventing any
reporting to law enforcement for
any reason. Any time. So, Mr
Chair, then I guess that would
beg the question. Why are we
putting this in there? If
there's nothing preventing him
right now, they can do this. Mr.
Chair. Uh, Senator Baca. The The
idea here is that we're going
through a process and
It being able to put into statue
that this is clearly something
that hasn't gone through the
general protocol, um, of waiting
that requisite 30 Day period. We
know federally after that 30 day
period ends, there's nothing
that we can do to intervene
essentially with somebody who
may not be able to pass a
background check, But that 30
days his arbitrarily past
Um, in which case we're saying
this is a suggestion that if
that has been incomplete, that
that, um, firearms dealer could,
um, informed that law
enforcement agency
Thank you, Mr Chair. I think you
answered my question.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Representative. How many of
these background checks take
longer than 30 days?
Mr Chair. Uh, Senator. So in the
F I r. They flagged that, um in
2022 nationwide, there are about
372,000 that had not been able
to be unsolved within that three
day window in New Mexico. It was
about 2500 were denials were
made.
But we don't know how soon that
denial came back.
Um, And so that's why that again
that waiting period is critical.
But that said if the denial came
late later in that sort of game,
or perhaps it was in that
category of 372,000.
Um, that 30 day window closes
And then the, um firearms dealer
can just hand over that firearm.
And so that's why the suggestion
is made. Maybe they want to
contact law enforcement to just
let him know that that that
period has passed and they're
handing over this weapon. Mr
Chairman, representative.
Why is there any indication as
to why they're taking this long?
Um
What we understand Mr Chair
senator is that there's been an
increase, um more recently in
the past couple of years and the
need for background checks
number one because many, many
more states are requiring it, So
we have a relationship now, with
the next system is a state of
New Mexico and a number of other
states in order to check and
balance that system and
additionally just a lot more
firearms cells in the last
couple of years as to why
there's a bit of a backlog.
And I understand that they're
really trying to keep that
clear. Um
At present day, Mr Chair
Representative when I go in and
it takes 15 minutes
Why does mine take 15 minutes
and others takes 30 days?
Mr Chair and Senator Purtle. I
hope my mikes on, um
Uh, Next background check can
be, uh, period for several
reasons, the most common I've
seen and working with our
concealed care unit is, um,
fingerprint readers, not reading
the fingerprints accurately.
Um, that's the most common one
I've experienced. But there's a
number of codes that we get, um,
that that put a person in a
holding period. Typically,
that's not the standard
typically
Especially in instances of
people with no criminal history.
It's pretty quick.
So
Mr Chen representative. I think
that just gets down to my
original questions. It seems
like this is a solution in
search of a problem.
So basically what you just
explained to me is the federal
system is already working.
In catching these question, Eri
Folks in taking up to 30 days.
To clear them.
And then sometimes they don't
get cleared.
And you're wanting to take it
Where myself Zero criminal
history. I think I'm a pretty
level headed guy.
Um and
Now you want to punish me when
there is not an issue.
Because the way it was just
explain to me and and correct me
if I'm wrong, But if there's
anything flagged up, whether
it's a technical issue on their
side, or it's a true flag in
their past, their already put
into a system that could take up
to 30 days and if it if it's not
an issue if it's cleared up or
find out, you know they
They got, Um Jon David Miller
mixed up with another John David
Miller. That has a different
birthday that they can get that
cleared up and done properly. So
I think
Just from the explanation. I've
I've
Heard Is that what your
amendment essentially does?
Then? Somebody doesn't clear the
background check because it's a
problem. Now you're saying we
can give them a gun?
Mr Chair, Senator. So first
lead. This is not a punishment.
Um, so the the second bit to
that is that after three days
right now in New Mexico and and
just in congruence with federal
law
That federal firearms dealer can
hand over that firearm. So the
three day window is all we have
right now, so somebody may be
flagged and have to wait three
days in New Mexico today. Um, Mr
Chair, Senator. So what we're
trying to do is extend that for
everyone to seven days to make
sure that that minority of
people who are trying to get a
firearm who haven't had that
response received.
Have the giving the dealer for
extra days to check and balance
that process And for those in a
crisis that seven day waiting
period is really critical for
that cooling off period. So, um,
Senator, Um, Mr Chair, Senator,
this is extending that and
providing that, In fact, they're
going to go into a holding
pattern for that 30 day period
if they haven't been able to
pass that background check.
Um we're making sure and
following federal law that
allows for that 30 days to clear
someone, and so since we already
know that there is a backlog
number one and that a lot of
folks have been flagged, but we
don't know within what period
they were denied that
background check. This allows us
to go through that entire
process to be absolutely sure.
That whoever is purchasing a
firearm in New Mexico has at
least gone through the requisite
federal period. And then after
30 days, if they haven't
responded, we can't do anything
about that. We then proceed with
the sale. That's what this bill
clarifies.
So, Mr Chair and representative
I'm going to
Translate.
What you said the way my brain
processed it, okay?
Um, essentially what you said is
we already have a system.
That flags people.
Puts them in a three day wait.
Uh, Mr Chair senators, so
That's not quite exactly how, um
it works so
Right now in New Mexico.
You have to have a mandatory
background check.
Are by default are state or
federal law says You can get
three days to do that. The next
system gets three days to
respond.
Um
If they haven't responded after
that, three day period than that
firearm can be handed over
whether or not they've received
a response.
And so
That's what they call the
Charleston loophole. Which means
if I didn't pass my my
background check in that three
days, I can still receive that
firearm. We're closing that loop
with this bill.
You're you're doing more, Mr
Chair and represented enclosing
a loop if I pass instantly.
Which I do every single time,
Even though I get a little
nervous, like Oh, my gosh. What
if
What if I don't pass? And then
you know, my dad won't be proud
of me anymore.
Is
You're punishing me.
And making me wait seven days.
Even though I passed instantly.
So I don't think there's anybody
here that would have issue with
You know, having a waiting
period until you pass.
But that's not what we're
talking about. We're talking
about.
Basically putting everybody in
the same
Category, Regardless of
Who or how, or you know how well
behaved somebody is throughout
their life. So I mean, I'm just
trying to the way I perceive it
as I go in as a law abiding
citizen.
Any law abiding citizen goes in
and I passed instantly. You want
to put me in the same
Um, waiting line as somebody
who, um, gets flagged, or I
believe there's a mandatory
three day wait on under 21.
It can take up to explain to me
but
To put
And that's why I think there's
the pandemonium is why there's
um everything that's coming
from. Especially people in my
district is that we're going to
treat those that have been well
behaved that are good citizens
and do pass these background
checks instantly in aren't a
threat to society.
Treat them the same as those
that do get flagged that do need
to wait more than the three days
or do need to wait, Say 7 to 14
days.
And so I think the amendment
that needs to be brought forward
is that waiting period for those
individuals.
And then if they don't pass
Not be given a firearm.
And so I think that's the reason
why you had so many people here
today.
People over online. Why I can't
even look at my emails because
it's just
I think I've had over 3000
today.
Alone.
Um, is because this is something
that is is dear to people and I
think it's just again and I
don't want to re harp it, But
it's just a little ridiculous 14
days. I mean, we wouldn't put a
14 day Wait period to go to
mass.
We wouldn't put a 14 day waiting
period. Once you fill out your
absentee ballot to make sure
you're darn sure you want to
vote for whoever you picked.
So I I think we're creating.
Um, levels of constitutionality
here. Um, and we are punishing
people.
So I think, Mr Chair to use
those terms. Yes, it gets me a
little excited.
Because in my opinion
You are punishing me.
In my opinion, you are punishing
innocent, law abiding citizens.
It's like putting a
One of the alcohol blow
machines.
And your neighbor's car because
you got to do, um, so I think
it's it's a huge. It's a huge
problem. That's why there is the
excitement over it. It's um
This amendment.
I just see a lot of a lot of
issue with it just with the talk
about the federal instant
background check that this is
now saying someone doesn't pass
and we're to me. That part
doesn't sound safe.
While we're also then saying me
who passes it instantly has to
wait 14 days, so I think it's a
little bit hypocritical and
dangerous. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Mr Man.
And representative
Seems to me that this actually
let's with the first Amendment
that passed
Mr Chair. Yes. So it will
conflict. Um, it I think when we
were trying to think through
being able to look at how the 30
Day period
Starts on top of this seven day
waiting period.
We were just looking to try to
create that means of being able
to create a an opportunity to
report somebody after a 30 day
waiting period and background
check hadn't come back. That's
what this does already have to
30 days.
Correct so in the number two
Of the first Amendment that we
passed, the required has nothing
completed within 30 days.
The seller may transfer the
firearm Buyer.
Correct that's already been
passed the only different
distinction substantively
apartment fact that structurally
we would have to feel that, um,
because we've already put it on
the bill.
Is that, uh, you you have that
they would also have to report
the complete federal background
checks.
To a law enforcement agency.
And, um
Correct.
If we
Candidly. We specify the law
enforcement agencies.
There might be
There might be a purpose to
doing so.
But if we're just randomly
saying
Any law enforcement. Anything to
I'm not really sure that that's
necessarily helpful.
And I'm not sure that the law
enforcement catalog
Mr Chair. Uh, Senator, um
Correct. I mean, all of that
makes sense. We Yes, we would
have to remember this is a
suggestion. Um
We're just trying to in good
faith, sort of try to figure out
how to identify for
Both the firearms dealer and for
the public or for the Law
enforcement agency in that
community to understand
This person wasn't able to pass
a background check. It's been 30
days, and now they have been
sold a firearm.
Is there something that we can
do of substance to alert
somebody? Um, and to be fair, Mr
Senator, Mr. Chair, Senator. We
just, um, we don't have that
ability right now.
Um, So this is that good faith
bit to try to figure out how to
do that. If you have a
suggestion, we're open to
consideration.
This is just merely trying to
get us there and
Mr Menon represented. I
appreciate that. My I guess my
next question is, what is the
law enforcement agencies
supposed to be in place?
As with many calls, Mr Chair,
Senator, you know, we can
imagine that there's a
cataloging of something right
when you make a call to an
emergency number or a non
emergency number that they're
keeping track of what to do with
those, um, different
circumstances. That is up to
that law enforcement agency to
deal with.
Okay, Um
And and I guess Mr Chairman,
representative.
I guess I have a concern.
That we're asking law
enforcement take a report.
And there's really no direction
for them, and there's no
indication that anybody is
violated the law.
That's correct.
So, um
And so given that we've already
Given that we've already adapted
I don't
Respectfully. I don't I don't
really see what they
Where there's any functional
addition.
If we had not already adopted
Amendment, I might feel
differently.
I would I would seek to
massages. We've already that
might explain the order in which
we consider the amendments,
Perhaps
Anyone else on the amendments.
On this amendment.
Um, I'll speak in opposition the
amendment to represented again.
I understand what you're trying
to accomplish your I share
Senator Ivey Soto, that I'd
catch him napping over there.
but I haven't been able to do
that. Just yet. He's right. Your
amendment would I think conflict
with the preceding amendment and
senator episode is right. We'd
have to go back and strike.
Some of the language from the
First Amendment to comport with
yours and to marry them. I'd be
concerned about
Conflict between the two
amendments that would be
struggling with probably figure
that out after the meeting, and
sometime between now and the
floor and be dealing with floor
memos. I think the easiest
solution is to reject this
amendment. We've addressed the
issue I think of the preceding
amendment is center at the soda
pointed out now, you sure is
concerned that I'm not really
sure what the point of reporting
this to law enforcement would
really be.
If it really accomplishes
anything at all the word
probably address this enough
tonight, but I really do believe
that we want to get serious
about this issue in the state.
We as a state Legislature and
the governor and the executive
branch need to start getting
more aggressive about background
checks. And when I've brought
this to the administration this
administration over the last
couple of years, you response is
usually
That it would be expensive.
And and that's not a very good
response. In my opinion, that's
the that's the far reaching an
ambitious way to begin
addressing gun violence and
crime is to enact our own state
background check again. I've
said other states do it. There's
really no reason we shouldn't be
doing it here and of the issues
money.
We'll see the guys in the other
committee next door. They've got
lots of it these days.
I'll urge the committee not to
accept your amendment with
respect.
Anyone else will go through a
member of activity has moved in.
Hmm. That's true to their There
is not a motion to accept the
amendment. Thank you for that
Procedurally representative in
the absence of anybody in the
committee moving the amendment.
We'll move on from that
amendment, and we'll go back to
the bill as amended.
On the bill as amended many
members
Everybody calm.
Chairman of nobody else seeking
the floor At this time, I would
move to do passive house to
share for think he did already
recognized
Baca. You just missed it, so
we'll come to your motion
moments in motion snapping
Hmm. You're right. You're right.
I wanted to ask you a couple
trying to achieve through your
bill. Mr. Chair, Senator, er,
trying to do two separate
things. One is to have a
critical waiting period for
those that may do harm to
themselves or others that may be
in a crisis seeking to purchase
a firearm.
Um, given the alarming rates of
suicide in our state's firearms
are the deadliest form of
suicide. And, um, certainly the
weapon of choice right now, for
those who are seeking to do harm
to themselves, so that's number
one. Having that seven day
period to address that, based on
the data that should be
something that works and to as
per the amendment, that we just
adopted or that you all just
adopted.
Um
Is to close a loophole that
currently exists where, though
we have, uh
Federal background checks is
mandatory in the state of New
Mexico. Those background checks
may not come back within the
requisite three day period. If
they haven't you have to wait
seven days under this law to
verifiably understand whether or
not you should be able to be
sold to firearm? Nff after seven
days that hasn't happened, then
you go into a 30 Day Wait,
waiting period. But after that
30 day waiting period now
You are then transferred that
firearm by the seller if you
haven't received that background
check
So on your second point, um
Do you know how many and 100
People are an example of I don't
know what percentage of of
persons that are not instantly.
We've heard, um sort of, uh,
data regarding the fact that
about 90% of folks hear back
within the requisite three day
period. Mr Chair, Senator, um
90% and what about following
that three day period?
Ah, Mr Chair Senator. So that
gets into the, um when those
denials are either made or when
there's that gray area, um, so
in that category in New Mexico
in, um 2021 I will are sorry
2022. There are about 2500
people, um, that were sought to
buy a firearm in that category.
That were either denied after
the three day period,
potentially within the three day
period or never heard there. We
don't know about the never heard
backs within that 30 Day period.
So that comes out to roughly, I
would guess. 2 to 3 people in
the 100.
Mr Chair, Senator, I would think
that was a would be a very, very
low estimate.
I actually I think that would
probably be a very high
estimate. But
Besides the fact so
So is there any additional
background check being conducted
through your bill? Is there
anything at all that's been
done. In addition to what the
background check that's being
done by the feds.
Is there anything at all being
done here, too? Mr. Chairs,
point. Um, Senator, We don't
have a state background check
system, so we're very reliant on
the federal background Check
system, So we're just Mr Chair
and representative. We're just
Stopping and we're not doing
anything, then we're just
there's no activity at all. This
is just, uh
Uh, I guess I would feel better.
Mr Chairman, Representative,
There was something happening
during this time.
I mean,
You're denying somebody their
right to a firearm for a period
of time.
With no activity that just
doesn't make any sense to me. So
I guess that's why I don't see
that it accomplishes.
Either of those two goals he set
forward.
Um do you have a study? You can
say or anything of that nature
that shows that suicides are
prevented by these waiting
periods. Um, Mr Chair, Senator.
Yes. We have numerous studies
that we looked at with the
Department of Health here in New
Mexico that talk about, um,
implementation of waiting
periods across those who have
adopted them.
And we markedly see that those
who have have a decrease
anywhere from 7 to 11 to 17%,
depending on the state decrease
in suicide and homicide rates.
Um, we, you know, we've looked
at everything from the National
Academy of Sciences nationally
to other longitudinal peer
reviewed studies that we can
speak to be happy to send you a
list.
Prior to this, um, this hearing
Mr Chair and representative.
Um I looked into this myself and
I couldn't find one such study
that showed that
Um I don't know how we can
implement a piece of legislation
like this across the board, Mr
Chair and representative.
Um to
I don't know if evaluate.
Somebody's, uh,
Mental status at that time.
And and and then make the the
presumption Mr Chair and
representative that they're
gonna feel better in seven days.
And they're going to decide not
to hurt themselves because
they've maybe they'll feel
better in three days. Maybe they
need eight days.
Maybe they need 35 days.
Maybe they'll never change their
mind. Maybe we should just strip
weapons from any everybody and
wait forever, Mr Chair
representative because they may
never feel good again.
Is that reasonable?
Mr Chair. I I don't think that
is so this is really just an
arbitrary number.
I mean, we're picking 714. We've
thrown a lot of numbers. I don't
know how Mr Chair and
representative Do you know how?
how the number seven was arrived
at in the house to determine
that. Hey, this is the magic
number other than it being our
lucky number seven.
Ah, Mr Chair, Senator. You speak
to the fact that many states
have adopted different numbers.
So again, the data is going to
be different in different
states, depending on that
waiting period, one piece that
we rely upon is the fact that in
Wisconsin they had a lot like
this, and it was repealed. For
instance, Mr Chair senator, and
when that law was repealed on
that waiting period
Um, there was an increase in
suicide, right? Um, for all
both, um urban and rural
counties in the state. Um and so
when we look at some of the data
as to why we want to bring this
in, we've seen that states who
have reversed course have seen
that increase in suicide. Mr.
Chair, Senator. Um, we've also
seen the fact that these waiting
periods are working so
It's the will of the body to
have chosen seven within the
house to have looked at just,
you know, we can pick a day on
the calendar. If I went in on
Monday. I can go back back in on
Monday. Um you know, we pick
pick a calendar day to just
create that uniformity around
it. That's why the 14 days was
also palatable. Too many of our
members. So while it may seem
arbitrary or inconvenient, Mr
Chair, Senator, what we're
trying to do is just give that
critical period to those who
might be doing harm to
themselves.
Um or those who have not yet
passed a background check. And
Mr Charron representative, I
think you just confirmed what I
I said there. It's completely
arbitrary. It was a matter of
convenience within the house.
and, um hey, if it's Monday, we
can go back next Monday. Well,
hey, if it's Monday, then maybe
they should go back on Tuesday
or the following Tuesday.
It. There's really nothing
behind it now. You cited some of
the other states and what
they're looking at, you
understand as well. Mr Chair and
representative. There's a lot of
collateral effects. I don't know
what's going on in Wisconsin.
Maybe they had 30 extra days of
cloudiness that year and and so
they're suicide rates of
increase due to that. Maybe it
was during Covid for a period of
time.
Maybe. I don't know. I guess we
could go on and on speculating
that so that's exactly why these
waiting periods to me. Just make
no sense at all. And I haven't
been provided any of those
studies that you're citing, um,
where it shows that suicide
prevention is somehow affected
by this. Um it troubles me that
We look at generally it's
suicide, and we blame the item
they used to hurt themselves
when, in fact, if we took that
item away, they might simply use
another item. Or how about
pills? We have a lot of
dispensaries and pharmacies that
that issue. Uh, pharmaceutical
pills out to
Mothers, fathers What have you
that are readily available to
anybody in the household, and if
they decide that they don't want
to be alive anymore. They just
they could just easily grab a
glass of water and take a few
pills and and, uh, satisfy that
urge, I guess, you know, but
instead we look at the gun. Um
it's it's simply like a d wi,
where
Someone decides to drive
themselves off of a cliff. Well,
let's you know, let's prevent
people from buying cars for
seven days then because that
makes about as much sense as
this, so I'll leave that I kind
of feel like I know where this
vote might be going, so I'll
leave that. But there's another
part and I'm not gonna
Go through the story that I
talked about the other night
with, uh um, the good senator
here who presented his 14 day
waiting. Period Bill, But I'm
gonna tell you that it offends
me. It offends me that a veteran
Or an armed, active armed duty
military person cannot purchase
a weapon readily anytime they
want in this country anywhere.
And the reason is Mr Chair and
represent it is completely
hypocritical to arm a man or
woman send them overseas to kill
people and buy them the rifle.
And then you tell them based on
their second Amendment
constitutional right in this
country that they can't go out
and buy a weapon while they have
essentially a license to kill
overseas.
Not a license a mandate in
order.
Where they will serve time with
heavy penalty if they do not
follow those orders, and then
they come back and they're on.
Leave their what have you They
want to buy a rifle to go
hunting and I've done this when
I was active duty come back, go
hunting with a cousin with a
with a family member, and I want
to buy a weapon. At that time, I
could buy a weapon to go
hunting. You're telling them
they can't do that while on
leave.
Is that in my reading this
correctly, Mr Chair and
representative
Mr Chair, Senator.
Sadly, the act those who come
back from a combat situation or
some of the highest rates of
suicide in our state and our
nation.
And so when we're looking at an
exemption like that, um, that
harm to self within that
critical waiting period, Mr
Chair Senator is one of the
reasons why we want to have this
waiting period. And so when
we're looking at the data that
is precisely one of the reasons
why we've done this, Mr Chair
and and representative that
answer. I'm sorry is laughable.
It is ridiculous for an active
duty member who comes back the
cab by so I'm going to offer an
amendment.
Maybe we can remedy that
exemption situation as it is so
on the amendment offered earlier
by Senator Cervantes, I would
offer a number six in the
exemptions, which would be to a
buyer who is active duty
military.
Yes, and I'll repeat it. That
would be unfriendly. Um, Mr
Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
representative.
So the people who could
potentially be mailed back home.
With a flag draped over their
cask cannot buy a gun in this
state. Is that what you were
telling me, Mr Chair
representative?
Mr Chair, senator. One of the
impetus is for this bill.
Is to prevent suicide.
And at the alarming rates of
what we have seen in our state,
Mr. Chair Senator. That critical
waiting period applies to not
only those who have served our
country but a number of other
people in a crisis.
And when we look at what has
been flagged as not only denial
or perhaps passed that three day
waiting period, many of them
have mental health orders that,
um, are flagged in order to not
sell that person. A firearm.
So when we're looking critically
at the data as to who might be
in those categories, Mr. Chair,
Senator, That is why this is an
unfriendly amendment.
So, Mr Chair and represented.
Let me get this clear. Yes or
no? If you if you can.
You are saying that the men and
women in uniform
That are sent overseas and are
being shot at
People are trying to blow them
up.
That when they come home to New
Mexico are not competent enough.
To be able to purchase a firearm
if they pass a background check
and my correct in understanding
that is what you were saying.
Mr Chair, Senator, That's not
correct. Um, that's not what I'm
saying. And what I'm saying is
that this is not an exemption we
would like to make considering
the fact of the data, um, that
we understand about those who
could do harm to themselves.
Or potentially others. This is
critically in that area of those
who could do harm to self. When
we look at the data within new
Mexico of those who are choosing
to do that with firearms that
the critical waiting period
applies to everyone who we
haven't exempted yet.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I won't belabor the point, but
I'm actually insulted that we
are excluding men and women of
the armed forces. Um, if they
just if anyone deserves an
exemption, it is them people who
are risking their lives who are
the best trained
I'll leave it at that. I'm just
offended Mr Chair.
Thank you. Others.
Every sort of
It's just a question for Senator
Baca, and that is, if you would
just consider instead of making
it number six, if you could, the
other ones.
Certainly that would work And
actually, my language would be a
bit incorrect, I said, or
reserves it would be or national
guard.
That would be the proper term.
Thank you. All right. We're on
that amendment. I'd like to join
the discussion debate by noting
that
Mhm Mobile by noting just this
last October.
Just for five months ago.
In Maine.
Robert Card. The third killed 18
people.
Lewiston's main
Uh, almost immediately after
leaving Camp Smith training
facility in New York.
Where the command there had
referred him to a military
hospital.
And he spent several weeks there
under evaluation.
In the preceding July before the
mass murders in October, Army
Reserve officers reported him
for behaving erratically. He was
transported to the nearby Keller
Army Community Hospital.
At the United States Military
Academy for Medical Evaluation.
According to the National Guard,
All of this before he in the in
October killed 18 people.
Out of concern for his safety.
The unit requested law
enforcement be contacted.
And he spent in several weeks
under evaluation of hospital.
The 40 year old card had
threatened to shoot up the
National Guard base previously
in Maine, according to law
enforcement officers. I could go
on with the story.
To me this reemphasizes what I
talked about earlier today. The
solution that we really want to
get to mass gun violence. We
need more thorough background
check. We need more time to
perform that background Check.
This is the reason I've
supported this law. That's the
reason I supported the longer 14
day waiting period. I appreciate
and respect.
The admiration of all of my
colleagues for the military and
law enforcement. I think we do
that routinely in the Senate,
and deservedly so.
And that applies to law
enforcement as well, too, but
certainly to those in the
military, and I appreciate the
again.
The the recognition for those
who put their theirselves, uh,
their lives on the line for our
national safety, but at the same
time, I can isolate this one
example which tragically was
only months ago where we have
somebody who
Is in the military is active
military
I'm receiving all the training
that's referred to serving their
country and still in this case
clearly suffered from mental
illness clearly recognized by
his command. Clearly recognized
by those, um in his military
service, and they failed to act
adequately.
And then, when they referred him
to law enforcement, the law
enforcement and if they had the
military service acted
I think, in hindsight where we
would recognize if they had
acted responsibly and if law
enforcement had acted
responsibly, there might have
been 18 people who didn't
deserve to die.
Others. Anyone else we're on the
proposed amendment will take it
by
Center, right?
And worse. No
No amendment fails.
Members on the bill. Other
amendments or discussion,
Senator back in and temporal You
saw the
Thank you. Thank you. And you
know all respond a little bit.
First of all, to what The good
chair said, um
Heart tugging story and and
terrible tragedy. And yet this
bill would do nothing to remedy
that story.
And so it seems, you know, in
this chamber. What happens is as
we rely on data when it's
convenient.
And then other times we rely on
an anecdotal stories when they
serve us.
So if it serves my if it serves
what I'm going to say, and I've
probably been guilty of this
before.
Um, I'm going to tell you a
tragic story and
I'm going to rely on that to get
my point across.
And maybe ignore the fact that
you know this wouldn't have
prevented any of that.
You know the words that I heard
we're in hindsight.
What a luxury and luxury we
don't have. We can't look back
at all of these items and would
have could have should have. We
can only deal with what's here
and what goes in front of us.
What's laid out in this
constitution.
Is a guaranteed to bear arms
even more stringent than the
federal constitution.
And what we're doing here again.
And I'm gonna be frank with you.
We're not doing it.
My colleagues on the other side
of the aisle or doing it.
You're taking the guns away from
the people, and there has been
no data here given to me. That
shows that this will have any
effect at all.
As a matter of fact, there's a
lot of data that says it won't
do anything. So what's left?
What's the real purpose of this
bill?
The real purpose of this bill.
Is to strip people of a right
Because of unruly individuals.
Or people with mental health
issues.
When it's holiday time and I put
on £20. I can't blame the fork.
It's my fault.
It's personal responsibility,
and until we address those
issues of mental health
Of treating criminals the way
they should be treated. We've
had serious crime bills passed
through here that are being
completely ignored.
Our pre child attention bill
went in and out. That's
something that could help.
That's who's killing people.
We're going to go out to the
citizen because that's what we
do in the state.
3 to 6 in this committee. I
can't help you much, but I'm
going to tell you what
This isn't right.
And I encourage people in New
Mexico to watch these committee
hearings.
Elections are coming up, and I
hope they're watching.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, I do
have one amendment that I would
like to propose on Page three.
Um, I believe that sub paragraph
two
Line 20.
Um
After aunt we would put a comma
strike or
And then online 21 after Uncle
put comma.
Or any other person who is
considered the equivalent of
family.
So, Mr Chairil note that that
will then make this definition
inconsistent with all the other
definitions of immediate family
members that are in the same
Section of law.
Like 30-7 Dash. 7.1.
Yeah, we would have different
standards for immediate family
members.
Throughout our statutes of the
criminal statutes that
specifically are dealing with
I would point out that it would
maintain one consistency.
That definition would
Confirm with what's in paid.
Family medical leave.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I still
have the floor.
Um
Thank you, Um
You know, I was just thinking
about something. Um
Well, you know what I want to I
want to tell this story. So my
son Ezekiel
Text me right about the time we
were starting this discussion.
And
Uh, he said, What do you What
are you doing in committee? I
said, well.
The Democrats want to take our
guns again, son.
And he texts me back. Tell him
to shut up.
You know, I think it's funny.
But it's it's funny because
Sometimes they youth get it so
right?
My other son told me one time we
were playing. Sorry. I don't
know if you guys are familiar
with the game. Sorry. It's been
around a long time, so I'm sure
everybody's played.
And he was stuck trying to get
his last guy into home.
And you got a four backwards
after about 30 rounds.
And he just got plum excited.
And I said some Are you so
excited. At least I'm moving.
So I think sometimes we ignore
Children, but sometimes in their
simplicity we we miss or we take
for granted.
How How is it possible that my
12 year old son
Freaking gets it.
How
And we're in a room full of
adults that are just so tone
deaf.
So tone deaf to this issue.
You're causing
The rift.
In this country.
I don't know if you're familiar
much with with World War two.
But America didn't go looking
for a fight.
Japan poked the bear.
Japan did that.
That's what this does.
We all know we see through, we
can hear through the BS being
spoken.
This isn't about anything that
you said other than taking away
guns. It's a step in that
direction from law abiding
citizens.
I can see through it. My 12 year
old son can see through it.
And, Yeah, we got a little upset
because it's over and over and
over and over and over.
This is something a certain
group of people feel
passionately about and you won't
leave it alone.
You won't take common sense
suggestions on where to go with
it.
So yeah.
You know am I
Operating the most.
Beautiful decorum right now, Mr
Chair. No, I'm not.
But the amount of restraint I
feel like I'm showing right now
I wish you could be inside of my
head.
My grandfather jumped out of
airplanes at 17 years old.
He lied about his his age to
fight and war.
For what?
Or what?
They were the greatest
generation.
And now it seems
That we are a society of very
weak.
People.
Very weak people.
Because those were Republicans
and Democrats jumping out of
airplanes.
For our freedoms.
It's not gonna be the Children.
Of many of the week.
In this state.
But it will be my Children or my
Children's Children.
Who will fight in the next war.
I guarantee you
Because we raise our kids up to
be proud of this country.
To be proud of what it's
What it is not necessarily proud
of everything that's happened in
its history because it's not
perfect.
I'm not gonna pretend like it is
But we have freedoms for a
reason.
And we have things that we hold
near and dear in my culture.
And when you bring bills here,
the reason I get so emotional.
This is a direct attack on my
culture.
And we're supposed to be among
united cultures.
And when you single us out, Yes,
we get upset.
I get upset enough that I'm not
afraid to cry with the tens of
12 people watching at home, so
When you say things
We have a right to be offended.
They are offensive. Not
everybody believes the same as
everybody else. But that's what
has made America great is that
one group of people does not
force their ideals on another.
That is what this does.
Seven days, 14 days.
Doesn't matter.
Let's get to the real issues.
Let's solve the real problems
instead of looking for that
headline in the newspaper. I'm
sick of it.
Mr Chairman, uh, I moved to do
pass on.
Okay?
Substitute motion to table Mr
Chair.
Thank you. Um I'm a gun owner
going back to my grandparents. I
can't remember a day in my life
when there were not guns in our
farm in on a ranch.
I was taught to be responsible
gun owner. I'm sure as certain
Pearl was teaching his son to be
a responsible gun owner.
But when we talk about, um the
culture and hurting people
I can't help it escape the fact
that as a gun owner, I feel like
I want to be part of the
solution. And and, um
And beyond, when, when somebody
will
Make it open season on Mexicans
in El Paso at the WalMart.
I'm way beyond thoughts and
prayers and one of the things
that our founders certainly did
was they were men, generally,
but women, of course as well to
have solutions to problems.
And and this is a problem that
has solutions.
And as a gun owner, I feel
particularly responsible between
part of the solution. I think
that I'm in a unique position
among my friends here who are
gun owners to be part of the
solution. I'm looking forward to
Anyone who wants to be part of
that dialogue.
One that do pass motion.
Is there objection to the new
past motion.
Show Center more center Pirtle
Center. Baca in opposition to
pass motion.
Before we're going to take a
short break. There's dinner in
the committee room next door.
We'll come back at quarter til
regrettably do not have enough
food to offer to all of our
guests who are here in the
audience today, too, but
committee members there's food.
Please be back at quarter tills.
We have a lot more work to do.
And I'd like to be prompt about
that. So I just want to say
thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
Members.
Operate better.
The key is morale.
That's the key to it, Somebody
said on in connection with
another bill and another
committee today. Doesn't matter
how you organize something. It
doesn't matter how you structure
it.
It's the people that work in it
aren't
Ready to do a really good job.
They won't get it done.
And it hit me that that's
exactly what's going on. We'll
see why F D
I know the department secretary
is is going to make an all out
effort and I wish her well and I
hope she can turn morale around.
But I also know
That with an organization.
That asks its workers to do the
kind of work they have to do.
If they're not well trained, And
by that, I don't mean they've
gone through a 30 Day
Orientation program where they
learn the forms.
And they learned the legal
ramifications of what they're
doing. I mean, if they're not
well trained in terms of having
the skills
To go out and talk to an angry
parent and communicate with them
enough that you can establish
rapport.
If they're not skilled enough,
and they don't have enough
background in order how to do
motivational interviewing?
If they don't have those basic
skills of how to bring people to
the point of wanting to change.
That's the most frustrating job
in the world.
They can't get people to come
with those kind of skills and
stay.
If morale is bad.
They can't attract the kind of
that's the problem. They have.
No, they're doing wonderful
effort recruiting people.
And they come in.
50 or 60. At a time they go
through the training. They get
into the jobs. And while they're
coming in 20 or 30, you're
leaving out the back door.
Because the work is not
The kind of work that you can do
without the adequate training.
But how do you attract the train
people?
If the department's morale is
reputation is so bad with the
public.
That people aren't willing to
come forward. So it's a It's a
downward spiral. They're locked
in a downward spiral tantamount
to a death spiral.
They can attract enough people
who can do the job in order to
raise their performance to the
level the public's confidence
cruise.
But then the public's confidence
Drops, and that makes it all the
harder to attract the people
that would be able to help them.
Bring it up.
I think the issue really is one
that has to be dealt with in
terms of the public's perception
of that department.
And what you need, in my
opinion.
Is
To give the public a voice
hence.
The Constitutional amendment.
Let the voters make a decision
about this. Do they want to
start a fresh? We'll see why F d
What would that accomplish?
That by itself, I think gives
them a fighting chance to say
We're really getting started on
a new footing. Then this idea is
you bring in three. No, we've
amended it five professionals.
Five professionals who have the
background.
Maybe they're retired, Um,
psychiatrist child
psychiatrists. They may be
somebody who worked as a
consultant and family
development programs of former
faculty member at one of the
universities, But you bring in
five people who really know this
field, the kind of people that
you'd be using as expert
witnesses in court cases, for
example.
And you have them, then function
as a commission that holds
monthly public hearings.
That is crucial.
Because one of the big problems
with the department is
They are a of secrecy.
And the cloak of
confidentiality that that
they've allowed to
Fall over all their activities
so that you don't know what's
what decisions are being made
until they spring it.
And then the public reaction as
well as from C Y. If I was at
the hearing they held on the
Carib Cars summit in
Albuquerque.
And they laid out a good plan.
It was a great plan.
Good South Africa. Mr. Chairman.
I'm sorry. I
I was supposed to have
Texted my co sponsor,
representative Eleanor Chavez,
and I and I
Spaced it.
I'm glad she enjoyed his thank
you.
I was at the core. A summit in
Albuquerque at the Spinal
Cultural Center.
National Hispanic Cultural
Center and
And they laid out a really good
plan there about 100 and 5200
people there.
The plan was fine. It had the
Health Department doing some
activities that had the early
childhood department doing some
of the activity. It had the
humans with the health care
authority.
Um, providing some of the
resources that we're going to be
needed. And then when they said
this will all be coordinated by
Seaway F. D.
You could just feel the the the
whole room said Oh, no, not
them.
They didn't say that. But that
was just and then all the
comments were very negative
after that was a good plan.
But nobody could see how good a
planet was because it was going
to be run by a department whose
reputation has bottomed out.
That's not because Theresa
cancel this is the secretary.
This. This is the culmination of
a period of long decline that
started the very year that the
department had the consent
decree lifted in 2000 and
Three.
2003
And it's just been sliding down
as soon as as soon as the
federal oversight ended.
The department started going
down. Caseloads got large. We
now have a caseload. That's
See what if Dina has a caseload
that is almost 500 kids larger
than it was in case load of
Children in the state's custody
and either foster care or still
being in the state's custody,
having been returned home
awaiting a decision from the
court about when they could
release custody.
But that's 500 more than we did
when the consent decree was
lifted. Most states have a
declining case. Look
But you have this kind of
Growing burgeoning caseload.
Because
The workers have caseloads.
Too large.
To really pay attention to
what's going on in the cases.
And they have those caseloads
because they don't have enough
staff.
And they don't have enough staff
because their reputation so that
which again makes it harder to
attract more people. And that
So the idea is that these
hearings would be held in
public. They'd be public
hearings with the press.
Uh, able to come. There'll be a
time for the public comment like
we do in the interim committee
meetings.
Were you trying to get from the
from the community? What's your
perception of what's going on?
And instead of the department
being behind the shield
It would be answering questions.
It would be, it would be making
decisions public policy
decisions on how the department
runs
In a public forum.
I think that would be the
biggest single improvement, but
they can't turn down. We can't
neglect to see also the other
improvement they would hire.
An executive director, who
hopefully
Would spend several
administrations.
When I think back to think we
can all think back to the most
effective
Public servants in our state.
They've been the ones who were
there for 2030 years in those
jobs and could provide that kind
of
Continuity of that kind of
consistent leadership.
This Steve Reynolds State
engineer's office who was there
for 30 years, the Leonard DeLeo,
who was at the Education
Department.
25 or 30 years. Those are the
kind of things that we've never
had it C y F D.
There have been and I added up
the other day 11 c Y F D
secretaries
It's that's every two years.
There's a there's a or every 2.5
years. There's been a new
secretary of C Y F. D.
So the department goes in one
direction. Then it moves in
another direction. The whole new
management we met the management
team that the secretary brought
in. Not one of them was part of
the management team. The doctor
silly and I
Uh, met nine months earlier. Not
one. They were all it's a whole
new team.
Maybe they needed to have a
whole new team. But that's not
the way you build that kind of
continuity and consistency.
That's not the way you build
confidence in the workforce.
That's not the way Maria
Um and we have to. Let's be
realistic. No matter what. How
good a job the current secretary
does. And we just voted to
confirm ER, along with all of
you.
In two or three years, she'll be
gone. The administration will
change that. The new secretary
We have never had a secretary
who bridged administrations
effectively.
This is now viewed as a
political position instead of a
professional position.
This this? I believe this.
Children using family commission
would be a way to do that would
be to change the public's
perception of this department
from just another hack
organization, which
People are rewarded for their
loyalty by being promoted.
Into one where there's true,
professional, consistent,
enduring leadership.
And so that's why I'm proposing
this and Chavez is has joined me
in this. She and I, As far as I
know, we're the only two former
C. What do you employees who
were
Who who? Who served in the
Legislature. We both worked in
the department, so I'd love for
him.
Thank you, Senator, Mr Chair and
members of the committee. Um, I
was a child protective services
social worker for about 10
years.
Um, at the Y F D and I actually
worked under the consent decree.
Um, And during that time we saw
major improvements in terms of,
um how, um
Families and kids were
addressed. Um, I also saw the
department hire social workers
with, um
Bachelor and master degrees and
the quality of care that we were
able to provide to those
families greatly increased. I'm
shocked at the situation at C Y
F D finds itself in now, Um, the
vacancy rates ranged from 25% to
35%, depending where, um, where
those workers are located.
35% for foster care workers.
These are the workers who are
responsible for monitoring kids
in foster care and making
permanent treatment plans for
them, determining whether or not
they will return to their
families or parental rights will
be terminated.
Um, we know that kids are
sleeping in offices.
Never did that happen. Um, back
under the consent decree, and
I'm not sure when it started
happening maybe a couple of
years ago, but that's not where
it should be.
I understand that the department
has lost numerous foster
families.
Um and foster families are of
valuable resources when kids are
are in need of alternative
alternative places continue to
stay with their families.
I am.
Also shocked at the number of
backlog caseloads that exist at
C Y F D over 2000 kids who need
to be visited by a social
worker. These are kids who are
probably in dangerous situations
and kids who are living under
abuse and neglect, and we failed
to get to them in a timely
manner.
Back when I was working with for
the department. We had 24 hours.
To visit
And to assess and determine
whether or not the child was in
a safe environment. My
understanding is that that
doesn't happen anymore.
Um, I'm concerned that, as the
senator said, we see secretaries
come and go.
They don't last
Workers talk about toxic work
environments. And I think that
the fact that we don't have any
stability there is a result of
that toxic work environment and
as a result, they leave. They
don't stay. They tell her
friends not to go work there. My
niece graduated from Highlands
University. She wanted to go
work at CPS. And I mean that,
um, C y f d.
Her friends told her not to
Because it was too toxic. She
did anyway.
She lasted a couple of months,
and then she left she was
working for a non profit
organization right now.
She loved her job but couldn't
deal with the toxic work
environment.
Many of her coworkers, then
we're also leaving and paying
the money back, and I forget
what it's called, but they were
paying the money back this that
C y f D had given them to come
work.
They would rather do that than
continued to work there.
I could go on and on
Um, but I think you get the
picture. We need to do something
bold. We need to do something
now. Our kids can't wait. We
cannot continue to leave them in
dangerous, abusive and
neglectful situation.
Thank you Represent good to have
you stay to see you back.
Recognize from your old House
colleagues think just about
everybody here today is former
House colleagues that may be
considered Jewish. Right? So
yeah. Look at that. You seem
surprised, Madam President. Look
at that old house.
Uh, Senator, Chairman and Dr
Alvin silly, the former New
Mexico state and a longtime
consultant on child welfare in
New Mexico and elsewhere is
here. And if you could say a few
words, please, But please be
succinct. Thank you.
Chairman Cervantes and you are
my former senator. Before we
moved. It's good to see you
voted for me. Yes.
Um
Just a little bit of where I'm
coming from 50 years in this
child welfare
Business. Um, I've consulted in
over 30 states and universities
across the country I reviewed
over 1500 cases.
Including serving as an expert
witness, K and in many cases,
most of those cases where in New
Mexico
Uh, that includes 660.
Child abuse investigations and
Burnley. Oh County when
Representative Chavez was there
and I was working for
Senator Ortiz de Pino.
What I found in all these years.
The research the publications
have down grants we've gotten
Is that even with the best
strategic plan
It's bound to fail if you don't
have the quality workforce to do
this work.
And I don't know how many of you
have had an opportunity to serve
as a guardian ad litem and
really get into some of these
cases. I wish that I could share
the details that I see.
And many of these cases, I'll
simply say it's worse than what
that one thing that I've
discovered is that you have to
have a high quality workforce
this legislature in 1990 past
the Social Work Licensing act,
and it did two important things
were one of the last states to
get it, but we did it right that
protects the title If you call
yourself a social worker.
You have to be a licensed social
worker. And, as the
representative said, that's
quite a process. It's a minimum
of a bachelor's degree is two
years focusing on social work,
720 clock hours and a highly
supervised agency working so
when you get your degree, and
you've been in a field placement
and see why F D
You know what you're getting
yourself into at the Masters
level. It's a 60 hour.
Master's program, um with over
800 hours and and placement.
So one of the things that at
also protects and most
importantly, as a social work
practice act protects practice.
And child welfare. Working in
these cases is centrally a
social work profession activity.
And yet there are very, very few
licensed social workers.
Working today.
Back in the 19 nineties, we had
people I entertain people from
all over the country, sometimes
other countries.
Um, coming to New Mexico because
we were doing things right. We
had the consent decree. We had
the new licensing act. Every
social worker at See why F. D
was a licensed social worker.
And we had a governor that had a
commission and we met monthly to
check and make sure that all
those positions were filled with
the license social work and I
hasten to add a licensed social
workers the bare minimum that
you need to work with these
incredibly complex and difficult
cases.
The other thing I want to say
quickly is that
Child abuse is not
Justice. See why did issue child
abuse and neglect? Maltreatment
is a community issue.
And at New Mexico State
University, They honor eight pro
project is doing a great job,
and I believe they're updating
counties providing the 10 basic
services you need to avoid
adverse childhood experiences.
So we were back in the 19
nineties. We had a excellent
Workforce. We in the family
preservation program that we
had. There was not one known
death of a child in that
program.
But we've strayed. I'll take
summer that responsibility. We
did not sustain this and part of
it is, the senator said the
Joseph. A federal consent decree
went away and some people you
all have will understand. This
is attorneys that Kevin s.
Uh, lawsuit is in agreement. It
is not a federal court order,
and my opinion has no teeth.
And the benchmarks. Not one of
them has been mad.
So the Kevin s is not the way to
go.
So what we need is not only a
workforce, but we need more
importantly in my consultation
around the country was always a
highly qualified, inspirational,
charismatic even leader.
That would inspire and develop
the morale.
To do this really, really tough
work day after day.
And as soon as that person left
That system came apart. It
really is so critical to have a
leader that can span from one
Administration to another. I'm
happy to answer any questions
you have. Thank you for your
time. Thank you for your
insights.
We have
Registered in advance of
opponents, Kim Logan and, um on
Zoom Donnellan, Sarah's Racine.
Oh,
Yeah, I saw I saw the secretary
and we've been joined with
Secretary as well to let me go
to our register. We go to our
registered
Most speakers. So, um, Mr
Chairman, I'm wondering, given
the nature of this hearing if we
need to go to public comment or
if we should
Hear from perhaps the
department and I appreciate the
suggestion center. I'm going to
try and respect the fact that we
have asked people to register.
At least Miss Logan has asked to
speak, so I'll recognize her for
two minutes and then we have
Donald in Sorrentino. I want to
expect those who did register on
the subject, and then you're
right. We'll come back to
recognize that the secretary
does, secretary now, I guess.
Secretary is here. So, um, Miss
Logan?
Recognize you for two minutes.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Kim
Elegant. I'm a registered
lobbyist for peak behavioral
health in southern New Mexico.
The peak is an inpatient
psychiatric hospital that also
has residential treatment for
adolescents as well as out
patient programs for families
across the state.
The peak has been working with C
Y F D collaboratively over the
last several months to improve.
um, and increased communication.
Um increase improvement of
delivery service, thereby
increasing positive change.
Changing the structure will be
counterproductive to the
progress that has been made over
the last several months. Thank
you and on zoom. Do we have
Donald in Saraceno?
We do, all right?
Mr Racine. Oh, can you hear me?
I can, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Recognized for two minutes, man.
Mr Chair and members of the
committee met do we might say
cash or short channel should
that Ohio wash the My name is
Donald and Saraceno. I am from
the public of a comma and I'm
the director for some of these
office of tribal affairs. I
serve as the department subject
matter. Expert on Indian child
welfare and state tribal
relationships. I have been with
the department for over four
years prior to coming to see why
f d I was a director of the
public of Atacama Social
Services.
Founded the New Mexico tribal
Indian Child Welfare consortium,
and I have over 10 years
experience in child welfare. I
am here to speak in opposition
of this resolution as someone
who is directly involved with
our nation's bubbles and tribes
on all child welfare matters. My
primary concern is there was no
tribal consultation.
Consultation is important
because we cannot talk about
changing the child welfare
system without recognizing
understanding and respecting how
our nation's pub, ALS and tribes
will be impacted.
And they will be impacted by
this. Secondly, the state travel
collaboration Act applies to
state agencies, and there is no
requirement for a commission to
continue this.
Should this continue with the
commission? It would be
important for everyone,
especially our nation's
publishers and tribes to be
aware of how these collaborative
efforts will work from the onset
of drafting there needs to be
ongoing communication,
supportive collaboration and
meaningful consultation with our
sovereign nations. Additionally,
C Y f D currently has several
intergovernmental agreements and
joint powers. Agreements with
our sovereign nations. Should
the department be made into a
commission there would be
significant.
Locations on how these
agreements are negotiated and
implemented. Lastly, Mr Chair
and Committee C Y F D currently
has ideas, which allow for pass
through a federal funding to
nations probables and tribes to
support native Children in the
foster care system.
The federal requirement that
makes it possible to do so
states that any tribe wishing to
access this federal funding must
have an agreement with the state
agency moving forward moving C Y
F D into a commission. What
hindered the tribe's ability to
access this this funding for
native Children in Foster in the
foster care system? I encourage
you to vote? No. And I
appreciate the time you've
allowed me to voice my concerns
that I
Thank you very much, Mr
Chairman.
Can you hear me? Yes.
All right, Mr Chairman, member
of the committee, Teresa Casado
Zion, the Cabinet Secretary for
Children, Youth and Families
Department. The department is
opposed to removing C y F D from
the Cabinet and creating a
commission structure. I believe
this structure would create
barriers to consistent and
effective collaboration with
other state agencies and our 3rd
23 tribes, Publishers and
nations.
Mexico has established a strong
cradle to career approach that
is nationally recognized. The
collaboration through this
network is already helping to
build a stronger child welfare
system and is critical that this
effective collaboration
continue.
The silo created by this
commission would fragment the
work currently being done to
support New Mexico families and
Children. This would triangulate
the administration on critical
issues, slowing progress and
impeding success for Children
and families.
Commission would also block the
executive's ability to provide
consistent leadership messaging
and priority, setting a fracture
a fracture.
Priority setting and fracture
our efforts to support families
and Children.
There is currently no other
state that has this structure.
And the few who have tried. This
did not see success and have
reverted back.
This has never been done through
a constitutional amendment.
Not ever.
Doing it through a
constitutional amendment would
make it nearly impossible to
pull this back if it was not
working.
New Mexico previously had this
type of structure for its public
education department, and it
ended in part because of
gridlock with lack of consensus,
and it was slow to make change.
There are also serious concerns
about the impact of commission
run agency would have on the
states Federal funding.
Specifically asked access to
title four e funding.
New Mexico must have a title for
E plan that is approved by the
US Department of Health and
Human Services and to my
knowledge, no conversation has
taken place unnecessary
amendments to this plan.
There has also been a lack of
collaboration and no
consultation with nations,
tribes and pueblos, as Donald is
unclear how this would affect if
one equal issues
Well, I respect the work that
senator of cheesy Pino has
accomplished in his career in
the child welfare system and his
strong advocacy for Children and
families. I truly believe that
the issues raised are of great
concern and strongly recommend
that you vote No on this
resolution. Thank you very much
for your time and thank you for
staying within the time.
Um, what I proposed to do.
Senator is going to the
committee and then old certainly
leave your last moment to
respond to any of the opposition
to your bill. Members of
committee with any questions or
comments.
Senator worth just just well,
couple things clearly the
collaboration jumped out the
importance of having
Different cabinet.
Secretaries communicating
together.
Ah, I will tell you when we went
through the redistricting
process. Thank you Remember
Senator RTZ Pinot We didn't do
as good a job in the Senate of
tribal collaboration which
resulted in me spending a day,
pausing the whole special
session to go through the tribal
collaboration. It's important
and I get that I guess the
thing, though, that it causes me
the most.
Concern about this proposal is
the Constitutional amendment
component.
I just That's that's what What
really does worry me. Uh,
because I think if we don't get
it right, it becomes really hard
to change it. And that's a
compelling argument. It's it's
It's
And and and I'll say I was
carried the amendment that
recently changed the PRC and did
restructure there, so it's not
like the you can't have an
independent commission. Uh and I
think in that case
It works. I just I guess I
appreciate your comments on
You know, setting up a silo.
And and how and and and let me
say.
It's compelling to me what
you're saying about the the
pendulum swinging back and
forth. I've been here long
enough to see it Swing back and
forth and, you know, we changed
parties in an administration.
Next thing you know, we've got a
whole different idea about
what's going to that's not good.
There's just no way in an agency
like this. That's a good thing.
But if this is sitting alone by
itself
How does I mean? How do you
envision?
The type of collab collaboration
as you have that swinging,
continuing to happen with the
new administration and these
other critical human services,
early childhood, these other
critical cabinets that need to
be part of this this
consultation, so maybe just some
thoughts on that would be great.
Sure, Madam Chairman. And yes, I
mean, I was struck by the fact
that the this idea is coming
across to the secretary and two
others as if we're talking about
pulling C y f d out of state
government.
We're not talking about pulling
states see where every other
state government we're talking
about pulling C y f D out from
under the governor.
And and and and trying to make
sure
That
It's seen as a non political
Very professional organism, and
it's exactly what we're doing.
I've been trying not to go back
to that. But it's exactly what
we're doing with the Public
Education Commission.
Trying to reestablish its
professionalism and and and and
pull it out from under the
government, not saying public
schools don't cooperate. Don't
coordinate with the Health
Department. Public schools don't
coordinate with the C Y F D or
anybody else in state government
just saying they're not under
the governor.
And that's what we would be
saying with this. Similarly,
there's still they still they
would have they. It's nonsense
to think that they couldn't be
the Fourie conduit. There's
still the state agency in charge
is the State agency. Just
because you're not named by the
governor doesn't make you not
the state. PRC is the state.
The ethics commission is the
state. None of them are named,
You know, are the governors
under the governor's
jurisdiction, so I think the
issue really is, If it's
professional, it's going to be
Corp coordinating with all of
those other agencies. It has two
and it'll probably do a better
job of coordinating because it's
not going to be you know, buying
with with them for the governors
of, you know, favorite child
status.
You know who's who's the one
who's getting the the perks this
week or
I mean, I really
Remember when Joe Goldberg was
was
The secretary and and the then
secretary of health fell out of
favor with then governor and he
over a weekend, Joe Goldberg was
suddenly the secretary of health
instead of the secretary because
the governor made a decision and
then we have no control over
that.
Those are the kind I mean.
What happened to doctors, Grace,
you know, one day he was in
charge of the Health department
and the Human Services
Department and the covid thing.
The next day, he was a private
practice and
That's the kind of thing we just
can't have that in a child
welfare agency.
And and so I just You know, I
don't know if representative
Chavez wanted to to to respond
to that. But when you have that
kind of of
Supposed You know,
accountability to an elected
chief executive. You get certain
advantages? Sure.
But the big disadvantages you
also get the turmoil and the
chaos and the and the disruption
in service. Just one thing, Mr.
But we could do this by statute.
Well, we could if the governor
would sign the statue, But
that's the point, though. I mean
again. What I just worry about,
though, is that we're in and I
get it. We didn't get a message,
and we had a lot of discussion.
Um
I appreciate the
The hearing that we held for
Secretary Cassano's. I think
that was that was good. And I
and I appreciate the support
that she saw.
On the floor.
But it just feels to me like the
constitutional
It just doesn't
Bit there. That's what's causing
me concern and we're hearing the
Judiciary Committee where that's
kind of a
The focus, I would be just much,
much more comfortable.
Doing this by statute so that we
could continue to tweak and and
and do that, So that's just
that's just my two cents. Well,
we could Mr Chairman and
senator, we could try it by
statute next year when we don't
need a message, but
Uh, I think the chances of it
not getting vetoed are pretty
slim. Um
Let me also point out that the
timing of this is such that if
the voters approved it this
November
It wouldn't take effect until
July.
2025
Then the the the pro TEM and the
speaker and the and the governor
would name their members of the
commission who would come in in
26. And so that's about the time
this administration is ending
Anyhow, that's about the time
Secretary Cassandra's will be
taking the Mementos, offer wall
and packing them up and getting
ready to move on, anyway.
So it's not going to affect this
administration's performance.
And if they're doing a great
job, then who knows? Then the
new commission might very well
decide to keep them.
Well, maybe we can convince
Secretary Posadas to stay over
for another administration.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Senator. Uh, I've been told that
they did something similar to
this in Oklahoma and that it is
not working. Well, yeah, thank
you. Thank you. I may have been
the source of that I may have
been because one of the
presentations I made and
breed Also when when Dr Sally
spoke. He has said he thought
We have not been able to find
any other state that's even
tried this
We talked to NCSL.
They sent us a long list of
commissions that were really
like task forces rewriting their
Children's code or an internal,
You know, an external commission
that was kind of making
recommendations, But there is no
no and no, no such prior thing.
We did it in the
In state government when I first
joined the public Welfare
Department, it was run by a the
state Public Welfare commission.
It was a five member commission
appointed by the governor that
ran the department and that
hired you know, executive
director Jerry up the DACA when
he revamped state government
converted all those commissions
because we had public education
Commission, the State
Transportation Commission.
Whatever that we had six or
eight commissions that ran state
government. He changed all that
to a Cabinet modeled on the
federal
And that was in seventies.
Yeah.
But we but we don't we couldn't
find any any evidence that any
other state and everything.
Well and and Mr Chair Center
just
I don't think Oklahoma is, is
necessarily exactly the same.
But I think it's this. It's a
similar concept.
Of and and and and if I defer to
Dr Sally, who consulted in
Oklahoma
Uh yes.
Mr. Chairman. Um, Senator. Now
there's nothing we found they
will establish a commission to
study a problem.
But that's not what we're doing
here at all. You know, this is a
whole new approach that will
span between governors Oklahoma
worked with when they had
Secretary Pino there was doing a
great job.
He laughed, and they had all
kinds of problems.
No, it's it's totally different
than what we're talking about.
The only thing that's the same
as commission and sometimes they
have an oversight commission,
but not in administrative one.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Lynn site before we consider
action for Were you on the
student center?
Thank you. Mr. I was just got a
couple quick and that is the
So if we
If we do this by constitutional
moment, and I and I understand
you're saying you're the issue
that you raised, which is just
that we've dealt with in the
past. We did it in terms of
Creating the public defender's
Commission.
Because because to get the
public commission out of the
executive, we didn't believe
that an executive would sign the
bill.
Uh um.
But then but then
Precisely if it if it
It doesn't go well.
Then.
Then we've already identified
that we've got
Three people.
That are selected this way.
We've got five people that are
selected this way. We've got
certain other things that are
that are set up in the
Constitution.
Um and then we need to keep
going back and then and re
amended the Constitution. Mr
Chairman and Senator.
Risotto? Yes, Which is what
we're doing this year with the
Public Education Commission
after 20 years.
The majority of the
The Senate. At least I don't
know if it's going to go all the
way through. But more majority
of us decided this. This ain't
working with try. Let's go back
to the have to do that, too.
Yeah, and and And And so but.
But at the same time I do I do
very much here. You you know
Part of me wants one simply to
ask.
Your extra witness.
To talk to his son about making
sure that enough money gets to C
Y F D.
If that's at all possible.
Mr Chairman, Senator, I am known
as Grandpa. Ah, Ah, but
Ah, I mean, it's it's It's It's
I, You know, I do understand
very much. What you're saying.
You know, it is. It is one of
the conundrums that we have.
Of a political system.
Um
Is is that those that are under
the executive
You know, profit we've got we've
got the
Chief of police here.
You know, um, stay placed. We
keep having rotating.
Chiefs of state police.
Depending on the administration,
right public safety and
That there are other places It
seems to be. That would be good
to have some continuity.
And what? That I understand.
We're talking about Children
here and the lives of Children,
which is
Which is special and unique and
And something that we need to be
very cautious about.
But it is
You know, it's a it's I think
one of the hazards of having
Ah government with terms of
office.
Where we end up going down that
path.
Anyway. Thank you for the input,
and I like for them to come
clean here for maybe
Maybe the last two sessions or
so there was legislation
introduced.
That would have created a
ombudsman program or whatever we
would have called it to
essentially
Be an overseer of C Y F D that
we did introduce by statute and
propose it.
Um, I always opposed it and
opposed it strongly in this
committee only because
Only in government. Would you
take government that's not
functioning and create another
agency of government oversee the
non functioning part of
government to report to the non
functioning part of government.
why they're not functioning. I
mean, that's sounds like exactly
Way government really just
screws everything up.
And so for those years, I very
candidly did not schedule those
bills. Um and I would speak with
the secretary then Secretary
To try and give her more time
because that's what we were told
she needed was more time.
I'm not sure that was the wisest
thing to do in hindsight, But
But, um and again, it doesn't
make sense to create more
government too.
Deal with non functioning
government. The solution seems
to be taking a non functioning
government and solve the
problem.
And that continues to be my my
thinking.
I share the concern with the
constitutional process, and I'm
sure that with you quite a bit
senator in
And I shared with you privately
and with my colleagues in our
caucus and with my Senate as a
holder, the constitutional
process is right in front of us,
and we have to accept
responsibility for this problem
because we as legislators have
not risen to the challenge.
Um, you don't have to do this by
constitutional amendment.
It doesn't make sense to me to
put this as a decision to the
voters in the ballot box and in
the voting booth.
Um, it's on us.
Were elected to do this. We're
We're here We have the time we
have the energy. We have the
intellect. We have the
resources. We should be
structuring and forming this
here in this legislative
process, and we have failed to
do that. But I don't think that
any more than I think the good
solution was to create more
government to tell the non
functioning government had a
function any more than I think
that we should tell the voters.
We can't get this. So we're
gonna
Ask you to take over for us, Um,
at the ballot that in the voting
booth doesn't seem like the
place to resolve this the way to
resolve this very frankly is by
a veto override.
And and I know that seems to be
sent chills down legislators
behind. I'll never understand
that it seems to send chills
down the spines of chief
executives. I'd love to know a
governor who welcomes need to
override because it becomes that
give and take of governing. It's
the dialogue. It's the back and
forth, and we've reached some
strange place where we don't do
that anymore. But that's exactly
what it be to override is four
is where the will of the
Legislature is so strong.
Um and so consistent.
That we decided to take some of
the authority away from the
executive. That's the way the
founders intended this to work
and so that an executive did not
become too strong and too
powerful.
But I know we're not gonna do
that either. Um And I know right
now in this session, there's
nothing to override because we
never created that that
opportunity for ourselves. But
that's why again. I think we we
have some responsibility here.
Um, you've you've told me
something that or maybe it was
Um
In the presentation. That was
interesting because they're
worth his asked about this
before the Kevin s agreement,
One of the questions he had for
me earlier was what is the
enforcement mechanism and I
think what I see both of you at
the table, telling us that there
is no enforcement mechanism in
place. You're shaking your
heads. That's correct
understanding. That's really
unfortunate because this session
in our conversations on this
committee we've been holding out
some promise.
For that agreement, But maybe
that's misplaced. It's not
enforceable by a quarter court
order, and maybe that's a good
place for us to be looking as to
to try and reduce that
settlement agreement to an order
which those of us as lawyers
know pretty simple thing to do.
You simply take that settlement
agreement to a judge and ask the
judge to essentially put a
Judges stamp and signature to
that as a stipulated order an
agreement. I hope we'll do that.
Consider doing that, too.
We've just so the committee
knows I've tried scheduling
since there that presentation by
My cart and Andy Schultz have
tried scheduling the neutrals to
come into this committee. We
just haven't been able to get
their schedule in in sync with
ours because they're on the East
Coast and I think would be very
useful to hear from them,
particularly because the point
was made that we haven't
achieved any of those metrics in
that settlement agreement to and
we have that letter, so
I think there's a lot we can do
and and we don't need to.
Sit on our hands and we don't
need to.
Very our head in the sand
either. And so I thought this
hearing was important because
Senator you've made this
presentation to us in our caucus
and before I think it's
thoughtful gives us a lot to
think about, too. But as I've
told you from the very beginning
a long time back, I was
concerned about the
constitutional process as the
mechanism because I think
there's a better mechanism
committee members.
They're doing.
Hmm. Mr Chair. I agree with you
that this is really important
conversation to have and when
we're passing this out of rules
was told Senator or TCP. No, I
don't. I don't know that this is
the right answer. I don't know
what the right answer is, but
But that I thought it was really
important for us to be
discussing this as a body. Um,
that kind of given the
temperature of the committee.
I'm going to suggest that we
roll this over this evening
rather than going to have a
motion.
There being no other motion
before the committee senator
we'll, We'll defer any action on
your legislation. Tonight's
meeting. All right. Thank you
very much. Thank you very much,
Mr Chairman. Very good, Very
good.
Senator Gonzalez Senate joint
Resolution five.
Support for Bobby's bill. This
Cetera. Yes, sir. Senator, a
couple of notes.
Probably doesn't escape you.
It's near nine o'clock that we
bring you back to the capital
had already gone home for the
day.
I just don't
Had gone to my room for a little
bit. Well, good. Good for you,
but let your chair no over there
in finance that they're
slackers.
They're what? They're slackers.
Let the let the chair over
there. No, he's a slacker, Will
you? It's near nine o'clock,
Senator. All note. There are no
opponents who registered on your
bill. I don't anticipate hearing
from many. I've got three
proponents. Um please present
your bill with that context and
try and be sure we still have
quite a bit of work to do here
tonight.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee.
With, um
Senate Joint Resolution five.
Cement article 20.
Of the New Mexico Constitution
by creating a new section.
Creating a trust fund to
administer public employees.
Health care benefit and
prohibiting any changes to such
benefit unless they are for the
sole exclusive benefit of the
trustees prohibited in the
expenditure, or encumbrance of
public employee health care
benefits.
And I do have my expert witness
and
We discussed that we will try to
make it as brief as possible for
the committee of Mr Neil Coup
for
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Members
of the committee just a few
points. I want to point out in
regards to the fund and what
we're looking to protect. This
bun currently does stand at
$1.34 billion. This is what
members as far as myself and
many other colleagues have
contributed into this fund as
well as the employers as part of
our compensation. In addition to
this, it is also another item
that's used for different
measurables as relates to
solvency and Gatsby.
In making sure that we have
enough dollars in there. So
where this helps the employers
as a measurement through Gatsby
is making sure that when this is
being reported on their
financial statements that were
able to lower those liabilities
that they have, um, for
instance, a couple of those
liabilities being for the state
of Mexico 551 million based on
2022. We know that for Las
Cruces, public schools being 75
Million A B s 264 million as
well as other counties and
cities such as the city of
Albuquerque, 1 57 million.
Where this could affect their
yield bonds.
With this resolution, as it was
stated, as it is going to
protect it for these members as
far as those contributions that
we have been putting into it, um
and ensure that it is therefore
the future of this program and
that we would have those retiree
benefits. Um, and once again as
far as with this relationship
resolution is knowing the
importance of being able to take
it to the people and having them
way out of this for many of
these public servants who are
looking forward to being able to
access a noodle that I do stand
for any questions we have.
Used to settle.
Proponents.
John Lipschitz, Carter Bundy.
John
She saw it was John here, John.
Dipshits. No.
Carter. I know you're here.
Cardio recognized for two
minutes. Mr. Chairman, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee carted by new with
asked me. We want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this. This
is something that's incredibly
important to current and retired
workers. We hope you'll support
this,
John. Uh, is it there's dirt.
Do you Y r C Z?
Durst. Thank you.
John Durst. No.
Alright John Lips. It's not
alright Committee members.
questions Senator Search for do
Pasts any other discussion?
The objection that do pass
motion seeing none Avenue past.
Thank you.
We've got by my account to
matters left.
Senator. Maybe Soto on Senate to
71 in the absence of centered on
274 will take hers last and
next.
You just missed it.
That's all right. We'll be
quick.
You'll bring your bring it.
Bring it home. Bring it home for
us.
Thank you very much. Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee.
Ah, we have a committee sub or
suitable to 71.
It's a 2 to 812 5.3. This is
first of all I want to note.
At eight lines. That is the
shortest bill I've ever written
in the last committee. I was
They spent. I think a fair
amount of time quizzing me as to
whether or not I actually wrote
this bill.
But I did.
Um
I
I would like to suggest a couple
of
Um, suggestions.
After conversation with Mr
Pepin. Maybe I can do that after
after we have some some some
discussion. Thank you.
Uh And and so, But let me let me
first explain.
The committee said. We can go to
discussion. Take some comments,
and then I've got a couple
suggestions, Mr.
Uh, from after discussion with
the court. So, Mr Chairman, uh,
there's been a lot of discussion
about the problem of people who
get arrested.
Released, Commit new felonies
get released.
AH, get new felonies.
Get released. People are
extremely frustrated. There's
been a number of bills to try to
create changes in Presumptions.
Uh, those, uh, have not come to
this committee. But if they did,
I think we would agree that
those would violate the
Constitution.
Uh, all of those focused on the
instant case, the the most
current case that someone has
been arrested for
This bill does not do that.
This bill focuses on the what I
refer to as the upstream cases.
When someone is arrested.
Before they're released their
given conditions of released
And and their conditions of
release, Among other things,
they're always told
Do not commit more crimes.
So when a person is and let's
just use the example of somebody
who
Whose job shall we say?
Is committing.
Uh, breaking and entering
commercial residential for
purpose.
And and they break into people's
homes.
They still things
Every time they steal things.
They also mess up. What are the
bedrooms? That's because they
take a single, um, a single. Uh
okay.
In order to put all the stuff in
and take it with them.
At least that's what they did
when they broke into my house.
And, um
Just further aggravating the
people whose house they broke
into.
Um, so if somebody gets
arrested, they've got three
previous ones.
And they got arrested.
On the fourth case.
The D a likely is not going to
file a motion to hold that
person.
And even if they did, the judge
is gonna have a tough time
holding that person. The judge
on the fourth case because the
question before the judges is
that person an immediate threat
to themselves or others, but
they're breaking into empty
homes.
I think the argument would be
they're not a threat to other
people.
And are they a flight risk?
Well, they're not a flight risk
there still sick and or stick
around in time to commit and and
to the committee of the
felonies.
Um
So the judgment the fourth case
has no choice but to release
them. However, they have
violated the order.
Of the judges and felony number
three number two number one when
those judges said don't commit
more crimes.
All I'm trying to do here is a A
I want
The judges in case number three
number two number one to be
aware before the person gets out
of jail.
To be aware that the person
committed a new crime.
And to take a look.
As to whether or not that person
whether or not there's a cause
to review their conditions have
released. Maybe hold them maybe
change their conditions have
released him on an ankle
bracelet.
Maybe, frankly say you've lost
the privilege.
Until your case is resolved.
Okay to disrupt their pattern
that they're in.
This is constitutional.
It does not deal with the most
recent case. It does not disrupt
what we did the good work that
we did with the Constitution.
But it disrupts what the person
is doing in terms of committee
multiple crimes.
Um, now this is an area that is
normally within the Supreme
Court's purview.
I've written the committee sub
to be very cautious about not
stepping on the courts purview
and you see at the end I have
the court asked support to issue
rules actually took out the A an
anniversary clause that was
suggested
In order to give the court time
to come up with the rules.
And, uh and that way we don't
take as quite as heavy handed
approach as I would personally
like.
But we do so in a way that is
more harmonious and a separation
of powers.
Context. And with that, Mr
Chairman, I'll be happy.
Hmm.
Thank you, Miss.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee research. Even
New Mexico State police. We
stand in strong support of this
bill. Um, you know, this bill
Bill really gets to the
individuals that we see a as the
drivers of crime in the
community. Um, these are the
individuals who are out in
regularly, uh, committing
offenses. They're not the one
time offenders there the repeat
offenders that are
Well.
Constantly committing crime and
the are pretty much didn't I
mean that's
Generally their their
profession. These offenders
regularly getting out.
Ah, The issue that we regularly
see is that this allows them to
improve their crimes, right?
They learned from their mistakes
that crimes that they commit
this week.
Is better than the crime they
committed last week because they
know how they got caught last
week, and they make the change
is the best example. I usually
give for that.
That we see, um is auto theft.
For example, in Albuquerque. Um,
not only did the individuals get
better at stealing cars, but
they know the auto theft units
tactics. Um, they get better at
spotting surveillance. They know
there's auto theft surveillance.
What are they immediately Do?
They immediately started driving
erratically driving the wrong
side of the road, so they know
the cops will back off. They
didn't know the air support's
gonna pop up. So what do they
do? They drive south of Central
by the airport because they know
that that's a no fly airspace.
They find an ears parking
garage. They go in the parking
garage because they know that
there's no aerial surveillance
there and they ditched the car.
Why do they know that Because
they've been caught multiple
times doing those offenses and
they've learned and adapted
their tactics. Um and so
Now we know to now now you know,
too so
Senator. You still any card?
All right.
Thank you.
Ms Westfall beliefs that they
violate them by committing
another serious crime.
Well, then we feel they should
lose the privilege of awaiting
trial without maximum
supervision. There's just no
excuse for that kind of
behavior. They have proven that
their detention is necessary to
keep the community safe. And
it's also really in their best
interest. Why do we keep setting
people up who have shown that
they will reoffend? We set them
up to fail. We hand them the yet
another opportunity to rack up
more and more charges and dig
that hole even deeper. It's just
a lose lose scenario, and we
Living with what that does.
And this bill will address that
the chamber is in full support
of this common sense bill that
puts reasonable consequences in
place for defendants who won't
or can't learn from their
mistakes. And we urge you to
support it. Thank you. Thank
you, Rob black or you on zoom.
Yes.
Two minutes, Mr Black.
Thanks.
Rob Black.
Yes, sir. Can you hear me? Yes.
You're recognized for two
minutes. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
I appreciate the opportunity,
Um, last week the change the New
Mexico Chamber released one of
our voter poll where a vast
majority 77% of voters statewide
expressed dissatisfaction with
crime and public safety and over
50% of them, saying they were
very dissatisfied.
The reason I share that that
result is it speaks to what
Senator Ivey Soto mentioned was
the frustration that has felt in
the public.
Um, I think this particular
measure addresses, Uh,
constitutional way an issue that
voters have been frustrated with
that law enforcement has been
frustrated with. In fact, our
courts have been frustrated with
and so we are here to speak in
strong support of this elegant
solution that Senator Ivey Soto
has brought forward.
And we would urge your support
not only because it's very good
policy, but it might reinforce
the idea that Senator Ronnie
Soto should use small, smaller
and shorter bills. Thank you.
Mr Chairman. I will note that
the secretary of GPS, although
we did not sign up. He is also
here in support. I understand
very good. Well, I think it's
been well covered, so there's
anything to add, You'll do it
for him. Alright. Members of
committee question I've got
nobody registered No opponents.
No, no, you registered
opposition. Stewart already
Pepin in the audience. Yeah,
That's what I was just hearing
from Philip as well, too. So
there's a couple of people
asking for you. So, Mr Appleton,
and I'll recognize you for three
minutes.
Three. Sorry it will not take
that long. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee.
I do? Uh, we do appreciate that
The bill has been amended to
remove emerging claws removed
the direction that the clerk
issue an order and all those
things and maybe some other
changes. I don't know if they
responsible directors, but
sadly, I stand here. I have to
stand here in opposition to the
bill. I hope the committee will
take seriously the concerns
raised in our analysis about
Amerman and this being a
procedural rule within the
jurisdiction of it.
Court. The 1976 case did
explicitly recognized pretrial
rules rules within the purview
of the court. Perhaps more
fundamentally, this bill will be
moved before it ever becomes
effective if it's adopted. The
Supreme Court's been working for
a few months and a significant
revision to the 400 rules for
one through 409, which governed
pretrial release.
And specifically 403. I can tell
you the provisions in this bill
much more detail.
Uh, are part of that revision?
that is the court while the
Constitution talks about
detention upon motion of the
prosecutor and the prosecutor,
proving that's in the initial
case, current rules allow the
court on its own motion.
Hold the defendant and to have a
hearing on detention.
What the revision to the rules
will require, is that the court
always hold. The defendant has
been arrested for a felony while
they're on pre trial release and
require the district attorney,
Uh and the council representing
the defendant have a hearing to
determine whether the initial
conditions of release should be
modified or indeed revoked in
the person detained.
On the first case, or however
many cases there are remind the
committee to please consider
we're talking about people
arrested. I hear the language
was used by the sponsor. They go
out and commit new felonies.
Well, you know, they're presumed
innocent is still entitled to
their constitutional rights.
Convict them, then they'll be
held for sure, But I really do
think, um
The resources available to the
Legislature in the last seven
days of your term.
Should not be spent on a bill
that will not have any impact
whatsoever, except to the extent
it may conflict with the Supreme
Court's requirement to adopt
procedural rules, which which I
think is significant risk and
therefore will have a bill on
the books that conflicts with
the rules the courts adopted.
Don't ever get challenged. It
will just be out there like a
sort of hanging around.
Not doing anything except so I
hope you'll take that all into
consideration. Spend your time
on other things, and I assure
you that the intent that remains
behind the committee sub will be
addressed in the revisions that
I think the court will adopt.
Next month.
Doing?
Thank you, Mr Chair.
So I
I am, uh
I found Mr Pepin's comments.
Persuasive.
It.
Let's speed. Totally honest.
Here, Mr Chair. This is
This is an election year effort
to look like we're doing.
Something on pretrial detention.
But it's going to be moot. We're
going to have rules that I think
probably accomplish something
similar. But in
I think I'm more appropriate way
where
They're actually looking at
what's going on, Uh,
And you don't just have someone
getting picked up for felony
possession.
Who is being detained Just
because of that.
Uh um.
And this language about
Each judge assigned to any of
the persons pending previous
Felony cases.
Sounds like a coordination
nightmare.
To me.
Uh um.
I don't know why we would
Spend
Precious floor time in a short
session on a bill that won't
matter.
By the time it becomes
effective, they were already be
rules in place that are doing
the same thing.
Other than because we want to be
able to tout it for re election
campaigns, and I don't think
that's a good reason to use our
limited time up here.
Tell Mr Chair chairman when a
center ivy soda
Course I'm not. So I'm I'm
moved so by Mr Pepin's comments
I mean, I think, he said the
Soto often is ahead of his time.
Um, I think it's pretty cool
that the Supreme Court justice
So you know, he
Um
Uh, why don't you let me make
comments and I'll let you close.
How's that? All right?
Um
This is this issue has
challenged us really, Ever since
the constitutional amendment has
originated and
It's um it's challenged us
because of course.
This committee has heard in
interim committee meetings and
Apple hearings that we've had
here too, but why it's not
working.
And just as a refresher in all
the last several years, the D A.
s blame the cops. Cops blamed
the D A. The D A blames the
courts. They all call me by the
way, Just so you all know I'll
call me up and blame each other
for what's going on, and it's
It's always important to me
because in the press the Chamber
of Commerce blames the
Legislature for not acting. The
mayor of Albuquerque blames the
Legislature for not acting.
Mayor of Las Cruzes. Former
mayor blames the Legislature for
not acting. I go to business
groups, and they blame the
Legislature for not acting and
the point that I tried making
with all of them on this topic
is we don't seem to have this
problem statewide.
And yet we have the same laws
statewide.
I think this is
Generally a problem in
Albuquerque.
And does not seem to call for a
A legislative fix. That's the
argument I made for quite some
time. Um, we need a better
collaboration. Better
communication between the
players, and I think we're even
seeing some change in
Albuquerque now, um, hopefully
some improvement.
I've in all the years I've been
here. I've always pressed for
deference to the courts and
allowing the courts to have
judgment. That's that's why we
put judges on the bench is to
have judgment and and telling
them how to do their job to
specifically.
I don't think it's a good idea,
but
But
Sometimes we in the Legislature
challenge the judges difference.
The best example of that for me
is Wi Senator I know you're
working on DW allies in the area
of tw. For whatever reason,
we've taken a lot away a lot of
difference to the courts because
candidly, I think the
Legislature concluded the judges
were not access, exercising the
difference that we expected them
to exercise consistent with
societal norms or what society
wants.
Couple of weeks ago. We have a
house in Albuquerque or my son
in law lives there finishing
medical school residency
actually, and broken into
cleaned out, not a bad
neighborhood very closely to the
North campus.
Um Albuquerque, for some reason
accepts this way of living.
Going into Walgreens. Everything
locked up little true here in
Santa Fe two. This is somewhat
foreign to me last Christmas
that you all have heard me a
long time. The Walgreens and
lost Cruz is open 24 hours. Um
Albuquerque has to close it
down. Businesses closed down in
Albuquerque go out of business
because they don't feel safe.
Their employees are not safe.
I don't understand. Albuquerque.
Accepting living this way and
Some of this candidly, in my
opinion is the judiciary and
things at times. It's not
Directly responsive to the
societal norms. Societal
expectations. Consider you're
not in your head affirmatively.
I think maybe I agree on this
issue. I don't know how that
happened. Some of that may be
for us to blame because we've
taken is it's a real challenge
because I don't want judges
susceptible to the voters
because they have to make hard
decisions that are sometimes
unpopular, so we don't want them
subject to the whims of the
voters and yet the same time
when we remove them.
From the voters process Then we
run. The rest of the judges no
longer reflect the wishes and
the and the values of the
society at large. I'm not saying
that's true across all
positions, but
But I have some sense of that,
Um
And and so I appreciate what
you're trying to do here. I do
not agree.
Oh, with all respect to the AOC
in some respects, which is well,
this is unnecessary and moved
and so forth because rules are
coming.
I think this is a point that
maybe Senator Stewart made
indirectly. Sometimes the court
is responding to some of these
things we've been doing here in
the last couple of years.
You know, we we raised the
Arnold tool in this committee
Three years ago we had hearing
after hearing we began to really
try and make a big deal about
how that was being utilized and
the courts have responded.
Right to reevaluate in that
entire process. We've done the
same thing in various areas and
so
Us having a bill like this is, I
think impactful
And whether it's adopted or not,
simply of the court's gonna come
responding rules. That's great.
Why didn't they have these rules
last year and the year before
and the year before that?
Um The only reason I can think
of is that they didn't have the
public pressure.
From Albuquerque or this city or
the community or from this
legislature and their courts are
responding to some of those
pressures. So I think it's good.
We do that. I think that that's
our job here is to try and
reflect the will of the voter.
We're going to go to the voters
in a few months and asked them
to reelect this and
I think the public will
rightfully say, what are you
doing to change?
Things on crime, and there's no
doubt that's the that's the
compelling issue for a lot of
voters these days, So I do think
there's a value in doing this. I
think this um
I don't know whether this inter
invades the province of the
court, and the court would
probably say it doesn't it's
interesting because if you if
you get challenged, the court
gets to decide whether you've
invaded the authority of the
court. It would seem like a
pretty tough battle to win. Uh,
but who knows? I don't know if
we'll get there. The other
concern I have is that I would
assume that that this bill would
have involved incarceration of
More people.
Um and there's going to be a
cost to that. My my general
sense why this will really step
into it. My my general sense is
in part. Albuquerque tries very
hard not to incarcerate people.
Um and you and I have talked
about that before by the consent
decree in the crimes of the The
city does not essentially charge
people with anymore does not
arrest people for just not put
him in prison for that's a
decision by the city of
Albuquerque to not do that
people in jail is expensive.
Maybe the county doesn't want to
jail people. Maybe the city
doesn't want to jail people.
Jail populations way down.
Right in Berlioz's county there
about half population.
Is there any correlation between
the fact that we don't want to
jail? People in the fact there's
more crime? Maybe. I don't know.
I don't know We can draw the
direct link, but there's gotta
be a discussion of that issue.
But but it looks like you're in
jail. More people here and I
don't know what we know yet
whether we have the cost of
doing that, whether we have the
money to do that, and whether we
have the city of Albuquerque in
door County. Burly, okay,
willing to put people in jail
that they haven't been willing
to put in jail in the past.
So I don't I don't know that's
gonna that's gonna be a solution
either.
But I appreciate this. We you
and I had a little discussion
about the idea. I appreciate you
trying to think.
Creatively.
Still not sure this
Is the ultimate solution, but I
think this moves them moves the
needle and I think that's a good
thing. I I
You can use the opportunity to
note that I think there's a lot
of spin.
On this subject by people who
have already locked in
To a position one or the other
The best example again all
respect to the AOC. I think the
AOC is locked into a position
that they cannot see sometimes
clearly.
Where we're at. So the argument
you'll see a statistically that
people who are released don't
reoffend. We've all seen that
statistic or they'll say that
it's what 5% or 0.5% of re
offense, but essentially,
they're saying statistically,
the people that are released
pending trial don't really
that's misleading.
The misleading statistic and
Those of us that are accustomed
to take it apart. Experts and
data are pretty good at finding
the misleading part of it. All
That means is that the people
that are released that tiny
percent fraction are arrested
for a new crime does not mean
they re often does not mean they
reoffend just means they have
been caught.
So to the Chiefs point, they get
good at the crime over and over
again, and they get
Less likely to be caught, but
But this this statistics that
are put out there in the spin
that's put on it is these people
don't go out and re offend, and
that's
The chief, I have enough respect
for him and people in law
enforcement. They know damn
well, that's false. They know
it's the same cast of characters
over and over again, and, um,
and they're being released. We
we as an exercise in the office
to try and get to the heart of
all this as an exercise in the
office. I've bragged earlier,
but I'll brag again. Incredible
Legal staff for Senate Judiciary
Committee when we see these
cases
They do a deep dive into the
docket.
They'll actually look at the
dock and look at the defendant
who is charged with a crime and
go back and see what their
criminal history looks like, and
they will sit around the office
and talk about the number of
times they've been arrested and
released.
And it's pretty recurrent
pattern.
We see it over and over again,
people what? Shooting it
shooting at cars and release and
shooting cars again and get
released and shoot at cars again
and we were puzzled.
Yes, until somebody is killed.
So, um, I'm not gonna support
your billing have gone on quite
a bit. This is this is really an
issue that I don't think
We've done enough on
Yes, of course.
Respectfully. I think Mr Pepin
is wrong.
Uh and, uh,
And I'd like to. I'd like to
explain why I think that is the
case. And I do understand that
there are five people who are
feeling a little bit defensive
right now.
A couple of blocks away.
Um
The the fact of the matter is
That we have statues. That's all
the court certain things and we
have statutes.
For example.
If you look at
Ah!
If you were to look at, um
31
Uh, that's three. That's 1.1.
Ah, which talks about review of
youthful offender records.
We're very directive with the
court.
About what they're going to do.
When they're considering setting
bail or other conditions.
If you look at 31-3 Dash two
Ah, we make very clear that when
a judgment has been rendered
against the defendant or surety
for the whole or part
The penalty of forfeited
recognizance.
The court rendering such
judgment shall remit the amount
they're up.
We have that in the statute, we
tell the court what to do.
We tell the court
That when a person is pregnant
or lactating
That presumption shall be made
in favor of release. The court
didn't come and argue Amerman in
those cases.
But all of a sudden
When you have a bill that simply
says
When a person is violated
conditions of release they
should have a conversation with
the judge who's conditions they
violated.
All of a sudden, you have the
court over here saying, Oh, my
goodness, Amerman.
Germans are not applicable here.
It's not
And I will argue that case in
front of those things.
I find it very fascinating that
all of a sudden when this bill
gets introduced a sudden Oh,
look, we've been working on
these rules. Listen, this would
this wouldn't make any
difference whatsoever.
Well, there's one way to make
sure this it wouldn't make any
difference passed this bill.
Pass this bill and I guarantee
you they'll come out with these
rules within the 90 days.
We don't pass the bill.
I don't know what's going on.
So actually
I do think I did not introduce
this as a conversation piece.
I introduced this
Because we have real world
situations happening.
I introduced this because when
people are getting arrested
The focus is on the new case.
And by the time anybody files
emotion
Or looks at
Conditions of release of the
previous cases.
The person is already at the
door.
They have already been released.
In most of the state, not old
state.
But most of the state that is
the case.
So, yes.
I want to change the narrative.
Now.
There is nothing in this bill
that tells the judge what to do.
We are not intruding on judicial
authority.
There's nothing in this bill
that tells the judge.
That they have to
Change the person's bond.
That they have to hold the
person for a certain period of
time, other than simply to
review their conditions in light
of the fact that they have
violated their conditions of
release. That's all
It doesn't even say they have to
hold a hearing in this committee
set.
It doesn't even say that older
hearing
They could just look at it on a
piece of paper.
We're not intruding.
On the purview of the court.
By doing this
And, yes,
What is happening right now.
In areas of the court that
affected over half of the
population of the state warrants
a law
May not affect where you live is
chairman
But if it's affecting over half
the population of the state it
warrants
A response.
From this legislature.
And this is written in such a
way.
As to not intrude in the purview
of the court.
Now it's just if this committee
is simply going to disregard
this fine.
This committee is going to take
it seriously and consider it. I
have a couple of improvements to
make comments.
Nope. We sort of what I would do
very quickly.
Page one line, 12. Okay, just
very quickly. I would strike the
words without bond.
So they would say, Hold a
person.
Line 13 online 19. I would
strike no bond.
These are all actually came from
Mr Pepin in the conversation I
had with him.
Very productive conversation.
Online 24 strike without Bond
So it was simply say in custody.
And then finally, on Page two,
Line five instead of directing
the Spring Court shall issue
rules.
Simply say may issue rules.
Those would be the changes that
I would suggest.
Mr Chair. I moved to table.
Table.
Is there? Objection.
Mm hmm. Build 274.
I sure hope so. Mr. Chair. I
don't think anyone signed up for
public comment, but if they are,
we waive it.
We waive public comment and
support
Oh,
No. Is the chief sorry?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you, mr Chair, so
You'll recall when SB six was
here before you. We had a
section on seizure and embargo.
Ah!
In order to for that to be
constitutional. The cannabis
control division needs law
enforcement powers.
So
This is would be giving them law
enforcement powers. I would like
to strike Section two of the
bill that you have, but I also
see that there is a committee
substitute here.
That does not strike Section
two. I thought that might be
doing it already, Um
First of all, Let's have, um
okay, let's have a motion,
please. What are we looking at?
Okay, So you know what? Mr
Chair, Ignore the committee.
Substitute, please. No.
Looks like we may need to have
you all present on Friday. Mr
Chair.
Uh,
All right, clear sense of
disagreement between you and
your expert. Alright. Then, In
that case, Mr Chair will go
ahead and withdraw. Okay. I'd
like to have this done.
Cleanly. I think this is an
important subject. I'd like to
see it. Pass. It is. Thank you.
Yes, thank you. Alright, that
concludes our work just reminder
for the committee. We will meet
Friday.
Yeah. And please plan to meet
Saturday morning at I think
we're gonna be at nine o'clock.
There was a conflict with the
Rules committee that's been
resolved by moving the rules
committee so we'll meet at nine
o'clock Saturday morning. Please
plan for that, but we'll see if
Friday at the usual time. Thank
you, everybody for a lot of good
work tonight.
