Good afternoon and welcome to
the very first meeting of the
Senate Judiciary Committee this
year I hope everybody gets used
to the landscape it's a little
different we move some people
around the we've got some
different members
or I think one member in
particular tools stand out a
little bit so Senator Wirth our
majority leaders join the
committee will trying to impress
us I'm sure with lots of
important good questions and
debate and discussion of the
good we've also got some new
staff folks which I'm looking
forward introducing to all of
you so we'll do that today will
introduce members will introduce
the staff the people that we
helping us I'll also spend
little time with you before we
do that kind of letting you know
what I hope the meeting will
accomplish today and also what I
hope the the interim sorry to
the committee itself will
accomplish before we start
seeing a lot of bills right now
there I built referred to this
committee will hear three of
them on Wednesday would somebody
look Senator Brandt no his bill
will be heard we passed it
before Senator Wirth if we for
your issue before too and we
passed the Senate bill two which
I'll be presenting on Wednesday
as well as we took by the
governor that's usual salaries
so we went to a hearing bills
we've heard this committee
passed before
will also be using the early
part of the session most of you
all realize the bills don't get
here until they've been through
the process here with other
committees typically so it takes
awhile for us to get the crush
of bills we're going to make
good use of that with hearings
as we've done in the past the
hearings from you are an
opportunity to educate myself to
educate Committee hope to
educate the public at large to
the media the press and also our
colleagues in the legislature on
topics where hopefully this
committee has some expertise to
develop some expertise so today
I'm going to offer an ask you
all to give us some suggestions
on topics you like to have a
secretary so we given that a few
minutes while we're going
through the internet
interactions right now we've set
up some time you may have
already caught this in the
press.
Just to begin talking about pre
trial detention once again the
governor has asked for this
issue for state of the state
continues to Verizon the
presses.
was in front of me back home
when I went back to Los crucis
the mayor of the city Los crucis
another spot that the problems
with our crime problem in New
Mexico are because of with the
legislature and failure to enact
pre trial detention so we're
gonna spend some time talking
about the constitutional issues
very specifically in this
committee and and what the
alternatives maybe so that'll be
one of the early hearings you've
heard some talk about the Arnold
tools as part of the pre trial
detention process so we'll do
that you all on the floor this
morning heard me talk a little
bit and then have last couple
days about the tragedy of gun
violence in our state we had
another tragedy last week in
California what we have already
seen a number of military
actions that relate to go and
safety gun issues we'll spend
some time we have a new homes
are we have New Mexico Supreme
Court rulings and so we last met
on the issue of guns out of the
state of New York so we'll
dissect what this previous
spring port said about on that
long and where they're at and
when we take a look at what
we've enacted in New Mexico and
see what's working and what's
more we went on that topic so
I've identified pre trial
detention guns
and is this a couple of topics
that will do to right away but I
I'm looking forward to the
committee today giving us some
additional topics will try hard
to have good presenters good
good people to hear both sides
of the issue if there is two
sides to the issue that's
usually my way of liking to do
things.
The thing that will do today I
hope we hope you'll take a
little bit of time to look at
the proposed committee rules and
procedures these are something
that I've been using the last
couple of years and will always
continue to revise as the
circumstances dictate but I I
welcome your input on how that
works for you as a committee
member
I find very little value just so
all of you know I I version
value in the practice that I've
seen here most of years I've
been here by giving people two
or three minutes of public
comment at the microphone and
lining people up that to me
that's very little value to the
committee process because of
there may be a very strong
proponent or opponent of
particular legislation that
really deserves ten or fifteen
or twenty minutes to be heard on
issues you care and that the
cannabis law that we did and do
it in two minute sound bites by
proponents so I try to set aside
lots of time for proponents and
opponents budget and time still
control the time of the
committee respect that as well
to that that means necessarily
people getting themselves
together when it comes to public
comment and organize themselves
hi I'm encouraging people to the
mail.
Comments to the committee making
an email address available
encouraging committee members to
read the email that is sent to
the committee in lieu of
extended testimony here so we're
we're taking public testimony
was doing it in a little
different way as well to I
encourage lobbyist that we don't
need to in my opinion have them
stand up I only read bill until
to the representative how many
members they have
whether they support or oppose a
bill bill sign in people that
wish to speak with funding and
so these are all hopefully clear
from the the rules that I
proposed in.
I'm repeating what I'm I'm these
are not on tablets of stone
circle unit but it has a good
idea about how this could be
done better for you as a member
of the committee please feel
free to let me know today during
our discussion four of our
outside the committee so that's
what I hope to accomplish today
for organizational meeting of
the that I'm ready to get
started so Senator Ivey Soto
went on to sell to everyone here
in the room and would come
through the committee members
from your direction.
Senator.
Percentage teams here in the
sense
of poverty
Committee for.
Some operator now says the staff
has I want to get a.
And
have here for the.
problem that built that thing.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and everyone here and on the
webcast I am state Senator Mimi
Stewart from Senate district
seventeen in Albuquerque it's
the international district in
the east gateway area leaving
town central very happy to be
here and Mr chairman I think you
mentioned that we could mention
things we wanted to hear about I
am particularly interested in
the warrant issued you know why
we have so many what can we do
to help what will really happen
it's just kind of amazing to me
we have five thousand felony
arrest warrants outstanding in
Albuquerque over sixty thousand
misdemeanor so I I just need to
get my head around those numbers
thank you good appreciate that
will know that right now and
then and then we'll also time
for the whole committee to
really be heard on any number of
topics and I encourage other
members when for example center
of president Stuart raise the
issue once and that interested
others of you please chime in so
we know that is an issue that
that has a great deal of
interest in the committee so
we'll make sure that that kind
of gets prioritized so thank you
senator o'neill thank you Mr
chair New Mexico state senator
Munoz district thirteen which is
essentially
a very and for to this committee
always learn a lot in terms of
issues a couple bills on overall
it's just something that I know
because it we're professionally
at aria for a long time so I
have to carry out proto taxes
will be for today legislation
passed seven deserves.
momentarily but also have this
technical parole violations bill
which is going on one serviced
on that regard some that would
be my from my part is for the
sessions around for all reforms
so thank you Mr chair happy
birthday right last last week
last.
Which is.
You get you get all the credit
you deserve for that.
Sir do.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Katie
do pick a represents Senate
district ten which currently is
part of the north valley that is
not and senator o'neill's
District
and mostly the west side of the
course suicide corridor up into
southern Rio Rancho two years
from now it'll be balloon fiesta
park it down to Tingley beach
and tailoring.
Senator Wirth.
I thank you Mr chair it is good
to be back on Senate judiciary
from the my thirteenth year on
this committee I was not here in
the last two years as we
navigated through COVID and all
the challenges that presented
but I'm delighted to be back on
the committee
I have been a lawyer for thirty
three years now and practice
here in Santa Fe doing primarily
mediation arbitration civil
cases and court appointed
fiduciary positions I just like
to say that that given where we
are with.
The state's finances and
extraordinary opportunity that
we have I really look forward
to.
Hearing from the key.
Legs of the stool in the
criminal justice system our
public defenders our dust and
obviously we're gonna hear the
courts on Wednesday I just think
we have an opportunity that we
really haven't had for well I
don't know if we've ever had
isn't just at the chance to
weigh in in the budget process
and I just think as that budget
is being built together having
those type of tool hearings here
and being able to convey what
what we all I think know needs
to happen which is the system
has to get funded
to in order to work I just think
we have a chance to do that in a
way I've not seen before some
really encouraged by that and
that's kind of a place I'd like
to focus thank you Mr chair.
I thank you Mr chair of great
Baca district twenty nine which
is primarily linked to County
and the very southern slice of
Bernalillo county I'm a
practicing attorney within a
business owner for some years I
I appreciate of being here on
the Senate Judiciary it'll be my
seventh year welcome back
senator Wirth from your brief
vacation from us I don't know if
you're truly happy or not you
are of.
When we were all in love right
now.
But I look forward to having the
the normal robust debates we
have but also
maybe getting in some more
expert type testimony on some of
the topics we're gonna cover
like like the gun topics so we
actually have an understanding
in and to give the the public a
window into judiciary of what we
do here and educate them as well
so that we make wise decisions
here another area that that it
has been a focus and concern
that I would like to see
explored at least in this
committee would be that of the
medical industry may be hearing
from our some of our doctors and
our medical professionals if the
opportunity presents itself this
year thank you Mr chair thank
you.
And I'm Joseph Cervantes of
before I go there of lotus
Senator Baca will be of one of
the will be the only Republican
on this committee does not have
amount but and so
And over here will not change.
So we're here for sixty days so
there's no.
I'm Joe services from hi the
point twenty two year Senator of
we're twenty two member the
legislature and all of those
years have been on one version
of the Judiciary Committee or
the other so it's a real
privilege to be asked by the
madam president and by the
Senate's committees committee to
continue to chair this committee
again and I I feel it's my
responsibility to be fair to all
of you you'll note one practice
supplies usually speak last as
the chair whenever possible and
the that's a that's a mercy rule
to all the rest of you is
usually we were time before we
get to me or my questions so
that's kind of a good could
practice I've learned along the
way but will will welcome all of
input and I I'm just.
I leave every session very proud
of this committee and I come
back weekly proud we we ended
the last session has also issued
and rushed and a little bit
frantic and a little hectic but
the should not escape us we
passed of the omnibus crime
package bill by putting together
a number of bills that would
provoke by various members by
working with the chair of the
Senate finance committee
realizing the financial budget
component to the criminal
justice system we have an
exceptional staff which I look
forward to re introducing all of
you to we did all of that in the
last final days and hours in in
very significantly change the
criminal justice system in New
Mexico and I noted that after
the session everyone was taking
credit for it but the work was
done on this committee and and
we're going to do more of the
same I'm sure this time around
too so so begin by introducing
you to our analysts
let me I've asked them to
introduce themselves will use
all all do that let me just tell
you before we do.
These recognize these are these
are for attorneys who are
extraordinary attorneys very
smart very capable very talented
which means that they would be
in great demand and are in great
demand at their job and we're
all state live hi Lisa
and the hello Center Curtis back
in the backs of next month
monitoring our activities of
former member former former
senator Lisa Curtis in the back
we just got done with about an
hour and a half long
conversation on the issue
medical malpractice Senator Baca
so we're we're going to follow
through with your interest in
that topic but anyway these are
these are attorneys I want to
introduce all of you to please
recognize of in Phillips case
yet to be a bag on my behalf
their employers to give them to
us for a couple months what we
pay you guys thirty Bucks an
hour pretty much sooner some
like that Mr chair.
Yeah yeah I was we water.
We will look carefully the
salaries legislation.
so thanks and please thank their
employers they're giving us some
really provide lawyers to work
with so and when we begin with
and I want you to issues of
football you by James and then
branded.
This is the right to this are
very practicing out of poverty
this is my second year in the
Senate Judiciary Committee and I
also serves to years House
Judiciary and right.
Thank you.
As all that from all the I
practice personal injury I have
a little bit of background
instruction on.
this is I
session Senator sharing the
house.
Right
this is my favorite time of year
because everyone is actually
federal has actually this is
what I think is constitutional.
Hi
Right.
Hey all right.
We do have a problem we are
excited but.
Yeah the the there was some re
of rearranging of offices
downstairs with a lot of
addition of needed space first
meetings down there and I'll
just tell you one of these days
somebody will take my position
with senator Sri Committee and I
hope though have much bigger
office because the conversations
that take place not office with
those three individuals and with
Mr Lara going to are very
exciting and and I hope all of
you get a chance to come into
those brainstorming sessions and
discussion so you all know
tools that are going to fill
point intrusions of the mental
health stay here to say that
about you and we're nor join
this is the old timers day this
is a former house judiciary
chairman and album art join us.
Along with.
Welcome Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
so what I'm sorry man and I'm
gonna Representative filled with
without just for a second so you
know the.
In the used to be that when I
got here of twenty plus years
ago all of the hard work on
bills was done in the house
Judiciary Committee when I was
chair and I was sure there in
before us can be Martinez was
other we routinely Senator was
on that committee
we we routinely work till two
with three in the morning that
was not a common thing.
It's
new microphones on.
Madam president.
you know and then and then as I
got into my eyes to I think it
was in my probably thirties when
we started I was probably this
teens I think at the time and.
And as the the years wore on I
began to think you know I really
don't want to be working it two
in the morning all the time I
want to go to the Senate where
they were usually done by about
six o'clock seven o'clock
and so that's the place to be so
I came over the center only to
find out that now we're the
committee this writing and
rewriting the bills over here
and I'm I'm really wondering
what I'm doing wrong.
Getting this all entirely wrong
but it.
Mr Lara going to go injures
yourself and then we'll.
This committee a lot of work
that not sure how long I've
served this honorable Committee
but I had the temerity to look
at the session calendars from
when I first served as a page
and Jack Campbell's the speaker
of the house I started having
and well beyond sixty sessions
that I I quit right about and
that includes of course specials
etcetera I served on
constitutional revision
commission I service your
deputy director of the
Legislative Council Service of
was of this for a long time
and this is this is a privilege
to serve you seven members this
is what we look at this is what
we need here the staff this and
this is where we start with a
very rigorous process for
reviewing the legislation
our job is to independently
review the bill so we do so
really without reference to FIR
is and other analyses that come
through the building because we
feel like everybody's analysis
is important we feel like arses
dispositive.
I'm happy to be here Mr members
committee and I'm on the server
thank you thank you you all know
that I have a lot of personal
affection for fill up because of
the fact that his mother was an
institution here Phillips an
institution here and having
somebody who has a history this
is so critical field but I was
just in a meeting with leases I
was in a bit ago we were talking
about the if the medical
malpractice after we talk about
the history of that in the
history of our judicial
selection process is what Phil
was there the table one all of
those decisions were made with
the from there.
And having somebody with that
history in in the service of
this committee some really
terrific asset nineteen
encouraging all your asco what
what what is the longest because
he'll tell you the year and the
date was passing bills are you
who made the deal and what was
traded for it in the and how it
came about it's always pretty
fascinated have that kind of the
like I.
Of between the two of us refer
to focus the the committee and
my concert here because because
he's he's a counselor but I but
I also give him credit for
assembling the team of lawyers
he's the one who has to go back
there employers to come let him
work with us for the first time
and so indispensable
we have a major analysts so
Mister the Czecho and
Just posted some legislation
and let's see what else we have
Current right
what you to introduce yourself
over the minority analyst.
Hi everybody my name's Mexico
also my first time here are from
New York
it is a privilege to be here if
you want to New Mexico on
Wednesday it's pretty cool.
Good afternoon everyone my name
is Angela picture for this is my
fifth year in Senate Judiciary
I'm a retired district attorney
currently I'm a commissioner
with New Mexico's sentencing
commission and as always I look
forward to being here thank you
very much.
New for the minority.
Well Mister chairman Senators
are projects and this is my
first year all are they retired
the COVID attorneys.
I love the New Mexico since I
was in high school because of
high school the the I got a call
for more research Cuomo to
Germany as account we're officer
came back up with you in a law
school fell into a job as a
clerk for bankruptcy judge
to get bankruptcies became
especially which entails more
practice was in a US couple
small firms with colored
concrete coming across the
border for airplanes so when I
came back up.
Of the traditional which is
needed a bankruptcy lawyer
recruited may I did eighteen
years of the state's bankruptcy
attorney primarily taxation and
environmental to all sorts of
issues.
I missing a cab ride back after
a couple year hiatus not the
same as Senator Wirth but the
path
related issues at home
maintenance of that committee
two years but it is working on
it last year from Senator Brandt
and I am assigned him this year
but I am turning over that the
time here to this wonderful
gentleman on my right this
renaissance.
His resume this is my seventh
year here and I will be showing
up from time to time it isn't
one of those things to help out
as as he needs me but otherwise
I'll be around if anybody needs
me I have a background in in Law
is you know and finance trust
banking particularly and I've
had a couple of interesting
local government positions here
Senator Wirth so I am delighted
to be working with all the this
is quite a hard working
committee the analyst
more funding committee of our.
Speaker and the information
that.
Thank you.
So go to my ride is Garcia again
you can begin to wonder what the
interim is like the in in this
is spent trying to make people
to come back.
After after the last session
family has a really good
education has the best job of
all being a grandmother by which
he loves very much and getting
her to spend time with us and
the hours we keep in the
schedule the work we do and and
weigh that against being a
grandma was a tough call but we
got our back right when he's
eight one one.
That's what we all say that.
Concerns like we can say for FY
twenty years right Senator one
more year anyway and willing
introduce yourself and let our
status is my seventeenth year
with the state legislature the
money next year with Judiciary.
Back in working for Senator
months thank you we have a new
committee secretary of the
session over another committee
secretary but nice I guess my
sectors we it works Moffett if
we can do is I think you well
known to all of you here as well
to
and she's been here for quite
awhile but introduce yourself to
us please.
It.
AFP Mexico ten miles from Silver
City South Park State I'm going
to be.
Related
party transportation working the
legislature now working here
with your committee I feel very.
And thank you so.
If you are to get yes and and
her father was the chairman of
the house Judiciary Committee
for many many years.
Gregory time in the nicer.
Yep we all remember of
celebrating the state Patrick
state many many times and one of
the traditions Representative
alright we'll remember that well
to say fabrics they was an
institution.
With you your dad and the.
Hi state this with some caution
there's some concern about the
rules but but I but I Irish
whiskey was part of the
tradition that was very nice to
have a toast of the justice of
of some Irish whiskey on St
Patrick's day we are who is a
hero on top of being in the
committee chair here.
zero to our country.
we have attendance Mr Martinez
ms younger both on my list so.
Yes.
This a motion to hear your.
Retired from the title insurance
business and the in my other I.
Hired over twenty eight years
for state high school and.
Good we could use we may need an
empire.
We want to you should you should
always bring a whistle.
Good idea of the new tool for
the tendency to so Baru.
I'm independent my first year my
professional background is in
insurance and risk management
but I'm tired of.
Over to the.
Thank so I have security people
here I guess we have security
and I I hi
I appreciate very much the rules
that you all play to it I think
it's generally not been a real
concern this committee but
increasingly it's good to know
that you all are here so want to
introduce ourselves to the for
small to.
Good afternoon members Senators
my name's said that but also
we're in nine years for the
legislature
mostly on the other side of the
house but like Mr serve on this
side now the Senate is all.
Beijing a fortune.
A retired as
tree so you can say I've been in
and out of the things that help
would be easier if you look at
my ankle on the ankle.
It's my pleasure to be here
today folks.
And thank you for the things
you're I really appreciated
it's nice to see I have a real
good session this morning with
the were comforting the people
that were very serving for the
school for the deaf and that
made my day.
Thank you to Lucy.
You.
Hi this is here he is asking
at what our.
Thank you that one of our many
experts in New Mexico yes thank
you for that with who are
state just affect well I work.
Table time time at work for the
city of Santa Fe New.
More more expert witnesses will
come up with that that then of.
And all of the services we
officers and the city and county
for about thirty five years.
Yeah senator Pete the last
twelve open security I retired
and asked me to come to work for
people this is my first year and
the very very interesting this
morning the purpose of people
and lightweight wraps of
Business School with their
so it's pretty special.
My name is Bob long of
I retired the state of
California.
We moved here about seventeen
years.
This is my first year working
here.
But I've been raised here the
seventy is that been here I
don't know some you have for you
are my wife Maryland along.
The server.
The R..
The workers Martinez merry Kate
and I have a wonderful
experience to.
So I've been here.
All I.
But
This way the.
And I thought it would be very
educational process rather than.
For a.
But so far so good.
And he can this be for a.
Thank you Mr alone all right
think of introducing this some
sorry to have it really
is you prepare and I'm sorry for
that I assume that you were
someplace other than here but in
the either I guess we have a
Zoomer right I guess act yes my
name there more often zoom.
I have a master's degree and
have committee regional planning
and worked as that business
administrator for the out of you
for the housing coalition for
last two years helping with
theirs in meeting these to be
more happy about.
Well it is nice to have you here
and have that resource for
people present for my part of
the state that will have to
drive four hours to be up here
and aren't always sure the
weather will cooperate with me
will take place as scheduled so
more more people to join this by
zoom so there for rural thank
you very much all right I think
I've got to my list so let's
take a little bit more time for
committee members for school
before we lose the Santo o'neill
used to wait for your bill to be
heard us.
Thank all right.
We'll continue on with the
meeting and just let's just open
up back to where we were out
with Senator Stewart you raise
the issue of warrants us a topic
it's in the media a lot I know
the City of Albuquerque's asked
for some funding that's
seems like it's changing
exponentially over time so we
want to expand on that Senator
than anybody else wants to
really just be recognizing
topics do Senator do have an
issue as well to.
Well Mr chairman.
I met more complicate the weeks
ago and
there's put together this task
force that has worked for I
believe it's two years
community advocacy groups
please obviously other law
enforcement to try to of really
look holistically at what we
could do in Albuquerque to turn
the temperature down.
what the mayor said to me was.
I've just got one answer.
Really what is he says warrants.
And of course you know you read
in the paper Albuquerque has
been criticized the previous DA
has been criticized for yes not
taking cases port not just
dealing with and when I heard
there were five thousand felony
warrants and over sixty thousand
misdemeanor warrants I'm just
scratching my head how did it
get that way what what happens
in the other communities around
New Mexico do they have that
kind of a problem and with that
big of a problem
me up I was grateful that the
more basically said we've really
additional this out over two
years and we think that if we
could serve these warrants get
these cases moving we would pick
up the people that are still
criminals Senator so I don't
know if that's true you know I
served on judiciary for twenty
years in the house I've been
here.
Four years.
I in the Senate eight but I
wasn't I didn't start in
Judiciary acts take at previous
Senator Keller spots that was in
corporations Sen.
And in fact and staff with
Senator Ivey Soto we had a good
time Senator Candelaria the
three of us really a ruling that
committee chair.
Those are the olden days
so I just I don't understand the
warrant issue and and really if
that truly is at the root of
what they could do to.
Turn down the temperature of the
crime in Albuquerque I'm
interested in what that means
what that looks like and the so
that's why project.
You should use a good
suggestions will add that to our
on our hearing suggestions of
had center due to the service.
Thank you Mr chair
and before I set the topic how
mentioned that I like to please
public comment procedures so
much here and Judiciary that we
have now adopted them in the
Senate rules committee as well
so.
That.
But
I would really like to have some
child welfare CYFD hearings I've
spent this last inner
Really trying to do it a deep
dive around CYFD issues and.
I consistently get completely
contradictory information
depending on who I'm talking to
I have not.
I have not yet been able to
identify kind of the.
A neutral trusted source for for
anything around these issues and
and they think it's also because
there are no easy answers in
this area every solution has a
drawback and I.
And it's possible that
everything I'm hearing is is
correct it's it's just it can be
both essentially
but it would be really nice but
it would be really nice to get
some clear answers on some.
Distinct questions that I know
this is a there's a number of
CYFD hearings during the interim
I didn't really get a lot of my
outstanding questions answered
during any of those
presentations
the other issue I would like us
to to look into related to what
senator Bob was talking about
you know with.
Kind of the.
The mail in the mail and
insurance issues going on they
strike me.
Largely as insurance issues not
medical malpractice issues and
I'd like to know what kind of
insurance regulation we can be
doing to address these issues
and what the OSI is doing and
look into that and the and what
that.
Thank you Mr chair thank you and
there will come back to your
roots was the committee wants to
state will move here this is no
more details Senator Ivey Soto
center with some ideas I thank
the chair next I want to follow
up on what Senator Stewart
raced.
And.
Part of what I'm interested in
knowing is what's the.
What's the age of these war.
Because.
We talk about sixty thousand
misdemeanor warrants my guess is
the number of those been sitting
around for a long time.
And.
One solicitor said around for a
long time we have people who.
Don't naturally come to the
attention of law enforcement.
And and Representative because
of someone actually comes to the
attention of law enforcement.
through their actions than those
warrants get taking care.
And so one of the question I
have is.
Should should warrants expire at
some point not the case but
should the course expired at
some point.
because you've got somebody who
is otherwise a.
Otherwise a law abiding citizen.
So and and and my experiences.
And I have.
I'm working with some folks to
to try to develop of the
legislation this because my
experience is that when they do
the the the big war around us.
Would you look at the pictures
most of those folks actually by
their dress it's pretty clear.
They found the of Skylanders at
work where they were supposed to
be.
And
and so if they're fighting
people while they're working and
disrupting them as a taxpayer.
It may be.
Creating such a situation where
they lose their job and they're
no longer taxpayer.
just so that we can make a point
about somebody.
depend upon what the underlying
charges I I I think that's
something we should we should
think about.
So
so anyway so that's that's
something that I agree with
Senator what I think it's an
important issue for us look at
I don't think it's a single
issue that would solve crime.
I think I think it's it's a
single issue that would that
would lower the number of
warrants but I don't know how
much of a difference election
making crime if these people are
not naturally coming to the
attention of law enforcement
anyway.
Thank you if you services that
are worth.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to put in the mix the
Water issue taxes The New Mexico
I know you and I have been
briefed
Have repeatedly as this is
progress but this is a huge deal
for our state and it's kind of
in a critical spots and I just
think having a perhaps a joint
committee meeting with the
conservation committee I know
there Senator panics is planning
on having a executive session
briefing but I really think it's
important for the other lawyers
and the other members of this
committee to be able to hear
exactly where that is and and
and the different direction that
it's going for states and school
within the next.
Thank you welcome back around
looking to round table going as
long as the conversations
interesting all always trends by
that but it seems like it's
gonna let all you all know that
before the session began Phil of
what a great always trying to
to counsel me well suggestion
that are first here should be
about water and and thought that
property was four he thought it
was such an important issue the
thought it should be among the
first he also advised me that I
didn't want to start the session
with the a nuclear bomb from the
from the from the get go and
this is why we work pretty well
together because he's usually
guy tells me to settle down to
come with the press and I
usually follows the advice for
this time I did and I said no
we're going to go right back
into crime again and so we'll
wait into water but but the
we've we've made some of the
things of on the agenda a little
bit of a priority I'm I'm
a little concerned by Senator
its report that on the issue
warrants is perhaps the best
idea the city MALAGARI come up
with to attack the crime.
what's that.
In fact my city life.
Well well well well hundred
first while I live I live in
Albuquerque and was in the years
I've lived in Los crucis between
undergraduate school in
architecture Law School and then
Jennifer I were married and
began our family.
I have a good memory my most
important my daughters the still
there was some house in
Albuquerque that's most
important so but you're you're
you're right Senator you and I
should be honest about this and
this so you and I disagree about
for many years because I
perceive there to be a problem
with crime in Albuquerque I am
ten years ago and and I know
that you felt that some of that
was exploited by the media and
others in there there may be
something to that we should
recognize well too but but I'm
I'm hoping that that the idea of
the the these warrants is is not
the best idea we come up with to
attack prime and I you know I've
gotten a lot of trouble last
couple years not just by you but
by the governor others by saying
that the problems with crime in
Albuquerque are problems at this
created for itself I got a lot
of criticism for that comment I
just made it again right now get
criticism for saying it again.
Well I I I I bring it up for
this reason because often times
when New Mexico's crime problem
really a lot of our problems are
attributed to the lack of
legislative response the we just
recently well known to a don't
let me finish what I'm saying
before you scalloping.
The the you know the just
recently the Attorney General
last outgoing Attorney General
said that you know we we need to
all log to make sure we have a
crime for parents to leave their
guns around children kill
themselves with this bill built
this up here
but there is a log in is that
right now and that law has been
used and people have been
convicted of that crime in the
past so too often times it seems
that the legislature gets blamed
for the reasons we have problems
in our state in the top line as
well legislature needs to pass a
law to do this legislation is
act on this that or the other
that's the reason for my
statements are Stewart is that
we get blamed for the that let's
take the warrants issue is is
the really the reason that we
have this backlog of course
because we have passed a law
some time or because now the
argument is that the City of
Albuquerque doesn't have enough
money well this is the first
time I've heard about this as an
issue and it's the first time
I've heard that within the state
boundaries more money to create
to come to the task with
warrants it probably go back
years of not many years not
decades.
I'm too often times in my
experience people blame the
absence of laws of lack of
legislative action for the
problems that they haven't
tackled themselves and this is
the with the microphone on I've
said this a lot lately and this
will give me a lot of trouble
too and you can file your ethics
complaint in room three nineteen
but you know I can't pass a law
to get people off their **** and
that's I don't know and these
are or more concise way to say
it so
I think there are many things
that have occurred to continue
that can do and and the reason I
say that it's a problem that I
will pre screen because too
often times the laws that we
have in Albuquerque the same
laws we have in Los crucis the
results are exponentially
different and we had a great
impact here this committee when
we give you my best example.
We met last year the clearance
rate for murders in Albuquerque
was in the high fifties I think
the number we were given some
more of maybe maybe low sixties
I'm looking at weeks or under
who knows the answer that but if
you were told always that when
there's a murder committed
Albuquerque the the percentage
of cases that were led to an
arrest of an individual for that
crime somewhere the fifty sixty
percent cap and I made a point
of that that Los crucis
clearance rate in the city
locked his country was about
ninety something ninety three
ninety four ninety five percent
state laws
applying monsters is the plan
after the didn't need to change
our laws do need a change in the
budget but they were clearing
cases and guess what two three
months ago occurred in answer to
Norma's progress in their
clearance right on or something
other they're telling us they're
is right committee something
like that.
And I bring that as an example
of what we can accomplish here I
bringing attention to an issue
and and realize that maybe we
don't need to change a law to
get people to work harder at the
specific subject topics if you
answer your questions or so
that's that's my point about
twenty state some of these
issues and we'll we'll we'll dig
into the you know Albuquerque's
jails about half full
is it because there are fewer
people there need to be in jail
just because they don't have
staff contract staff campaign
staff to the not arrest people
because they don't have the the
staff to take care of them I
don't know it's always the
chicken or the egg for me here
you know what's what's driving
the train but I'll come back to
the service at a new job and you
know me I'm always tossing out a
little bit of of snow sparks
through spark out there and see
what it takes but warrants is a
good issue in and of and the
fact that the city boundaries
are needed five million three
weeks later sounded like there
was some interesting absolutely
so well there's some positive
response I know it's all about
ten some positive response that
maybe we need twenty million you
know I I I feel like I I kind of
see what's going on there
candidly admitted maybe less of
a focus to the issue but but
we'll get there Senator doing
music term that I made a note of
contradictory information
there's this is a wonderful
committee because guess what
happens in in our committee
report frankly in my office the
cops come in and they tell us
what's really going on
but they tell us they can't say
it
but you may or may not be
accurate but it's their
perspective that will tell us
what they think is going on in
Albuquerque but they don't
control so they don't want to
complete state plan and frankly
the.
Secretary comes in the office
and says what he thinks the
problem is and but he doesn't
want to say to the wanted to
trouble the judges and the
judges come and see us and
they've trial judges and they
say they take those with big
things going on with the problem
is but they don't want to come
up and say either because they
don't in trouble with anybody
either publicly and so use or
contradictory information that's
we are the gathering place we
are the great melting pot of all
of this contradictory
information we should challenge
ourselves to figure out what we
can do about it.
so that's important I want to
make note before under my
comments and go back to all of
you the governor has an agenda
as well too I want to respect
that she's got elected with our
expanding numbers she deserves
credit for that who Mexico every
entrusted her to that position
for another four years she's
raise some issues in her state
of the state our staff just
today was gonna pull that start
dissecting her the gentleman hi
I just ran into her in the
elevator few minutes ago with.
Mr Ludwig two nine we use the
moment or two or three holding
the elevator to raise some of
the issues that are of interest
so let's let's try to respect
her agenda and find a place for
that in our dialogue and
discussion debate as well too
because she's in the central
part.
so come back to you other topics
and maybe have sparked a furore
have you had time to think of
something else anybody else
sorry so again except what's
gonna want to follow up on.
This case which is that is that.
We look at the problems of
Albuquerque.
You know one of the things.
And where the legislature office
plant.
Is set up correctly entered into
a consent agreement.
And with the loss of.
And part of the consent
agreement includes.
I have a list right here twenty
two crimes for which police
officers shall not arrest.
And and so if you've got.
You know these twenty two crimes
are people aren't going to rest
our our can be arrested.
That includes things like formal
trespass includes.
Things like shoplifting.
it and it includes some of the
stuff where we're frankly
It.
It leads to several problems
with some of the local
businesses.
Because although some of this
baby news for us it's not news
to the people on the street.
What they are not going to be
arrested for.
And and so that in that in both
of those people to.
To go into businesses and commit
certain crimes.
because they feel like the on
the cost benefit.
Analysis that they do that the
cost is lesson for them.
Because City of Albuquerque has
agreed not to arrest people for
that that is not a making of the
legislature.
That is a making up the of of
the decision of the.
More more prior city attorney
who.
Signed off on that on that
agreement.
And you know so so we we need to
be aware that there are there
multiple challenges.
That that they have it's not all
the justice department it's not
the legislature's federal
funding so that is Albuquerque
agreed to certain things to get
rid of a lawsuit that then that
then opens up the door for folks
locally to be able to feel like
like they can act with impunity.
so that's something that we all
need to be aware.
Yeah and and thanks for that
would McClinton you first raise
the deficiency in our in a
couple years ago it's been a
fascinating discussion that we
had we should have that again I
think here in front in front of
this committee the the stressing
to me for two reasons one is it
gives rise to my statement when
I say Albuquerque it is separate
from a crime problem that's
largely of its own making that's
a good example of that
Albuquerque has decided not to
arrest people for certain crimes
including some of the ones that
cause the most conservative
crimes right.
And
the the the tragedy of that to
me is this that decision that
McClinton agreement to not
arrest for certain crimes was
the product of jail overcrowding
back at a time when the jail was
downtown many we all remember
those days in Albuquerque New
Mexico was downtown different
different jail Turley Division I
was in the model offer we were
in the building across the
street so I can watch the jail
all day long.
Is really billing hours I
promise but.
But but you know
there's quite a drama going on
with the McClinton was was to go
to because it was a chronic
problem it in terrible
conditions in that jail we've
been out of the jail for how
long now five or six years I
think that's all much longer
than that yeah and and yet we're
still not arresting people for
all these crimes because of the
agreement made because of the
condition a little longer
exists.
Is that what you're given grant
from Albuquerque also has a lot
of solutions right right for the
and maybe even better than going
back to arrest warrants so thank
you for that that issue I think
that the fact that I can't make
that point enough that.
We were operating under a
consent order that zero one
really today it seems to me the
reasons for the reasons for that
and and the with the the you
point out the fact that it
creates issues here's one of the
because as we heard about the
cops come in and when they talk
to me privately say there's a
morale problem and with the
moral problem the real problem
is because we know we're not
supposed to rest people
professors was watch it go by
for we the rest and then we know
that they're going to be
released the same day and are
going to repeat that crime over
and over again that creates
morale problems for the cops in
that and I don't know what it
does to the mind set of the
judiciary but it's got to have
some affect so you know get good
point there Senator Ivey Soto
the topic will come back to I
think we should probably have
I'm sorry will come back if you
know your races frequently the
issue of the of the justice
department and the the orders
that are imposed on the City of
Albuquerque there let me just
tell this committee this is a
real troubling issue we've tried
for the two or three years and
I've tried this committee to try
to bring in department of
justice this committee into the
inner committee to explain where
that's at and they will they
will they will not talk to some
of the committee.
So we'll continue to try to push
for the session I told us the
parents and.
As a representative Senator do.
Thank you stretched out of
another topic that I'd love to
have a hearing on the.
fentanyl patches
I I was one of the sponsors of
the federal yes Representative
bill last year and very
enthusiastic about that and one
of my brothers is a is an
infection psychiatrists that
works a lot with this population
tells me none of his clients are
using test strips
so I think panels is a a unique
Problem that we're dealing with
that we I want to be sure that
we are you.
That the political efforts and
capital that we are spending on
is one that can actually pay off
in in the population.
Thank you.
Most.
Senator a lot of work to do.
What issue that notice statewide
faster service is the dearth of
public service lawyers we don't
have enough district determines
we don't have enough public
defenders the courts don't have
enough lawyers to help them I
would hope that we would start
to inquire about why and and is
that a function of what we're
trading at the law school is a
function of what we're paying I
discover there's a little glitch
it how we and our public service
a student loan program wasn't
working well we hope that we now
have it working a little better
but Mr chairman the difference
between how we budget for for
the public service lawyers and
the ethical obligations that
attorneys have as members of the
bar sometimes those ethical
requirements are not addressed
in the budget process and it
would seem a uniquely this this
committees responsibility to
ensure that we're providing the
assistance that we need because
if we round up a whole bunch of
people who's gonna try who's
gonna Representative does the
judge have enough time to
process these cases of so I
would just hope that the
committee would consider that as
well.
Thank you.
Anyone else just on on that last
topic we should note to that in
terms of the the dearth of
lawyers and and public service
there's a dearth of lawyers in
the legislature let me say that
for the press who's at home
enjoying our committee meeting
today that the press assumption
is the legislature's made up of
a lot of lawyers.
I I don't remember what it
looked like when I came here
awhile back but there are a lot
more lawyers than than there are
now I think this committee now
has just about every lawyer in
the Senate we have center
Maestas who's new who's joining
us and we have Senator Sedillo
Lopez
who are not on this committee
but apart from those two members
to have any other attorneys
other than those that are on
this committee and this
committee is not all attorneys
so Santo Domingo senator Senator
is not internet and neither is
senator Morris or center pirtle
so you're looking at it just
about and and the notion that
the public has with the press
has a lot of lawyers in the
legislature it's just not true
imports are not to today so
that's a follow up to two years
I I will of the last topic of
put out there was Curtis center
for center Chris was here we had
a very good meeting today with
some very the some of the
lawyers I respect the most of
the state would most population
she's one of the in in the trial
of our and.
And like me and like you we try
cases services center work was
with me for a couple of in
October November we try cases
and and I'll just tell you the
composition of the judiciary the
experience of judiciary has also
following a great deal in the
time I've been in practice and
so I'm hoping the committee will
devote some time it's important
is how we picked judges how we
retain judges
and how we can best see of the
ideal.
Most experienced people from the
bar on our bench and we'll start
with the state when we review
again the issue of judicial
salaries.
I can usually make that argument
with the simple point that one
there's a federal vacancy I
don't see Representative park
here in the room anymore I don't
think you might be saying this
with when there is a judicial of
judicial vacancy
former representative forecast
right a little recommendation
for.
He'd like to have that
appointment when there's of
federal vacancy there are sixty
seventy eighty applicants for
those positions in their of
applicants by some of the best
lawyers that we have in the
state the people that I respect
the most we have a state vacancy
last couple times you had Los
crucis we had maybe three
applicants to of the map minimum
qualifying Commission
and even then the governor would
happy with those and send it
back to them and they gave for
three with a lot of effort so we
we have a problem and and it's
reflective of the fact that our
entire countries moving toward
the city's
there's not a lot of lawyers to
make a judge in order to work
for lots of other parts of our
state so we have to find a way
to solve the judiciary people
would be able to match is always
a long term vision I'm hoping
this committee will will rise to
that challenge the sessions time
to do it.
The top any other topics before
we call it a day.
Mr.
Chairman I like probably
everybody else on the committee
had a really good long
discussion with their Chief
Justice about their efforts to
reform the judiciary I was
amazed by the bills they are
going to offer and so I'm hoping
that we'll take connect them I
would.
I was a little disappointed that
ninety percent of them are
starting in the house I mean you
have one of their bills and I I
think that's it there might be
another Senate Bill I think
Senator work presents sponsor
one
but these are significant bills
that the judiciary spring
forward and so I hope we can we
can hear from her fifteen killer
about all of those and I'm
fortunate there and starting in
the house but hello.
So I think one of the chief
judges here Wednesday to talk
about the issue salaries which
is the general revisiting of the
bill we passed here with strong
bipartisan support put on the
governor's desk.
so we'll ask you to suggest
that's very first question I ask
is why she started these bills
in the house.
I'm sure there's some strategy
behind that but I'm assuming you
that for her we have we want to
do fees I think is just spot on.
Look at Monaco smiling back
there's.
That's a that's the agency alts
the issue is you used to be on
our Judiciary Committee staff
once upon a time too so.
You just can't get it out of
your skin can use distance gets
under skin.
to work on these issues that are
part.
So you're right of center we've
met several times the Chief
Justice and I met sometimes we
met just recently again with Mr
Lott according to so we know how
urgent I I didn't know she
started using the house that was
not a topic of discussion so I'm
sure they have some strategy
over there.
But the.
You know us will treat the house
built with the appropriate
consideration do.
