I'll be probably hearing those
tomorrow night, um, which a
regular scheduled day for this
committee. So Senator Sher, you
have Senate Bill 510. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair. So Senate Bill
510 is an omnibus crime package
bill that deals with um the time
that uh.
The statute of limitations and
when you can deal with uh human
trafficking increases
penalties for sexual
exploitation of children, stash
houses a crime, uh, and it
addresses youth, youthful.
offenders as well as competency
in evaluation before you go to
court, and with that stand for
question.
Thank you, Senator.
Uh, so my.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Sher, and I know there's a lot
of provisions in your bill, uh,
It's, you know, some are good,
some are bad, but in this late
hour,
It could be nearly impossible to
come to consensus on a lot of
those provisions.
Um
But we, but we, we definitely
need to pass something. So
So I have a substitute, a
proposed substitute bill that
deals with some of the sections
of law that your bill touches.
And would ask the folks to um we
can vote for discussion.
So I moved that, that uh for
discussion in Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate.
Oh good. I move that we uh do
not passinel 5:10, but we passed
the Senate bill Senate Judiciary
Committee Substitute for
Extended Bill 510 for
discussion.
Thank you, Senator
asked to explain the subject.
Thank you. uh, this is the
language Mr. Chairman, um, that
we, that we passed earlier, but
even better. This is the
language that we discussed in
Senate Bill 166, which
Which changes the definitions of
harm to self and harm to others,
it incorporates the original
bill 166, the amendments that we
did in this committee and also
an amendment that was proposed
uh by the NCLU, uh,
To, to capture the
Uh, someone that has suicidal
ideation. So I think uh
So with that I'll stand for
questions.
don't have anyone registered in
support or opposition, so
members of the committee,
Senator sure, yes, thank you,
Mr. President. I'm not sure this
is exactly a friendly amendment,
but it's friendly enough for
tonight.
enough for what tonight
that's the spirit.
Uh, uh, senators anyone with
questions.
echo.
I move it do not pass on Senate
Bill 510 and a do pass on Senate
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 510.
Right
What with motion made the
motion, right, we, well, we had
the motion already, so the
motion is for the do pass on it
can be substitute any further
discussion, anyone else?
All right. Is there any
objection to the do pass
motion done. There's a do pass
with the sub on Senate Bill 510.
That completes our business
tonight. Thank you all for being
proud and getting this work
done, uh, being expecting
another meeting Thursday in
