And we're going to put her to
work. I know, I know, I know.
That's why I wanted to begin the
hazing process immediately from
before she sat down.
But
So
Saville 85 is very similar to a
bill that this committee
Has the Senate passed 2 years
ago. Uh, it does a number of
different things and what um
Senator Bergman's and I will do
is go through the various
sections, walk through, um,
Again, this is a continuation
of.
The work that I've done to
close.
Loopholes as a result of the
changes that have occurred over
the years with our election
code.
Uh, just for a little bit of
history when I first came to the
Senate in 2009.
Uh, working with Senator DD
Feldman. We were able to finally
uh put campaign limits for the
first time in New Mexico, we
used to be one of the only
states with no campaign limits.
Uh, we finally got those in
place and then in 2010, the US
Supreme Court and the Citizens
United decision, I decided to
create a whole new category of
independent groups that did not
have any limits.
And ever since that time, we've
been trying to.
Navigate with our campaign and
closed loopholes and so I'm
gonna talk about those sections,
Senator Bergman's will talk
about sections in this bill,
which are cleanup and then also
sections specifically dealing
with campaign reporting uh time
frames and, and we'll address
those. So I'll address sections
135, and 6, and then Senator
Bergman's will address 25 and 24
and 7, and then we'll stand for
questions.
So I'll just go through the 1st,
1st, the first section is the
definitional change. It's on
page 7 of the bill.
Uh, and it's, uh, changing the
definition of expenditure. The
problem with the current
definition of expenditure is
that there's a circular
argument, uh, that basically
could have money that's that's
expended during a certain window
and for a political purpose
being excluded when you walk
around that definition and not
getting to the relevant
disclosure provision that's in
Section Q, the existing law,
just as a reminder, independent
expenditure committees.
Um, are really, there's a very
limited window when we can
require disclosure if there's
express advocacy for or against
a candidate, that can happen or
there's a 30 and 60 day window,
30 days before a primary, 60
days before a general election
when if those um expenditures
are made during that window,
there needs to be disclosure, so
that's what section one does.
Section 3 is again to address a
problem that we have seen in the
ethics commission uh has dealt
with.
And basically, under the current
law, there's an exception for
disclosure by an independent
expenditure committee when the
donor, uh, or contributor as it
is under the current law, we're
changing that to donation, but
when it, when a donor
specifically requests that their
fund, that their donation not be
used for an independent
expenditure under the current
law, uh, you would think that
that would take care of the
issue. The problem is what
happens when the
entity that receives that
donation goes ahead and makes an
independent expenditure anyway.
So what's happened is that we've
had that situation. So this new
section creates on page 14, line
12, a segregated bank account,
and the key thing is if you're
getting those donations that
are, um, and, and the donor
specifies it's not to be used
for independent coordinated
expenditure.
Put it into the separate bank
account and a segregated bank
account, and it has to, those
two things have to happen
together. So the donor's got to
say I don't want this used, and
it's got to be in a separate
bank account when that happens,
then that does not get, uh,
disclosed. And of course, the,
the money is not being used,
which is what we're trying to
get to.
Uh, the second two sections deal
sections 5 and 6, deal, they're
basically a proactive, uh,
provisions to address.
A case that at the federal level
involving Ted Cruz, so Ted Cruz
went and loaned his campaign a
whole bunch of money and then
charged some interest for that
loan and then paid back the
interest with donations.
So section 5, on page 22 line.
Uh, 21 basically states it's
unlawful for any person to make
an expenditure to, to repay a
loan that is received from the
candidate that includes a rate
of interest. So in other words,
you still can loan your campaign
money, you just can't charge a
rate of interest and then pay
back the interest using campaign
contributions.
And section 6, is just an
additional disclosure that's
required, uh, so basically this
is the contents of the report of
expenditures and contributions
on page 24, section G is amended
to add right now, you need to
disclose the amount of each
unpaid debt and the ident the
identity of the person to whom
the debt is owed. So if you make
a loan to your campaign, that is
disclosed currently.
But this also requires
disclosure of the terms of any
loan that a candidate makes to
the candidate's campaign
committee and evidence of any
loan that a candidate makes to
the campaign, the candidate's
campaign committee again to
require so that there is, so we
can
Transparency, you can understand
what that looks like. So, um,
again, what is the term, if
there is a term,
Is there any kind of uh note or
something to evidence that that
loan is being made, uh, again,
just so that it's, it tracks
again and, and requires
disclosure of those. So that's
what sections 135, and 6 do, and
I'll yield to my co-sponsor
senator Bergmans for sections
24, and 7, which she has a lot
of experience with having worked
specifically with reports and
time frames.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Peterworth, and good
afternoon committee members. Um,
I'll just start right with
section 2, which is a simple
change. It simply amends.
But could be now an outdated
section of statute that
requires, um,
Descriptions of expenditures
when using telephone calls for
campaigns. It also adds
electronic communication so that
it would now include emails or
text messages.
What Section 4 does is basically
alter the
Reporting timelines and a few
other small things for
candidates.
Right now, uh, the biannual
reports for candidates not in an
election year are due in April
and October. And what this
changes that the, is that
they'll be due in June and
December, which is a more clear
time frame for the average
person and not randomly April
and October.
Um, the next amendment.
Other than clarify. So the next
minute it clarifies that if
reporting dates on a holiday,
then it's due the next business
day.
And it also changes that if or
where I'm making the changes
you.
I say, so section 4 starts on
page 15.
And so I was right.
The next change in that section.
Is the amendment that clarifies
if it's on a holiday, then it's
due on the next business day.
Then the next changes for
supplemental reports, and those
are the ones that are due right
before an election, an election
day and have to do with amounts.
Right now, it's
It says $1000 or more for
Candidates
The legislature or disapplied
and 3000 for the governor and
that's bringing it down to equal
$1000 for all candidates.
The next amendment changes the
primary schedule of the 4th
primary date, which now that
period will end on primary day
in that report is due 70 days
later.
It also does the same thing for
the general report, which in the
4th period now will end on
election day with the report
doing, being due 7 days later.
And that creates a new reporting
period, which will be from the
day after the general election
until December 31st first.
Do 7 days later.
Um
It also creates a new section
that if you receive money during
the prohibited period while the
legislator is meeting, then you
have to require, or you have to
file another report that says
what money was received. Not
solicited just received.
And
It also deletes a section that
currently allows inactive packs
to close the registration with
the SOS office.
Even if they have a bank account
that's still open, that sections
deleted and so PAs will be
required to continually file
reports as long as they have a
bank account that's open.
And then that's basically
section 4. If we move on to
section.
6.
Which starts on, I didn't, no,
sorry, section 7, which starts
on page 24.
This
It clarifies who um can and
cannot or who the prohibited
period applies to and
It includes the part that now
also cover covers candidates for
lieutenant governor, as well as
legislative, and that
legislative caucus committees
and other candidates cannot
solicit nor accept
contributions.
The change that's on page 25.
On line 3 and 4.
Right now, um,
Let me make sure I have it
right. Right now, um,
Yeah, and candidates or
incumbents.
A campaign committee and a
legislative caucus, caucus
committee cannot accept
contributions.
And they already cannot solicit
them.
And it also says down on line
21, that
You cannot accept these
contributions from lobbyists,
lobbyist, employers, incumbent
or candidates campaign
committees or political
committees. So it's also putting
a restriction on who can accept
the contributions and it
basically applies to the people
in the roundhouse.
And then the final period or the
final changes.
Basically just describe.
Who these restrictions apply to
you and also
Relist and add lieutenant
Governor.
It does also do one other thing
where um
It gives it so on page 27.
And that first subsection B.
It says that right now the
governor and lieutenant governor
are prohibited from, or sorry,
just the governor.
Um, are prohibited from
Campaigning and accepting
contributions.
21 days after.
The session ends, but this also
says or after all the bills have
been signed or veto.
And that's
All the sections I had.
So Mr. Chair with us today is
Lindsay Bachmann from the Mexico
Secretary of State who can
certainly.
Help us, uh, as we get into more
specifics about this. But again,
I think this is a
An important cleanup bill, but
also a super important bill to
continue narrowing, uh, and
clarifying when disclosure of
independent expenditures needs
to happen. And with that, we're
happy to stand for questions.
Oh, yeah.
let's see. Are you all here?
OK.
Um, thank you committee members
and chair for the opportunity to
speak in support of Senate Bill
85. My name is Molly Swank. I'm
the executive director of Common
Cause New Mexico.
Common cause is supportive of SB
85 because it closes major
loopholes in the campaign
Reporting Act, including
disclosures and the timing of
the disclosures, expanding the
definitions of expenditures and
contributions and abuse of the
opt-out provisions for
contributors currently in the
campaign Reporting Act.
Altogether, these gaps in our
laws have allowed for
organizations and individuals to
participate in elections with
high levels of anonymity and
common cause fights for
transparency and ethical
accountability at all levels of
government.
Common causes also in support of
modernizing the reporting system
for campaigns with the
additional electronic filing,
which increases efficiency
within our, um, electric
election administration systems.
I hope you will vote in support
of SB 85 with the DuPA
recommendation. Thank you.
Anyone else?
Oh
Richard Mason? Nope.
I don't think so. I think women
voters? You leave one voters.
All right.
That's who we have registered in
support, no registered
opposition. Right, you can go to
members of the committee. Many
questions.
They're doing.
And
Mr. Chair, I don't have any
questions. I'll just say that I
think that this bill is
closing is a common sense
approach to closing,
um, a lot of loopholes in our
campaign financing scheme, and
just making it run better and
run more efficiently and
increasing transparency for the
public, um, changing the dates
of
Those reports so that folks can
see.
Right before we're going into
session.
Who has been donating to us. Uh,
so the folks can see right after
session.
Who donated to us during
session. I, I think that is
probably information that, that
the public would like to have.
Um, and so I think this
increases transparency, closes
loopholes, um, and, uh, it's
just a, a common sense cleanup,
which is probably why I passed
the Senate last.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Others, many questions.
ment s
Masters, is that a is that a
hand? Yes, thank you, Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Senator, Senator
Bergman's gentle lady, the um
couple questions, um,
But it really kind of ties up
any confusions with regards to
the prohibitive period.
Uh, which is a good thing.
But I draw your attention to the
bottom of page 25.
accept a contribution from what,
why don't we just stop it there?
Why don't we just say accept a
contribution.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator,
um, I'm talking about line 21,
Ms. Turmer
as well, um, as far as I
understand.
The intentions of the original
drafting was not a part of, um,
it, it applies to the people
that are in the building of the
roundhouse.
The people that are working
together day to day to pass this
legislation.
So that's why that's specific.
And
so Mr. Mass, so right now, um,
Section one.
Which is we can't solicit.
That's, that's the current rule.
Right now, we can receive
contributions.
From individuals, from
lobbyists, from
Campa interesting the campaign
committees, that's, that's the,
the leadership packs or
political committees. You can't
solicit, but you can receive
them. I think the bar here is
new.
The bar here is new to add this,
so, so now this particular, but
it's not saying an individual
can still make a contribution.
And I think part of the
discussion and senator
Stephanics.
Really helped shape this two
years ago.
And wanted this distinction
because if.
Somebody, a constituent makes a
contribution during that window,
um,
You don't solicit it, but it
comes in.
That's allowed. The other thing
is we have a whole now and I
think this happens more in the
house and and.
Uh, senator can address some of
that from her experience, but
there's a lot of also monthly
contributions that are set up on
a recurring basis. I think I
have one of those. Um, so I'm
not doing very well, but I think
there was a, there was a
specific desire not to have to
have those stop and then reload.
And so that's the basis for the
distinction.
Mr. Chairman Senator. No, I get
the second point. I get the 2nd
point. The first point, I just
think um
It uh
You know, it should be
everybody, but those, those, you
know, those monthly
contributions, we would know
what to do with those, so I, I,
I can see that. Um, and then
also, um,
With regards to uh
2.
So we talk about an incumbent.
Or, or a person who is a
candidate for an office. I mean
was a candidate like let's say
we're talking about in January.
Does that mean was a candidate.
In November and lost or they're
currently going to be a
candidate.
And, you know, 20 months from
now.
Mr. Cherry, they are candidates,
so they're running, and right
now we got a situation where we
got one set of rules for the
incumbent and a different set of
rules for the candidates, so
there's no bar right now on
someone who's running against an
incumbent during this period. So
this is leveling the playing
field and basically saying for
an incumbent.
Or candidates, so the candidates
also are going to have to abide
by this. So you're in a
situation where again you're
making that that distinction
what you may want to consider,
uh,
Mr. Chairman, senators on 26 is
instead of saying a person who
is a candidate, a person who
will be become a candidate or
who will
Be a candidate, it's like, well,
I wasn't a candidate then. I, I
just decided to run next week or
whatever. So anyway, uh, you may
want to just think about that as
this moves forward and then, um,
And, uh, I think.
I think that's it. And then
lastly, what I asked you to
consider um
I, I believe, uh, is that the,
the dates of filing.
You know, these, these campaigns
are so expensive, you know,
everyone needs a a bookkeeper or
a CPA.
And I think the filing is due.
you know, it doesn't say the
date and statute. It says the
2nd Monday, so it's right on
April 10th or so.
A lot of CPAs are super, super
busy that week with the federal
tax deadline on April 15th, so.
Um
You may want to consider moving
that back a week.
But anyway, thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
You
You, Mr. Chairman, I saw this
rule, uh, this, um, exec bill
come before us and rules, and I,
I would certainly consider it a
cleanup bill and voted to
support it. I see nothing wrong
or concerning about the bill at
all, but I want to push back a
little bit on the, the message
that it's a transparency bill
and so follow me here, we're
gonna pick on the house for a
little bit, but we have a house,
Democrat super PAC. I'm talking
about the NMHDCC who shows in
the last year's contributions
doesn't show any contribution.
to any particular candidates,
but they gave almost $400,000 to
advance legislative leadership
services. It's an LLC. Super PAC
makes a $400,000 payment.
The same
Payment is made from the speaker
fund. They pay almost a million
dollars to advance legislative
leadership.
And also doesn't disclose any of
the races or candidates that
benefited from that. So I would
say one, there's two concerns
when I look over the, the
analysis of these campaign
finance reports, it seems that
we have two super PACs that are
operating on behalf of House
Democrats based on the
contributions that they're
making. And 2, how do we shine a
light on these nuclear.
End kind contributions to a
candidate because that's where
the secrecy is, is through the
super PACs. So how can we
include them in a transparency
building?
So first of all, I would note
Mr. Chair and Senator Brantley
that uh you have correctly
pointed out the chamber that
does does things that way. It's
not this chamber we've, I think
both sides, uh.
Democrats and Republicans here
have rated a specific campaign
caucus committee.
And then reported those
contributions coming out of that
committee. The House has set up
a different structure, uh, using
a, a limited liability company.
I'm not completely familiar with
that and maybe, yeah, so.
It's a legitimate
Question that involves not an
independent expenditure
committee because that's a,
that's the separate deal. This
is a reporting act, they, they
are reporting their
contribution, but they're
running it through the limited
liability companies and I think
you, you're raising a, a
legitimate.
Question, I don't think this
bill is peeling back the layer
on the limited liability
company, and I just don't have
enough information about exactly
how that structure works, other
than to say,
These are the kind of things
that this is always a work in
progress and we need to
Kind of as these different
things are brought up, look at
them and figure out if there's,
if there is something that needs
to be fixed.
Uh, so I just don't know enough
specifics about how they, how
they do it other than here in
this chamber, both, both of the
Democrats and Republicans.
Do the reporting the way.
You know that it's more
typically done.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
gonna pick on your co-sponsor
for a little bit because she is
the treasurer of that super PAC
or former treasure if I'm right.
So I'm gonna pick on you just a
little bit. Thank you. Welcome
to the Senate, so we can, we can
pick on the house a little bit I
have things to add, but, but,
but if we're going to really, if
we're really gonna shine a light
on this, this does very little
for it. This is reporting and I
understand this is kind of some
clerical cleanup work, but this
is not a transparency bill.
There are loopholes that both
sides are using and I, I don't
think this bill, frankly,
Senator Wirth goes far enough to
push back on some of the IEs in
their reporting, but, but what's
happening?
ending with the super PACs,
paying an LLC and I'm, and I,
and I'm gonna bring up the point
that you have 2 super PACs
operating.
Under the guise of House
Democrats, which has always been
a concern that the Secretary of
State is never one of them is
identifying as a super PAC.
Right?
Their reports are, are exceeding
contribution limits. If I could
clarify Mr. Chair and Senator
Brantley, the NMHDCC that you
cited is just a regular
political committee. It, it has
the, it's, it's just a path that
meets the same and has the same
contribution thresholds as any
other pact that exists. I can't
think of any other Republican
ones off the top of my head, um.
But it's just a regular pack
within the Secretary of State's
system and within the campaign
finance rules. The maximum,
maximum it could accept the
last, this last election period
was $5500.
In the primary in $5500 in the
general period, so it's not a
super PAC for sure. The
speakerphone that you cited,
that is the House Democrats
Legislative Caucus Committee,
which
Because there are 4 of those
packs that exist in each
chamber.
One for the Republicans, one for
the Democrats in the House and
the Senate, and those can accept
5 times the amount of a regular
pack, which last year, last
election cycle was $27,500 in
the.
Total election cycle.
No, you, for the primary and the
general.
Both.
And there's the LCC that you're
signing as well is a political
consulting company, just as any
candidate is allowed to use, and
they do report their in-kinds to
the candidates they work with.
You just have to look for them.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. I'm,
I'm gonna visit with um uh Mr.
Chairman.
And and Senator, I mean a visit
with the Secretary of State on
this and one that I have
reported on the Republican side.
This is, this is not abiding by
laws because I'm gonna tell you
that right now, let's pick on
this NMH uh DCC, they made
contribution limits to advance
legislative leadership services
that exceeded a contribution
campaign limit maximum of 5200
per per electable Democrat
candidate at the time per cycle.
And didn't report who the who
the.
To to the donor, right, who the
uh beneficiary of that campaign
is. So they're receiving more
money than campaigns were
happening at a 52 times.
The campaign limit.
We're gonna get it in the weeds
on this, but I would like to
visit because there's another
pack that I've had great
concerns with on our side that's
operating very similar, but my
point to say this is that these
super PACs, this isn't a
transparency bill, but I would
welcome and, and maybe I lead
the effort to actually expose
where who, if you wanna really
get into the roots of which
campaigns are bene benefiting
and from who, it's within the
super PACs. I can name out
almost $2 million right off the
bat that does not.
disclose who the beneficiary of
those campaigns were through
LLCs and we're doing it on both
sides.
If I could just clarify a little
further, um, I think the amount
you're citing as an expenditure,
and we have no limits on
expenditures.
Like a pack or a candidate can
spend their money.
Pretty much any way they want
within
Certain rules on donations.
But I see Lindsey looking like
she wants to clarify.
So just, um, uh, chair members
of the committee to clarify
there are specific provisions in
the code that would speak to
what you can spend it on, um,
but in terms of limits, there's
no limit on it an expenditure,
their contribution limits. Yes,
and the limits is what I meant.
You can, however much you spend
on what you're allowed to spend
on, there's no limit to.
And so
And so I also do want to push
back a little bit on the message
that this is not a transparency
bill, Section 3 is closing a
huge loophole that's being used
right now when individuals have
made donations or contributions
to an independent expenditure
committee and they've said they
don't want to use for an
independent expenditure. But
what happens is the independent
expenditure turns around and
ends up using that money.
Or independent expenditures by
requiring the second segregated
account, now we're gonna know
exactly what's being used and
and those, you know, you
couldn't do what they're doing
right now, so I mean, again, I,
I do think that there's pieces
of this that certainly are
designed.
Or that transparency component
with respect to the independent.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um
I'm bothered by some of it, but
I'll get used to it.
Um
Uh
I think there was, there was a
candidate.
In this last election that was
in debt.
And uh,
Uh, they came to visit me
January and I wrote them a
check.
And with this, I couldn't do
that.
Right? That's the way I'm
reading it.
Mr. Chair, Senator Stewart, if
they were current incumbent
or not a not a current incumbent
were a candidate with campaign
debt.
Um, but page 24 and 25. It's
unlawful.
During the prohibited period,
4 and incumbent.
Or candidates campaign
committee, legislative caucus
Committee to solicit or accept a
contribution from many of these,
so that person should not have
have accepted that check.
Am I reading it wrong?
So, Madam Chair, I think that
Mr. Chairman.
Madam prote.
I think certainly.
If I know my lawyer, I would
tell you to make your
contribution after the session
is over.
Bye.
Uh, it's a little tricky here
because that person no longer is
a
right. I think there's an
argument going the other way
that you could do it.
Right
with our good friends of the
Secretary of State and the
ethics commission around to do
is wait till after the session's
over and then help that
candidate out.
Yeah, no, I get it. It's just
one of the reasons I don't like
it.
So here's a, here's a question.
Uh, if we pass this,
When does it go into effect?
It's if it's just 90 days after,
then we're still with the April
and October next year, or at
least we're with the April.
I mean, I like the tune and
December, that I think is a real
uh good change. I want that to
go into effect. I don't like the
rest of it, but I want that to
go into effect, but it wouldn't
go into effect.
Uh, essentially, at least for
the April, would it be the
latter one?
I mean, would it be instead of
October, would it be the end of
December?
Yeah, I let the our expert
answer that, but I do believe
that is how.
It would work.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, yes, so next year if
this passes, we would file in
April and then we would do the,
the, uh, 7 days after the
election cause it's a local
election. No, 7 days after
December 31.
OK. All right. Thank you. Thank
you for all this work.
As explore something a little
bit. I uh
First of all, I want to also
join Senator Wirth to suggest
that I think this is a
transparency bill, but I also
agree with Senator Brantley,
it's far from full transparency,
um, and we have a long way to
go, and I don't know if we'll
ever get there that seems to be
that, you know, Senator Wirth,
when you first came here, 20
plus years ago, this was your
cause, right, this campaign, uh,
transparency finance laws, and
here we are 20 years later, and
every time we seemingly pass one
law, and somebody figures out a
way to get around it, right? And
And a loophole and this is the,
it seems like a never ending
game, all of those 20 years, um,
there are some people who have
reported the demise of the
American democracy.
Yeah.
Excuse me, from the decline of
the country, um, and I don't
want to believe that. I like to
be an optimist, but if there was
a uh beginning of the decline of
the American democracy and
experiment. It began on January
21st of 20.
10.
Uh, which is the day that
Citizen United was decided
because with Citizen United now
we have an individual, probably
the wealthiest, I think the
wealthiest person in the world,
who spent 20 and $77 million.
Uh, to, uh, elect the current
president.
Um, and if you got the money to
burn, and you have billions of
dollars and $277 million is a
drop in the bucket, and let's
face it, that individual could
certainly guarantee the election
of the next governor of the
state of New Mexico or any
number of senators here with,
with, you know, pocket change,
right? Uh, something in the, in
the sofa.
Um, and so, you know, with
Citizen United, you all are
getting ready to get elected
governor over there.
Call up Elon Musk and, and tell
him you'll tell him you'll give
him a few tax breaks or a couple
of contracts to launch out of
the spaceport and you're, and
you're a governor, right? Um,
and it all began really on
Citizen United I don't know how
we correct that except by some
real boldness from
Uh, the states and, and maybe
trying to overturn Citizen
United in some way, and that I
know nobody wants to even.
Suggest that, and it's certainly
not going to happen in the next
4 years, because you have Elon
Musk effectively running the
government, right, today, uh,
almost indiscriminately, and I
know that's off the subject,
but, but we're, we're not, we're
not, we're making some progress,
but let's not kid ourselves.
And, and you're right, Senator
Brownlee, everybody's figured
out ways to do it. And, and I
appreciate very much your
candor, you're saying both sides
do it and both sides do it,
right?
Um
And so we're doing it as
Democrats and we're in the
majority, so we raised more
money and we do it more
effectively as we're in charge
over here in New Mexico. You
guys right now in DC are doing
it more effectively, uh, in, in
your own way, cause you guys are
in charge over there, so
whoever's, whoever's in charge
kind of figures out their own
way of, of making this work for
them, and I think that's
unfortunate. Uh, I did, um, on a
specific issue, um, Senator
we're the, you may wanna help me
to understand. I, I was amused
but not at all surprised to hear
your
attribution to Ted Cruz.
Uh, our neighboring senator in
Texas who figured out a way to
make money out of this, it
sounds like, I loading himself
money for his campaign and then
charging himself a rate of
interest, which I assume is a
lower rate of interest that he's
charging himself and he was
probably earning on his.
stock portfolio or investments,
right? And, and uh he's parting
the spread, right? Uh, gee, I
never thought of that. Uh,
I wouldn't have done it, but
it's, you gotta give the guy
credit, uh, figured out how to
make money, uh, on the slide
here. So I appreciate you're
trying to change that, but I'm a
little concerned about it. First
of all, look at that page 22,
so.
I'm carrying a campaign debt.
Uh
And so
And I'm not charging myself
interest.
would never dream of judging
myself. I just, but, but you're,
the way it's worded is that it's
unlawful for any person to make
an expenditure to repay a loan
that was received from a
candidate that receives a rate
of interest. Are you, what, what
you're saying here is that um
it's unlawful to repay the loan
at all, and it seems to me like
you wanna, you wanna make it
unlawful to repay the interest,
right? And am I reading that
wrong or am I reading it too
quickly? Isn't that what you're
really trying to do, is you're
trying to prohibit the payment
of interest, but, but it says
it's unlawful to repay.
alone has received, that
includes the rate of interest of
the loan so the loan includes
the rate of interest, and you
can't repay the loan at all.
Correct, I mean, if, if it's a
and it's important that it's.
A loan that is received from the
candidates. We got to make a
distinction here. So if you go
borrow money from a bank, that's
a different deal. This is, this
is dealing with the camp, but
it's clearly if you make a loan
to yourself,
And you're charging a rate of
interest, you can't pay. That's
right forfeit the whole loan,
right? The principal, the
principal and the interest
we're trying to do is get in
front of Ted Cruz here in New
Mexico. Yeah, I got it. I got it
and and but
Um
Yeah, I, I mean, you're, you're
doing two things, I think you're
saying, you know, seeing it,
you're saying it's unlawful. So
what's the consequence of, and
again, I don't think, you know,
I'm not doing that, and I don't
know anybody's gonna do this,
but I just want to understand
that we're making new lawyer,
what is the consequence which
says unlawful to do this.
What's that what you go to jail
or?
What, what happens? Those are
great questions, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, um.
Um, and, and there are, um, a
number of rules that we have
promulgated at the Secretary of
State to deal with excessive or
prohibited contributions or
expenditures, um, and, and what
I hope the committee hears is
the way that that works is once
there's sort of a violation or a
potential violation flagged by
someone to the Secretary of
State's office or by a member of
the Secretary of State's office
team. Um, there is an effort to
seek voluntary compliance. We
are compelled by statute to
seek.
vol un t ary compliance, um,
and, and the way that that works
is there's a number of ways, um,
in which someone, for example,
that if the, um, um, prohibited
um contribution came from an
individual. They could return
the money to the individual. So
there are different rules for
different types of contributions
that are received and in the
same way with loans, um, there
would be a way to address it,
um, in that voluntary compliance
period.
which we are required to. Thank
you.
I, I understand you're trying to
get a voluntary from us, I'm not
still really sure what the
consequences you violate this.
Obviously, 11 consequence is,
you're not gonna get the loan
repaid at all, but they're the
answer to this one, do you? So,
Mr. Chair, if the Secretary of
State's office was not able to
obtain voluntary compliance. I
one, it could be kicked to the
State Ethics Commission, who has
concurrent jurisdiction over
campaign finance. Also, uh,
1-20-22 makes any violation of
the election code of petty.
misdemeanor.
Um, and this would be a, that
would be a violation of the
election code.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I couldn't
hear the last part of that.
Could you just repeat that maybe
facing this way rather than that
way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator.
So, so the last part of what I
was saying was that, uh, by
statute, any violation of the
election code is a petty
misdemeanor. So,
I would hope that it would not
get to that point, and it could
be uh resolved with voluntary
compliance, but
That would be a consequence that
is out there.
And if I may, Mr. Chair, thank
you for that, Senator Duha. um,
there are additional civil
penalties within the Campaign
Reporting Act itself, that
could, um, result in fines up to
$1000 so there are other penalty
sections. It depends on what it
is, and it does depend on the
enforcement authority of the
SEC, um, saying that there was a
violation in doing their
investigation, etc.
And um, so I still have the
floor on that one. So I
appreciate the clarification. I
don't know what to do, and I
know just whispering I just want
to propose an amendment. I
understand your intent and um
again, I'm hoping this language
never gets applied, right? I
think the goal here is to deter
anybody from doing that. And
again, in all the years I've
been there, I've never heard of
anybody doing this.
Uh, charging their, you know,
charging their campaign interest
on the loan they make to the
campaign,
wow.
People are creative, I guess
sometimes that Ted Cruz guy,
something else. All right, um,
and then the other, um,
Uh
The question I had is on page
15.
You're exempting certain
donations.
And on page 15 at about line 12,
subparagraph 5 exempts a
personal loan from a family
member or repayment of a loan.
That's a, that's a loophole that
caused me some concern.
Uh, uh, and I understand it's,
it's, it's an exemption to what
does not include a donation.
That seems like a pretty,
you're, you're gesture what
your, your enemy. I didn't even
ask the question, but you seem
to know where I'm going, so go
ahead, tell me what, what I'm
gonna ask. I think the thing
that's important is that this
only applies to independent
expenditure committees a
donation to an independent.
There was a lot of confusion on
the floor of the house about
this provision and thinking it
applied across the board, it
doesn't. It's designed solely in
that.
In that window, and, you know, I
can have Ms. Bachman go through
the
A logic for that, uh, in, in
this window, but it's not gonna
affect.
Your individual campaign or
reporting pack. It's just on
independent expenditures. Right,
but I could, I could make a
contribution to for an
independent expenditure, like, a
donation.
And I could do so with a
personal loan from a family
member.
And it's not a donation, then,
isn't that the way I'm reading
this, right?
That's then, then that's not a
reportable donation to the
independent expenditure because
I borrowed the money from a
family member.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that would be a
contribution to the IE and would
be subject to the contribution
rules for independent
expenditures, including limits,
etc. a.
This would make it different
than a donation, yes. OK. All
right. um, again, the lawyer and
he's always trying to figure out
how would I get around the laws
you're making, right? And that's
one of the, that's one of the
exercises we apply here all the
time in this committees is the
language something I can get
around when creative people put
their minds to it uh sounds like
maybe you've, you've covered
that. So, um, I believe those
are all the questions I had, uh,
Senators just one thing I think
it's important because we're
having this discussion and we
did talk about.
Mr. Mosk and his involvement and
whether he could come into New
Mexico. One thing that's super
important that I think needs to
be reiterated.
There can't be coordination.
So you can't have a candidate
running for governor, picking up
the phone and calling up Elon.
And saying, please come in, you
know, there can't be
coordination, so this is if
there's a separate line there
and it's an interesting
we have dealt with this and, and
with it on both sides in the
Senate and in the and on the
Republican side, this has been
an issue. We have these
independent, we are very
careful. You can't have, you
just don't.
You don't know what's what's
happening there and we've, and
the bill that passed in 2019
defined that coordination. I
just want to flag it because I
got the sense that we were
talking I don't want to be
flipping, but it's real easy. I
called my brother and say, hey,
I can't coordinate this, but,
you know, Eon calls is whatever,
one of his, I don't know, I, I
think you would need to be very
careful making that call to your
brother because if you did that
and that got traced back, you're
gonna be having a little visit
to the ethics commission, except
then you'd have to be prosecuted
at the federal level by the
the Justice Department, which
probably won't exist by then.
Anyway, so, uh, you know, I
mean, who's gonna prosecute
Elon?
And just one other thing I want
to clarify too on Citizens
United, man.
Citizens United, I, I agree
completely, Mr. Chair, with what
you said about that decision. It
has made things incredibly
difficult.
Uh, to deal with. But the one
thing in Citizens United that
was unanimous is that we can
require disclosure. And so
you're right, it's a constant
battle. It's kind of whackable.
Trying to figure out what's the
next way to navigate through and
by no means and I appreciate
very much, Senator Brantly,
you're
Pointing out by no means are we
sitting here saying this is the
last time we're gonna be back to
do this. I think it's gonna be
something that's gonna be uh
A work in progress as new
creative ways come up that need
to be closed, and I just
appreciate the the chance to
have the discussion and, and
understanding that we need to
take the steps and keep working
on it.
So thank you, Mr. Chair.
Well, and for amusement, uh,
that our word, and I.
Or are fond of discussing the
founding fathers from time to
time, uh, he likens himself much
more to Thomas Jefferson, and I
like it myself much more to
Alexander Hamilton, which is,
uh, you know, we, and so we have
that tension between the two of
us at times, in fact, it's been
nice enough to give me my
Hamilton socks, and he has his
Jefferson socks, and those of
you that watch the play or, you
know, the show or read the book,
we'll probably understand the
distinction, but um,
Either one of those two guys, or
any one of the founding fathers,
I think would be appalled.
Uh, to see what the democracy
that they created has wrought,
um, that you have an Elon Musk
with that kind of money, um.
Making those kind of
contributions. I hope, I hope
we'll figure out a way to do it.
I hope it'll be both sides,
eventually, cause I, I,
otherwise,
I, I think the democracy is
probably in deep trouble if if
it can be bought, um, and sold
it seemingly seems to be added
to her, but anyway, beyond the
scope of the bill, obviously,
but it's a chance to pontificate
a little bit, so you're looking
at me so puzzled, Senator
Brantley, like
you're looking at me like I'm an
alien from some other planners
Soros or uh there's, there's,
there's, yeah,
Yeah. How much is George Soros
spent to buy a presidency? Any
idea? I don't, I don't know what
your.
Sources, but to buy a
presidency. Any idea?
I don't know, I'm just curious.
Well, we'll have the discussion
will be good. Um, so I know you
want to come back, did you want
to come back to you again? I
just wanna, I wanna follow up on
that coordination piece. I think
that's very, you're, you're
right, while we may somehow be
able to enforce it. It's so
difficult to prove. And so we're
sitting here picking on bad
apples. I'll give you another
example is what we've seen
recently is we have a, we have a
pack, our values pack. It was uh
clearly exceeding contribution
limits when the Secretary of
State comes in on this last
cycle, they
say, oh, I'm sorry we misfiled,
we should be in IE and then we
would be able to give unlimited
contributions. They've been
coordinating for the last 3
campaign cycles. Now they're
identifying as an IE and we have
not given any enforcement.
Really teeth to the Secretary of
State to come in and say, and
here's the consequences. If you
received 1015 $25,000 of in-kind
services perhaps the candidates
themselves would be held
responsible or have to pay it
back and we continue to let
these bad apples operate, and I
think that that's because I'm
not usually quick to wanna, you
know, beef up the authority of
government of any kind, but I
will tell you that when you come
back with this dream bill to
increase transparency. I, I
think that there's a need for
the Secretary of State to have a
a little more enforcement and
come down here, it's easy for
them to pay their $1000 fine
when they're giving $50,000 to
the candidate.
An easy misdemeanor.
easy misdemeanor, I think, so
what they get slapped on the
hand, they continue to operate,
but I, I would support, um,
actually giving some teeth to
the Secretary of State. We're
talking about transparency for
the bad apples that refuse to.
Comply.
And George Soros, yes, he gives
a lot of money to Democrats, Mr.
Chairman.
Yeah, but can you build an
electric car?
bunch of rockets. That masses.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Senators for the 2nd time. If we
can turn to page 22.
may have some language I I
should to consider.
Lines 21 through 23.
So what if we, um,
We strike line 23, we strike
repay on 22.
And it reads, you know, for any
person to make an expenditure to
Pay any interest.
On the repayment of a loan.
That is received from the
candidate.
So it would read, it is unlawful
for any person to make an
expenditure to pay any interest.
On the repayment of a loan.
That is received from the
candidate.
OK
You guys get that?
Anyway, that's friendly.
So, Mr. Chair, just to be clear,
so this would do away with any
loan that accrues interest.
Not just alone you could.
I think that that that's a
we, we wanna make that
distinction. I think there are
scenarios where you want.
You go borrow money from a bank.
No, but Mr. Chairman, but we
would keep the language that is
received from the candidate.
The repayment of a loan that is
received from the candidate.
In other words, it's not the
payment of the loan with with
interest, it's the payment of
the interest that should be
prohibited.
Chair members of the committee
for the purposes of the
Secretary of State because we
would be receiving the loan
terms, um, in terms of
enforcement and transparency,
etc. We would have that
information available. It would
be available to the public, um,
and so whether or not the
legislature decides, um, on the
difference between just
prohibiting loans that accrue
interest full stop or just
prohibiting the repayment.
That's a decision for the
legislature. On the
administrative side, that is my
feedback. So that's.
helpful.
Yeah
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. what's, where's the, where
does it talk about loan terms,
let me just lances that.
24 24 11. OK. 1010 through 13.
Disclosure.
This, um, I just have a question
on this. I I meant to ask it
earlier. Many times.
A candidate will loan the
campaign money and not even know
what's gonna happen next.
Um
Hope that it gets repaid back,
you know, in the future, but
there's really no terms.
From the get go. So what's,
what's the goal of this of G?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, G is is supposed to
capture whether or not a loan,
um, would show um interest. So
like if you did get a loan, um,
that had terms and you would
report it that way, um, to the
Secretary of State's office.
So it just creates a reporting,
um, transparency mechanism for
loans that candidates make to
themselves in an official way,
um, to disclose interest. That's
the goal.
Of the amendment.
Loans from candidates to their
committees, for example, are
permissible under the Campaign
Reporting Act currently and
would be permissible should the
bill pass. The difference the
bill is making is saying you
cannot make a loan as a
candidate to yourself that
accrues interests. It doesn't
touch the existing provisions
that you could still make a loan
to yourself during the course of
the campaign.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. No, I
understand that. It just.
What, what I mean, the terms of
any loan.
Like when it's gonna be paid
back. I mean, if, if, if there's
no interest allowed, it would
never be part of the terms.
So anyway, uh,
But getting back to page 22.
The way it reads just the way it
reads is you can't pay the loan
back, uh, so it just seems kind
of weird, so obviously that's
unfriendly, so.
I'll turn it back over to the
chair.
Yeah, I, I just, um,
I think I've got some to do
next, but just, just in context
that last one.
Um, well, actually different
point, but, but Senator Mash is
referring to is the requirement
that you disclose the terms of
any loan.
Um, and it says that in the
evidence of a loan as I read
that in context, that has to be
done every time you make a
campaign finance report.
And so every time you do a
report, you've got a report also
because if you go back to page
23.
This is under section 119-31.
The contents of a report, right?
So each, each required report of
expenditures and contributions
shall include, and then it goes
down to G and it says the terms
of loan. So just realize you're,
you're putting up a kind of a, a
new additional burden rather
every time I file a campaign
financial report, I've got a
report of terms. And as I said,
I've got a loan to my, myself,
so I'm gonna have to report the
terms loan and provide evidence
of that loan so, you know, I'll
create a note, but then the note
cannot include interest.
to the point that I should make
earlier, I think that's probably
illegal.
I think the IRS requires you to
pay interest on any loan, and I
don't think you can make an
interest-free loan. I may be
wrong about that. I'm not
obviously a CPA but uh my
understanding is you can't make
an interest free loan.
To yourself.
So there's no question that.
Two entities, there is, there's
a whole chart of minimum
required loan percentages.
Yeah, so how do we that if the
IRS says, if I make a load to my
campaign, the RR says, I've got
to charge my campaign interest
on that loan. I don't do it now.
But so I'm probably going to
jail with the IRS, but the good
news is they're getting rid of
the IRS too, so, uh, and, and
you know, and any kind of
enforcement, so nobody's gonna
enforce the tax code anymore, so
guys like me can get away with
all kinds of shit now.
Thank you.
Excuse me, I'm sorry. I know, I
know, I'm on the microphone.
Sorry. I'm sorry, beep, beep.
I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
Everybody, I'm sorry, but um,
but, you know, I mean, let's
face it, I mean, if you don't
have, right, I mean, you've got
the IRS as you've got to charge
interest on a loan.
got to.
Or it's imputed, and you said it
right, so there's a chart and
IRS says you got to do all this
stuff, but we're saying here you
can't do that. You cannot charge
interest on a loan, so what do I
do?
How do I, how do I, who do I
want to go to jail with?
Secretary of State or IRS?
Mr. Chair, I think we need to
get an answer to that and, and
we'll certainly look at it
because again, obviously that to
the extent that that that that's
triggered and that there's not,
I my guess is that there's
somewhere deep in the federal
regulations, there's an
exception because this happens
all the time at state and
federal levels and my guess is
that this, when it's done to a
campaign entity.
There's an exception
You know, would be my, would be
my sense that it's there, but
we'll find that out. Yeah, I
think it's a good question to
which law.
To break. Yeah.
I don't, it's not that funny.
Uh, anyway,
laughing.
Stewart and Sara O'Malley.
Then start doing after that,
right, so Stewart.
O'Malley, do it.
Mr. Chairman, I move with Du
pass, so send it Bill 85.
Thank you, O'Malley and Senator,
uh, we won't cut off the debate
for the motion just yet.
Thank you. I just want to
clarification clarification. If
you get a personal loan.
And it of course has interests
associated with it.
You're saying that you can
Um, get interest, you can
basically
They, uh
Pay the interest on that book.
Through with campaign
contributions. That's what you
say right now.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, the distinction
is under a candidate cannot loan
themselves the money and then
charge an interest rate and pay
it back, so I couldn't loan
myself $1000 charge 10% interest
and then collect campaign
contributions to put that extra
10% into my pocket. But if you
go to a bank,
And you get a loan then you can,
you can pay back the interest.
Using campaign contributions,
and I wanna make sure I'm I'm
not it's a personal loan and
you're loaning it to yourself.
You're lo to yourga, but still a
person alone.
You're saying no. bank is
different though, but the bank
is you're going to a third
party, so the bank is the bank
is the one charging the
interest. So versus.
You, you putting the interest
into your pocket bank is getting
the interest under that
scenario.
OK, so the distinction then is
you happen to have the money.
And you loan yourself that, you
can't charge interest, but if
you go to a bank, get a personal
loan, you can recoup that
interest.
Is that, is that what you're
saying that that's the current
law right now. It's my
understanding is that, and
again, Ms. Bachman can correct
me if I'm wrong, but that is the
distinction that we're making
here.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, so as it's outlined
in the bill, if you give
yourself, um, Senator, if you
give yourself, um, a loan and
you charge yourself interest,
that would be prohibited. If you
went and got a loan somewhere
else, it would be facilitated as
current law is for, for loans
and be subject to contribution
limits under the campaign
Reporting Act. OK. I, I, I guess
I'm just making the distinction
that you're getting a personal
loan and then you're loaning it
to yourself.
You're still doing that. You're
still loaning into your
campaign, but you're saying
because of that, because of the
institution is charging you a
percentage, you can recoup that.
That according to the law.
Mr. Chair, members, there's no
prohibition on that currently.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
We're OK with Wells Fargo making
money, but not Peter Worth,
right, so
Senator Deig and then Senator
Mastis.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So a couple of things, um,
Uh, um, I'm just doing quick
Googling about the minimum
interest, there's a ton of
exceptions. And you, you might,
you might absorb a tax
consequence, potentially.
From, from doing a no interest
loan to yourself, assuming one
of the many exceptions don't
apply, but you're not, there's
not.
It is not unlawful, you, you are
not facing any, you are not
going to prison for, for doing
that. That is a, a financial
decision that, that you would
have to make in the event that
it even applied, which it is not
clear to me that that it does
apply, but I have no CPA
certainly.
Um
The information about needing to
show evidence of a loan. So you
said, I don't think this is a
problem we have here. We
actually don't know.
Because we have not traveled, we
don't know if anyone's done this
because we have not checked it,
but also,
You could lie and say, I could
say I gave my campaign a $10,000
loan, and I didn't, and then
everything I am paying back to
myself is profit.
Um
So, I think we don't want to,
that, that is, and we don't know
if that has ever happened here.
Um, we have, we would have no
mechanism to capture it if it
had.
Um
I, I think
And center masses are you
withdrew your proposed
amendment. Is that correct? OK.
In which case I want to dress
up. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Pretty interesting discussion,
right? Never thought of that one
either. Make up a pretend loan
and repay yourself.
You know, out of your campaign
funds.
by a car company. Um, uh, all
right. Anyone else? interesting
discussion, uh, sir, Ma is still
with you, and then we'll take
that motion. Thank you, chair.
I think um
I think your opinion may be
assuming something the loan is
not, if the loan were to the
Maastis campaign, the Ma
campaign can pay interest on
that loan. But if the loan is to
Antonio Maestas and then Antonio
Ma says loans, it doesn't matter
where I get the money, doesn't
matter if someone loans me the
money and charges me interest.
Under this provision, I can't,
I'd have to eat the interest, so
I, I just want to be clear. I
think Senator Mal is correct. It
doesn't matter where you get the
money as candidate cannot
collect any interest on any loan
the candidate makes, even if the
candidate's paying loan, a loan
interest over here.
I, I, that's the way I read it,
and that's, that's
I believe. Anyway, I just want
to make that point that would
you agree that there's a
distinction between a loan from
Wells Fargo to the candidate.
And alone to the
Campaign committee. If the loan
is to the candidate,
that candidate cannot repay that
interest from the campaign
committee to himself to replay
Wells Fargo, I just wanted to
make that point, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I
think when maybe I can
articulate it this way. If you
are requesting a loan for the
purposes of your campaign, you
should be reporting that as a
contribution to your campaign.
So if you go to Wells Fargo and
request a personal loan, even if
you're, like, if you're going
for the purposes of utilizing
those funds, then they would be
subject to the Reporting Act,
regardless of whether or not the
loan was made directly to the
campaign. Do you know what I'm
trying to say?
You're describing like a way in
which you're, you're splitting a
hair, but if you're going for
the purpose of getting the
campaign, getting money for your
campaign, you should be
reporting that as a campaign
contribution at all.
I'm just telling you straight
up.
You're gonna eat the interest on
that loan. That's what I'm
saying. Anyway, thank you.
Anything else? No? All right. I
appreciate the free for all I'll
just note while it's on, um, my
mind first of all, I apologize
for my language. I, I regret
that very much. I'll try not to
let that happen again. And I'm
looking at this school teacher
to my far left
as a place for me in the
principal's office, no.
Um, the other, the other thing
though too is just so that you,
um, some chairs are really
insisted that you go through the
chair and Mr. Speaker and Mr.
chair and all that kind of
stuff. I'm, I'm a little more
free flowing here, so don't
worry too much about going
through the chair unless it gets
out of hand. If we're talking
over each other and it gets a
little out of control. Oh gave
us back into some kind of
control, but don't worry too
much about the myster, Mr.
Chairman, uh, and so forth, back
and forth. I think it adds a
little more fun to the dialogue.
So we're gonna do pass motion of
Stewart. Is there any objection
to the Du Pass motion?
seeing none, you have a due
past, senators, and
congratulations on your first
bill through the Senate
Judiciary Committee, not nearly
as bad as you thought it was
gonna be, but.
This was fun. Thank you.
Yes, uh, Senator Brantley, you
had a motion as I understand it,
we're gonna take up.
I do, Mr. Chairman, having voted
in the affirmative on Senate
Bill 182 GSD insurance coverage,
it would move to remove that
from the table for reconsider so
that the uh the more accurate
intent of all votes could be
captured in that vote record.
our committee members recall the
particular uh bill. So Brent,
you want to remind us what the
bill was just real quickly,
please. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman,
SB 182 GSD insurance coverage.
That, that was the one that
capped, um, coverage and there
was a tabling motion in the
committee that passed
unanimously was tabled by that
vote, so it remains on the table
with the committee. The motion
is to remove it from the table.
Is there any objection to
removing it from the table.
Righting on that bill is removed
from the table and is um the,
the motion may be for the next,
make it the next order of
business is that accurate,
Senator Brownley? Yes, sir, Mr.
Chairman, so that's the bill
before the committee right now.
Uh, um, the motionen doing.
Oh, now if the motion is said,
place on the the next session
for the committee. I have no
comment on is there any
objection to making the next
order of business, there being
none, the chair then will take
uh motions on the bill, Senator
Doohe.
Mr. I moved the table. The
motions to table.
Is there any objection to the
tabling motion?
There is roll call vote please,
Mr. Chairman.
didn't have a real combo, can
also raise your hand,
we'll have a roll call vote. The
motion is to table a yes vote
would be to table the bill a no
vote against the motion. We'll
do a roll call, Emily Senator.
No.
OK.
Generally
Pa.
Stewart
Very.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes,
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, did you
come here for that?
You gave me twice. They told me
twice.
You got your money's worth
we are so fond of you, Senator,
we thought we'd give you a
couple of shots at it so all
right, um.
Let's take up because we have
the superintendent here. Let's
take up Senator, uh, uh,
Superintendent of insurance, I
think that'll be relatively
quick.
But let's see if I'm right about
that, so, um, stay with us,
Senator Ramos.
Senator Woods, I think you've
got another one on the agenda
too, so we're gonna give me a
second, we're gonna take uh
Senator Duo on Senate Bill 124
and then
Senator Mayer says, I'm gonna
put you last because you're here
with us, right, for the
duration, so.
Senator De, 124, 124.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I have
here with me today, our
superintendent of insurance,
Alice Kane. This is a bill that
would give the superintendent of
insurance subpoena power before
a notice of contemplative action
was issued, uh, to allow her to
do the investigation. She needs
to do to know if that notice
should be issued. Um, this is a
power that we give to uh.
Many of our agencies, many of
our boards and commissions, um,
And if we want the
superintendent to be able to
appropriately regulate the
insurance companies that we have
tasked her with regulating. She
needs to be able to get the
information necessary to do so.
So, Mr. Chair.
That's it, I don't know if the
superintendent wants to add
anything briefly.
Uh, yes, uh.
Mr. Chairman, uh, members of the
committee, uh, and Senator,
thank you very much for
sponsoring this. Uh, we really
feel our hands have been tied,
you begin by introducing
yourself to the committee
members. We have some new
members to the legislature. Why
don't you introduce yourself to
us. I'm sorry. That's right. I'm
Alice. I'm superintendent of
insurance.
At OSI. Thank you.
Good.
Um
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, again, uh, we feel
our hands have been tied uh in
uh the fact that we can't
subpoena records. We've been
asking uh major insurance
companies for information,
sometimes they tell us it's too
burdensome. Other times they
tell us, uh, they just won't do
it. Uh, so, uh, and then, and
you, as you know, we're having a
lot of the issues on the fire,
you know, non-renewals on auto
insurance and uh we really feel
we need this power to determine
whether we should go forward
with.
Uh, a hearing.
Thank you. All right.
Anyone else, Senator, we don't
have anyone registered in
support or opposition on your
bill. Uh, members of the
committee with questions.
you.
They're masters.
Thank you, uh, Chairman Senator
Doix and superintendent, so was
this amended in a prior
committee?
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, in the
rules committee, so there was
originally language in there
that said,
Uh, that would give the
superintendent the ability to
delegate that subpoena power to
staff. We only do that when we
are giving subpoena power to a
board.
Um, I don't, I don't think it's
necessary or appropriate when
we're giving it to an
individual. And so we amended
that language out in the Rules
Committee. OK.
Thank you, and I think I know
what's amended out because we
have a.
I don't think we have the
prior permitted report, but we
have the good old fashioned.
Oh, understood. Thank you, thank
you, thank you. Thank you.
Who else?
Uh, just quickly,
Superintendent, um, with the
subpoena authority extend to,
or, or have you?
requested or obtained documents
to establish the surcharges that
are being imposed to assure the
solvency of the patient
compensation fund.
Um,
Mr. Chairman, um, we have all
the information on the
surcharges ourselves because we
run the PCF and we get the
actuarial report, so we know
what the surcharges are and um
the the, you know, they
recommendations by the advisory
committee of the PCF and then
it's my final decision about
whether the recommendations of
the advisory committee coming
through the actuary are
implemented, and as you know as
many people know over the last
few years, my
predecessors and myself have not
imposed the full recommendation
on the independent providers
because of the, uh, we, we feel
the uh the high cost of
malpractice insurance has, has
been a problem in keeping
providers in the state, and
that's why we've been uh taking
that approach.
So the solvency of the fund has
been assured by general fund
appropriations.
Uh,
Mr. Chairman, uh, there has been
money appropriated over the last
few years to uh support the PCF.
And, and really my question is,
are you,
are Mr. Weeks is give me hand
signals like a baseball game, I
go, Are you trying to tell me
it's been 3 years?
So, I don't know, uh, miss he
was trying to tell me.
Uh, it's about $100 million
isn't it? $100 million. Oh,
thank you, Pat.
Senator Woos be very casual. We
have the Senate Finance members
over here chiming in. You really
want to be on this committee,
don't you, Senator Woods?
Uh, yeah, about $100 million
going into the fund. I'm just,
I'm just asking whether the, the
subpoena authority would extend
to uh records that you may need
to assure the solvency of the
fund, you're, I think you're
telling me you've been able to
get cooperation with all the
documents that you need to
assure that. Correct. OK, good.
Um, any other questions?
Senator Woods, any questions?
Uh, motions do pass motion. Is
there any objection?
OK, without a roll call?
All right. So all members voting
in the affirmative, have a do
pass that are due.
All right, Senator Woods, coming
out of your chair, Senate Bill
220. Again, I appreciate the
consideration of Senator
Maestas.
To let us get some of the
members who don't need to be
here out of here.
Senate Bill 220.
Yeah
Good afternoon, Senator. I, I
tell you, I've really got a good
one this time.
This is Senate bill.
220
It's an LFC endorsed bill that
has two main purposes.
It requires a posting of all
terms of state settlement
agreements on the sun side
portal.
Even those that occur outside
their risk management division.
Risk management division as
voluntarily posted most of them
and information to the sunshine
Portal since August of 2019.
In late 2023, the division began
posting all settlement
information.
Including
Settlements involving minor
children.
Diminished capacity individuals,
however, agencies.
That do not opt in to use the
RMD legal representation can and
have been able to avoid posting
amounts in terms of their
settlement requiring RMD to
appoint a loss prevention review
team, when a deaf or serious
injury or substance substantial
losses is alleged or suspected.
To be the cause, at least in
part of the action.
Of the state agency.
This bill was modeled after laws
in Washington state.
Which also require after action,
loss prevention teams.
Substantial losses are defined
as those over.
$250,000.
Are those identified by the RMD
director.
The team is required to compile
an incident report, including
written responses to the
findings.
Conclusions and recommendations.
From the head of the state
agency involved in the loss.
RMD is required to report all
losses to the prevention team
activities to the legislative
annually.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, this, uh, this also
uh just brings transparency.
To, to.
To the uh
A risk management division and
the, and the actual reporting,
um, which is very well needed.
It, uh, it, it requires everyone
to uh.
To go ahead and uh.
Uh, in the settlements within 30
days into the portal.
And uh, you know, we, we ask
for.
Ramos. All right, and support,
uh,
Chris
Capela
trailer you here? Yeah, there
you go, Chris, I saw you
earlier. I might be loud with
senator. I don't know if I.
We need to do it that's the
first time I've.
For the online folks.
That afternoon chair centers uh
my name is Chris Papaleo. I'm an
attorney, board member of the
New Mexico Trial Lawyers, and
we're standing in support of
this bill.
And we think the
That's of this bill that help
prevent harm to New Mexicans is
really important and as uh
senator was just describing.
Investigation and determining
the cause of harm and
identifying the status of
preventing it in the future we
think are very important to help
Mexicans safe. We're also
supporting this bill, as was
mentioned about transparency.
Again, putting this in front
that everybody understands
what's happening, who's doing
what, where the harms occurring,
why it's occurring and what we
can do to prevent it are
amazing, amazing steps to help
keep New Mexicans safe. Lastly,
I went out on these steps that
mitigate hard to New Mexicans
also mitigate liability to the
And so this is a win-win. We, we
are keeping New Mexicans safe or
identifying things that are
hurting them.
Firing out ways to fix it.
And
Helping the state mitigate its
risk along the way. So for that,
we ask for a due pass on this
bill. Thank you. Thank you very
much. All right, that's all I
have registered, and I
appreciate you registering in
advance, committee members,
questions, Senator Dewey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so I
have a question because right
now, this says state agencies
that enter into an let me back
up. What I hear you saying is
that the intention of this is
that all
All these claims are on the
Sunshine Portal, whether they,
whether risk management assisted
or not.
But right now it only says
That the ones without the
assistance of risk management.
are are posted. And so I was
just looking at the sunshine
Portal Transparency Act, see if
there was something in there
that says the one that, that
would, would require this for
one.
With the assistance of risk
management. I'm not seeing it
there. Am I missing something?
Or do we need an amendment to
make clear that all claims,
whether they have the assistance
of risk management are not, are
posted.
She will answer the question.
But
Let.
Fisher, here is my expert
witness.
Thank you.
Yes. Thank you, sir. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
So currently, risk management,
anything that comes out of this
management fund, risk
management's working under an
executive order from prior
administration to post
everything. They weren't
posting.
We found during the evaluation
that kind of precipitated some
of this that they were posting
settlements that with miners and
most of the settlements that
came out of CA.
in particular
Uh, they started doing that
voluntarily. We don't have any
reason to believe they'll stop.
But there is some
Legal activity that's happening
outside of the risk management
division and outside the risk
management fund, and that's not
being posted at the Sunshine
Portal, so this would
Make that happen, yeah. So, Mr.
Chair, I think we do need an
amendment then, because
otherwise, because I understand
that you are doing it under an
executive order now, but I, it
should be in statute. If we're
putting without risk
management's involvement in
statute, we should make clear
that with risk management's
involvement is also included.
So
Uh, just to make it extra clear
on page one.
At the end of line 20.
Insert the words with or.
So it would read.
Uh, page one.
We're inserting the words with
or
at the end of line. I know it's
out of place for me, but can
you, can you consider this just
striking all of lines 21.
22 through General Services
Department.
So Mr. Chair, that's originally
what I was thinking, but I
actually like the clarification
of making sure that ones that
are done without.
Risk management involved.
are definitely posted. I think
that's a.
That's some good extra
clarification rather than just
Just taking out that without the
assistance of risk management.
And then there's no question
whatsoever that absolutely
everything.
Must be posted. We'll give it
some thought, but I know you're
starting to read a different
amendment, but I think if you, I
think if you just strike 21 and
22 through services would mean
any claims against the state
agency would have to be posted.
And, and Mr. Chair, I, I think
you're right. I'm just thinking
if this goes before a judge, and
they are trying and that issue
comes up.
If we have
That with or without?
That
And there's not so much, they're
not, would not be struggling to
interpret, as you said, our
bills should, on the face of
them, judges shouldn't struggle
to figure out our legislative
intention. We should make things
extra clear. So that was my goal
with that. But I think you're
absolutely right, taking out
that just that line 21 would
Should also accomplish the same
thing. I'm just trying to avoid
bickering about it down the
road.
You're, you have the floor and
you can make the amendment as
you choose. I just wanted you to
consider maybe but with uh our
old colleague in the house she's
called more elegant solution.
Right, right. Uh, sometimes I,
Mr. Chair, I like clarity more
than elegance, um.
So
The amendment would be end of
line 20, page one, just
inserting the words with or. So
it would then read state
agencies that enter into an
agreement to settle a potential
legal or other claim against a
state agency with or without the
assistance of the risk
management division of the
General Services Department
shall within 30 days.
That's the proposed amendment,
Senator, I accept the amendment.
It achieves your goals, which
is.
Transparency, so, uh, from the
proposed amendment, any
Question or discussion.
Right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and, and
Senator Duhe to further clarify.
are suggested amendment looked
exactly like the one that you're
bringing forward with one
exception to strike the word a
before state agency to clarify
with that state agency.
So that subtle potential legal
or other claim against that
state agency with or without the
assistance of risk management
division.
And Mr. Chair, I, I don't think
that changes.
Changes the effect of the
language, if, if, if that's
something the committee thinks
further clarifies.
Uh, I, I, I don't have a problem
with that.
I don't know that it's
necessary, but I don't have a
problem.
The
Bradley, we're on the proposed
amendment.
You want to respond at all.
There's a lot of lawyers in the
room, Mr. Chairman. So what I'm
understanding is that it could
be interpreted that it's
interagency just in our agency
and to clerks to further clarify
that it's just that particular
state agency by changing an A to
a that.
Mr. Chair, I'm not sure if I
understand.
The argument.
Yeah, I, I kind of do, um,
that's more clear than a, I
think it's more specific kind of
probably improves it a little
bit, um.
Um
But it's just my
response to Senator Brantley. So
Brantley to let Brownley still
the floor.
I think, I think it's just a
little more specific, so we do.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
just suggesting to Senator
Duhague that if she also wanted
to further clarify, you could
change in the same amendment to
the A to of that to further
clarify, in addition to the with
with with with or.
Additions.
You doing OK with that change,
Mr. Chair, yes. So we're on the
proposed amendment, um.
Anyone else on the proposed
amendment very objection to
adopting the amendment.
Signing on the amendments
adopted then on the bill as
amended. Anyone else?
Uh, the only thought I have, uh,
Senator, um, as I'm going to
support this, I think it's, uh,
what you've been trying to do
and I commend you for doing so
and I appreciate the, the
lawyers uh support who also
Or behind you supporting
transparency. The, the only
thought that I have is this,
this relates to claims against
the state agency. Um, I hope
that at some point we will maybe
expand it beyond even state
agencies and maybe even discuss
claims against a state.
Official
The example that comes to my
mind, and again, I always get my
myself into trouble here cause
it always sometimes seems
partisan, but on the very waning
days of the last administration,
uh, there were a number of
claims that were settled
involving the former governor.
Um
And I see you nodding your head
affirmatively on that one too, I
think, right? So there were
claims of, of employment, uh,
Uh, hostile work environment, I
think sexual harassment, etc.
They were all settled on the way
out the door and it's kind of
interesting cause earlier Bill,
we're talking about how people
can manipulate the system to
profit, uh, we have, and
certainly one of the things that
a politician could do uh to
financially enhance their
supporters is to entertain uh
lawsuits made against them, uh,
what lawyers will sometimes call
a friendly lawsuit.
Right? So sue me, and I'll get
uh somebody to pay you for the
settlement and uh a number of
people were paid in the very
waning days of the last
administration, uh, some very
large sums.
And uh I know you wouldn't
support that Senator, and I
think all of us, I, I was
surprised how little attention
was paid to that, to to settle
some of those last claims in
the, in the final hours, final
days. Um, so, um, I don't do
that to
To bring up old news, but I
think that that example may be a
case where we want to look at,
at disclosure of settlements,
not just against state agencies,
but against state actors or, or
government officials, um,
because we do that too. We
settle claims against
individuals and, and I'd like to
know.
And I, I can't remember whether
we ever got a disclosure on
those settlements. It was kind
of a little, and I don't, I
don't know if you all know or or
folks on finance. I don't know
if we ever really found out.
Uh, who was, who was being paid
but so I know one of the folks
being paid was a very close.
Uh, personal friend of the
governor for quite some time.
And again, uh, we should, we
should at least be aware of
that.
Think about that.
Uh, we're on a Du pass motion
for Senate Bill 220 as amended.
Oh, we didn't have motion. He
said
thank you, and we had the, we
had the amendment already
adopted due pass is amended.
Senator Dude. Is there any
objection to the due pass motion
as amended.
Singing none, yeah we do pass,
Sara Woods and Senator Ramos,
thank you both.
Good to see you again, that
Ramos 60%.
Yeah, what's the deal? What are
all these bills of yours in our
committee.
All right, we got everybody but
you said this, I think on set at
155.
Yeah
Yeah
Yeah.
Chief.
amendments
Mr. Chair.
One of them I think I need to
sign.
I haven't heard.
So since we had a full hearing
on this bill previously, is that
right?
The committee debate, so we
won't go back through that
again.
last year 12 years ago we did,
yeah. Although we do have
supporters, we have uh.
The chief weasel
here but or not here, but me,
right, the deputy chief in the
back, so see him back there.
Yeah.
I love, I'll move the amendments
for discussion.
All right. Let's take this slow
down just a little bit here. Uh,
So at 155. Let's see.
All right. So, why don't you
just go ahead and with the bill
and then the proposed amendment,
put it in context. Thank you so
much, Chairman honorable
members. This is Senate Bill
100.
55, it amends our embezzlement
statute, as you all know,
embezzlement is kind of
different than stealing it.
You're not taking something
that's not in your possession,
but you're rather converting.
to the person.
You're, you're converting
something to your own use,
something of value in which you
have been entrusted, for
example, uh, someone loans you a
car and you don't give it back.
But anyway, right now, uh, it's
based on the market value of the
of the object that you
embezzled, and the amounts go
from 250, 500, 2500, etc. up to
20,000. What this bill would do
would allow prosecutors and uh
investigators to deal with the
crime of embezzlement in the
aggregate.
So if you were to steal from the
till once a week for 5 weeks, it
would be one crime.
Adding up all the money
embezzled as opposed to 5
distinct crimes. I think it
would emphasize the importance
to law enforcement, uh, as well
as make it simpler to prosecute
and extend the jurisdiction so
that restitution can be paid
back.
Many of the victims are
nonprofits or or small
businesses and uh it's very rare
that someone would go to.
prison unless they have an
extended criminal history, uh,
so I think it's a, it's a good,
it's a good tweak to the
statute. The, the two, there was
concern, uh, Mr. Chairman,
theoretically, if you're a CPA
or
You could embezzle from two
different victims, we want to
make those two distinct crimes.
And so we want to make sure the
language is clear with regards
to that, so.
So that's the amendment 382.1.
And then there, uh, the
effective data on our criminal
laws, we want to make July 1st,
then on July 1st, uh, all the
new criminal laws go into
effect, makes it easier for
lawyers and judges to
To not be confused about when
the when criminal laws go into
effect.
You're 382.1 amendment, Senator,
Senate Bill 155. This is the one
that would insert in 5 places
against any 1 victim. I think
you've adequately explained that
amendment. Are there any
questions on that particular
amendment or the effect?
So my question. I think Mr.
Chair, I, I just, well, I'll ask
a lot of questions actually,
Senator, um, just go ahead and
All right. Anyone else on the
proposed amendment is 382.1.
Is there any objection to the
adoption of that amendment. OK,
they're being on that amendments
adopted. The other amendment you
had was 209.1.
Dula or I, I'm sorry, not delay
but establishing an effective
date.
Is there any question?
On that amendment.
there any objection to the
adoption of that amendment.
9.1, so the Second Amendment
adopted shall all members
supporting that amendment. All
right, as amended.
Uh, I said we had the deputy
chief, I guess there in the
back, right? You're here to
support it. Come on up.
Hello, Mr. Baker, you're next
after that.
My name is.
My name's Bill Wagner. I'm a
deputy chief narcotics
operation.
Uh,
DPS would be helpful to law
enforcement.
Because it would allow a higher
level of charging for ment
crimes that occur over several
days.
It would also give law
enforcement a better tool to
deal with individuals who
regularly.
Professionals are aware of the
threshold dollar.
Between misdemeanors and felony.
Well as between degrees of the
felony.
They often still an amount just
below the threshold to make it a
higher level of crime.
Because they know it will lessen
the criminal penalty.
This, this bill would prevent
the loophole from being used by
offenders or they are charged at
a level equal to the crime
there.
The end result would be a
positive impact on public
safety.
The primary people affected by
this law change would be
defenders.
carry out pri in an order.
Thank you, Deputy Chief.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh Benjamin Baker, I
work at the governor's office,
it's a privilege to be in front
of you today, like to thank you
for your attention to this
important matter related to
crime in New Mexico, I'd like to
thank the sponsor or a
sponsorship of this bill. Um, I
come to you today to ask for
your support. Senate Bill 155
for a couple of different
reasons. Embezzlement does not
get a ton of uh play. You won't
see a ton of this on the
television screen and it doesn't
make a lot of headlines,
however, I have worked in
financial crimes.
For most of my 28 year career,
and I will tell you the per unit
impact to families when a person
over a period of time embezzles
hundreds of thousands of dollars
for that family and is either
not charged because they can't
aggregate the criminal uh
amounts or is undercharged.
To provide accountability to
what the actual impact is to
those families, is something
I've seen firsthand and so we
are grateful again for the
contemplation of these bills,
and this is more about aligning
the accountability to precisely
the offenders who were
committing the most egregious
crimes. Uh, thank you for your
attention to this matter and
thank you for allowing me the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you, Mr. Baker. All right,
that's all we had in uh support
registered in advance. I thank
everyone who does that for us to
do so, committee members with
question Senator Doogan and
Senator Mill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so I
like this a lot more with, with
the, the amendment, uh, saying
against anyone, one victim.
I do
I do question whether this is
going to have the impact that
Of having a better tool to deal
with folks who regularly commit
embezzlement, because under
this, Mr. Chair,
I am, I am Bezel $5000 from my,
the company I work for.
Um, and I am caught.
And I am.
charges and and found guilty of
of a third degree felony for
doing that.
Now
9 months later.
11 months later.
I do it again. I have not
learned my lesson. I've no, I'm
not, uh, incarcerated yet. I
don't know why they would have
kept me on, but go, go with the,
the hypothetical. Um, I, I
embezzle $10,000 now.
I have now, we would want to
think of that. You would want to
be able to charge that person
twice.
But because you have already
punished them for the first
time.
You have a double jeopardy
issue. You can't, because,
because those two things are now
considered one offense.
Both times I've done it, they
are aggregated into one offense.
You can't go back and punish
them.
For that second time, because
that's to say you'd be punishing
the same pers the person for the
same offense they've already
been punished for. You'd have a
double jeopardy issue. So I just
worry that, that that
If that happens, that's going to
undermine the intention.
Of the legislation.
I don't have any suggestion for
an amendment or anything, Mr.
Chair, but
But I, I do think that's a, a
concern.
Thank you, Serge, uh, Senator
O'Malley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think I
could be wrong, Senator, um.
Uh
it's just if um
This was kind of like uh
patterned a little bit after the
retail crime.
Idea about the aggregate sort
of, so, but in this case, I
mean, if you get, if you go to a
store and you, the idea is,
right, you go to the store, you
rob it, you get charged, and
then you do it within a 12 month
period and it accumulates that
then, you know, you, you, um,
You know, you're charged with
the with the crime of let's say,
you know, a larger amount. And
this is a little different in
that, you know, you
Your, your, I guess, you know,
you're charged with something
when you first embezzle, and
then, uh, because you would have
to be, I guess, and then you go
to I guess another place of
employment, and then you're
charged again. Um, and then you
go to another place employment
and tell you like uh over 12
month period, it's $20,000 and
then in that case, you're now
charged with, let's see what
kind of 3rd degree felony, which
is basically the
the same charge as someone.
commits armed robbery.
Is that kind of where we're
going here?
Thank you
Oh
Not
OK it's not
quite, uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator
O'Malley, not quite for the
following reasons. The amendment
that we just did, uh, remedied
that your first concern.
That if you have multiple
victims, uh, you cannot
aggregate those embezzlement
instances. So in your scenario,
that person would be charged
with 3.
Crimes given the
The amounts of that particular
individualized victim.
Number 2,
embezzlers.
Mostly are either drug addicts
or gambling addicts. A lot of
them don't have criminal
history, a lot of them have
convinced themselves they're
gonna pay it back. So it's not
like somebody is like a chronic
embezzler, I think that's highly
unusual if not.
If not, uh
Incredibly rare.
And then, uh, an armed robbery,
um,
Career correct, a, a 2nd degree
crime is armed robbery, and
armed robbery is probably facing
serious prison time on their
crime.
These, these sentence for most
embezzlers is restitution.
Uh, Mr. Cha and
Senator, um, I guess that would
be my concern because I don't, I
mean, it's.
It's the charge.
That is very serious, right? I
mean,
You know, you could say, well,
it's highly unlikely that that
person would be charged, you
know, to that degree of prison
time, but because it is a
felony, they could be. I mean,
it's possible, right? And I
guess that's my concern. The
other thing is, um,
The
And, and I understand the
embezzlement because it's
happened in a sadly, a lot of
times with nonprofit
organizations and I think we
both know one where that
happened.
Um, I think that, you know,
Hopefully that individual is,
you know, paying that back.
Um
But
I think that if there is a
You know, if there is any kind
of time, then that doesn't give
them the opportunity to pay
anything back. So that's also a
concern. So, um, OK, let's go
back to, I'm sorry, let's go
back to um
How this person is charged over
a period of a year.
So
They, they're slowly embezzling,
right?
But once someone is caught or
charged with an, you know,
embezzling. I mean, that
basically would lose their job,
right?
So then
They would, you're saying they
would go somewhere else,
embezzle some more.
Possibly, and then it just kind
of like comes to this total of
20,000 over a year, in which
case they would be charged with
this surgical fe.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Mali, uh,
no, because as mentioned, uh,
the amendment.
Uh, remedies that concern.
Um, each individual victim, each
nonprofit or small business
would be a distinct crime, so
what you're describing is if
they went to a new store and and
embezzled in a third story and
embezzle, that would be.
Three different indictments with
3 different victims. What we're
trying to do is aggregate.
The uh
Mm
That money that was transferred
over, uh, in the aggregate. So
for example, if someone
Uh, embezzled $200.
Uh, every Friday for 5 weekends,
the state wouldn't have to prove
that on this day they embezzled
$200 they would simply have to
prove that
In that 5 week period they
embezzled it, so it would be uh.
Easier to, it would, it would,
it would emphasize the
importance.
You know, investigating petty
misdemeanors and misdemeanors.
Uh, it's just not high on folks'
priorities list, but if they
were to be able to investigate
and charge in the aggregate.
Uh, it would, in my instance, it
would bump that to a 4th degree
felony, in which case it would
be investigated, it would be
brought to the grand jury or the
preliminary hearing would be uh
charged as opposed to just
letting them.
Not be charged.
So it so if on the in the
aggregate over a period of a
year, someone slowly embezzles,
and they get to that 20,000.
Over the period of year, then
they could be charged.
with this crime. It, it for like
one individual or one nonprofit.
Mr. Chairman said correct. If
they embezzle $20,000 or more.
Um, they, they could be charged
with a second degree felony.
OK. And be eligible for 5 years
probation to pay it back. OK.
So why
I mean, so I guess my question
is, if we just, if someone
Bell's $20,000 right? And one,
you know.
One given time then they also
get charged with this 3rd degree
felony.
Mr. Chairman said, you're, if
they embezzle $20,000 or more.
Uh, in the same instance, they
Um, and, and I'll just repeat my
concern was the, the extent.
You know, I mean, armed robbery
is pretty serious. You have a
weapon. It's, it's very, uh, it
could be a very dangerous
situation.
Um, you know, I, yeah, as was
mentioned by other people, I'm
not an attorney, but I would be
concerned that it was
At that that level of crime, you
know, uh, along with, you know,
an armed robbery, that, that
would be my concern.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
senator.
I'm a little concerned and
again, not being a lawyer, I'm
concerned about the serial
embezzor.
Someone who takes, let's say
$250.
From 10 different people,
multiple victims.
Um
And based on the way.
So now we have multiple victims,
which is a single charge per
victim.
And yet they're the they're the,
they're the person doing this
again for 10 different people,
and, and I've met people who've
done this.
And so my concern is we want to
take this person who's a serial
embezzler and put him away.
Uh, but now with it's like,
let's say it's $250 but let's
say they did it 10 times, that's
$2500.
And they did, and they can
probably do all this within a
month.
And so,
I guess my, my concern is here.
I, I, the amendments that we
just added on actually.
Seemed to
Defeats the purpose of trying to
put away the ambassador.
You're saying now it's only a
misdemeanor and we'll let him
go. It doesn't matter if he did
it 10 times or 100 times.
And so I'm concerned about that
because now you're having
multiple victims, each of which
has to be proved that this
person embezzled.
As opposed to aggregating the
fact that they did this to
multiple people.
So, so I, I'm not comfortable
with the language that we have
in this bill as it stands right
now, just because of that, um.
Can you help me rectify that.
Thank you Senator Thornton. No,
that's a great, great way.
That's one interesting dialogue.
So under today's law, we
wouldn't be able to aggregate
under a single.
So if this bill were to pass as
amended, we would be able to
aggregate for a single victim,
which we wouldn't be able to do
now.
But
The concern of the of the
committee lawyers was that
theoretically you could
aggregate.
Uh, the amounts from multiple
victims, I don't, the serial
embezzler.
To me it's foreign, but
apparently you're aware of it.
Um, but, but folks were more
comfortable with with.
Aggregating for a single victim
rather than
Then being able to aggravate for
the serial embezzler, we had a
similar dialogue, as Chairman
when Senator Deig was concerned
about uh charging, you know,
with the person with 6 stolen
firearms charging him 6 times,
and we decided as a committee.
one time.
It's similar. I want to charge
them one time for the crime they
did as opposed to.
Each, each instance, uh, that we
have now. So to answer your
question, Mr. Chairman, we would
not be able to charge the serial
embezzler.
Oh, that with multiple victims,
but, but this bill is trying to
uh charge the embezzler.
Uh, the multiple.
Embezzling of the single bit.
And I understand that, and I
can, I understand how somebody
can be embezzled multiple times
if they're never catch the first
time or second time.
But at some point you say, who
he wants, right, and somebody
comes back and you still fool me
twice, uh, shame on me, sort of
thing. So I, I, I'm, I'm more
concerned about the cereal and
Bezor than I am, uh, uh, because
I think it's, it's
Those are the folks that we
really want to because they're
impacting several different
people in the community as
opposed to just a single victim,
so the language here bothers me
a little bit. I'm not quite sure
how to resolve that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for
letting me speak for a second
time.
Maybe my, my impression is
wrong, but I'm sitting here
thinking I feel like.
We've all heard about cases
where someone was embezzling
over multiple years.
And then they get caught and
then they're charged.
For all of that embezzlement
together it's like.
Makes me think, why do we need
this if
If that is something that can
already happen, if, if it's not
every discrete, every time I get
the $10 if over, over 10 years,
I am embezzling $10 from my
employer every day.
When I get caught, I don't get
charged.
For individual
For each $10 I get charged.
Using the total amount that I
have embezzled over that course
of time.
So if we can do that already,
why would we need if, in fact, I
think we are.
Kind of limiting ourselves by
then limiting it only to a
12-month period, a consecutive
twelve-month period.
Why
Why do we need this if someone
can already be prosecuted for
embezzlement that they have done
over the course of time, and it,
in reality, is aggregated.
With charged.
Thank, uh, thank you Mr.
Chairman Senator Doig. There's
actually a disagreement amongst.
DAs and judges, whether that's
allowable.
Um, and, and to kind of, it kind
of gets back to.
Senator O'Malley's question,
this is not modeled after the
retail theft bill, we did a
couple years back because this
was actually uh.
predate this was actually tried
15 years ago.
We, we, we, uh, aggregated the
larceny statute, I think about
10-12 years ago.
And then we uh aggregated the
retail crime statute, back in
the day, Mr. Chairman, there was
a.
It was written, each separate
incident of embezzlement or
conversion constitutes a
separate and distinct offense.
That was the law prior to 2007.
The uh
That bill erased those words.
And uh
But there was no, there was no
legislative history, there was
no legislative intent. So there
are some folks that are getting
stacked.
Uh, in some jurisdictions and
other jurisdictions that uh.
They are trying to prosecute in
the aggregate this, we just want
to make it crystal clear.
Thank you very much. I'm
concerned that um when I
I put this on our agenda, I
thought that this was
Important to do to make sure
that we do aggregate, um, but,
uh, I'm, now I'm left a little
puzzled cause I started doing
maybe persuading me that, that,
um, this may be actually
weakening the ability to, to
prosecute embezzlement by that
twelve-month window that kind of
limits.
The, the, um, potential for
aggregating.
Embezzle of crimes, the uh.
Somebody made the point earlier.
I, I've made, I, I know you
probably didn't maybe intended
this way, uh, Senator, but when
you say, well, embezzlement is
maybe more prone to those with
gambling addictions or drug
addictions.
I think a lot of embezzlement is
pretty sophisticated, um, with
individuals who are treasurer
for a nonprofit or a.
Some other executive director of
a group who's uh or the church
till rights giving money out of
the church till and um.
But I, my, my sense is they're
usually pretty sophisticated,
and if they're sophisticated,
they're gonna make sure that
they do their embezzlement only
once every 12 months, right? Or,
or, you know, so to avoid the
aggregation so so um.
I'm waiting to see what others
in the committee are gonna
persuade me one way or the other
cause I like I said when I, when
I saw this initially, and you
could help me when I, when I saw
this bill initially, I thought,
yeah, we need to do this, and I
did liken this to the retail
crime, uh, where we could
aggregate all these small little
sails a razor.
From Walgreens every hour,
right? Um, and, um.
You said it, there was the one
was made earlier, some of them
are pretty sophisticated. They
know exactly how much they can
steal.
Um, and
Like they, they, they know the
law pretty well. Um, and they
know I can go steal a power saw
at Home Depot and make sure that
I don't exceed the, the whatever
that limit may be and come back
and do it the next 30 minutes,
over and over.
So, help me, help me feel more
comfortable about that we're not
really actually making it.
harder to prosecute the
embezzlement crimes at the
higher levels uh of some of
these thresholds.
Um, really the point Senator
Doug was making.
this
Oh, it's much easier to.
Much easier to investigate.
importance of an investigation.
And if you're a white collar
crime detective,
even though 5 years.
Not, but are you going to
investigate a 3rd degree felony,
so for example, if somebody
is converting uh
$000 a month.
course of 5 months.
Um
They could be charged with 54th
degree felonies.
They could be charged with 5 4th
degree felonies.
4th degree felony, white collar
crime in district court, you're
really low on the priority
scale. But if they were to
charge them with 1 3rd degree
felony equaling $5000. I think
that would be a heightened
importance, it wouldn't be pled
down to 14th degree and then
they only have 18 months to pay
it back.
They got convicted of the 3rd
degree there that the victim
would have 3 years of that
person being on probation to pay
it back.
It's funny that folks can uh can
vote against this bill because
they don't like the aggregation,
people could vote against this
bill because they like the
aggregation. There's a lot of
different ways to vote against
this bill, but this will clarify
for all police, DAs and judges
throughout the state that these
are investigated, prosecuted,
and sentenced in the aggregate
because it really is one harm.
Uh, you know, once you realize,
you know, that you're $10,000
short on your books, that's.
That's when you know you've been
harmed and that and that, and
you're harmed in the amount of
$10,000 you're not harmed.
Through 1000 cuts, you're harmed
$10,000 in your organization or
business has to recover that,
so.
Um
This would, uh, you, I would ask
you to convert the, the
conversation for those of you
who hate stacking, this would
stop the stacking of charges for
those of you who.
Uh, you know, would prefer
things to be stacked, this
would.
Put that crime in the correct uh
2nd, 4th, 3rd, or 2nd week tier
for an appropriate sentence.
Yeah, I, I see a couple of
things going on. One is you're
with your amendment, you're
creating a crime of embezzlement
based on each unique victim,
right? So let's use the CPA and
I'm, I'm embezzling from 5 of my
clients, that's 5 crimes. And I,
so I like that. I like the
separation of each victim being
a separate crime.
But, um, but I'm not so crazy
about the 12 months.
Uh window because again, a
sophisticated embezzler will
will embezzle, uh, one year,
it's kind of hard to imagine
they'd wait 12 months to
embezzle again, so I'm, I'm, I'm
a little torn about this still
Senator, but, uh, I'll wait for
motions and we'll see where it
takes us. Generalalley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and I
understand you're attempting to
do a senator, um, I, I'll be
honest, my concern is this, uh,
that, you know, that
At, at some point, about 20,000
or more becomes a second degree
felony, and I could see, you
know, 3rd degree felony at the
max here, but I feel very
uncomfortable about the second,
that's really.
You know, my, thank you.
All right.
This job's not easy, guys, is
it? No, this is, uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Um, I, I'm struggling
with this one because I, I'm,
I'm thinking of the, let me give
you an example, uh, what I
referenced earlier.
Uh, someone who does home
remodels.
And goes to a home.
And gives, they say they need
down payment of say 2500 $3000
and they start construction.
We walk away.
Never to appear again, no
intention ever to finish the
job, then they go to another
home, they do the same thing.
And they do another home, do the
same thing.
So it's the same person.
Investing money, people giving
them thinking that they're going
to do a good job on a remodel.
Uh, and so,
With no intention of ever
actually completing the job, so
that they start the job and the
folks think they're gonna come
back.
And they're there for
Sometimes a year.
Um, and
So my concern here is this is
the person that needs to be.
Um
punished for that embezzlement
and in this case, it would be 3
charges for $2500 and that's 3rd
degree.
Possibly.
Um, but it could, you know, it,
it just feels like we're, we're,
we're supporting, we're
supporting the embezzler, as
opposed to uh supporting the
public, and that's my concern.
So I'm, I'm having heartburn
with this one. And, and because
I'm not illegal.
person. It's, it's, I'm
struggling with.
The ramifications of of this
down the line because it allows
someone who does this on a
consistent basis too, to get
away with uh multiple crimes.
Even though I know there's
multiple victims, but they're at
a lesser extent than say,
Pulling them up because these
people would come together. I
know, I'm giving you a case that
I know for a fact it happened.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Thornton,
you're correct. I, this wasn't
my amendment. This amendment was
brought to me by folks on the
committee, and I considered it
friendly. Um, your concern
exists today.
This bill does not create your
concern.
This bill does not remedy your
concern.
But it doesn't create.
Uh, your concern. So I would,
uh, I would just ask you to
consider what the bill does from
today till tomorrow, as opposed
to what it.
But it doesn't do.
It
promotions. So I just, just
quickly before I motion, I just
want to understand though,
because under Senator Thornton's
example.
If it's
$2,501 cause that's the
threshold for a third-degree
felony, and the person is
committed 5 different 3rd degree
felonies.
Right now they can get charged
with 5 different 3rd degree
felonies, correct?
I mean, you know,
some jurisdictions, yes, and
others know.
Um, so that's a policy decision,
but keep in mind this this bill
was brought to us by the
Association back in 2007.
The bill we passed thought, we
thought we did what we're trying
to do today, but it didn't pan
out cause there's no legislative
history in New Mexico. The DA's
association.
And multiple law enforcement
agencies are supporting this, so
these are the cops and
prosecutors asking us, or, or
rather supporting this.
And then we're having, we're
espousing concerns.
From that prosecutorial
standpoint, I just want to point
that out. No, so I get that, I
guess, and I'm not a criminal
lawyer, but I guess I'm just
having.
Trouble
If, if someone commits 5
separate embezzlements against 5
different folks for $2,501 for
each one. Can't each one of
those be charged as a 3rd degree
felony. Yeah, it seems to me it
could, right was correct with
different victims, yes, correct,
correct, under today's law and
under tomorrow's law, yes, that
person will be charged 5 times
for those particular amounts.
And so, Mr. Chair and Senator
Maestas. So if you're charged
with 5 different 3rd degree
felonies.
under the current law.
3 years apiece. I mean, is that,
again,
Could you be, I mean, each one
is treated differently, but if
you're convicted of each one,
you're going to prison for 15
years, correct? Each 3rd degree
felony, it's a separate count on
each one, is it, is it not? So
Mr. Chairman Senator, so in that
scenario, it would take, let's
assume they're in the same
county.
That would take 5 separate
investigations.
Hopefully the same investigator
and then 5 different
indictments.
So they may be in different
courtrooms, but it would be the
same prosecutor, so the same
prosecutor would have 5
indictments against that John
Doe.
Each victim would have their own
interest. There may be a victim
who says send that dude to
prison, other victims will say,
no, I don't send him to prison.
I want him to pay me
restitution. So in that
situation.
You'd probably uh, want him to
plead to 6 or 9 years of
jurisdiction, the maximum
someone can be on probation in
Mexico is 5 years.
Now granted, if they violate
probation, you can hit them with
what's called the tail. So in
that situation, if I was the
prosecutor, I'd have him plead
to at least 6 years'
jurisdiction, put him on 5
years' probation to pay the 5
victims back. I just, again,
what I'm hearing is that.
This bill improves the situation
when you've got one victim. No
question, Mr.
Chair that doesn't diminish the,
well, and it doesn't change the
status quo that exists now when
you've got, I mean, if someone
commits 10 different felonies
against 10 different folks, each
one of those is gonna get
investigated and you go through
a process, and you're right,
maybe that depending all the
different factors play in, but
there's still a remedy there to
address that situation, which
isn't going to change.
if we don't pass this.
We still got that issue that's
all there, but we, we, we're not
addressing the underlying Mr.
Chairman, Senator, that's an
excellently put, correct.
Mr. Chairman, I move a do pass.
Yes, ma'am, as amended.
We're, like I said, I appreciate
the collegiality on your side
over there, but you've got
center Worth over there on your
side too, so I,
I think I think you'd have to, I
think you have to be, I think
you have to be a little more
clear. Yeah, motions are made
individually on the committee,
Senator Brantley, we don't do it
as a team
approach we're moving a pass.
Well, I, I got it, but I'm just
kind of suggesting to you, you,
you can make your own motion and
on our
side as the
committee, Senator Brantley, we
don't do it as a team
approach we're moving a pass.
Well, I, I got it, but I'm just
kind of suggesting to you, you,
you can make your own motion and
on our side as a
little unusual.
Yeah,
so the motion is to do pass as
amended.
Um, we'll do a roll call vote,
how's that?
Senator Brantley.
Do, yeah.
O'Malley.
Better Paul.
There Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
Yes.
Yes.
They are my this. Yes.
Stewart
Senator Cervantes,
uh, you have a do pass and I'd
like to explain my vote, if I
may, um, and remember, any
member can always ask to do so.
I'm supporting your bill for uh
for one principal reason center,
which is, and you've told me and
I'm persuaded that we have
inconsistent applications of the
law in different districts and
different judges, and different
district attorneys, that should
never be the case, uh, and, and
that's a failing of lack of
clarity on our part. So your
bill does certainly give us
that.
gives us clarity and that's
better, I don't know the
ultimate, we'll look back at
this later and see whether this
actually uh was, was the right
clarity, but it's certainly
clear and, and any notion that,
that we have different and
inconsistent prosecutions and
interpretations is probably
something we should always try
and correct. So that's the
reason for my vote. Anyone else.
I'm just gonna say that there's
hardly anybody that we put in
prison for embezzlement. If you
read the FIR. I mean, this does
not seem like it's a crime that
we see very much of just notice
that there are 7 people in
prison for embezzlement.
And I know, of course, the
senator mentioned that it
usually doesn't go to prison,
you have probation, then you
have to pay it back.
Um, but nevertheless, it's not
like this is rampant.
Thank you, Senators, uh, Senator
work, just, just Mr. Chair
process question. I know we have
a public safety package that's
being built by the house. It's
gonna come over to this
committee. Is it the intent?
To have this move forward to the
Senate Finance Committee.
Or is it kind of
Old here until that package
comes over and then be
considered as an amendment to
that package. I just wanna,
since we did take a vote on
this,
I think it's important about you
and I perhaps with the ranking
member and decide how we want to
do that so we're, we may, we may
want to keep it here and put it
into that roll that into that as
well too. That may take some
extraordinary effort on my part
and being very slow on a
committee report, um, or, or we
can maybe do it any different
ways, but we'll, we'll, we'll
consider that and take
Your direction.
So Mr. Chairman, if, if, if
we're gonna do that.
I mean, I, I don't want us to
rely on you having a late
committee report, there has to
be some other process that we
come up with.
Yeah, the other, the other way
we've been doing it so far so is
just by not taking a boat,
right? And we did that. We, we,
we took the vote, we could
always.
Oh yeah,
I changed the boat, we could
always do a much for
reconsideration and not take a
vote and table.
So,
so I, I would suggest on this
one we, we stay where we are, we
took the vote. I think it sends
an important
Signal and I have it, it's good
to get a sense of where folks
are and, and
And Jen, let's, let's visit
about this and figure out. I
just think it's important that
we, uh, we realize that given
we're doing something a little
bit different, we need to have
the discussion and I think we
should just
Stick where we are and then if
we need to do something
different, we can come back on
Friday and tweak it if we needed
to, uh, depending on what the
option is. I appreciate the
flexibility and again I'll
confer with the leadership here
and the ranking member
particularly because we have a
largely a uniform vote on the
committee.
In support, so Senator, for now,
for now anyway, you have a due
pass. We'll see what happens
