Thank
all right so Mister Mister
Rogers so Mister stoner I don't
know what you all have talked
about the order would you like
to make the presentation or
begin but let me ask you and and
have you guys through your
presentation.
Thank you Mr chairman a rich
Olson is also here and he will
be presenting with us I see him
on the zoom.
And of we we are awaiting
Michael Browde B. also who will
be presenting as well I don't
see on the screen yet.
And I.
Right good oh yeah Michael good
so you all let us know the order
would you like to present the
region.
You always know the order would
you like to present the
redistricting issue and we'll
take it in whatever order you
direct Mr also it's going to
scare me throughout the
presentation with his video and
all of the bankers boxes in the
background there that just makes
me that makes me realize what
the weights me when I get done
with the sixty day session
that's about what my office
looks like some some so I'm
gonna go take some of the blood
pressure medication and will
we'll let you all get started
from there so who would like to
go first and let me know what
order you want to go.
Thank you Mr chairman I think Mr
Olson will get us started and
then professor Brody will we'll
take it from there and then
followed by myself and and back
to the Mr Olson who will wrap it
up for us and we'll try to move
quickly rich.
Mr chairman members committee at
the the
Our point there Sir.
Yes Mr Chairman would be
acceptable for me to share my
screen to to walk through a
presentation.
Your muted sorry.
Mr.
I believe I believe we have the
capability to that if you give
it to the person was running our
webcasting.
well.
I don't know they can authorize
you to do what we can Mr chair
Senator you have permission to
share screens.
Very good thank you.
Thank you and thank you Mr
chairman I will do that now.
And Miss up.
Okay.
I'm.
It is not he can everyone see
the screen okay.
Where those are okay.
As Mike Michael not all right
now.
All right Sir I did see hello
Michael screen pop up but I
didn't see him on the video yet
thank you so I'll go ahead and
start we're waiting for Michael
but let's let's let's go ahead
and and just jump in here
because I know you have limited
time and we've got the.
material to to to plow through
so we thought we start off with
just some basic redistricting
principles and and what we did
is we sort of
Plagiarize with his approval the
some slides that but then
prepared by research and polling
Inc a private matter often is is
grew to to that was actually
presented to Legislative Council
a couple weeks ago so let's go
to the next slide Serra so the
the the basic principles of
redistricting that need to be
kept in mind from a legal
standpoint as we're going
through the processes.
R. A. equal protection in other
words generally speaking their
needs to be relatively equal
population between districts
there is a there's a difference
between the.
the between the variance you can
have in congressional districts.
As compared with state
legislative districts that will
touch on just briefly.
Minority voting rights under the
voting rights act and under the
equal protection clause is
another a critical principle of
redistricting.
Relative compactness of
districts rather than districts
that are drawn out in a
configuration.
is is another principal
continuity of districts in other
words you can have separate
islands and then the
consideration of communities of
interest whether that the and
generally as you graphically
cultural communities of interest
in the our our issues that in
impressed well that can be
considered.
So let's go to the next slide
Serra.
So it with respect to equal
protection there's a number of
Supreme Court cases that are
referenced in the slide.
That basically stand for the one
person one vote principle.
That the in order to have
equality representation amongst
all citizens you have to have
relatively equal population
between the Representative just.
The the law that's come down
basis congressional districts
have to be as equal as
practicable Sir will touch a
little bit on some K. K. fathers
come out in the last ten years.
But at least I think it's fair
to say in New Mexico the last
round in the last couple rounds
I mean the the Brian and his
crude made tremendous efforts to
really get it down to virtually
identical population between all
three have been gradual
districts.
State legislative districts in
can have a total population
deviation of no more than ten
percent plus or minus five
percent.
That gives a little bit of
flexibility to deal with the
issue such as voting rights act
issues trying to maintain
Try to avoid splitting up the
geographic or excuse me a
governmental entities County
indoor disparities in light.
So minority voting strength
The section to the voting rights
act basically is is one of the
most critical provisions we have
to look at.
Which would stand for the
proposition that you can't we
can absolutely voting strength
at that grow language minority
groups.
and and the native Americans
African Americans and spat.
The the press was you have to
get in minority populations an
opportunity to elect a candidate
of their choice.
And so the criteria need to be
Matt to require with respect to
single member districts.
Is a minority population just to
be compact and large enough to
constitute a majority in single
member district.
The minority population SB
politically he said.
And there has to be evidence of
the funding by white population
the past that would indicate
that the minority populations
otherwise might not be able to
elect a a representative
in the who is
who represents them
the representative there.
So if we go to the next one.
To prove dilution of minority
voting strength you may have to
meet all three criteria
established by told to tell you
that circumstances.
The local process season store
they have been equally open to
minorities and that minority
group.
So there's been for instance if
we look at the bottom part of
this slide
there were there have been
instances this is the one out of
North Carolina.
that was declared as I recall
this on path to small as a
racial gerrymander.
Or they basically in order to
put together as I recall this
Louise you can jump in here what
to put in order to to create a
minority
majority districts.
The they came up with this our
state the district and that was
determined to be a racial
gerrymander and I'm happy to
small in the in I think with the
shoppers Reno K..
We are the next slide.
One thing in trying to deal with
the minority voting rights
issues that the what else if you
can't do is packed in other
words try to concentrate
minority group members into a
few districts so if the
minimized the number of
districts they can basically
have effective and meaningful
participation and.
And so you have to avoid packing
and the other critical factor is
cracking in other words we take
a minority population and divide
them up into multiple districts
so as to minimize their
potential influence in the
district.
This next slide is
This is more the more for type
issue but
this sort of show this is
Bryant's etcetera
Slide shows.
What a compact different looks
like any cases and simple our
third congressional district
back in nineteen ninety one and
frankly after this.
The sense that too I mean you
look at New Mexicans rational
districts.
they're they're spread out.
The where population spread out
but they're relatively compact.
And then if you look at the one
that he shows the Texas eighteen
different nineteen ninety one.
That's just sort of a mess I
mean you know I I don't know I
figure out I you're.
Eighteen this year go across the
street to get a.
Local Representative but I mean
that's the that's was sort of
just.
Unity is the other the principal
part of the principal.
And this is just laughable and
you can have islands
we're.
Where you take I'll as a
population created after that
for both men it's got to be.
Communities of interest
I mean that's one of those
things is the we noticed you see
it.
but the political subdivisions
neighborhoods geographic
boundaries could be a river.
The Arroyo.
respecting cultural historic and
linguistic traditions.
One of the things that can be
considered and maintenance
support existing districts.
Another thing that can be
considered and and and efforts
to avoid sharing income with the
legislators in the in the
redrawn districts and those are
issues that can be considered as
long as basically the equal
protection issues and the voting
rights act issues are otherwise
violated by consideration of
the.
It is of interest and avoiding
parent of incumbents and.
So that's sort of the just a
general sort of real broad nuts
and bolts overview.
And if anybody has any questions
I'll try to answer them about
the thanks Harris got the next
portion of the.
Thank you what we hold grudges
to the end we'll go through the
full presentation to any
questions Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you rich.
And I think.
I missed something there.
Okay
so what we what we also wanted
to do for you today members of
the committee is is give you
some updated case law on some a
Supreme Court cases that have
come out since the last cycle of
redistricting obviously there
have been too many cases
generally for us to fit into one
a session together this
afternoon but we tried to pick
out some of the more significant
ones that have some take aways
you know applicable to to us
here in New Mexico generally
speaking and some of the the
decisions that that stood out to
us on the issues that rich just
covered so the first one is
actually case that got a lot of
attention and is a very
significant case but doesn't
really affect us here in New
Mexico directly and that's a
Shelby Shelby County versus
folder decision from twenty
thirteen.
That was the case that struck
down as unconstitutional section
four of the voting rights act
that's separate from section to
that rich was going over that
that provide some of those key
protections for racial
minorities section four had a
formula for the federal
government to use to identify
jurisdictions with particularly
problematic histories of racial
discrimination and and states or
jurisdictions that that that
formula then had to go through
what's called a preclearance
process under section five of
the voting rights act such that
they couldn't make any changes
to their voting lines unless
they were pre cleared or
approved by either a three judge
panel in DC or the U. S.
Attorney General
to ensure that those changes to
laws didn't have a harmful
effect on
voters who were racial
minorities and and that was
something that was you can put
in place quite some years ago
and in response to some of the
problems that that have been
going on for a long time the
court I'm gonna move to the next
slide still talking about Shelby
just to give you a little bit
more background.
Essentially what the the US
Supreme Court decided was that
the kinds of extraordinary
conditions that justified using
that section four formula and
pre clearance years ago well not
a hundred percent we appreciated
no longer existed quite in the
extreme the court thought than
it did previously so but it's
not that it is no longer
justified
and so essentially without
section four section five of the
act really doesn't doesn't apply
anymore no way to enforce the
under Shelby County so
the dissent in that case pointed
out that that racial
discrimination voter to put
suppression is alive and well in
these safeguards are necessary
but
they were in the minority and
the so the the rule of of Shelby
stands and because New Mexico is
not a section five jurisdiction
at the time really doesn't
affect us here but it is one of
the more notable redistricting
decisions of the last decade.
In the one person one vote
category that will population
principle that rich talked about
couple of cases I just wanted to
mention and and sort of
additional down for you.
In drawing congressional
districts of the law does
require that those districts B.
as nearly equal as practicable
it does not require one hundred
percent precise mathematical
equality across all the
congressional districts even
though now we have the
technology or more accurately
people like friends friend
Sander off have the technology
to actually get districts down
to just about perfect equality
some population differences
between the districts are
allowable under federal law if
the those variations can be
justified by sort of practical
legitimate state objectives so
this tenant versus Jefferson
County K..
The case that was sort of
reaffirming that Nick knowledge
and even though we do have the
technology to make districts
perfect it's not required as
long as you can justify that
variance here it was really
driven by it
of policy the state had not to
split counties not to pair
incumbents and to preserve the
course of existing districts
those are deemed by the US
Supreme Court to be legitimate
consideration.
an interesting case also in this
category is the even well K.
from twenty sixteen.
This is relates to legislative
districts not a congressional
districts and that that ten
percent deviation that rich
mentioned in his piece was
reaffirmed as that that is the
sort of the touchstone of equal
population legislative
redistricting
the question even well was
really who gets counted for that
for for considering that
deviation is it everybody in the
population or in this case for
example some some of the folks
who brought the lawsuit that it
should be limited to citizens of
voting age because there were
some pretty high disparities
depending on if you ended up in
a district with a large number
of noncitizens.
Or a smaller number of
noncitizens people were
concerned that there might be
diluted
here you go back in even well
the court decided that
it's acceptable to use
set to count the population
based on total population which
is how the census does it those
are the numbers we get for
purposes of
a portion of the Congress and
there it's also acceptable to
use those numbers for
redistricting state legislative
districts he didn't rule out
other methods but they did
uphold the thank you.
So moving on to just a couple of
racial gerrymandering cases that
we wanted to point out that are
more recent.
The Cooper V. Harris case also
originated in North Carolina we
have North Carolina to think for
a lot of redistricting
jurisprudence in our country
North Carolina it.
Intentionally.
Had a plan where they drew two
of their congressional districts
with majority black voting age
populations.
And that Matt was challenged
the District Court found that
there was a racial gerrymander
any and what they look that was
was race a predominant
consideration in drawing those
districts and and if so was
there a sufficient
justification.
and that was
They have another slide on it
yeah.
The what the core part of what
the court looked at was that
those two districts were already
safe districts for black
candidates money if they weren't
already major
of black voting age populations
and the court did not see enough
evidence that the in drawing the
maps that the that there was
enough need under the voting
rights act to
condense if you will that
population into those two
districts so the District Court
found that the map was a racial
gerrymander and then the higher
courts of health that decision
gives deference to that lower
court.
Last one that I'm gonna do for
you is the Bethune hill versus
Virginia state board of
elections also a voting rights
act K.
also the case which examined
whether race was a predominant
consideration in drawing
districts this case I think it
has a takeaway it's a little bit
more nuance than some of the
others but it's a reminder that
when there's a challenge to a
map as having been a racial
gerrymander that the courts
examining whether or not that
that map violates the voting
rights act we're gonna have to
look at all of the district
lines and not just those that
violate those traditional
redistricting principles that
rich one over earlier so here
account that the District Court
had really conducted too cramped
of a review of the math needed
to take a broader look at how
those lines were drawn and how
the
How the use of race as a
consideration interacted with
those other traditional
redistricting principles.
so I will turn it back over to
rich then to talk about another
category of of more recent
cases.
So Mr chairman members of the
committee
One issue that has sort of been
floating around for.
Number of years it's all issue
of whether.
Courts can
can can address.
What's called partisan
redistricting or partisan
gerrymandering the sorts of
issues and there's been a.
I think it's fair to say
The federal courts in the United
States Supreme Court had
expressed a reluctance to do so.
But had left the lever up to the
people that are just in those
sorts cases that perhaps there
could be some mechanism to come
up with.
To address partisan gerrymander
It the the cases in the past and
always sort of expressed a
reluctance to get into it
because of the difficulty
finding any sort of
Representative Lee the.
Usable standards to try to
determine what should be part of
a proper Parsons balance given
all the circumstances and I
determine whether there's.
Violation of the equal
protection clause or other
constitutional clauses in in in
in district so what what what
happened over this last ten
years in fact in two thousand
nineteen we got the first slide.
Is the United States Supreme
Court and ratio versus comment
because finally determined that
it will not deal with partisan
gerrymandering issue it it
basically L. that.
issues involving partisan
gerrymandering are political
questions that are beyond the
reach of federal courts.
That they're not just Boller and
so federal courts are not going
to get involved in.
Partisan gerrymandering and that
looks like this going to be the
final word other questions
gerrymandering issues at least
as far as federal forces Sir.
There's been some some action in
state court state the Supreme
Court certain last.
In a couple of years a few years
with respect to partisan
gerrymandering.
if we go to the next slide.
I really want to deal with this
much but there was a case out of
the Supreme Court of Florida.
They give women voters versus
Dessner that held that partisan
gerrymandering claims are
cognizable in Florida state
point.
The specific tasks to for
provision it was based on is
sort of a.
Almost region Harris to Florida
as best I can determine and that
the Florida constitution
specifically I had a provision
that disallowed the
the consideration of parson
issues in drawing congressional
districts and and that's the the
the the portion that side it
there is so it's it's just in
case but the.
Like I said I think it's sort of
unique to Florida just because
of its.
Discussed judicial permission.
Another case the claim that I
was going to the Google more.
The state of Pennsylvania yeah
this one.
League of women voters of
Pennsylvania versus
Commonwealth.
This was decided two thousand
eighteen this a little bit more
just the case and that.
The Pennsylvania Supreme Court
in a decision based on its
prostitution.
Chairman that a congressional
redistricting plan was
on passed to fund the parson
Jareth then.
Based on the provisions of the
in the constitution.
The legislative elections shall
be free and equal.
And no power civil or military
shall anytime interfere to
prevent the free exercise of the
right of suffrage.
Pretty broad provision but it
was construed by the
Pennsylvania Supreme Court to
halt the next slide.
That is demonstrated in the
creation of congressional
district labor deal with
congressional districts in this
instance.
That's a neutral criteria then
subordinated noteholders.
Considerations so to
gerrymandering for for partisan
political advantage the
congressional redistricting plan
violated that provision the back
the speed at the Pennsylvania
gas station.
So those are just in case
It you know I remember when it
came out it would probably and
there's been there's been cases
in the past that have gone up
to.
State the appellate courts deal
with partisan redistricting I
think there was when I was no
little research one back in the
eighties I think one of the West
Virginia Supreme Court another
one.
They've gone up to the Rhode
Island Supreme Court but really
had never
the disorder potted auditors or
or found it leases that time
there were Justice ripple so
this Pennsylvania case was sort
of restrained sort of a.
The.
What is it is new and different
names really the first time at
least for a while the the it
looks like state courts have
been interested in a state court
been willing to get into the
issue partisan redistricting.
Another case I found in my
research at the two thousand
nineteen K..
Common cause verses Louis it's
out of North Carolina.
This actually remove it with the
so my means a three hundred some
odd page decision.
Is was actually out of
a three judge panel and that is
provided for apparently by the
North Carolina law
but it was a trial title
Dealing with it is a a.
That tack on the Jeffords.
On the district plans.
In North Carolina.
This one has a different
remember this was that I can't
recall this is the threshold.
Or or legislative districting
but in any event in this case
and and and and anyone up to or
efforts made to to will the
federal court that were in the
federal court said they will
want to have anything to do with
this.
And then after the trial court
decision from a three judge
panel came out.
There is an effort made to take
it directly to the North
Carolina Supreme Court which was
rejected.
It looks like ultimately what
happened was the parties are a
great to resolve it and
submitted the new districting
plans to the three judge panel.
Which were approved in by census
probably because they're on the
cusp of a new.
Census of the new districting
session anyway but.
Was this thing is they found
that the effective plan.
in the partisan gerrymandering
evident in the if you can plan
the was violative of numerous
articles that the Mexico
Carolina constitution.
One being what they call the
free elections flaws.
which was that the simply said
that all elections shall be free
I mean at.
Was that lease inside in the in
the case of some all of the free
election laws in North Carolina.
But the the trial court found it
violated the free elections
laws.
Thousand violated the equal
protection clause of the North
Carolina application.
And also found that the partisan
gerrymandering that they struck
down violated the freedom of
speech and assembly costs so
again that from a three judge
panel is that the early.
I
Have a provisions which three
judge panel cornerback are.
On on this occasion but North
Carolina does and it's not an
appellate court cases
interesting they they they
actually took it up on on three
separate the provisions in North
Carolina capitation the
gentleman that the the arson and
gerrymandering excessive
partisan gerrymandering.
The was violative of those three
sections in North Carolina
passed to each.
So there's been some.
Actually movie the in the in the
last ten years in this area but
spread much more at the state
level we finally had the the
death knell put to it at the
federal level so.
That's sort of what's happened
in partisan redistricting.
Right I'm.
Mr chairman the that is the.
Prepared presentation we had I
think professor Brody is here
and right I didn't want to
exclude him we couldn't we
couldn't see you before Michael.
Is there Michael if you can you
yourself at least a hello.
Michael you're not of you
yourself on your years old.
Does that Griego good yeah well
I mean rich did such a wonderful
job and Serra and and and then
the later staff is is really
interesting for I didn't want to
interfere either.
Tell us real quick we've got
some new members of what will it
give us just a few couple
minutes what what have you done
in the past with a redistricting
process well at least is it is
there in the background and
would share this this is my
fifth decennial representing
legislature.
We we've already retained you
yes indeed.
The yeah the I. we're under
contract to with the role and I
think it was the contract is
approved by the Legislative
Council.
Good I see the president of the
Senate nodding her head so well
that's good so we're all lawyer
not.
The only thing I would at I'd
like to add about the about the.
voting rights act is you know
our last the last The Simpsons
last decennial it all got thrown
into the courts and and and and
our court went through a lot of
the criteria that the.
That region and and share
touched on but I found it very
interesting that they have the
they had a little trouble with
what the judge called in the
District Court with respect to
one district in
And Clovis any said what ever
it's a venturi form.
The relevant Clovis Community
must be represented by an
effective citizen majority
minority districts as that term
is commonly understood in the
voting rights act and as it has
been Representative at least in
the fact for the past three
decades so that that was one
piece where where the court just
looked at that one districts and
said you know the voting rights
act
rights are in there in that
additional.
Member that Louise.
Do that.
Time ago yeah.
Mr Chairman.
I'm sorry this a couple minutes
with the questions
committee members with questions
I've got one or two but let me
go to other committee members
first anyone jump in.
Mr Chairman yeah Daniel.
So thank you Sir.
All right.
Accent.
So.
Couple things that but I I think
of one is chair on the national
scene the other is notable on
the state seeing in terms of
some of the cases that you have
reviewed and and and and thank
you all very much for the
presentation of the issue that
she did I think it's helpful for
the committee members to hear
this
what are the National Front in
is is is impacted even well are
you it was and Mrs even Randall.
All those in Texas and the and
the issues in that case are
those unanimous decision written
by by mistake against for.
and and issues Americans were
just affect what shall and and
New York and then we can
director filling the gaps.
Well as I explained this is that
is that in basically their their
their fees as well as in Texas
what Senators there's a hundred
thousand
population two right to a
congressional district if you
live in the various access.
Thousands of millions of online
census.
And so there are two women a
congressional act because of
this is interacting with world
is entirely based on statements
that.
Representative all right so what
are some of those are.
Center seconds response to get
to the Texas Senate's.
Are in part of the state with
with eight hundred thousand we
actually part three hundred on
the vaults.
If you're in the east our fax
service.
One thousand I'm gonna be able
to thousand gonna be reminding
us of the sevens and so that
means that you're gonna have to
have one hundred and one
thousand three ten fifty one
thousand all rights to get
elected and the fact that you're
going to need to have more votes
to get elected because the
citizen population created an
equal protection problem and and
so that's what and and and so
even while did not address.
Federal district and it was
strictly state districting anime
and
Decision is from corporate
provide repetitiveness Berg
was charging as a compromise
position.
What is that they basically
dependent basically reinstated
Mrs even well thank you for your
petition we're not going to
require Texas change the way
that they district at all from
total population to only
population.
Setting dots of where we we
either.
And so.
Part of even well one and just
it's going in this case ever
since in fact I find discussed
this case on a and a and a and a
panel of the United Nations
years ago are there in your city
winds back back when people are
able to travel we talked of this
hates and you're going to see
the state legislatures
complete gerrymandered very
mattress give it will give them
to them so this.
Sure that they're the ones doing
the federal districting and
impacting Congress and
insulating themselves from from
our population are are a kind of
situation terms of motors and
and so I am why can't I do
anticipate that that is I don't
think we're going to go to that
standard in New Mexico I do
think most of the southern
states are going to are going to
start applying the even more
standard what made their state
districting which is going to
give them a decided advantage
not only a state issues but when
they get the federal district.
Our our as we as we as we
proceed on that it's it's
actually there is an in is an
amazingly provocative.
R. K. that was done.
and and so and so structure so
that on that one.
The legal when brothers of
Pennsylvania verses the climate
the Pennsylvania.
Which was the partisan Water
partisan gerrymandering cases
where with the courts in
Pennsylvania said under the free
and fair elections Clause of the
of the common words constitution
you can not
you can drive a partisan
gerrymander districts in cannot
seek that partisan advantage
we'll be doing that districts
are bear in mind.
What the Pennsylvania and New
Mexico the state of New Mexico
share the exact same language
and operating fair eauctions
close.
So that it's it's article to
acting section eight if I
remember correctly I see
professor body shaking his head
and and also sectors
constitution to be sure but I am
on our that language in the in
the our our that that was used
more Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania is the exact same
language that we have in the New
Mexico constitution.
in terms of of striking down
districting based on partisan
advantage up and and so and so
we need to be aware of that that
is wow to think bonds in part of
the are relevant case from the
Mexico and we go into our our
district in process over the
next year.
So I don't know all of which or
or a professor certainly so if
if if you guys want comment on
that at all.
but up.
Yeah I mean Senator we we we
read a little bit about the end
of my third cells at the.
The New Mexico passed to small
provision is some are identical
You know whether I mean of
course you never know whether
the the court.
In New Mexico gonna want to jump
into the fray the like they
didn't have to wait just a
minute let me it's who knows
This is that they may they may
not but to yeah I mean you know
it is and and and and and North
Carolina cases I found
interesting to just because they
they rely on multiple the
constitutional provision on that
one which.
That that was just in case to
so.
That's about it.
Yeah I
I think that
In the the other part of of
those cases is they all they
also.
Somewhat hinge on equal
protection principles and so
there's any state I would say
could could use state
constitution
to take on the issue and and and
decide it one way or the other.
It.
It is it is.
I thank you you point out with
respect to both of those cases
that looking in those cases are
some.
Interesting potential issues.
Which could come up under state
constitutional principles.
And and and and and and as far
as at the.
The other case you mention
Senator.
you know the the.
The man is.
The decision was unanimous that
the that they weren't going to
deal with that unless they were
confronted by a state that had
at least tried.
K. yes your yeah yeah yeah but
but they both the both the
majority and the concurring
judges staked out positions.
And articulated positions
the the the.
The main opinion
Really argued.
Even though it didn't apply to
that particular case that that
the equal that the total
population of the total
residents was critical and and
supported by both the
constitution.
Prior cases and the practices
and and laid out an argument for
that and and the two concurring
judges talked about how may be
new theory would would cut the
other way.
But it was very interesting that
they side stepped it
by saying we're only focused on
what the state did and what it
did is not unconstitutional.
Yes certainly although as it was
representative of data that they
were giving that that I think
came by to some some.
Some conversation from the clerk
would.
The Supreme Court both both both
both I mean eight out of two
different positions real.
Many students are in talks on
the.
I'm not.
I I I really don't have
anything.
Yeah.
Okay that.
Sure.
Activist and author I think it's
absolutely correct the language
so.
Institutional that in the a
Pennsylvania constitution is is
also at an accurate analysis and
I think it's Michael said it's a
question that we need to keep at
least in the back of our minds
as we proceed with redistricting
but the the Supreme Court of the
United States report as the
thoroughness of the issue of the
better the federal court
federal court.
There is no federal claim in
terms of the partisan makeup
transaction consisted of the non
just disability our political
questions are when they come
before the though the federal
courts as well.
Are
you Sir I'm gonna have to ask
you to help us get to our budget
a little bit so I don't
apologize so I I just want to
there is a one run article that
I do want to run it for the with
our hands as we have them and
that is that is so we've had at
in this legislative session
the based on on on cemex from a
nonprofit
we've had some independent
redistricting proposals that
have been
presented to our to our
legislature for for
consideration in terms of
procedure and and one part of
the on and and I was credited
and but they are pretty
gentleman that sent a Mexican
today talking about this one
part of the provides that the
legislature council district
plan that is submitted by this
independent group from each of
them and passed the selected
district plan without
amendments.
I want to note for appointment
medically different selects one
districts plan.
That we shall our house with the
amendment and present to the
governor the district plan that
the commission thanks is the is
the most advantageous and and
and and always Curtis positing
that that when you could not
constitutionally problem maybe
that you can restrict the
legislature's ability amended
bill are statutes.
R. and and so let me actually if
if I mean it Mr chairman a good
professor Bradley since he says
he has are.
Not just in terms of
redistricting but also
legislative process and
procedure tremendously and and
maybe very briefly as a former
legislator of mistrust as well
but a district right.
I I I'm I'm just not familiar
enough with with that issue what
what struck me.
Out it was.
The constitution.
Give us the legislature
authority.
to to redistrict.
and and whether that would be an
interference with that.
It raises an interesting
question I bet but it's not a
question I've I've examined in
any in any.
Systematic way
senator Tom Kricka side point of
the constitution potentially
gives us the ability to work
portion because originally it
was by county yeah as opposed to
re district but but it's been
interpreted as it is.
Mr Chairman is also enough on on
on the part of the job.
You said this any other
questions a committee members.
Will be brief I just have a
couple of further anyone wants
to ensure it might my concern is
well
There was earlier maybe a couple
months ago some discussion by
maybe legislator suggesting that
they would being a redistricting
of the second congressional
district to the disadvantage of
the incumbent.
do we as legislators have a roll
to publicly take a.
Objective non partisan
of position are we jurors are we
judges are we required at this
point time to take a position
that we're neutral on the
process under the laws that that
you all are going to guide us on
or can we come out and in that
than expressive pants about what
districts should look like
including
Political partisan the drawing
of districts.
I know you're gonna tell me not
to do that but but tell me
legally I can't.
This is just a if I may Mr
Chairman.
This is this goes to the
question of partition issues
right partisan redistricting
yes.
It and I think that those the
supreme court's decision does
not preclude.
We.
The state processes from
considering the issue.
Right very good anyway tell me
that I got a muzzle my opinion
about what district boundary
should look like anybody want to
tell me also I get to do what I
usually do actions speak my
mind.
Mr Chairman the only thing I
would add to what professor
ready said is that in the cases
we read that are examining where
where it's pertinent for the
court to examine what the intent
was or what the motivation was
for
drawing a particular map putting
district lines where they are
the the you know the courts will
examine both the sort of
circumstantial evidence if you
will suggesting legislative
intent and then or and or direct
evidence of what the motivating
factors where so that's just and
when we read the cases where
motivation is is permanent that
is something that the courts
look at
it's just.
Piece of the record.
We see in the in the cases that
we read that basically if the
court finds them to be judged
justiciable at all good well I
hope to give you all a good
fighting chance to defend the
action of the legislature for
when the time comes I've been
through to redistricting I think
center store probably has as
well my bet is Senator Lopez pin
it through at least two
redistricting before so we're
used to seeing it will go to
work after we're done in the
federal courts for some period
of time in Senator because she
was within the house for both of
those two redistricting is knows
that for at least the twenty
years we were together I have
advocated that that the Southern
District should have an equal
opportunity to elect a Democrat
and the notion that the Southern
District is a conservative
district.
I I need to express is always a
factor of where you draw the
line and the the the thinking
that that's a southerner
conservative part of the state
it is certainly not true in my
district for my community of
Dona Ana County but of course
where you draw the line that
could create that impression and
so I've always wanted just a
fighting chance
to elect a Democrat and I hope
this legislature will do that.
Thank you anyone else in the
committee we can get to our
bills let me think our our our
presenters very interesting it
sounds like you're going to make
Daniel A. Ivey Soto as the
summer so okay sure he can
hardly wait to spend lots of
time talking with you all.
Well and we we will wait for the
executive summary Daniel thank
you.
All right thank you we can
excuse those of you on the
presentation thank you again
with our appreciation for the
legislature yes.
Thank you thank you thank you Mr
chairman very well done thank
you all right so the first bill
we have up is Senator Pirtle.
On
ordinance elections adoption
center portal you're ready to
go.
Thank you Mr Mr chair I
apologize that that okay with
the committee I can proceed just
with voice only.
All right before you get started
Center Purnell I ate a social
time about seven minutes after
five o'clock we're probably only
committee still meet in this
late on a Friday but that's
Judiciary we will try and make
this quick your bill's a very I
thank very clear a policy
directive of or proposed change
I I show that you have a number
of speakers on the bill I don't
know that we have anyone
organized to oppose the bill.
and so I'm going to ask that you
present with your your advocates
in no more than fifteen minutes
and then we'll try and then get
to the committee after that
assuming that we don't get we
don't have any up on one who
wishes to speak in opposition
Philip I see you raise your
hands or something that you got
at Mr chairman there is one
opposing speaker I believe
that's Mr Farrand well you're
right I'm sorry you did because
I knew that Mr Graham I see him
on the committee okay so what
we'll do is we'll we'll all Mr
Gramm up to five minutes for the
only opposition and will allow
up to fifteen minutes for us
and our current keep in mind
it's a Friday afternoon Senator
Pirtle.
And and thank you Mr chair my
goal is to keep this under five
minutes on my side as well the
way the statute is written it's
it's kind of an interesting way
regardless of who's president
you would have to have a
majority of those on the
committee so with with the
example of Roswell there's and
counselors so basically if line
showed up to the meeting an
ordinance could pass I for but
yet it wouldn't be came to pass
by the statute because you would
have to have six votes
regardless of six people were at
the meeting that constitutes a
quorum you would have to have a
unanimous vote of six to zero in
order to pass the ordinance this
brings it in par with with the
you know what the New Mexico
Senate we're going to have a a
quorum present a majority of
those present have to vote in
favor and then in in the event
of a tie a more could still
break the tie in with that all
all go on to the advocate thank
you Mr chair thank you want to
recognize many order the so
Senator Pirtle.
Well and and and and Mr chair I
didn't organize any of the
advocate but if there's some
here to speak they're more than
welcome to speak and just be as
brief as possible.
Senator a lot of which are Emily
do you have a list of of
proponents on the bill.
Senator we don't have anyone in
the bill just the opposition are
very good I will try to Mr
Parameswaran I hope you'll be of
as brief as senator portal in
support Mr Graham you're
recognized thank you Mr chairman
members committee Larry around
registered lobbyist for the city
of Rio Rancho in the New Mexico
municipal league we we actually
rise in opposition to the
legislation is proposed by
Senator Pirtle by by changing it
this bill would fundamentally
change the way a local
government or city council would
work if you had a nine member
council and you had only three
members show up those three
members could could pass
ordinances and resolutions in an
act
enact legislation in the
municipality and so it really it
circumvents the entire intent of
the election of local elected
officials and so we stand in
opposition thank you Mr
chairman.
Before the committee expand your
last statement you said that we
had a nine member council in
three showed up you could pass
ordinances how would you have a
quorum with only three of the
nine.
Mr Chairman because with the
changes says it's just a a
majority of the members of the
governing body present and so it
that would change what a quorum
would be so it's it's not a
majority of all the members it's
only the members present so if
you had that doesn't mean you
have to five members present you
could have any number and as
long as you had
they were present they would be
able to enact an ordinance or
resolution so as I understand
your interpretation of the
proposed law if there was
another part of the city or
county ordinance requiring there
to be a quorum a majority of
members present to conduct any
business this would supersede
that.
I guess Mr chairman right
understand your position all
right members of the committee
Chopin's first of all would like
to ask questions to be
addressed.
Put on your camera for me to see
that.
Anyone.
Would you pass no soccer Mr
chair we see Senator Ivy Soto us
recognize anyone else going to
be as we recognize right now.
just in case Senator do it
center doing center I was a
little Senator Ivey Soto I saw
you first enter doing you got to
get that camera ahead of them
we're also also Daniel is going
to keep us here
Mr Chairman says someone's
program we happening here at the
center to look at them.
The fresh of fresh freshman US
senator do you you yourself we
recognize will fall back to the
center of the Soto.
Great thank you Mr chair
so I do have concerns about that
question about how this would
affect a quorum and I wonder if
that the sponsor would would
address that.
And thank you Mr chairman and
senator doing that that concern
is not been brought to me I
think if that have been brought
to me ahead of the meeting we we
possibly could have come up with
some language that would have
taken care of that I don't
interpret it that way
but somehow that this would
supersede any local ordinance
requiring a quorum present this
doesn't precluded or excluded
but you know that that would be
something that I would be open
to that's not the intent
essentially what can happen in
the governing bodies as one
member can just not show up and
basically bring the entire city
to a standstill and so that's
that's what's happening now and
and most of the organization
these municipalities don't have
the call of the state and that
that we have to ensure that if
we need a quorum present that we
can ensure that enough members
show up that we can do the work
of the Senate so this would just
encourage members to to show up
and and so that cities can do do
the work that they were elected
that counselors will do the work
that they're elected to do.
Thank you Mr chair Senator.
I almost wonder if if it would
end up having the opposite
effect that they they wouldn't
need to show up because there it
can be this lower standard for
passing these things and and my
concern here is that we're
talking about these these local
bodies they are much smaller
bodies stand then certainly we
have here in the legislature
and so so what we my only put
that obligation for all the
majority of all members voting
that that might only apply to to
constitutional amendments for us
it to me it makes sense and and
I'm sympathetic to what you said
about one you know one member be
able to not show up and kind
hold everyone else hostage but
but it makes sense with those
much smaller bodies that you
would have that higher standard
because otherwise you have a a
five person commission
and even if you do have so I
have a quorum with us are you
have three people show up and
and two people are then passing
ordinances that apply to to the
entire jurisdiction and and
that's that's just our.
A narrowing and focusing of that
decision making authority I
think if there was a too much I
I have concerns about.
About just small D. democracy
with with us.
Thank you Mr
thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator for those
concerned I can tell you what's
happening now is is if the vote
is known to be a five five tie
if one member doesn't show up
then then the ordinances kids
and I don't think that your
small the to be small D.
democracy is represented in
those instances where the mayor
would break the tie and so this
would ensure that everybody
would show up make your vote and
then.
May
the collected to to represent
the the the municipality of the
whole but basically the the way
that it the statute is worded
now the threshold it is
extremely high that
even if you only had.
Six members which would cost do.
For me it have to you have to be
here at seven.
Senator Pirtle your audio is a
common
could have been ordered so this
just brings it and it would be
heard and and it would force in
my part should be attainment.
Yeah I apologize that it my
audio is is messing up yes
center portal you're you're
you're not is becoming
unintelligible I hope you can
find a better spot than where
you're at at the present time
I'm gonna trust that you can
hear the committee so Senator do
it want to continue with your
questions and reporter will hope
for the best but but I'll
interrupt you if we're not in
understanding what you're
responding.
Thank you Mr chair and center
and and and I think I'm I think
I'm basically done I just.
I even though this has something
like this might take away an
incentive for someone not to
show up in just in order to
block about I don't know that it
actually.
Create an incentive for people
to show up I that the way that
that it's being proposed at what
so I I still have concerns about
a very small number of people
getting to make get getting to
pass ordinances and and a local
body thank you Mr chair thank
you Senator Ivey Soto many
others beside Center Ivey Soto.
There is
also a rural.
Yes this is that a certain
amount of yielding to somebody
else before you speak.
Our.
Was.
When responding to parliamentary
the principles behind what are
Senator Pirtle is raising and
the
Are we heard what Senator was
saying recognizing her
experiences miss Clark president
and we think and and so what she
was talking and the issue
Representative.
Where
have it over to meetings act.
R. to see what is the definition
of court because that was the
result of the whole thing and
and what I realize.
That is that
Open meetings act at ten dash
fifteen dash one subsection B.
which says all meetings of a
quorum.
The parking commission the
ministry of educated monitor
possibly vitamin stated state or
yeah yeah yeah our hope the
purpose of providing public
project can do business R. ten
take option and.
I'm realizing.
What does not provide court.
Executive defined quantum as a
majority of the members
residents are resolved it for
me.
By the time important and sold
us I think.
I think the issues that that are
embraced and that and that and
the senator would raise a
particularly
We
are change our position on this
and and and and we just have
sympathetic to mission that that
Senator
is raising.
in the and right because you
know in the in the in the state
Senate.
Hi to questions of the state of
New Mexico we require a majority
of the entire body for
constitutional amendments.
Are Jordan is present and voting
for other other business that we
conduct however our our that
language in the bill does not
make that distinction I'm I'm
not talking Trust conservation
issues our pregnant doesn't make
a distinction in in terms of of
the ensuring that there is a
majority of the members
residents and the and so it does
actually allow water shows up.
It's it's it's it's interesting
right this way.
We're building stronger and as
well as.
shows up.
That's the majority of the
members of the governing body
presents.
And and so level
I think that's a problem.
And and so and so Senator
part one what I'm sympathetic to
the issue that you're raising I
think that's probably when you
get there but but but but it's
not a significant amount of work
actually do get that is a big is
going to require you definition
Korean talk about allowing I
think you were wrong.
Enrollment is contemplating
astounded to be able to set up a
higher level if they would like
to R. because because they are
not a for the there are there
the government for that body and
the and so I was
just plain white Senator is
right and I made the mistake of
letting Senator do would go
first and I and now unfortunate
position of being able to
support this R. this bill.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you.
Many members anyone else.
Say no others all I'll add my
part to this I'm I've done some
municipal work my experience is
that the local governments
cities will typically in their
own ordinance prescribed what is
a quorum and what is not a
quorum the to provide this for
themselves and sometimes those
rules are pretty complicated so
for example they may count the
more for purposes of
establishing a quorum but not
for the purposes of other boats
more typically a lot of these
ordinances only cast a vote to
break a tie so the more
sophisticated municipalities
that I've I worked with before
have all of this pretty well
spelled out in their ordinances
and I would have to agree with
the slide to college before me
that we're going to entertain
this notion.
We would we'll have to really be
thoughtful of what this would do
all of those local ordinances
and all the various
circumstances and so I would be
very cautious there.
The other thing that I would add
maybe this will occur to you is
that the existing rules and and
as they exist are intended to
protect the minority.
and we throw out our democratic
process have a number of rules
to protect the minority
including even in our Senate
where at any point time a quorum
call can be made to challenge
the existence of a quorum on the
floor
or or the basis for a proper
vote
and that's intended to protect
the minority.
The minority was not present the
majority could essentially
established a quorum and pass
the legislation without the
minority presence so I go bring
that up only because of our good
sponsors Center curled being
part of minority on this
committee and and on the floor
itself I I I hope that you will
appreciate part of my reason for
not supporting this is to avoid
situations where the minority
cannot hijack the process and
prevent the majority from doing
their business we see this in
Washington the state quite a bit
these days to and we talk about
filibuster rules and so forth
you know what is the proper role
for the major what is a proper
and fair role for a minority and
so in this case I think that
this with them me to a great
disadvantage to the minority and
could have unintended
consequences I will not be able
to support your bill's central
anyone else after the chair
spoken.
the pleasure of the committee we
don't have a motion to I I moved
to do password earlier but I'm
not accounts for.
Senator Morris with a do pass
motion.
Emily will take a roll call
wanted to pass motion them.
Senator Baca.
Yes.
No.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Now.
Senator Lopez.
No.
Moores.
Yes yes.
Senator Pirtle.
Yes.
Senator Stewart.
Senator.
No Senate bill one twenty five
has failed to pass the Senate
Judiciary Committee.
Thank you Senator Pirtle.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee that would ask in
the future there's lobbyists
that have issue that they would
bring those forward ahead of
time that would be appreciated
thank you Mr chair what is.
Point I am trying
on this committee all are to.
Have these conferences being is
as orderly as they possibly can
we're asking everyone to sign in
ahead of time support an
oppositional just tell any
sponsor including several with
anyone you're always welcome to
check with the committee staff
Emily of who's on the call
inviting her that that any point
time there is a list of
proponents and opponents to any
legislation that we will share
that with everyone and and we're
trying to just that everyone let
us know that at least four to
six hours I'll give you I'll put
out and publish a hard deadline
by which we're going to ask
everyone to sign it just we can
plan our meetings Senator Pirtle
your request is a reasonable and
wraps you Mr and can have a
discussion.
All right our last item for the
day the bill three seventy five
Senator windows are you on the
call.
Mr chair Senator Munoz is not in
the waiting room.
I did speak with him about an
hour ago and he told me he
intended to present his bill Mr
chair for up want to get a.
Okay.
Mr chairman of the in the
absence of our center many of us
your margin.
So do I want what center do you
want to ship the motion on his
bill well let's see he's calling
me this second let's give it
just one there is.
Mr Chairman join us explain
those who out and is he's here.
Little man.
Senator money does your cameras
on your microphone is not.
George they just.
Yes.
What.
All right.
Yeah we have certainly owes we
had some folks with some
feedback on the internet please
make sure those microphones and
calls are muted.
Senator Mr chairman I think
we're and I think Senator Ingle
we hear a lot Senator Ingle
start I'm sorry for that.
Your nose we're.
Okay.
Yes.
Somebody has a microphone vote
is getting feedback and has two
conversations going so you'll
have to discontinue that.
However that may be Senator
Ingle is gonna go and start
presentation Mr chairman all
right it's they are the time is
five twenty eight I would by the
sponsor you'll have not more
than fifteen minutes to present
of the opposition will have not
more than ten minutes or
opposition and then we'll go to
the committee mindful again it's
late on a Friday Senator Ingle
you started this present that
you are
ready.
I have a very a very short
version at all it just a little
detail to but basically what
Senate bill three seventy five
is going to attempt to do it's a
bill that's going to support our
law enforcement by invest
investing public dollars before
you know something can happen
we're trying to retrain our
police so we will make sure that
we have.
Orman law enforcement and the.
Basically we want to create a
law enforcement certification
board and that toll collection
will be to certify the new
officers to investigate and
adjudicate cases chairman of an
officer certification shall be
suspended or revoked.
And they'll be nine members of
the board to be appointed by the
governor and confirmed by the
Senate more than five of which
would be a the spam political
party.
In the membership we would have
a retired judge that would
service chairman you have a
member of the municipal peace
officer member who is a share
our member who is a tribal law
peace officer Devin Attorney
Egyptian private practice to
practice uses a plaintiff's
attorney in the area of civil
rights Representative criminal
defendants attorney in private
practice represented public
entities and civil rights claims
in a turning point by the public
office should our office of the
public defender and an at large
member.
And
It would revise the law
enforcement academy board
initial collection redevelopment
employment training for basic
service law enforcement
training.
And the membership would be
directors of training of Law
enforcement academy.
And also have a lot Law
Enforcement Academy each one
survive please chief from Mexico
Indian tribe or pueblo.
One attorney this import by the
district attorney's office
attorney is currently employed
by the office of the public
defender to members who have
experienced sexual lives
providing adult education to
citizens at large members want
to shell have experiencing
behavioral health provider.
And chairman of the committee I
have but I HA or Taos municipal
a good worry archer Randy
represents them well we feel to
them for program explanation of
this bill I know it's Friday
evening with you.
Your you're anxious to take a
look at the issue and the
committee to take action on.
You wish to have state Exeter
Center when no Sir Ingle
directors please.
Okay.
Mr Chairman will have a J. forte
explained the bill and then we
can move forward.
Is Mr forte on the call yes he
is.
Mr Porter.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
What we try to do here is make
sure we give our our law
enforcement and.
Really public safety performance
a whole make the changes on the
front and to give them the tools
that they need.
From a holistic approach we want
to make sure we have better
training better policies it's
what we do is in restructuring
the LED board we give more
ballots it what the senators
have done here is in creating
that balance we want to make
sure the L. E. A. movies the
officers along and give them
their due process currently
there's about a hundred and
thirty officers in the queue we
want to make sure that gets
better.
As an insurer also but we want
to make sure that we are not
having officers just with one
job and moved to the police
department town next door so the
the restructuring of the board
we believe will help that we
also train to modern day
standards so we basically asked
the BA Ellie a.
Focus on modern day training
practices so C. H. E. training
mental health for officers
reality based training your
intervention.
Being specific on use of force
training and name that limiting
Joe Cole's we really want to
make sure that there's better
accountability better training
and we also do we want to make
this unfunded mandates what
we've done as far as funding it
is making sure that there's a
revenue stream so currently the
law enforcement protection fund
that comes from a ten percent
fee on insurance products.
Basically what happens with that
fund there's several million
dollars that reverts to the
general fund so we're looking at
this is truth in taxation we're
gonna charge the public the feet
let's make sure all the goes
into law enforcement so we just
diverted the reversion to the
general fund and put it into the
DPS budget so they can do
everything that's been asked of
In this.
In addition to that you have the
board you have the law
enforcement certification board
you have the more they training
standards and it also includes
EMS and fire to make sure it's a
holistic approach to public
safety as a whole.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Etcetera monos Sir Ingle thank
you Mr chairman I believe she
had resigned with us and and
he'll be next.
Recognize yes Sir thank you Sir
I'll make it brief I strongly
support this bill it addresses
some of the key things that
we've been talking about
throughout the fall as we look
at some other police reform
measures it addresses training
in particular for new kids
coming into the profession we've
got to get him off to a better
start this Law Enforcement
Academy has been funded at about
thirty five to forty percent
staffing so you know that they
are not getting the quality
training on the front and that
our officers need and deserve
and then on the back and the
accountability we don't we've
talked about it all fall the
Attorney General himself
described it and he sits on the
board he described it as quote
an absolute train wreck this
bill attempts to give more teeth
to that process speeded up
everybody still gets their due
process but then we make a
decision and we move on and if
people don't need to be police
officers anymore we need to take
those steps shorter than the
time period we're looking at
right now which is a period of
years in some cases I have an
officer right now we're about
fourteen fifteen months since a
fairly significant incident and
still there's been no action on
this so this bill is an attempt
to to meet our obligation to do
better job training and to do a
better job holding officers
accountable on the backside I
think you're gonna find
widespread support among the
cheese and today I'm I'm
speaking both as Farmington
police chief and chief of our
president of the New Mexico
police chiefs association thank
you have a good weekend.
The chief very much Senator when
Senator Ingle anyone else thank
you Mr chairman I think we will
you will stand for questions.
Looking to opposition and my
recollection from our last
report a stab that there had not
been anyone passing we recognize
an organized opposition of
Philip is that still accurate
that's correct Mr chairman.
Anyone on the call as part of an
opposition to this bill.
Saying we'll go to members of
the committee I see a chief
Johnson Johnson to Johnson I was
told you would be present as
well too are you are you just
here to help us with the
questions.
Mr chairman of the committee yes
Sir technical questions that may
arise as part of DPS or or state
police you're not advocating one
position or the other I I do I
do but I do believe this bill is
very workable and you know I
have I have several things like
at I don't think I'm on here for
that but I do believe this bill
is very workable and in it does
move us towards you know some of
the a reform conversations that
have been happening for the last
seven eight months and if you're
you know if you want me to go
further I will otherwise all
local stand for questions like
everyone else or hi very good
it's going to committee members
so you can slide show hands
indicate a desire to be
recognized to speak.
committee members hand Senator
Stewart I see
Senator Lopez.
Anyone else at this time.
Right Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman of I like
this bill a lot I like what
you're trying to do I like what
you're proposing I'm just
looking at the FIR earns their
supposedly from the FIR there's
a conflict between section six
and and that maybe you could fix
before the next committee
section six of.
I'm in section twenty nine to
seven yes I the director has the
power in duty to issue
certificates of completion for
graduates of the law enforcement
training program section and
creates a new section against
the law enforcement
certification board the role of
issuing certificates of
completion to graduates so it's
probably a minor fix to section
six because section ten as the
new secretary trying to create
so that's the only thing that to
I jumped out at me on the F. I.
R. so
And that's it Mr chairman good
catch us good catch Senator
Stewart Sanchez are you all of
my with the FY are on this one
issue do you agree there is a
conflict if so how do you intend
to correct or correct here
tonight what if you disagree
there's a conflict let's hear.
Chairman we agree that there's a
conflict and we seeing that
technical issue we didn't have
time to get the draft amendments
to you before that but we did
catch at the last minute FIR and
we can either fix it here or fix
it in its next committee which
is sent funds.
Yeah we don't have much
confidence in that.
We'll keep my mouth shut.
Mr chairman the as senator Munoz
to the finance committee thanks
several of my bills really good
the other day so I have
confidence in his ability to fix
system built.
There is a need well you're
you're just you're uttering him
up Senator Stewart the I don't
have to but are not the already
fixed my bill.
Exactly the way he with thought
he was fixing it.
Let's let's will come back to
this wonderful.
might my preference do not send
bills out of the committee that
can be corrected here when we
have the time an opportunity to
do so sometimes that's not
available to us but I think we
have that time and and the issue
being a pretty narrow industry
that that we can fix it here
tonight you that's the pleasure
of the committee so I have next
on my list Senator Lopez and
Senator Ivey Soto.
Senator Lopez who have the
fourth thank you very much Mr
chairman I'm you know the the
alley a has come in front of
Senate rules for many many years
and we've had discussions over
and many times Mr Chairman
about the role of the Ellijay
and exactly what its function is
I know it serves a very
important role and I I what I
see in front of me is is that a
good proposal because I think it
does need some work
my question Mr chairman is so
the AG is taken out completely.
Mr chairman and Senator Lopez.
Of the boards is that what
you're referring to on the alley
yes.
Mr chair.
That is correct.
May I ask Mr Chairman why did
you take out take the AG out.
Mr chairman I will for terror
expert witness AJ for.
In center.
Mister chairman Senator what we
try to do an in restructuring
the board is is making more
bounces you can see we took up a
lot of law enforcement in tried
to.
What more advocate on the board
and so at in trying to decide
who came off and we went on we
just try to figure out.
What is the best way to create
balance and not create a
conflict and we felt that that
was a secret we can
replace more advocates and
that's why we really pushed or
for balance in the bill.
Okay.
Mr Chairman
I guess for me I think the AG is
still a law enforcement officer
in the context of of what his
role is in the state.
So was there consideration at
least to leave on as an ex
officio there's still some
opportunity for if coordination
between the AG's office and the
L. E. A..
Mister chairman Senator.
Since there's already a
technical fix that's I think
something we can do is yes we
have that oversight perspective
from the Attorney General.
Mr chairman and I think you know
of course it depends to the
Attorney General as we know how
the everything in the mix as but
I would def I think that would
be a consideration if you would
consider it Mr chairman because
I think it just
Again it works hand in hand and
Mr Chairman there's also and I
realize secretary Johnson knows
is to is with the public safety
advisory commission I know that
one pertains specifically to
state police if I believe
correctly but
yeah there's there seems to be
sometimes an overlap of some of
the different entities that have
oversight of some of our
officers in the state.
So
as we continue to look at this
Mr chairman I just a yeah
there's a think other room for
improvements to that at least Mr
chairman for right now I would
appreciate if you would consider
I think the Attorney General
still needs to stay involved
with this thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I think we're in
agreement in place.
Within that.
Thank you Mr chairman for right
now thank you what are the
social.
And our mission and how much I
would I would point out the
brown.
the AG is the lawyer.
Well our personal County Board.
So the so the AGS presents
in the board I think and I think
actually it's been one of the
problems that happened in the
past was that we had a previous
AG.
where where the agent was
Representative as the chair of
the board was making certain
decisions and then the lawyer
for the board was in a position
to Sandi thank you has he work
for the guy who was making the
decisions
in terms of of of of that and so
I do think that is something.
I hear very clearly what what so
what this is saying and I and I
think she's right in terms of of
the renewal of the AG in terms
of the overall ecosystem in New
Mexico but I think I think we do
need to resolve the question
them on over of how you deal
with representation of the board
if the AG is on the board also
recognize the edges involvement
as the lawyer for the for some
something along those lines Mr
chairman I'd I think given that
what we're talking on the floor
session until until Wednesday
that that this is a bill that
there some amendments new issue
working over the weekend and and
and and and we may be able to
resolve those as we get our
meeting on Monday
I do have so as I'll glance of
the bill I did that that you
have in the
Section.
Some of the bill.
On on page ten lines one through
three.
The official transfer six
million dollars to the county
for the purpose of implementing
the law enforcement training and
and that appears to be the only
change that you're making and
section seven of the bill and
when I looked down at the bottom
of the bill I'm nervous that.
Sections one two six eight three
nine am going to factual I want
my twenty one The effective date
of section seven is Sharman
twenty twenty two so I'm
assuming in two parts.
Six million dollars will be
transferred.
On July one twenty twenty two is
that correct Mr and and someone
else in.
Mr chairman and senator yes the
reason in the reason for that.
That delay is whenever you make
the we take that reversion from
Ellie pia that gives the system
time to take into account right
because that's coming out of the
general fund financial summary.
Sounds of that I have no is been
disturbed by the by the fact
that that we have this fund and
that in that it's it's a it's a
content on reversion to the
general fund.
it's I've I've always thought
that there are better uses what
proper uses of the fund.
And and so I'm glad that
somebody else has been looking
at that I guess the concern that
I have.
If you look at this over the
weekend is that the language
that exists though on page ten.
At the top there which is part
of statement dimensional
transfer.
Is that right on on July with
the divisional transfer it says
the mission transfer and
language remains in statute.
Some of them.
In twenty twenty right it's
process management shall
transfer and then the question
becomes what child H..
How does how they transfer is
also one time six million is
this an annual assessment.
And so and so while I understand
I appreciate very much the
purpose of this section of the
bill and there are two thousand
six million and I and I and I
have absolutely no problems
substantively with that it seems
to me that that may be part of
the provision.
What Representative at the end
of the bill striking the
sectional together where do you
draw resistant will say our job
around the twenty twenty two or
whatever date you choose depends
on.
Terms dollar shop take place I'm
not
talking about a long time
requests for six million dollars
not an annual distribution are
we're talking about a
We're talking about you got all
of the services are growing
Senator tech and impact of this
section if you look on page nine
our.
Wells which is the beginning
section seven S. as manually
on or before April fifteenth and
so in in in in this so on
one point one inches on us I
don't what you're talking about
an annual distribution of six
months.
Is that Miss Mister chairman
assuming us AJ is that is that
is that correct.
Mister chairman Senator the
intent was to have an annual
annual distributions so they can
continue the funding of the
alley a on a recurring basis
this house Mr chairman Senators
the for the.
Yes.
Yes yes.
So
that was completely
Last time that you wanted to
annually.
And so and so
you have your religion some
technical fixes.
perhaps than subsection C.
should be commended the state.
And you know annually on July
one of each year the official
transfer six million dollars or
or or something of that nature
so that so that is clearly
you're not talking about Gen
distribution.
Distribution and and and and Mr
Chairman seven yes I I just it
Mr forte
Start with the product there and
and if it's really important
that I would invite him to up to
complete.
Thank you Mr chair Senator the
the intent there was to me here
what was done historically with
the distributions from the
Olympia just building on is.
B. Ellie PS bill from last year
to increase the distribution
again state police at two
million dollar distribution on
an annual basis we tried to mere
that language to capture the
intent of what was done
historically with Ellie PS in
this bill.
And and and I do appreciate that
it is it is
This is a less than clear
section of law all.
and the and for example identity
thank you know on page eleven
line twenty one perhaps after
annual distributions are
determined in accordance with.
You know yeah yeah not right leg
like there's not there's a few
things in there where I think I
think we can make this are all a
little more workable and in so
that so that the intent of what
you're trying to do R. is is
that are.
It's not subject to somebody
later on reading in a different
way.
right you know
You know twenty some years from
now when centering was no longer
the legislature
and and given you're given your
but assessors my tenure you know
forty five years from now when
you're no longer the executive
director of the of the
municipally that there's
somebody on that document
document plan out of space
on the number of us I mean I do
think I don't think this is the
kind of bill that that I mean I
I tend to agree with the
gentleman that that'd be good of
this bill have these these
revisions done before it left
and and I and and I do recognize
that there's no there's no
difference on the ability of the
bill to move forward if we did
it if we tried to tonight or if
you guys worked on it over the
weekend with our feedback and
then and brought it back on
Monday for us to present
amendments and then and then and
then plus the bill going forward
I'm just trying to have one last
question if I may instruments in
the US for Mr forte that I'm
that I'm trying to figure out of
this moment and it's really with
the very perplexed and that is
our the previous bill Senator
Parnell's Bill which the
municipal league opposed Garcia
sent as well yes Representative
but he is present in person on
this bill and and I was hoping
on this front page you can
explain the division of labor.
Mister chairman Senator Mike my
energy was totally focused on
this bill whether gonna be
distracted with the previous
one.
Representative expertise in this
thank you.
Thank you Senator Ivey Soto
anyone else on the committee at
this point.
Senator when you know Senator
Ingle I'll ask you to give
additional thought to the point
made by Senator Ivy Soto that a
do pass tonight would be no
different than you getting a do
pass on Monday in terms of the
advancement of your bill since
we don't meet to take the
committee report on a Wednesday.
it you also heard me say that it
is long as we possibly can hold
this committee to its task I'm
very reluctant to have any bills
come out of this committee with
the expectation they're going to
be resolved or or pick up in a
later committee or on the floor
when we know what they are here
I realize there may be issues
that get identified after this
committee that we miss.
But none the less I'd like to
resolve them here so there are a
number of considerations that I
I'm asking you to give some
additional thought to and
ideally agreed to a tabling of
the bill to Monday so table into
a date certain I'm I've I think
that's the more court probate
procedures what we call it
context temporarily table but I
think you'd be doing temporary
table in there has to be a
motion to move it off the table
it's center to give fair notice
I think the alternatives to
table to a date certain all I'll
turn to the parliamentarian in a
moment but before I do that I'll
just note that a few things one
is a I agree this is much
needed.
Please understand for you you in
law enforcement.
A friend.
Both both of her she's.
That's not a problem we'll we'll
fix the bill by Monday
thank you committee all right
very good I think that's
advisable if I can do for you
before we conclude the meeting
of the committee I just have a
few thoughts
it's always very challenging for
me to be from Los crucis
although having lived many years
in Albuquerque and many of you
know that I have for my
daughter's living in Albuquerque
and many of my good friends and
my colleagues in the Senate
living in Albuquerque at the
same time to be read the papers
even as recently as last week.
To seeing what looks like a
complete okay Austin the
Albuquerque police department
despite years of negative press
negative headlines department of
justice oversight federal law
enforcement coming in and yet
even last week I'm still saying.
Some sense that the special
master feels there's non
compliance and and they're
talking about even taking it to
a higher level of of control of
Albuquerque police department
by by those outside of not only
Albuquerque not even outside of
our our community but I think
outside of our state.
And I think that's terribly
unfortunate I wish I could speak
intelligently about it but
obviously I can't that's not an
area where I have enough
information but I would like I
would like to know more about
that and and I think this bill
may be the opportunity for us to
do that I think it is incumbent
on the legislature Albuquerque
to being our most important
commercial center are more large
university of the center of
commerce that that we recognize
that even most recently when the
federal government look at
Albuquerque among other cities
for a space investment defense
investment one of the reasons
that I was given when I explored
why didn't go to a very was
crime of the crime rate in and
safety concerns.
So this is costing us and and
it's costing us our young people
are leaving.
I hang around my daughters and
their friends they love
Albuquerque led New Mexico
they're afraid to raise families
there I don't want to have to
raise our families in gated
communities that want to have to
send their kids to private
schools.
but they but they feel that
feeding that is the M. O. for
Albuquerque when you can afford
it Senator because the academy
so live behind gates and ten so
what should be the way it is so
I hope I hope center windows
you're you're on a good step to
this the only only other
observation I have and will
conclude is with regard to the
AG I think there's some good
points were made there it
probably is an appropriate role
for the AG but it may not be on
these boards and I and I hope
you'll get some real serious
thought to that and one other
thing too which surprised me it
were removing a need to Senator
Lopez point from this from this
process of this board I'm
surprised they wouldn't be here
today unless they don't care.
About whether the removed or not
if you know if they were being
removed in the in this is not a
surprise bill center windows is
not something you just dropped
this week you've done this in
the regular order and it's been
in front of the legislature for
several weeks of the fact the AG
is not here and we've not heard
from aging opposition can only
suggest to me that they have no
of this agreement with the
reforms and and being removed
from the process in a way that
you propose that that would be
my observation about the AG but
I I think Senator Lopez is
invited you to maybe reach out
and find the appropriate role
for the AG's office in this
legislation.
So those are my thoughts Senator
Duhigg you just to be recognized
yes I'm sorry Mr chair I I I
don't mean to to go after you
but just one thing just jumped
out at me and census sounds like
there's gonna be a little bit
more work done on this I I
wonder if while you are doing
that.
Is looking at page thirteen it
seems to me that the intention
is that the information that's
in the data back there's a
database is not intended to be
public records and I just wonder
if the existing exceptions that
are within it prop would cover
all of that information so you
just might as as you're looking
looking again at this bill might
want to just just look at that
and and and if if it's meeting
the the intention or not.
Thank you Mr chair thank you I
don't see it Senator Ivey Soto.
Thank you Mr chairman the first
is in response to a question
if if if the rest of the
chairman and if the if the
sponsors are are happy to come
back on Monday the motion is to
be made the second thing is
it interestingly sept
Representative bill removed and
I did a bill some years ago I
think it's primarily has built
an and I'm departments in terms
of of of who will would be on
the board of the law enforcement
academy
and in that bill we we did
remove the.
Recognize that the agent was
going to be the.
The lawyer for the the economy
one we didn't keep them on the
board and interestingly the AG's
office was not
engaged in that in that
discussion either so so this
would be over the consistent and
then and then the third thing is
and we can talk about over the
weekend if we need to but
and and I certainly would not
ask you guys to incorporate this
in any changes that you make
it's possible that that that
that at least for messaging
purposes there may be an
amendment made on Monday
to whatever you bring in our
that in any municipality of over
five hundred thousand the
sheriff Shelby the lawn of the
chief law enforcement officer
and we'll see what the reaction
is because of that amendment
between of this committee and
finance committee
and and and and and and and
finance can give it you can give
it further consideration thank
you.
Thank you from the body language
I think you'll have a discussion
with Senator Stewart you
certainly drew her attention I
also kinda at ten minutes also
gonna hurt is that is that an
advertisement Daniel A. Ivey
Soto for eight G. in the in
twenty twenty two perhaps that's
what I heard I'm not sure about
that
it is not you know you never
just never notes that arriving
so that job base this one
doesn't.
When parents are part of a
larger position.
Sh well you have a bill to maybe
correct that.
With that serves as a the chair
will know the time is a little
bit after six o'clock committees
but in a good hard week I'm
going to have the the committee
in recess until Monday with
Senator windows that are Ingle
your bill we will try to take up
first recognizing your
responsibilities on the finance
committee will try to get you
first and out to get to your
committees on it'll be the first
item on our agenda Monday all
right.
Thank you Mr chairman we're
running women pushing your time
today we appreciate the comments
we understand what relief with
clean bill and and we don't
have.
Please please.
Council service and our staff.
Mr water which is on the call we
have an exceptional it is very
staff centered on the line
setting but not on this anyway
so you might as well go on a
return to work.
Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman just tell them that
if they don't bill amended more
information the look then
senator Daniel Ivey Soto this
weekend.
Good luck to all.
No objection I'm it.
Thank you to thank you to the
committee for staying late thank
you senators for your time the
chiefs law enforcement June
Johnson chief eight thank you
very much we'll see all of you
again Monday please thank you
thank you chairman say it.
