It's what this is proposing, Mr.
Chair, is to increase.
Oh
To make essentially a permanent
in the legislative Health and
Human Services in terms of.
Mr. Chairman, there are so many.
years I sit on the Canadian set
all of you have also sat on the
committee during time.
There was so much
responsibility, um, the
oversight of the committee have
to dedicate.
Yeah I believe as a something
similar to the legislative.
Yeah like you say about study
committee.
They do some.
They have permit a staff.
I believe this is a proposal
that could serve us here in the
legislature
by making it a permanent um
Essentially just duplication of
permanent committee for us to do
this.
Uh, this would also provide for
your staff.
looking for state agency
compliance.
Yeah,
Mr. Chair, I think it's just an
important
conversation for us to have.
Thank you, Senator, Senator, we,
uh, the rules of this committee
are not here very frequently,
but the rules of this committee
have people registering in
support or opposition
beforehand. We don't have anyone
registered to support our
opposition on this particular
bill, so we all go to members of
the committee.
questions or comments or
emotions 488.
You want it all?
Well,
all right, I'll move do pass,
um, is there any other
discussion?
seen them? Is there any
objection or opposition, then
Senator, you have to pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee.
Munoz.
Also chairing a committee at
this time, part of the reason
just so members in the public
understand that sometimes we
give priority to some of the
bills with those that are
supposed to be a place else,
needed someplace else. Senator
Munoz here on thank you. 225
Senate Bill 225 modify several
existing state laws.
Increases the penalty for living
from $500 to $250 for graffiti
and maintains it's a petty
misdemeanor and a $1000 fine,
but it, it mandatory community
service for 150 hours within 6
months.
For damage over $1000 and
maintains the 4th degree felony,
but it's a mandatory community
service from 160 to 200 hours
within 8 months, improper use of
travel lane fines doubled from
250 to 500.
Illegal dumping penalties. It,
it creates a new 4th degree
felony classification for
illegal dumping with fines up to
$10,000 and it maintains
existing penalties for scrap
tire violations, um, misdemeanor
for under 5000 pounds and 4
degree felony for 5000 pounds or
more.
I do not have a.
This is
please.
Very good. If you don't have an
amendment, you might have a due
pass.
I don't,
I don't know.
but
Nope, all right.
We have uh one.
Person registered to um support
your bills, uh, it's identified
as Chief Dale Wagner, but you've
got somebody standing in for
Chief Wagner, is that right?
Oh, we got the chief, the chief
chief, huh? All right. I've got,
I've got Chief Dale Wagner's
showing on my list.
We'll, we'll listen to the
metal, meadow.
Mr. Chair, uh, Deputy G Wagner,
he, he tagged me in for the rest
of this evening, so you'll have
me instead of him.
Uh, good evening, uh, Mr. Chair,
member of the Committee, Troyer
chief, New Mexico State Police.
Uh, we support Senate Bill 225
because it strengthens penalties
for several behaviors that are
harmful to our communities. This
bill raises fines for littering
a stricter illegal dumping
penalties, including felony
charges for large-scale
violations. This will not only
keep our state and communities
beautiful, but also discourage
pollution while protecting the
environment. Uh, it increases
community service hours for
graffiti offenses, as you
already heard and holds the
offenders accountable. Um.
Senate Bill 225 also has some
penalties related, a few
penalties related traffic
safety, which increases fines,
serving as a deterrent for
dangerous driving behaviors and
habits, New Mexico currently has
some of the cheapest penalty
assessments for traffic
violations in the country
despite some of the highest
rates of driving deaths. Uh, I
believe the 2nd highest rate in
2022, uh, and the highest rate
for pedestrian deaths in the
country. Um.
Citadel 225 promotes
responsibility and respect for
public places, ensuring a
cleaner and safer in New Mexico
and I urge its passage that I
think it'sponsive for bringing
it forward.
With or without amendments.
Thank you. That's all we have
registered and support your
opposition members of the
committee.
So dude.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. So I, I think a $250
fine for littering is excessive.
Um, especially,
Given that I
suspect that a lot of people who
would get hit with this are
probably unhoused, um, I think.
And would never be able to pay
these fines. Uh.
I
I can't support the bill because
of that.
Mister Chair. Thank you, others
in the committee.
Thank you,
Mr. Chairman Senator Munoz, I
think that this bill complements
the Breaking Bad Habits campaign
that we rolled out, and I think
there needs to be a message sent
that we need to clean up New
Mexico and I actually, because
in rural New Mexico, they don't
just dump bags of trash. It's
like washing machines, and you
should see our arroyos and
people just use r New Mexico is
dump centers all over. It's hard
to get it cleaned up, so I, I
absolutely support it as a
deterrent, especially for rural
New Mexico and the dumping
problems that we're seeing, so
thank you.
Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and Senator Munoz.
I appreciate you. It's good to
look at this statue of Mr.
Chairman.
Because on page 4, page 5, page
6, you know, those are the fines
for all the various traffic
offenses.
And there's a couple of them
that might be too high,
riding without a motorcycle
without a helmet, 300 bucks, uh,
glittering from a vehicle is 300
bucks.
Uh, but there are some that are
really low, 25 bucks, 25 bucks.
These were appropriate fines,
Mr. Chairman, when we had court
costs, when we had court fees,
but we, you know, realized why
are we taxing criminal
defendants when, when we should
be paying for these programs out
of the general funds, so we
removed all of the court fees.
Um, but I think we forgot about
the fines that we need to impose
these fines upon a guilty
finding.
Before, folks would be deferred,
you don't pay the fine, and then
you see my clerk pay the court
costs. Now folks are still
getting deferred sentences, and
they're not paying anything.
So, you know, this may be a good
way to hold folks accountable,
but on page 11, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Munoz, on the top of
page 11, the $500 fine, what?
What violation is that? Is that
the, the building we saw earlier
with regards to the diesel
trucks.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, so
that, that $500 fine is, is
essentially getting on that in
that left lane of traffic. So if
you're going down the
interstate, you're getting in
the left in the traffic and
camping there. Um, I've worked,
uh, several areas about most of
the state across I-40 and also a
large portion stayed in I-25,
um, when we're, when we're
running to emergencies, um,
including when our, our last
officer was shot and killed, and
we are heading out to that area
to help support him or
Heading to your guys's
emergencies that left lane ends
up clogged up with semi trucks,
particularly semi trucks, which
gets very, very tough. Um, if
we're running a license irons
and things like that, we cannot
get.
They don't go anywhere. They sit
in that left lane and they'll
sit there sometimes for miles,
uh, if you have a licenses on,
oftentimes that makes very
little difference whatsoever. So
what it does is it helps keep
that left lane open for people
who are passing, who are
actually passing, that aren't
just driving side by side, uh,
and primarily for emergency
vehicles as we're responding to
things um because obviously
pulling into the, pulling into
that, that uneven inside
shoulder of the interstate is
hazardous for us. It's hazardous
for them as we're trying to. No,
it's amazing how many folks.
in that left lane. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Mr. McCready.
Senator Thornton.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Just a
quick question regarding uh page
3, the last uh section D.
Talks about when a single
occurrence of graffiti is
committed by more than one
individual, the court may
apportion him out based on the
degree of culpability. How would
that be determined?
Mr. Chairman Senator, I think
that's up to the judge to see,
you know, who brought the spray
paint, who drove him there and
the, the court will have to
determine that, the culpability
of, of who was really the
offender and who, what role they
played into it.
So if I'm uh with my partner and
we get caught. I'm gonna say he
did it.
Mr. Chairman, I police are be
camera proves it. You did it.
I, I mean, the judge is gonna
have to determine who bought the
spray paint, how much
culpability did you plan it?
Were you gonna go do this all
day long, or did you just
a can of spray paint in your
dad's garage and decided to go
have fun, and it turned out bad.
Thank you. I didn't mean to be
facetious. I, I actually don't
have a problem with the
Most of the uh raising of the
fines, I think, um,
For most folks, fines don't mean
anything until they actually
commit the
The crime, if you will. Uh, and
so most people won't even
recognize that these fights have
gone up until they actually do
the do the crime. So, um,
So how is this money used once
it's come in, where does that
money go?
Um, Mr. Chairman, some of that
the, the fines for dumping go
into a fund for cleanup.
Uh, and then the other clients
go into the general fund for
appropriation, is that right for
the state police. Thank you.
That's all, Mr. Chair.
So,
uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
page 12, uh, line 3, we're
creating a new 4th degree felony
for illegal dumping and a
$10,000.
Uh, up to $10,000. My question
is, what's the current?
penalty for illegal dumping,
which is 7413-4J is illegal
dumping. We've previously had a
misdemeanor when it was tires up
above, but we're adding a new
criminal penalty for a new
felony and a $10,000 penalty.
I'm just curious
I couldn't find the penalty. The
existing penalty for illegal
dumping now under the statute.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, there
isn't one right now. Um, so it's
essentially, if someone comes on
your property and they dump off
their refrigerator, a wood stove
and, you know, 7 microwaves. Um,
there is a civil a civil
citation that can be issued for
that. Um, there is no
misdemeanor, there's no felony
for that, for the illegal
dumping. Now, if it's tires, so
if you have, you know, it's
that's, that's listed in there
with under tires, but it's
specifically the tires with the,
the misdemeanor and the felony.
So what this does is it actually
creates a crime, so if someone
comes out.
your property and they dump that
that trash or the uh, you know,
the, the trash that Senator
Rattley is talking about when we
go out around this beautiful
state, and, and as you're hiking
or you're driving or you're
doing whatever, um, in
backcountry and there's these
huge piles of trash, essentially
all we can do with that is, is
littering at this point in time,
which again, amounts to a $50
citation as it stands right now.
So, or with the illegal dumping
as it stands currently, um, it's
a civil citation in which um
they can
forced to clean it up, but that
all has to go through the court
and that's, again, it's also,
well, there is no, there's no
um.
There's no criminal aspect
attached to that.
So no, I appreciate the fact
that there's no criminal
penalty. I, I'm just not
comfortable with a 4th degree
felony. If someone, I mean, to
felonize someone if they, if, if
they go out and drop off a, a
mattress, that's the classic and
I'm not, I don't support that
for a minute, but the collateral
consequences that come with a
felony.
are extensive and a $10,000
fine, it just seems like
That's similar to what we're
doing for a
You know, 5000 pounds of tires
up above, where once someone
could go out and
Drop off a stove, but now they
they got a 4th degree felony,
and does that.
That just concerns me that that
penalty, potentially, I mean I
get it, if it's depending on
this, like the, like we did for
tires, we created a gradient
penalty. So for one level it's a
misdemeanor if it's a certain
quality and it's a 4th degree
felony if it goes up. I mean I
just I'm uncomfortable without
having that.
Radiation in there.
For the same situation. I mean,
if someone's dropping a few
tires, they get a misdemeanor,
and yet under this, if they drop
one washing machine, they get a
4th degree felony. Does that
make sense? The challenge with
that or, or
Curious what your thought is on
that.
Yes, sir. It, it certainly makes
sense, um.
The goal of this is to make it
much easier to just go and
dispose of stuff properly, um,
because oftentimes with this
stuff also comes hazardous
materials that end up getting
into our waterways and things of
that nature that have if there's
just, there's a lot to come with
the illegal dumping that, that
the goal of this is to help.
Again, just, um, essentially
push people towards the
disposing of it properly and,
and correctly.
So that was like, I, I think
there needs to be a gradient
there because whether you change
oil at a mechanic shop and they
decided to go dump the barrel of
oil in the desert, right? That's
a different felony because it
takes a lot more to clean it up
than just me throwing.
An air conditioner.
you know, but if you throw a
refrigerated air conditioner,
then it has a CFCs and feel, and
then it's a different felony
because those gotta be.
in my high back guy and so it's
a different felony for a
different level, but
OK, Mr. Chair, I, I, I will tell
you, I, I have some heartburn
about the bill generally, so I
was hesitant to go make a bunch
of amendments to the bill and
then vote against it. So again,
but I do have concern. I think
you need to have the same this
is problematic here. I agree
with that too. I think that we
need to do some grading there
because there's a difference
between
just dumping the mattress and
dumping 500 gallons of oil on
the ground.
And
Sure.
OK. We'll bring you back in an
amendment for that.
I don't cruiser look.
There's, there's deliccluses
here. Ho there it is. So
representative Bill Cruz.
The very first house bill this
session to the Senate Judiciary
Committee.
And what a, what a privilege.
Members.
Members were hearing House Bill
47
Representative Dela Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members, I'm joined today by
Stephanie Chardon Clark,
Secretary of Texan Road, uh,
rather than winging a chair I'm
gonna read a statement that kind
of describes why we're here,
which
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members, I'm joined today by
Stephanie Chardon Clark,
Secretary of Texan Road, uh,
rather than winging a chair I'm
gonna read a statement that kind
of describes why we're here,
sure you all already know
anyway.
Uh determined the HRC committee
substitute for HB 47 is a simple
build and effectuates two
veteran property tax exemption,
constitutional amendments that
were approved by the electorate
in November of 24 general
election. The first
constitutional amendment
increases from 4000 to 10,000,
the exemption that may be
claimed by any veteran or
veteran surviving spouse in
future years, the 10,000
exemption will be adjusted for
inflation in the future. The
second constitutional amendment
expands the disabled veteran
property tax exemption to
include a proportionate
exemption reflecting a veteran's
partial disability. The current
exemption only provides a 100%
exemption for 100% disabled
veterans. ZHTRC substitute
ensures there is no confusion
about how the two exemptions are
to be stacked together, so that
the county assessors can
implement them consistently and
was chairman members, there is
an emergency clause in this
simply because the assessor
have to give notice in a timely
fashion, um.
Secretary, you wanna add?
We stand the question.
Chairman, stand for questions.
Thank you. I'll say it's a good
bill.
All right. Well, uh, we've got
um in support.
Uh, Joe Dickerson.
Are you here?
Diggerson? No? All right, we'll
go to members of the committee
though.
Members of the committee,
Senors. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Rosano de la
Cruz. So does this merely codify
what the voters ratified last
November or uh.
simply codifying statute the
constitutional amendment.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Maestas, yes, uh, they agreed
that this was what they wanted
to do for our veterans, and this
codifies and creates the process
for doing that. Awesome. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Representative, for your
leadership, I think we should
codify all the property taxes in
the Constitution and then take
them out of the constitution.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Any other questions? Pleasure of
the committee with motions,
anyone?
There you go. Who's that?
Senator Thornton? It's a good
motion to make.
Standing for the vets, right? Is
there any objection to the DuP
pass motion on House Bill 47
before we announced the vote,
Representative, please let your
colleagues know that things in
the in the in the senator are
moving along for house bills
we we we chairman, I'm impressed
we're not as quick as you are.
You should always be impressed
over here
Thank you. You have a do pass
47. Thank you, Chairman,
members.
Do, um,
So you wait here, set of Bill 66
next.
Oh
Yeah
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 66. I have
only one person registered in
opposition, Nelly Wilson, no
others and support, so you have
the time you need.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So as
you'll recall when we did the
recreational cannabis, uh, bill.
We also made some changes around
expungement and also to uh the,
uh, criminal offender Employment
Act.
Um, and there is an existing and
we, we basically said that look,
if the, if the your prior
conviction doesn't have some
nexus to your job. It can't be
considered. And we gave law
enforcement an exception for
that, but we really should have
given uh some other exceptions
as well, particularly for folks
who are working with vulnerable
populations. And so that's what
this bill does. It would add to
the exceptions, uh, to that act
so folks who who could not
consider those convictions, uh,
unless they were part of the
nexus of the job, uh, folks, uh,
the EC ECD if for folks who are
working at a childcare facility,
um,
caregivers uh at hospitals, uh,
CYFD employees and, uh, PED uh
applicants, and so that is the,
the bill, Mr. Chair, that's all.
You want anything?
Thank you, Mr. Chair Shelly
Stro, general counsel, Early
Childhood Education and Care
department. Uh, the other thing
that the amendment, um, that
Senator Duig mentioned, uh, did,
was it removed the ability for
misdemeanors to be considered as
a part of um looking at crimes
in public employment and
criminal history. This includes
background clearances for people
who are caring for children, um,
licensing for PED.
And uh the vulnerable
populations that we talked about
in uh for hospitals and CYFDs.
So, uh, the main driver of this
is that we would like to be able
to, we don't, we don't want to
be required to, um, preclude
them from a background clearance
simply based on a misdemeanor,
but we do want the ability to at
least look at them some uh
misdemeanors can be very
concerning when you're talking
about children enticement of a
child, for example, is a
misdemeanor and uh we uh
Um, would like to be able to
consider that when looking at
Criminal history for.
People who watch kids.
Much as I said, we have an
opposition, uh, Denali Wilson.
This a Zoom or
oh there you go.
Miss Wilson, you're the only
opposition. I'll recognize you
up to 22 minutes, please, OK?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Denali
Wilson. I'm a staff attorney at
the ACLU and the ACLU
respectfully stands in
opposition to SB 66, uh, the
criminal offender Employment
Exemption Act was enacted to
protect individuals with
criminal convictions from undue
discrimination in employment,
the act already allows public
employers to consider
convictions that have a direct
nexus to the, to the job, um,
and any associated risks which
balances
safety with fair hiring
practices. We think that that
fairly addresses the
hypotheticals that were
presented in the bell
presentation.
Well, we recognize the
importance of protecting
vulnerable populations,
expanding exemptions to this law
undermines its court purpose
while protective, wind
protective statutes are weakened
by numerous carve-outs, the
exceptions overtake the rule,
and eroding protections against
discrimination.
We would encourage a narrower
fix, um, rather than a wholesale
exemption and urge the committee
to preserve the act's intent and
reject um additional exemptions.
Right. So we have registered and
supported opposition members of
the committee.
Senator Branley.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Dupe, I see this as a public
safety bill, and I think it's
one of your many bills that um
strengthen uh child welfare laws
in New Mexico. That's exactly
what I see this. Can you, um,
Can you maybe give us some
examples of some very disturbing
misdemeanors, um, that would not
be allowed to be considered for
a childcare worker today.
Thank you. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Brandley, thank you for
that question. Um, the
misdemeanors, um, enticement of
a child is um one of them, um,
definition of that crime is.
uh concerning cruelty to
animals, misdemeanor, aggravated
battery against a household
member, battery against a
household member, stalking, um.
Dog fighting cockfighting,
negligent use of a deadly
weapon, negligent use of
explosives in these and exposure
voyeurism, assault on a
household member, assault on a
school employee, misdemeanor,
aggravated battery, um, battery
assaults and harassment are.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, and I agree, I would
think that any of those crimes
that you just mentioned should
absolutely be considered before
we put them in employment
opportunities around their
children. So thank you for this
and many of the other laws
you're carrying.
Anyone else in the?
Questions?
A way in um, I'm puzzled a
little bit. I'm glad to see the
secretary here for CFD. You're
this bill directly implicates
CYFD but they haven't taken a
position on it, uh, here today.
Uh, this bill also directly
implicates PE, um, and allows
both those agencies to consider
criminal history and hiring, um,
and the fact that they're not
supporting the bill, which
puzzles me a little bit. Um,
we're, we're opposing the bill
one way or the other. So again,
I appreciate the secretary being
here, but um we haven't heard
from either one of those two
agencies.
on the bill uh today and so I'm,
I'm gonna assume from back that,
OK. She's telling you she
supports, so good. I would, I
would expect that you would uh
CYD would want to know and be
able to screen uh employees for
criminal history and would
encourage the agencies who are
directly there, the bill reads
exactly CYMD in the bill, um,
and reads public education.
do these things, if the bill
passes, and I would think they
would really want this enough to
Advocate for it with you,
Senator. So I'm glad to hear the
secretary here on CYFD but
Um, yeah, push, push.
And, and Mr. Chair, I know when
we were first discussing this,
we were just talking about ECECD
and then these other folks got
it added in. My understanding is
at their request.
OK. So,
Good. Um,
Next time we'll invite you all
to come up and say nice things
about it, so.
Others from the committee, any
other questions, Senators? No,
motion? Anyone?
motion for a due pass. Any
further discussion, seeing none
Senator Duke of a do pass on 66.
We're looking for a couple of
other senators who can do quick
matters. So let's see, I've got
the note, Senator Ham Hamlet.
Oh, we have Senator Brent too,
OK. Um, Senator Hamblin, we'll
do yours first. Sit at 357.
OK
He.
All right, thank you very much,
Mr. Chair. The committee.
Today we are talking about the
much beloved anti-donation
clause.
And I know that you'll
Get the sarcasm in that we have.
Uh, in many of our communities,
we have rural areas that are
just yards.
Uh, away from attaching to basic
utilities that should be
everybody's right. Seel 357
creates the essential Services
Development Act, which will
allow state support for
infrastructure projects
primarily in residential areas.
Relating to broadband
deployment, energy, water, and
wastewater services under SB
357, only the state may provide
public support for essential
services projects, including
grants, loans, loan guarantees,
infrastructure improvements, and
professional services.
I'll give you a little bit of
background in 2022, the
legislature passed a House Joint
Resolution One.
will allow for an exception to
the anti-Donation clause to
allow the expenditure of state
money to provide for essential
services primarily for
residential services to include
infrastructure, including
internet, energy, water,
wastewater, and other services.
And this safeguards, and there
are safeguards to protect public
money and develop a program to
allow for public funds for
Internet and those basic
utilities that we all talk about
and especially those that we are
learning so many of our
communities are, um, in, in very
much need, and I want to give a
background.
a brief background.
Is that this started from a
conversation in my community,
and there are several folks that
you're going to be able to hear
from that are online.
That are on septic systems that
are just yards away.
From city or county sewer lines,
but can't afford the 15,000 or
$20,000 it would take to connect
to them. So they're stuck
depending on septic systems,
many of them that are leaking or
not functioning in full
capacity.
There are folks who are paying
over $300 for access to the
internet in rural communities
when those of us who live in
cities have access to cheaper
internet.
Many of us have rural
communities in our districts,
but this doesn't just apply to
those rural communities. It can
help those in urban areas as
well that are on septic systems
or have poor access to
broadband.
And I would like to introduce my
expert, Larry Heran, um, also we
do have folks online and I'll
get to those after Larry says a
few words, if I may, Mister
Chair.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman
Larry Harran registered lobbyist
for the city of Las Cruces. Um,
the city of Las Cruces for
years, we've had um several
areas where the septic systems,
uh, you have residents working
on septic systems, but now it's
changes to the regulations
regarding septic and, smaller
than half-acre plot, if they
need to replace their septic
system, they won't be able to
get permit for it. So we've been
trying to get them connected to
sewers for probably the past 15
years or so. So this would be a
perfect type of program.
the essential services of
anti-donation exception, and so
that's why we've been, we've
been working to help try and get
those citizens connected. Just
real briefly, what I would tell
you is, in order to adopt a
program or get public support,
the local government must enact
a development plan and also an
act by ordinance, the plan and
the criteria for application and
awarding of any grants pursuant
to this program. Once that's
approved, um, and funding has
been provided by the state. They
have to enter an agreement with
the
Department of Finance and
Administration. So there's
several layers of oversight for
these programs and then also the
legislature will have to
allocate funding for any of
these projects, and so there's
several different layers where,
um, elected officials and you
all will have a chance to look
at these, um, programs as we
adopt them and I, I'll stop
there and stand for questions.
And Mr. Chair, um, I, I do want
to acknowledge that this is a
strongly supported by Donana
County, and we have the chair of
the commission board of
directors, I believe,
Christopher Shell.
Hernandez is online. Also, we
have, uh, in case we're needing,
uh, Elizabeth Teeters, who is
the director of the city of Las
Cruces Economic Development
Department. But at this point,
if we can go on to online
proponents, we do have somebody,
I think, Mr. Chair, that you and
I both know, Rose Garcia from
Tierra del Sol, uh, as well as
some other folks, is Rose not
online?
What about uh Orlando Gonzalez?
You've got my list there, so
you're welcome to bring people
up.
Larry Suillo, my understanding
is none of them are present or
on Zoom. Rose might be under
Nora Beltran.
That's so, yeah, we can have
Rose speak first and then go
through the rest of the lines if
that's all right, Mr. Chair.
Sure. All right. Ross?
Go ahead and unmute yourself.
There you go. Hi, this is Rose
Garcia.
And uh I'm uh with Tierra del
Sol housing, a nonprofit
organization I've been asked by
several residents of San Miguel,
uh, to represent the community
as many of them do not have
internet and broadband access to
send you this message and uh as
well as many of them lack uh uh
wastewater treatment uh in San
Miguel, um, the only
facility that's really
compliant, is like clinica the
familia, and they have uh
somewhat uh internet, however,
the rest of the community lacks
a wastewater treatment, so basic
services are not existence, um,
many of the residents are low
income elderly, and um the
central focal point is the
church and the parish hall, and
uh and so that small
businesses are discouraged
because it lacks basic services.
So I totally support the Senate
Bill 357 and I'm very grateful
for you all to consider it and
um so um I'm happy to answer any
questions that you may have and,
and I appreciate that the county
is sponsoring this
appropriation, um, and, um, so
please, uh, call me.
If, uh, you have questions.
Thank you, thank you, Rose. This
is Joseph Sabata. I just want to
say hello.
Orlando Gonzalez.
He was traveling, so there is
also a copy of an email that he
sent, uh, that was received
earlier today. Also, um, Arturo
Uribe.
Uh, if Arturo can speak.
Mr. Reba, you're recognized for
2 minutes.
Hello, Mr. Chair and
And committee, my name is Arturo
Uribe. Um, I'm from Mesquite.
I'm living in Las Cruces right
now, but I've been working in
the unincorporated areas of
Donana, which they are
recognized as colonias.
And there's a much need for a
lot of infrastructure in our
communities. So I urge you to
support uh Senate Bill 357,
because I know it will bring us
a quality of life that we all
deserve.
Thank you. Thank you, Arturo.
Arturo, how come your camera is
not on.
Like, I just wanted to put the
picture on.
The the the picture does kind of
represent him pretty well for
those of us who know Arturo. I
think the committee would
benefit from having the camera
on you today, Arturo, I don't
know whether you, well, never
mind, we'll leave it, we'll
leave it. We'll leave it alone.
All right, um, Orlando Gonzalez,
Chris Chacho, Larry Suillo, any
of those enator? I don't see him
around or if I, I do know, uh,
Elizabeth Teeters, who is the
director of the City of Las
Cruces Economic Development. Uh,
she's more than happy to chime
in.
Well.
And Commissioner Shelto
Hernandez is also online.
OK.
Elizabeth, if you don't mind
speaking and saying a few words,
and then we'll go to uh
Christopher.
Go ahead.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
committee. Um, again, this is
Elizabeth Teeters with the City
Economic Development department.
Um, you know, this bill, there's
There's a, there aren't a lot of
mechanisms in the state of New
Mexico to assist, you know, uh,
any kind of constituents because
of anti-donation. So this bill
finally gets the opportunity to
give these homeowners, um, the,
the opportunity to get the
infrastructure that they deserve
and they need, um, because they
don't necessarily have the funds
to do it on their own. So, you
know, it's, it's a step in the
right direction, and it's
something that I believe is
needed in this state.
Thank you, Ms. Teeters. Uh, did
you say Mr. Salchos? Yes, Mr.
Chair, uh, Commissioner
Hernandez is online if if he
doesn't mind speaking on behalf
of Donanata County.
Yes, of course. Uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for having us here this
afternoon. Um, I just wanted to
say that I am fully in support
of this bill as a district one
commissioner that has a large
majority of the underserved
population of Donana County,
including a large number of
colonials, and I think we all
know very well that we have done
it just disservice to colonials
for many years. That's why there
is the colonial infrastructure
fund, and I think when looking
at the
future of infrastructure in
these areas and the needs and
looking at how do we get people
off of septic or, you know, a
lot of these communities are
still on cesspools, a lot of
them, and getting them on or
getting them off of those, um,
it, those horrible septic
systems are so on and so forth,
but getting them onto the
much-needed critical
infrastructure, getting them
tied into water and everything
else. This is, this is starting
to right those wrongs, uh, in
our community, and I, I hope
that
we can all fully support this.
Thank you.
Serio. All right, um, and I'm
not seeing any indication of
Laidil Orlando Gonzalez here. So
we'll go on to committee members
questions and comments.
are doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator for bringing this. Um, I
just have one question, uh, so
in section 3,
I, I like the, the guardrails
that you're, you're putting in
there. I saw that in tax you
took out that subsection B on
page 4, lines 11 through 14.
I don't think you need it that
language, but I just wanna make
sure that it wasn't taken out on
the assumption that by taking
that out, it would authorize a
local government to provide that
under
Under subsection H of Section 14
Article 9 of the Constitution.
Mr. Chair and Senator Duig, I'm
gonna let Larry go ahead and
answer that question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator Do
think.
You're correct. It was, we, it
created confusion, Donna County
pointed it out when you saw that
it was an affirmative, that they
cannot provide public support.
If you look at the definition of
public support, it clearly
indicates that only a state can
do that. So in order to avoid
confusion, that's why we took
it. Thank you. Great, thank you.
That's all, Mr.
Who else?
Uh, Senator Hamblin, I'm just,
uh, I'm gonna swear you Phil, I
want to give you just a little
bit of history center words
here, Senator Stewart here, uh,
years ago, I enacted legislation
to allow for the creation of a
lower Rio Grande Waterworks,
um, organizationent Worth was
there for that too, and Stewart
there. So, I want you to
understand what members of that
was bitterly opposed, and you
can believe that now, uh,
incredible success story, I
think you'd agree. I think
everybody on the phone would
agree. We've been able to take
hundreds of people off of septic
systems, but it
infrastructure wastewater
treatment throughout my home
community, Mesquitevado La Mesa
San Miguel, um, all the way into
Anthony, and now I think we're
up at Fair Acres and I'm not
sure seems like that, that
groups everywhere uh these days.
So a great success story, but
it's important and so will tell
you bitterly opposed by the
Anthony Waterworks uh system
because again it was a
territorial fight and we spend a
lot of hours here. We had
meeting after meeting, hearing
after hearing, and we finally
put it together and it's just
been a great.
success, we had to uh Senator
Lujan, uh, Ben Ray Lujan out
recently, Senator Martin
Heinrich out there to uh talk
about some of the federal
support they've given us to some
great success story. This is a
continuation of that, so it's
important, and you may or may
not know that history, but
we'll, we'll talk about the
history. It's important. It is
important, especially for the
people who live in those
communities.
Carratuto was around, Rose was
around, they, they've all seem
to fight over the years too, so,
uh, any, uh, Senator O'Malley.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. I so
appreciate um this uh.
Bill, um, and I do also
appreciate the guards that it
has to go through that process,
uh, the processes that you
pointed out, and this will be
very helpful to areas that are
still like far North Valley in
Albuquerque that still has
septic tanks and, and I know
that those folks would be
willing to and want to tie into
systems, uh, the systems, but,
um, you know, because of the
cost.
Thank you.
Yeah,
I, I might add that 2 years ago,
we passed Senate Bill 1, which
allows these local entities to
regionalize. It doesn't force
them to, but it creates a
process to do it, and I just
wanted to flag that with this
piece of legislation added to
that option.
All of a sudden,
That's something that it's hard
to believe those local entities
wouldn't want to consider that
now that they can actually get
the, the last mile, that last
piece of it, so, again, this,
this is an example of an
exception to the anti-omation
clause that I supported, and it
makes sense, um, I still have
reservations about doing away
with the anti- donation clause
altogether, and of course this
is just the enabling
legislation. We did that a
couple of years ago, uh, with
the exception that allowed this
piece of legislation.
So I just really encourage, I
mean, Senator Cervantes is
right, the struggles that we've
gone, and it used to be you had
to come back each individual
association had to become the
legislature and try and
horsepower a bill through here.
There's now a template to be
able to do that.
Anywhere, and I just think we
need to work to try and get this
across the line to add it to the
uh options for those entities.
So thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you motions.
So
questions just a quick, I just
wanted to
Actually, I think it's very
brilliant to get around the
anti-donation, um, clause.
And I think it's something
that's definitely needed.
Um, as I look through this, I
go, why didn't I think of this
earlier, but I'm, I'm new, so,
uh, it's OK, but I think this is
a good idea. You're welcome to
co-sign on to us if you want.
I'm serious, Senator, Mr. Chair.
Well, I know because I know for
a fact that I had some, an
organizational water group come
to my to my, uh, and they want
to be able to do exactly this
and they're saying we don't know
how to do this and we don't.
And we can do it ourselves, but
we're not quite sure how to do
it. So now you, you lay out a
template for them so they can
now approach this and, and I'll
make sure, so I can sign up to
it, I will.
OK, very good. Um,
And I wanna make sure it's clear
that this is only for internet,
energy, water, and wastewater
services. So it's very still
limited.
Is that correct, Mr. Cha,
Senator, yes, it is for those
utilities and especially those
that many of us are, are
constituents are experiencing
and having challenges with.
Very good. And that offer is to
anybody on this committee
because it is something that is
because of the hard work that's
already been done. This is that
extra little caboose to help
those people in those
communities.
So I'm absolutely that offers
very serious.
You know, we get accused of not
reaching out to the other side.
trying to have a bipartis
double, double thing going on
here, co-sponsors when there's
an opportunity for
bipartisanship, I'm gonna grab
it, so, um,
Senator Brantley has offered a
due pass motion, there being no
other discussion, is there any
objection to a do pass motion.
Sing, Senator Hamley, he would
do. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair and committee. Thank you.
Senate Bill 364.
It's their brand.
Good day both of you. Uh, do we
have anybody in opposition? We
have nobody in opposition. We
have nobody in sport. You all
have up to 10 minutes to do with
whatever you want.
6.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, members. Thank you
very much for having us here. I,
I am very happy to be here
presenting Senate Bill 364,
along with Senator Craig Brandt.
Uh, he is one of uh my key
co-sponsors, um we have 16
additional members signed on to
this bill and Senate Bill 364
recognizes that our immigrant
family members, neighbors and
friends are an integral and
valuable part of our community
and our workforce.
It does so by removing outdated
restrictions in state law and
allows immigrants with federal
work authorization to be police
officers and sheriff's deputies
in our state.
We have a lot to say about the
restrictions and the issues that
are currently occurring in terms
of uh recruiting and retaining
police officers, but I want to
share how this all started.
My siblings and I came to this
country in 1996 as kids, and my
brother Eric had always wanted
to surf. He did, he went through
ROTC in high school, ROTC at UNM
with inspiration and aspirations
to serve in the military or in
the work or in the police force,
but he couldn't do either one.
Unfortunately under current law,
only US citizens can be law
enforcement officers in New
Mexico.
Sadly, my brother Eric left New
Mexico and found a police
department that recognized the
value that he could bring to
this vital public service. My
brother was admitted and is now
a cadet in the Blue Island
Police Department, located in
Illinois, 16 miles away from
Chicago's South Loop.
He wanted to be here to share
his story, but as you would
guess, as a new cadet undergoing
the academy, not even his big
sister could get him out of
there. So here I am.
Um,
Senate Bill 364 expands
eligibility for law enforcement
work uh to individuals who have
received work authorization from
the United States citizenship
and immigration Service,
otherwise known as USCIS. That
means legal permanent residents
and also DACA recipients like my
brother.
They would still have to meet
all of the standards and
qualifications to be an officer.
Standards based on their
education, their experience and
character, not their immigration
status. That would open the door
the door to more than 51,000
more New Mexicans who would now
be eligible to apply to be long
to do law enforcement work, and
these are individuals who are
desperately needed by our police
departments and sheriff's
offices.
Mr. Chairman, we've talked a lot
about public safety, and we know
that public safety starts with
having police officers in our
communities available to help
and respond to our residents'
needs. The Albuquerque Police
Department said recently that it
has 885 officers, but it has a
budget of 1200 for 1200
officers. Every police
department and sheriff's office
in the state and nationally has
a similar challenge.
My brother would have filled one
of those openings.
He could soon be an officer who
understands the unique needs and
challenges of our communities
across the state.
In Albuquerque and Santa Fe
across New Mexico, who can talk
to people in their own language,
but instead, he's going to
serve.
And do that wonderful work for
the people of Blue Island in
Chicago.
I hope that today we take a
first step in fixing this. With
that, Mr. Chairman, I would like
to introduce my expert witnesses
and also uh yield to my
co-sponsor, I yield first to
that or Craig Brent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh,
you know, it's it's an honor to
be able to.
Carry this bill with some with
Senator Nava, um, you know,
Being a police officer is, is
quite an honor, uh, in our
society, and we have a huge
shortage. Um, this just opens up
the door to people here who have
legal status and not citizens
yet, but they have legal status
and they can serve in our
communities as law enforcement
officers if we change a couple
of little things in law that
this bill does, it opens the
door for them to be able to
serve.
One thing we definitely need in
Albuquerque and Rio Rancho and
and really our whole state is
more law enforcement officers.
We just don't have enough of
them. This will make it to where
we hopefully get some more, and
maybe in a couple of years, uh,
Cynthia's brother can come back
to New Mexico and serve in rear
Rancho.
Thank you.
Did you want to introduce your
expert and add anything more.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, yes, so joining us
today, uh, is at the table,
Jessica Innes Martinez. She's
the director of policy and
coalition building at the New
Mexico Immigrant Law Center.
She's a legal expert with deep
well and knowledge on
immigration and the work of the
authorization process and
joining us virtually on Zoom is
Chief Jeffrey Farr, who serves
as Blue Island's, uh, police
chief, and he has a master's
degree in criminal justice and
he has worked closely.
with uh the US Department of
Justice, and he has been a
powerful champion for allowing
DACA recipients to serve in
their communities as police
officers, and with that, Mr.
Chairman, I will yield.
All right, we'll go to members
of the committee with questions.
Anyone?
Motion for a DuP pass, any
further discussion?
Um I would just add, uh, before
we finish up, we do hear
senators, both of you, the, the,
uh
The fact that we're struggling
to fill a lot of law enforcement
positions and you, I think you
mentioned the, the statistics
Albuquerque's PVD department's
funded for up to 1200 positions
they've been able to fill 300
less than that. Um,
Interestingly, I'm trying to
look around the room to see who
would, would have been with me
in Toiana County, but we
recently had a presentation
there with the sheriff, Donatta
County. She's fully staffed, um,
and so we go around the state
and hearing to our committee, we
heard the presentation. We go
out here and everybody's saying
they can't fill their law
enforcement positions. She's
able to do it, uh, so we should
try to figure out. I have asked
her what she's doing differently
and I think she'd be happy to
share it. She did in our
interim, but she seems to have
no difficulty filling her
position, said Tonyana County
Sheriff's Office of just
Mr.
is fully staffed also is it
really? Well, well, and that's
terrific. It's good to know that
the more that we can hear people
are able to staff um their law
enforcement agencies, it may be
something other than pay,
really, right? And it, it, there
may be any number of other
factors under consideration. I
see a lot of our law enforcement
friends here in the room today
too, but um the fact that we,
we're sometimes not able to fill
positions may be explained by
the people who were in charge,
so, uh, thank you all very much.
Uh, we're on a do pass motion.
seeing none, you got to do pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members. Thank you.
it
And here, yeah.
OK. Who's gonna do it?
Ber Berg. Oh, good.
Senator Bergman isonics, House
Bill 214.
What's the number?
House Bill 214 bottom of your
agenda
I'm trying to
We're trying to show the house
some activity over here.
Well
OK.
Oh.
I'm not sure what you're asking.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I am
sponsoring this with some House
members, and I now have some
other uh Senate sponsors. This
is the Doula credentialing and
Access Act, uh, the doulas have
been working on this for 4
years, and it's asking the
Department of Health to set up
some credentialing. It's already
been written into the state plan
for Medicaid. So Medicaid is
ready to approve it. Adua is not
a midwife. They are.
An assistant of they're like a
medical assistant to assist
midwives, and this is a, a
service that will be provided in
the rural areas of our state.
And with me today is Kelly C
Legislative Finance Committee
staff. Oh, are you there? Yes.
OK, so she
She's the expert.
And then.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Bergman. We also have 5
speakers in support, and I
believe you have the list.
Your group. So, um, Melissa
Marie Lopez Sullivan. Uh, you're
here. OK. Uh-huh,
Your group. So, um, Melissa
Marie Lopez Sullivan. Uh, you're
here. OK. Uh,
to
the poy. I got that right,
you're here too, right?
Uhwendolyn Romana?
OK.
The secretary Gurginsky, you're
here?
He to
Doctor E. Espe too.
Yeah
Special Sturgis, Zoom also,
looks like.
Not here, but not on Zoom, OK.
And then Jennifer Goetz.
And then I get to Roiss.
You hear Zoo maybe.
OK, uh, we'll recognize each of
all for up to a minute, Miss
Melissa Marie Lopez Sullivan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Melissa Marie Lopez Sullivan,
and I serve as the executive
director of the New Mexico Doula
Association. I'm also full
spectrum doula, a certified
lactation counselor, student
midwife, and commissioner on the
New Mexico Commission on the
Status of Women. I have
personally supported many
families throughout birth
postpartum and have seen
firsthand the many benefits of
duaca. I encourage you to
support HB 214, a bill was
strong bipartisan support that
is rooted in evidence, equity,
and cost effective.
ive ness Doula's work alongside
patients to reduce medical
interventions, improve birth
outcomes, and enhance both
patient and provider
experiences.
With Medicaid covering roughly
70% of births in New Mexico, HB
214 is a smart investment that
expands culturally congruent
community-based duaca, improving
outcomes and saving the money
saving the state money. This
bill is also a workforce
investment and the association
along with the coalition of over
20 organizations is prepared to
train, support, and sustain this
workforce. We've built
infrastructure, training and
mentorship programs so that we
can ensure that doulass are well
equipped to integrate and
To health care settings while
providing the community-based
care model that makes this work
so effective. Thank you.
2
Good afternoon, chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Taz Tamopovi, and I am
from Santa Alfonso Pueblo. I
have been a Doula for 17 years,
supporting families through
prenatal labor and delivery and
postpartum. My role in these
families' birth stories has been
vital to their physical, mental,
and spiritual well-being.
As the black and indigenous
mother, I know firsthand that we
That fear can be present when we
are expecting a baby. In New
Mexico and nationally, black and
indigenous people are far more
likely to experience
complications and death during
birth.
The US has one of the highest
maternal mortality rates among
developed nations.
With black and indigenous
birthing people facing mortality
rates 2 to 3 times higher than
white breathing people.
New Mexico's maternal mortality
and infant mortality rates
reflect these inequities.
It is important to have
representation in both our doula
curricula and in the workforce
to be able to choose a doula who
shares some of the same lived
experiences, traditions, and
beliefs beliefs as our clients.
This saves lives. I am asking
you please to support HB 214 Ju
credentialing and Access Act.
Thank you.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jennifer Raphael Goetz,
and I'm the director of the New
Mexico Commission on the Status
of Women. I speak to you today
in support of the Doula
Credentialing Act. When we hold
events and speak to women around
our state, one of the most
important issues they raised
with us is the lack of birth
workers in their rural
communities.
Doulas are culturally and
medically significant in these
communities. They are trusted
members of the community and
it's time to recognize and
reward their importance. The
funding has been allocated for
this program. All that is left
is to vote for the
infrastructure to be put in
place to allow doulas to
continue to serve their
communities. The commission on
the Status of Women asks you to
stand with us and vote yes on HB
214.
You hold for me?
You want me to? OK.
Good evening, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Elizabeth
Greginsky, secretary for the
Early Childhood Education and
Care department here to share
that we know that doulas play a
critical role in maternal and
infant health outcomes and that
research consistently shows that
Doula support leads to better
birth experiences, fewer medical
interventions, and improved long
term health outcomes for both
parents and babies. At the early
childhood education and care
department, we recognize that
perinatal support is essential
early childhood support,
investing in children and their
families during the.
their earliest years, beginning
in pregnancy, yields lifelong
benefits. That's why I'm here
today to voice my support for
House Bill 214 community-based
doulas are an evidence-based
strategy for states to improve
child and family outcomes,
creating a voluntary doula
credentialing process will allow
more birth workers to utilize
Medicaid reimbursement for their
services. We, uh, so I surged
strong support for uh House Bill
214.
240.
Thank you.
Online, Gwendolyn Omana.
Are you there?
So when you recognized for up to
2 minutes.
I am here.
Good afternoon. My name is
Gwendoly Nomana, and I serve
upwa Women United, an indigenous
nonprofit in northern New Mexico
as an indigenous person myself,
Doula and Mother, I want to
highlight the critical need for
doulas in rural areas of our
state, where families face
significant reproductive health
disparities, limited access to
providers and cultural barriers
in birth care.
Yes, Doulas provide essential
support that improve birth
outcomes, reduces interventions
as the, the teammates have
mentioned and strengthens
community care, but investing in
doulas means investing in
healthier communities. We need
policies and funding that
recognize their vital role in
ensuring every britain person in
our country relieves the
respectful, culturally centered
care we deserve.
Thank you so much.
Also on Zoom, Doctor Eve Espey,
you're recognized for up to a
minute and a half now.
Doctor Espi.
Yes, can you hear me? Yes, for a
minute and a half, ma'am.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair
Cervantes and committee members.
My name is Eve Espey, and I'm a
board certified OBGYN. I've been
delivering babies in New Mexico
for over 30 years. I'm here
representing the American
College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists to support HB 214.
We support this bill because the
science clearly shows that
Dulacare results in better
outcomes for our patients and
their babies. And at a time when
we want to recruit and retain
providers, we know that better
patient outcomes make New Mexico
a better place for providers. I
recently cared for a young
pregnant woman who presented to
the hospital in early labor with
her partner. They were scared
and anxious. We were fortunate
to have a volunteer doula for
her. She had a beautiful baby
girl with the emotional,
physical, and spiritual support,
she could only receive from a
doula. What's good for patients
is also good for their midwives
and doctors, creating a better,
more supportive practice
environment where we all combine
our
unique expertise to provide
great care. Please join me and
the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists
in supporting this important
legislation and vote yes on HB
214. Thank you very much.
Thank you on Zoom also.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Danica Tarones, and I am
a wife, daughter, and mother.
I'm also a full spectrum doula
and the birth justice manager
with bold futures. I have spent
the better part of the last 5
years providing support in
different capacities to birthing
people and families in my
community of southern New Mexico
and beyond.
I have also spent nearly 4 years
working alongside state
agencies, organizations, and a
community coalition of experts
who provide care to pregnant
individuals to crack the content
presented before you now.
Today is monumental because we
have an opportunity to truly
support the duala profession and
create real sustainability among
the workforce of individuals
providing this essential care.
Too often our duelis have been
forced to choose between diving
into the hard work that they are
called to do, or providing a
livelihood for themselves and
their families.
We are also one step closer to
the healthcare system that
provides true wraparound care to
New Mexicans. For this reason,
and countless others, Julas are
an essential piece of this
puzzle. Doula save lives.
With a strong vote of support
today, you will be reinforcing
to your communities that their
pregnancy experiences matter,
and that duaca is not for just
the select few that can pay out
of pocket, but for all New
Mexicans, please vote yes to
House Bill 214. Thank you for
your time.
that completes those who
register and support and nobody
registered in opposition, so
we'll go to members of the
committee for questions.
They do it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
senators for bringing this, uh,
so my only comment is, uh, on
page 5.
Uh
You had lying.
24
You have the Doula credentialing
advisory council being
administratively attached to the
Department of Health.
I have been educated by Senator
Trujillo, the administrative
attachment is way more trouble
than it's worth and we should
avoid it, uh, unless there's a
very good reason to do it. So I
would just suggest, uh,
Hello, is this
Have any amendments been made on
this already with making this
amendment, send it back to the
house. Um.
So, Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
we're happy to discuss this, the
funding is in the budget for
that um administratively
attached um advisory council.
Well, and Mr. Chair, Senator, I
was just gonna going to suggest
striking and administratively
attached to it and replace it
with within. So it's just part
of the department. It is just
under the department.
In general, rather than being
administratively attached. I
don't think that would change,
change your funding issue,
it did pass unanimously in all
the committees and on the floor
of this house.
So if they choose to do this,
this should not be um
controversial.
In that case, Mr. Chair, I'll
move on page 5, line 24, strike
and administratively attached to
and replace that with the word
with it.
No
or Mr. Chair, the secretary of
the Department of Health is
here.
And I'm just wondering if we
could get her input.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, it's my understanding
that the amendment would um
place this within the Department
of Health, the, the budget's
already there and um I'm
supportive of that.
Motion for an amendment. Are you
on the amendments on on the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, um, the nurse deponics,
no great catch. It, it, it's
very problematic, um, at times.
It's problematic when we
When we add words to that. Like,
the words administratively
attached to the department.
That's laid out in statute as to
how that happens.
Case in point on the, the
The uh
Police, uh, the police, yeah, I
don't want to mention it by
name. The police bill that, that
I was one of the sponsors of
Centerville 19 a couple of years
ago, added words and it said
administratively attached to,
and then it said the department
shall provide staff and you just
confused everything. These words
are really, really clear and
they point to a statue that all
the secretaries and everybody
kind of follows.
I believe it's problematic when
we add to, to that, I, I don't
have any problem with this, with
the words as they read now.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You, uh, work.
So I think Senator is to some
extent it's going where I was
going, I guess.
I mean, we've done this.
I, I guess I need to be educated
by Secretary Trujillo, but I
At this point on this bill, it
just seems like
We really need to make that
change.
I mean, is it going to make it?
tell, explain the difference to
me. What, what, so if it's
administratively attached versus
within. I is this a semantics
thing? I mean, it's what's the
difference I'm saying, yeah, I
don't understand the difference.
Mr. Chair, uh, I suspect Souther
Trujillo can explain it much
better than I can, if you don't
mind having her.
come up and do so.
Mr. Chairman, um, Senator, so
the difference is
administratively attached means
that they operate um
independently of the department
that they're within. They have
the authority to create their
own budget, and they have to,
and they can submit it through
the department, but the
department doesn't have
authority to change the budget.
The department doesn't also have
authority to hire employees or
supervise those employees. So if
you look at the government
reorganization Act, that will
tell you what their
Administratively attached.
Authority provides them. This is
an advisory board, and there's
no reason for it to be a
standalone. It's going to
function within the department.
So having it just within the
apartment saves all of that
other we're independent, you
can't supervise us.
Some present given what we're
seeing at the national level.
That answer really concerns me,
quite frankly, if we have a
change of administration decides
it doesn't want to do this
basically if they're not
administratively attached,
they're gone. Am I wrong about
that, Mr. Chairman, um, Senator,
I hate to say it, but you are
wrong about that. And and the
reason is is because of their,
their advisory.
Right, if they were like the
medical board, that might be one
thing, but their advisory, they
have the ability, they have the
authority to
To, um, exist. Nothing, whether
they're within or they're
administratively attached will
stop them from having the
authority to exist.
But I guess I heard you say
something about the budget,
they're gonna be within the
budget of the agency if they're
within and what happens if the
agency decides they don't want
to fund them. Chair, Senator,
could we have Ms. Klund from LFC
respond to the finances. I would
appreciate that. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, so,
um, right now the way the budget
is set up, there's 200,000
transferring to personnel for
the Department of Health to
staff this and 400,000 is put
into the other category for
costs of um
education for the doula's
community and for costs for this
council separately, saying that
you're gonna put it within it
would put that money more
flexible in the Department of
Health, but they could then
possibly use it for other
auxiliary.
So it's 61 half in the other
depending on what this body
chooses to do. So, we spent 8
years with the independent
commission on the Status of
Women not being
Followed through because an
administration didn't want to do
it. So I, I, I would oppose the
amendment. I think it's better
to leave it the way it is, just
because, again, that way there
is some separation and it's not
part of a budget.
On the moment, you know, the
discussion.
All right, send down. Let's go
to a roll call on the amendment.
So.
Be do
Senator.
Senator Paul,
Senator Stewart.
Senator Thornton.
Senator
No.
No, so that amendment fails,
Senator Duke used to out
Florida, only to say that I
think y'all need to spend some
more time talking to some, yeah,
that's it.
All right, thank you. Um, um,
anything else on the bill with
you know I guess I should say.
Anyone elseentor trying to make
a motion. Over depends.
Motion is due pass. Any
objection?
no senators, you have a new
path.
Thank you very much and
senators. Thank you very much.
We have uh Senator Woods on
Senate 281.
And then, uh, for everyone here,
we're gonna take a 30-minute
break after this bill, uh, we
have the committee's gonna have
a bit to eat.
And we'll do that quickly. It'll
be 30-minute break.
Sare Woods
281. Thank you very much, Mr.
Cha. I want to thank you for
taking the time today to hear my
bill.
so
I consider that a, a personal
thing you did for me, so thank
you, sir.
This bill is a uh
This legislation creates a
comprehensive framework for
managing wildfire liability for
electric cooperatives in New
Mexico and established the
detailed mitigation
requirements, liability
limitations and procedure
guidance for wildfire-related
claims.
The key provisions is wildfire
mitigation plan requirements.
The approval and oversight
process, the liability
limitations, the support
agreements.
And
The, uh
I, I would like, Mr. Chair, I'd
like to
Vince Martinez is an expert
witness. He's uh
Uh, manager, uh, the executive
manager of Electric Co ops here
in the state in Mexico if I'd
let him.
Described the bill to you also.
Good evening, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Vince
Martinez, I'm the interim CEO of
the New Mexico Rural Electric
Cooperative Association and
senior government relations
advisor for Tri-State Generation
and Transmission Association.
The inception of the rural
electrification Act in 1936
brought electricity to rural
parts of America that for profit
electric companies would not
serve.
Bringing light, heat,
refrigeration, economic
development of factories and
businesses to areas that have
been exclusively dependent on
agriculture.
Today are New Mexico Rural
Electric Cooperatives provide
electricity to about 80% of our
state and 20% of our population.
They serve as the cornerstone of
economic stability in rural New
Mexico.
And are a large part in New
Mexico's grid resilient and are
a large part of New Mexico's
great resiliency.
Cops and their employees are
leaders in the community and are
huge supporters of youth and
civic activities.
Their continued strength and
viability are critical to
protecting basic needs and
essential services such as
health, safety, financial wealth
and financial welfare of people
in rural New Mexico. In addition
to ensuring delivery of reliable
and affordable electricity
daily, the rural co-ops exercise
of vegetation management and
wildfire mitigation plans by
clearing and cutting back
electric rideaways.
We have full-time crews, crews
working on vegetation management
daily.
We are using our acquiring the
latest equipment, such as trip
saver and
Similar equipment.
That quickly, uh, and that can
quickly sense faults and bitter
and, and better turn off power
in targeted areas.
Installing uh sparkless fuses.
Fire retardant poles.
covers and coatings, replacing
old reclosures with more remote
control capabilities.
Some co-ops are replacing wood
poles with steel poles.
And we use the latest
technology, satellite imagery,
drones, and we're looking at
software such as Firescape,
developed by Sandia scientists,
which identify high-risk areas
more precisely.
Despite all these daily efforts,
there are a myriad of things
that can cause a fire that are
out of our control, such as
birds hitting lines and falling
to the ground on fire.
There are locked gates of
rideaways by landowners and
government entities.
Let us be clear, in no way are
the rural Electric co-ops ask
you to be exempt from liability
or responsibility for events due
to our negligence or misconduct.
If a cooperative negligent in
its operations and vegetation
management programs that can be
sued and there are no caps on
liability.
If a cooperative is sued into
bankruptcy for a fire that was
started, that was out of their
control and despite all their
mitigation efforts.
Who is going to step in and
provide electricity to that
area.
And what will be the effect on
New Mexico's grid.
Senate Bill 281 is not just
about liability protection, but
it's also about protecting grid
resilience. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I do have the
amendment.
If you ready.
OK, on page 3 line 3.
After being strike the remainder
of the line strike lines 4.
7 and er this, therefore.
A far originating from an
unplanned ignition such as
lightning, volcanoes, and
unauthorized or accidental.
Human caused fire or a
prescribed burn that is declared
a wildfire.
Replace the
Definition of the wildfire with
this one.
Sir.
Senator Woods, is this just a
legal definition that you're
clarifying it's used somewhere
else of wildfire.
Right,
um, Mr. Chair, Senator Branley,
that's the definition that was
asked by the state forestry, to
put in.
Thank you.
too big.
Mr. Sumner.
So in the original language it
says who would have to declare
it a wildfire.
This does not. This just says
that is declared a wildfire.
Uh, so it would not have to be
declared that by federal or
state emergency management.
Uh
Is that right?
That's right. So if I declared a
wildfire.
Has it been a wildfire under
this cement.
chair.
I
I would think that uh it would
be more of an expert, not to say
you're not an expert,
said a buddy.
I would say it's would have to
be a
Declared by a federal agency.
For that.
And Mr. Chair, Senator, that's,
that's kind of my point is that
you're removing that language.
Uh, with this one.
That's true.
They would also.
We'll take a roll call on the
amendment.
And I really
Oh, I'd like to play poker with
you. Senator.
Senator O'Malley.
And I
Senator work.
And stuff.
No.
amendment fails.
Back on the bill.
The members coming in so doing.
Mr. Chair, I believe I have an
amendment as
the head of us before the
committee,
so we were on the amendment
before we get to discussion,
we've got proponents and
opponents signed up, so let me
get to those real quick. Um.
Matthew Gonzalez on Zoom. Are
you here?
Yes. No.
And then we also have proponents
Edward Rochemont, uh, Mr.
Matthew Gonzalez, I can
recognize you for up to 2
minutes, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Matthew
Gonzalez and I'm the executive
director for the Consumer Energy
Alliance, a CEA, we advocate for
affordable, reliable, all the
above energy options for working
families and small businesses,
um, that support, uh, policies
while balancing environmental
stewardship with affordability
and responsible energy
development. Um, but I'm not
just the executive director,
CEA. I'm also a rural New
Mexican, a former mayor, and I
have the privilege of living in
my hometown of Siarron. I come
from a community that relies on
rural rural electric
cooperatives, and I know
firsthand how critical
they are not just to power as
power providers, but as integral
parts of our community. That's
why SB 281 is so important, um,
because when we talk about
protecting rural communities and
rural co-ops, uh we aren't just
talking about some distant
corporation we've never heard
of. We're talking about our
neighbors, our friends and
people who show up for us every
single day. These are the folks
who keep the lights on for us,
sponsor our kids' sports teams,
offer scholarships for students
and are the first ones out day
or night in the middle of a
snowstorm to restore power
because they aren't just serving
customers, they're serving
people who they know and care
about. Um, the beauty of
ops is that they are owned by
their small by members, all of
us who buy electricity from
them. That means we all have a
vested interest in seeing them
do the right thing, and we do in
small towns like mine, when
something isn't right, people
speak up, co-ops operate with a
level of accountability and
personal investment that goes
beyond the typical utility
because every time the power
goes out, it's not just about
restoring service to some
faceless account number. It's
about making sure our neighbors,
our families, and our local
businesses can keep going. At
the end of the day, SB 281 is
about protecting more than just
rural electric cooperatives.
It's about protecting our
community.
It ensures that we keep
affordable, reliable power while
maintaining high standards of
service and accountability. So I
urge you to support this um
statewide community backed
legislation. I thank you for
your time. Thank you, Mr.
Gonzalez. Edward Romont.
Here anywhere? No.
So here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee in 2 minutes,
sir.
My name is Edward Rougemont. I
am a registered lobbyist for the
immeasurable Electric
Cooperative Association.
With rising premiums and less
insurance coverage, cooperative
face a big challenge.
They could potentially become
bankrupt through no fault of
their own.
Cooperatives already spanned a
lot of money on vegetation
management and wildfire
mitigation, and we need to spend
more.
In order to protect our electric
assets.
We cannot do that if we are
paying out for lawsuits that
were not our fault.
Wildfires are serious threat to
our communities.
Word is that is that a major
insurer
is pulling out of the east side
of Santa Fe.
Because wildfire liability is
too great.
Let's face it,
Wildfire risk is here to stay.
We most recently found out that
our wildfire reinsurer.
will no longer provide wildfire
reassurance beginning January
1st, 2026 to rule electric
cooperatives. And that's the
reinsurer.
Having said that, in an effort
to keep cooperatives financially
liable, we request that you, um,
support uh Senate Bill 81. Thank
you. Thank you, sir. Uh, we only
have one registered opponent.
He
stout Sanchez.
Since you're the only
opposition, I'll recognize you
for 3 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Kelly Stout Sanchez. I'm a trial
lawyer, um, and as such, I
pursue um justice and access to
the court system through trial
by jury, um, for, for clients
who have been injured as the
result of misconduct of others.
I'm here to oppose SB 281
because this bill just
unnecessarily restricts New
Mexicans' access to our court
system. Um, first of all, the,
the bill grants almost blanket
immunity.
um, to the co ops if they follow
this fire prevention plan, but
the, it doesn't take into
account whether the plan was
reasonable, whether the plan was
within industry standards.
And then the bill goes on to
allow for a couple of instances
in which, uh, someone can bring
a claim against the co op. One
of those instances is if the co
op intentionally set the
wildfire.
The problem with those
limitations, um, in, in bringing
claims is that it raises the
burden of proof to one of the
highest in the legal system to
clear and convincing evidence.
That's the legal standard that
we use when we're evaluating
whether we take away a parent's
rights to their children.
Um, and it's this.
Raising the evidentiary standard
that significantly is just
unnecessary because our process
already has a system, right? We
already have to prove number one
that the co op acted
negligently, that their conduct
fell below industry standards.
And then number 2, most
critically, that their conduct,
their misconduct caused the harm
that it wasn't some unforeseen,
you know, windstorm that came in
or other situation that caused
it, you actually.
to prove that they caused the
harm.
And finally, one of the most
concerning pieces um in this
bill is the limitation on the
amount of damages that can be
obtained to $2 million per
wildfire. And so that means that
everyone in the community who
lost homes, businesses, loved
ones who suffered injuries and
harm from the fire, all of them
are limited to $2 million and
what that means is that it's
gonna fall on the backs of the
states to come in and assist
these
communities with relief, um, as
a result. And so just to be
clear, um, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, this is
removing these provisions from
the bill.
is not going to make these
co-ops have to pay every time
there's a wildfire.
People have to come forward.
They have to prove with evidence
that they acted negligently, and
secondly and most importantly,
that their negligence caused the
harm.
Thank you.
All right, that completes the
registered supporters and
opponents, committee members.
They're doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator,
so I, I agree with, with what we
just heard. Um,
And we kept hearing, well, we
shouldn't.
We're gonna go out of business
if we keep having to pay for
these fires that that aren't
these losses that are not our
fault. You're all, all, they're
only gonna be paying for losses.
If there was negligence and that
negligence did cause the harm.
And so,
This isn't, this isn't, we
don't, we don't have an unfair
system right now for these
co-ops. We have our, the same
system of law that that would
apply to everyone else. Um, so
I'm gonna suggest some
amendments, Mr. Chair.
Uh, and when this was first
scheduled uh before I had
something drawn up by LCS but,
but I don't have that now. So
I'm just gonna go through it.
Uh, on page one.
Line 11.
Striking relating to liability,
some might call them.
Page 1 line 12, striking
liability.
Page 1 line 16.
From the first semicolon after
Nota, so striking everything
after notice.
Up until the period on my 20.
And I'm gonna, I'm gonna go to
Mr. Chair, would you prefer that
I go through the whole
amendment, everything I'm gonna
do
some of your amendment is gonna
be to address the limited
liability and immunities, is
that right? Correct, yes. So
you're presuming that we're
going to adopt that and you're
doing so with the title. Yes,
yes. Let's take it all at one
time. Page 2 striking lines 7
through 11.
Which is that subsection 3.
And striking subsection E, which
is lines 22 through 25.
And continuing on to line one of
page 3.
And read lettering, those other
subsections.
Page 3, line 10, after the A
period, striking the remainder
of that line, striking in line
11 up until the word and before
an electric cooperative, making
that a capital A for A.
you
Yeah, so page 3, line 10, after
a period, striking the remainder
of line 10 on line 11, striking
everything up until the word
and.
Which comes after the that.
And making that a capital A, so
it would start just say
subsection A and electric
cooperative shall prepare a plan
that includes as well.
And then
Striking and the starts on page
7 and goes to the end of the
bill.
Striking section 6, section 7.
Section 8, section 9.
And section 10.
Of that.
Yes,
striking sections 6 through 10.
And this would, so this would
Keep the requirements, uh, to
file one of these uh plans. I
think that makes sense. I
understand that that's happening
already, uh, but it would not.
Uh, excuse negligence and, and
liability, uh, simply for, for
doing so.
Right uh.
No, I don't think those are
friendly, Mr. Chair
Yeah.
Goodness.
Yeah.
Other committee members'
questions.
I just, I do have a question.
You're stri striking the
relating to claws completely. Go
to relate to something.
I think that's
page one, page 1 line 11.
The, uh, Mr. Chair, I can, I
will revise my uh amendment.
To on page 1 line 11.
Striking.
Liability.
Um,
Could it, can it something
relate to in acting?
And I don't think so. Uh, so
relating to
And my company tractors, so
you've got, I think you've got
to do that, right, right,
you got to enact.
I mean relating to wildfire
mitigation plans?
Yeah, you can.
your original, your amendment
right now would strike.
On line 12.
Well, uh, wildfire liability
Act, you may be able to just
strike the word liability on
line 12.
You did that.
Well,
well, you, you struck while you
struck all of that wildfire
liability Act, didn't you? No,
no, I just struck liability
around 12.
There with
um like you fired on it no more.
We'll call it good.
We'll pull a bill.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, sir.
We will take a 30 minute break.
We will see everyone back here a
little bit less than 30 minutes,
quarter till, please be on time.
My apologies to all of you who
are waiting on us. We're gonna
get a little substance so we can
keep going, all right? So please
take a little bit of time and
see you back here quarter tire
reset.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Honorable members.
What we have for registered
supporters or opponents in a way
I send a message just before we
get started, we've got
individuals who uh sign and
support a Chi Wagger.
Not cheap wacker, but
There is stand in,
uh.
you, right? Is that right?
Yeah
I was the right way, Terry Cole
and support those of more
individuals to support them.
In opposition registry, we have
Diana McCash on a silver LMs Jim
Jackson, and Williams,
Lilo, Bernadette Hardy.
and Doug Carver,
which told me ask are the
opponents deserve a coordinating
spokesperson behind the
opponents.
Right, no.
Um, I'll recognize each of you
for a minute. That's
4689. It's about 10 minutes,
you're in a position with your
10 minutes and support center by
this.
that you have 10 minutes in. I'm
gonna rely on you to coordinate.
The individuals uh recognized
have signed up and support is
Alison Riley with you for your
presentation?
You know, yeah, it's very cold.
All right, you, you can do it
all in 10 minutes, that'll be
great. All right.
So we're
So we
just see this on that there's a
stop, correct? I mean, is
everyone testifying and seeing
this uh they understand what
they're, I just wanna make sure.
Thank you. Bye.
OK.
Cerise.
Thank you very much, Mr. 166.
component to our behavioral
health initiatives here in the
state.
To my right is Tim Shields, the
director of Mexical Behavioral
Institute.
And of course they counsel for
Michelle and Ali Again, and then
also after Thomas McClelland
from State Police. Mr. Chairman,
we're not changing any of the
procedures.
This affects two acts for
changing definitions to harm to
self and harm to others. And so
it, it applies to two sections
of law, the mental health and
developmental disabilities Act.
And the assisted outpatient
treatment Act.
We just talk about the assisted
outpatient treatment Act.
That doesn't change any of the
procedures, any of the abilities
or any of the thresholds that
someone would need to meet.
To put someone into assisted
outpatient treatment.
The requirements are the same,
the timelines are the same, and
the uh
And the burden of proof is the
same. What we're doing.
we're modernizing the statute as
it relates to the definition of
harm to yourself and harm to
others. So if you look on page
5, Mr. Chairman, if you look on
page 5.
changing the definition of from
lines 4 to 10.
Which is the current and
outdated definition, definition
was written in 1977.
And we're changing it to lines
11 through 16.
Uh, and so,
It's, it's, it's, it's a magic,
but it's not.
Currently, you have to, you have
to show that it's more likely
than not.
In the near future.
A person will inflict serious
unjustified bodily harm.
How do you prove that evidenced
by behavior causing attempting
or threatening such harm.
And then it causes a reasonable
fear. All of this is kind of
It's not really proving facts,
it's kind of proving various
things, the new definition is
much more clear, much more
precise.
And so
The person has inflicted.
has attempted to inflict.
Has threatened to inflict, in
other words, facts, if you could
establish those facts or has
acted in such a way to create a
substantial risk of serious
bodily harm, and the reasonable
probability that it will be
repeated with regards to the
harm itself, it's, it's similar,
uh, modern language.
Currently, you have to show that
something is more likely than
not in the near future, a person
will attempt to commit suicide
or cause serious bodily harm,
how do you show that? How do
you, how do you prove that, that
the new language is that uh a
person's recent behavior, in
other words, let's deal with
what's happening on the ground.
The person's recent behavior or
behavioral history demonstrates
that that person lacks the
capacity to care for the
person's own welfare or to
satisfy the person.
need for nourishment, personal
or medical care.
And that there is a reasonable
probability of death.
In other words, suicidal
ideation, serious bodily injury,
or
We uh serious physical or mental
debilitation and that's the key,
that's the key. You can take a
loved one to you and I 33 days
later, they're out and they're
doing the same thing. We have to
acknowledge the consequences of
bail reform every single
misdemeanant gets out the next
day.
Every single one, no matter if
there's domestic violence, if
there's misdemeanor batteries,
if there's drug addiction, if
there's homelessness, and so
sadly, we had a horrible system.
Drug addicts would stay in jail
345 months, but at least they
would be clean. Now they get
out, we need to create these
modern definitions to allow
professionals, police,
Parents, siblings, and, and,
and, and medical professionals
to uh to make these
determinations so that these
folks get the help that they and
their families much so desire.
So with that, I'll turn over to
general counsel. Welcome.
Thank you, Senator Maestas, um,
thank you for
The excellent work on the
pronunciation of my name. Um,
When I get married, it'll lead
to a Johnson, I'm sure. Um, as
the senator said, nothing in the
procedures here are changing.
Nothing in the procedures, the
commitment procedures are
changing that remains the same.
Um, and nothing with the uh
assisted outpatient treatment
procedures are changing. The
harm to self and harm to others,
um, is one piece, it's a
threshold matter that has to be
established by one of the
physicians that's examining the
person.
Um, and as the senator said,
this is just an update of that
language, uh, to, to sort of
reflect.
The world that we live in now as
opposed to the world that that
existed in 1980 when these
statutes were written, um, and
excuse me.
Um,
So again, so, so with that, this
isn't.
Changing any of those threshold
matters and for the commitment,
the Supreme Court of the United
States has said that the
standard for involuntary
commitment, the evidentiary
standard is clear and convincing
evidence, that doesn't change.
Um, the Supreme Court has said
clear and convincing evidence of
harm to self or harm to others,
but they have declined to define
what that means, uh they let
states do that themselves. And
so in this case, what we are
doing is really bringing our
statutes in line.
But the vast majority of other
states in this country do and
have for their definitions.
Yeah, my name is Tim Shields.
I'm the director of the Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute with
the Department of Health, um,
and I am here just to kind of
discuss how this plays out and I
kind of from a clinician
standpoint, so it is somewhat
difficult with the current
language to be able to evaluate
and try to predict future
behavior. So this cleans it up a
little bit and helps people be
able to better define what we
mean when we say danger to self
and danger to others, and that
also actually helps on the
inpatient process because as we
discharge, we need to set up a
safe discharge and this also
helps to find.
when that would, um, when that
would meet that criteria, so
they would no longer be eligible
for the civil commitment.
Mr. chair members of the
committee, um, Officer Thomas
McClu. I am a crisis
intervention officer, crisis
negotiator with state police,
been doing it for the past 6
years, and have probably close
to 300 hours of additional
training in the mental health
realm about how law enforcement
interacts with mental health.
Um, incidents and people who
experience mental health
concerns. Um, this bill is
really based on the language
being set forth, it, it helps us
because imagine your family
members are going through some
sort of mental health incident,
um, suicidal ideation when it
comes to um more extreme
measures. Maybe they're hearing
or seeing things that other
people don't hear or see, and,
and they're having that incident
that helps.
must be able to define, um, and
gives us the ability to make
sure that their rights are
intact if we have to detain them
for a warrantless emergency
health evaluation that's
Really, the Supreme Court and
the appellate courts have
already deemed that the standard
for that's gonna be probable
cause for evidence purposes. Um,
and they've deemed that
warrantless evaluations, um, are
good as long as we abide by
that, uh, probable cause, uh,
New Mexico has a statute for
43,110 that gives us the ability
to do that in 4 separate
categories, um, and this really
just plays along with the
behavior itself, uh, when we
look at incidents, it is, it's
It's really just indicative that
past behavior really predicts
future behavior.
Um, so when we start talking
about actions that have been
done, um, actions that are
currently there when the uh when
we received that call from
service, it gives us the ability
to
Um
For lack of better words, hold
that individual accountable to
those actions and base it off of
real incidents, not something
that we have to predict or weigh
out about in the future.
Um, I think ultimately when it
comes to suicidal ideation and
mental health. It's, it's a
significant issue in New Mexico,
um, and I will tell you from
the, the data that we collect,
it's, we deal with individuals
around the state at least one
per day.
Every day of the year. So, um,
this bill's only gonna help us
be able to provide the community
a better experience that
individualperiencing, uh, that
mental health concern, a better
experience and get the
information to the providers
that is needed so they can
continue service and have a
continuation of care.
You. Thank you, officer, um, on
online, we have uh Alison Riley
by Zoom and Trey Cole by Zoom.
Miss Riley, are you there?
Yes, I'm here for a minute, Ms.
Riley.
All right, thank you.
Good evening. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
with the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce. The chamber is in
support of Senate Bill 166.
Right now, too many individuals
in crisis fall through the
cracks because of our legal
definitions of harm to yourself
and harm to others are too
narrow. SB 166 broadens these
definitions to reflect real
world risks, ensuring the
individuals who desperately need
intervention, don't have to
reach a point of intimate danger
before they receive care. This
bill is not about criminalizing
mental.
It's about restoring competency,
providing life saving treatment
and closing the revolving door
that keeps cycling between
homelessness, emergency rooms,
and jails. By clarifying these
standards, we can expand access
to care. Any bill that addresses
New Mexico's behavioral health
crisis is a positive step
towards economic or future
economic development and growth
for our state. Therefore, we
urge you to vote yes.
Terry Cole, you're recognized on
Zoom, are you there?
Yes, Miss Cole, you're
recognized for a minute.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. I'm Terry
Cole, president and CEO of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, testifying as score to
best be 166. A big part of the
legislature's efforts to improve
public safety this session is to
rebuild the behavioral health
system and rightly so. We know
that addiction leads to crime,
homelessness, and
self-destructive behaviors.
Sometimes the state of mind of
addicts leads to threatening
actions to others or an
inability to care for.
themselves. SB 166 seeks to
refine the definition of what
constitutes a threat to others
and a threat to oneself. Making
these definitions more clear,
will help judges determine the
proper course of mandated
treatment. When successful
treatment not only betters the
lives of those with addiction
issues, but it also betters the
lives of their families and our
and our community. Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee, we
thank you for addressing public
safety issue.
issues above and beyond the
crime package, this represents
yet another issue that you all
are addressing at Senate
Judiciary, and we wanted to
express our appreciation for
your consideration. Thank you
very much. We hope you support
SB 166. Thank you. I overlooked
also on Zoom.
Uh, Santa Fe police chief.
Joy, are you there?
Chief Joy.
Hello there, Mr. Can you guys
hear me? I'm sorry. Yeah, you
recognized for a minute, chief.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman of the
committee. I, I, you know, have
the good fortune of listening to
everybody before me. I really
can't say it any better than
what's been said already, other
than to just say that uh pile on
my agreement with this, with
this language change and update,
so uh thank you and I hope, I
hope you both uh vote yes. Thank
you. Thank you very much, Chief.
All right, I went through the
names of
Those who registered in
opposition, so we'll, let me
just get an idea of who's here
and who may be expecting to be
on Zoom, so uh McCash.
here.
No
Silva.
No
Rights
I I saw you, Jackson, yep.
Williams
OK
Paris
Well thank you, Bernadette Hardy
on Zoom.
I'm expecting anyway, uh.
Bro,
Bronwynneer on you.
The carver, you're here, right?
Yeah
Marshall Martinez, because
Either here or Zoom.
To
All right, uh, if you would,
let's see, did I say uh Diana
McCash, you're not here.
No.
She's on Zoom too.
Oh, I wish I could show up on
um.
Mone Silva,
like not here either.
All right, we'll do with the
folks that are here.
That one
please
and I'm gonna recognize
everybody up to a minute and a
half, all right. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, and members of the
committee, Ellen Pines
representing the Disability
Coalition, we advocate for,
excuse me, the interests of
people with disabilities of all
kinds, including mental health
disabilities. Um, the, uh, I
understand you're working from a
substitute, that substitute
hasn't been posted for public
consumption, but what I
understand is that um the most
egregious language
in the original bill has been
removed extremely vague and over
broad language and we are really
appreciative of that being
removed. However, there are
still vagueness and overbreadth
problems with the remaining
language, and I'll give you just
a couple of examples, um, for
example, there's a reference to
something happening in the
relevant past with no guidance
on what that means. Um, there is
a reference to looking not only
to recent behavior, but
behavioral history, whatever
behavioral
Or history means and um how
relevant is it if it's
historical. So there are still
problems with vagueness and
overbreadth. Um, I do want to
make clear, um, to correct
something that a previous
commenter said, um, Ms. Cole
referred to dealing with people
with addictions, the mental
health DD code and the AOT
assisted outpatient treatment
Act do not address addiction.
They are mental health issues
only, so um just to make clear
that that's not the group.
We're working with. I would also
mention that um it's troubling
to bring this bill in the
context of what has already been
done by the legislature in the
realm of behavioral health this
year. You all passed and the
governor signed into law.
Thank you.
Commit sentence, but I've got to
get, give a chance to everybody
else, um, Miss, uh, Mr. Jackson,
but you can go ahead and.
That's right, stand your
committee members. My name is
Alicia Corris, a lobbyist for NM
need to vote and community
organizer in Albuquerque, we
respectfully oppose Senate Bill
166 as this bill dangerously
expands the definition of harm
to self in a way that could
force treatment on individuals
simply for experiencing poverty
or homelessness, lack of food,
shelter, hygiene, or medical
care is not a justification for
stripping someone's rights. We
need policies that address the
root causes of these crises.
With voluntary and accessible
support. Furthermore, the
language around harm to others
risks sweeping in nonviolent
individuals raising serious
civil liberty concerns. I urge
you to oppose this bill and
invest in engaging with on the
ground behavioral health
professionals, grassroots
organizations, and those that
are working with our community
that assists our unsheltered
relatives and not threaten to
impose involuntary commitment
for nonviolent existence. We
respectfully ask that you please
oppose SB 166. Thank you. Thank
you.
Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Jackson for
disability rights in New Mexico.
We too appreciate that the
substitute makes a lot of
progress from the original bill,
but we do have some uh
continuing problems with that. I
think I just have time for one
example, um, the current law
requires uh showing of
likelihood of harm to so for
others has to be shown by clear
and convincing evidence and more
likely than not. Now I don't
think of that as old fashioned
language. The new bill, the,
would, would say.
You just have to find reasonable
probability that there'll be
harm to sell for others. Well,
what does that mean? More likely
than not means it's at least the
50% chance that it's gonna
happen. Reasonable probability,
what's that? 10%, 20%, 80%? I
don't know, and I don't think
the judges are gonna know.
Um, it, we, uh, and just to
follow up, um, Senate Bill 3
passed out of here, it's going
to create this planning process
for regional uh mental health,
uh, people who are interested in
it, they're gonna develop plans,
they're gonna identify what the
gaps are, what are the service
needs. Let that process play out
and then based on that kind of
input, you'll have a much better
sense of what you might need to
do with our state's mental
health laws. Thank you. Thank
you.
Disco.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Douglas Carver. I'm the acting
director of the New Mexico
Sentencing Commission, and our
commission's legislative
committee discussed the original
bill and unanimously voted with
3 abstentions, not to support
the original bill.
And while I recognize the sub,
make some changes that address
some of their concerns. The
principal concerns of the
sentencing commission were the
shift in law from the present
law which which focuses on
future behavior and the shift in
the bill which focuses on past
behavior, and they're also were
concerned about the shifting of
the standards like Mr. Jackson
just discussed. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Daniel
Williams. I'm a policy advocate
at the American Civil Liberties
Union of New Mexico, the ALU of
New Mexico stands in strong
opposition to this legislation.
It's been represented that this
legislation would modernize and
outdated statute.
We respectfully disagree.
Neither are constitutional
rights nor our cherished values
of personal liberty, bodily
autonomy, and human dignity are
old fashioned relics of a
different time. Rather, they are
fundamental to who we are as a
state and how we live together
as a community. Sadly, this
proposed legislation strikes
right to the heart of both our
rights and our values, and in
fact moves us back in time to
the era of mass
institutionalization. This
legislature has already taken
bold strides to provide more
new.
Mexicans with urgently needed
behavioral health care,
drastically expanding the
criteria for civil commitment
and court-ordered outpatient
treatment, both of which
represent a deprivation of
liberty is unnecessary,
constitutionally dubious and
thus likely to invite litigation
and tremendously harmful. We
urge you to oppose. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Williams. Um, do
we have Diane McCash on Zoom?
No. Do we have Monique Silva?
Yes.
More silver.
Yes.
Miss Silva, can you hear me?
Silver.
Yes, I can hear you. Silva, you
for one minute, please.
Thank you. Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Mone
Silva and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Coalition to End Homelessness,
and we stand in opposition to SB
166 today. The expanded use of
the civil involuntary treatment
and commitment process against
unhoused persons with mental
health disparities raised
several legal, ethical and
social concerns, and contributes
to criminalization of
homelessness. This approach
often exasperates systemic
inequalities and may lead to
more harm than good.
Criminalization.
does not address the fundamental
issue, lack of stable,
affordable housing and
behavioral health services do.
Hospitalization and
incarceration are far more
costly than providing permanent
supportive housing with
integrated healthcare. Rather
than expanding involuntary
commitment and criminalization,
policymakers should prioritize.
Housing first approaches,
providing stable permanent
housing without preconditions,
voluntary accessible mental
health services, expanding
outpatient services, mobile
crisis teams, and peer support
programs. SB 166 paired with HB8
will have devastating impacts on
our unhoused neighbors. We urge
the committee vote, do not pass
on SB 166. Thank you. Bernadette
Hardy, do we have her by soon?
Hey, Ms. Hardy, you're
recognized for one minute when
you begin.
Hello, committee members. My
name is Bernard and Hardy. I am
here with Anim Native boat
lobbyists, um, and it's a
constituent of District 7,
Senate District 17. We would
like to speak in opposition to
HB 166. This crull bill does not
address the root cause of the
issues at hand. Our relatives,
neighbors, and community members
are suffering from mental health
disorders, um, and and and our
people with disabilities who
need care, um, and should not be
punished for a crime that that
they haven't even com
yet. This bill targets the poor,
the sick, and the suffering from
mental health crisis. Please
don't criminalize people who
need specialized support, please
post SB 166. Thank you.
Thank you, Bronwyn Naser on
Zoom.
Leer.
Yes.
Can you hear me? Yes, you for a
minute.
Thank you. Good evening, Mr.
Chair, committee and sponsors.
My name is Doctor Bronwyn
Easter, and I'm a forensic
psychologist and forensic mental
health advocate speaking on
behalf of myself and Nami, New
Mexico and strong opposition of
SB 166. This bill was introduced
during the special session in
June and received backlash from
over 32 different organizations,
all, most of whom are present
here today. Uh, the bill aims to
broaden the definition for harm
to self and others effectively
lowering the bar for civil
commitment. With respect to the
sponsor, all risk evaluations
are based around the future
language, providing clear
measurements. This bill is not
the answer to any question that
is being asked today. This
session has largely been focused
on public safety. There's been
an outcry for commute from our
communities that are not doing
enough to make our neighborhood
safe and to keep our businesses
open and thriving. However, the
national statistics have not
changed, only 3 to 5% of violent
acts are attributed to people
with serious mental illness.
This is nationally and people
with SMI are more likely to be
the victims of violent crimes.
the perpetrator. So what is this
bill saying that we want more
people to qualify for civil
commitment that we're more
interested in individuals having
judicial oversight that we want
more individuals to lose their
liberties. There are years of
case law that got us to where we
are today with the definition of
harm to self and others as it
currently reads. The bar for
civil commitment should be high
because it infringes on
individual civil rights. Let's
instead invest in education,
training, support, policies and
procedures to get individuals
the help they need in line with
the least drastic means
principles, as New Mexicans.
Let's continue to stand up for
our citizens' rights and support
our communities in ways that
strengthen them over time and
not just with a band-aid
approach. We know mass
institutionalization doesn't
work, so let's commit ourselves
as lawmakers, providers,
community members to making
meaningful and lasting change. I
urge you to vote no on SB 166.
Thank you, Doctor
Marshall Martinez on Zoom.
Mr. Martinez, you're recognized
for up to a minute and a half.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, I'm Marshall
Martinez, executive director of
equality in New Mexico. Civil
commitment in its various forms
has long been a tool that was
misused and weaponized against
the LGBTQ community. The
definitions in this legislation
are incredibly broad, and those
of us who see the attacks in
modern day on LGBTQ individuals
remember too vividly and see too
clearly the ability of a
political motivation to use this
legislation.
To harm LGBTQ people. To be
clear, we live in a time when
the President of the United
States
Refers to healthcare for
transgender individuals and
mutilation and expresses such an
executive order. This
legislation is dangerous to
LGBTQ individuals and our
families, and we cannot afford
to hand over even one more
opportunity to be criminalized
or harmed.
Thank you.
Mr. Martinez, that concludes all
of the
Persons who register to speak in
opposition, so we can now go to
members of the committee they're
doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator, um,
So I, I agree that the, the
standard to to civilly commit
someone should be high.
Um, I also hear that these are
old definitions, uh, that, that
needs some update.
Um, I, I agree that the, this um
is way better than, than the
previous draft was, uh, but
there is still some language in
here that's, that's vague and,
and pretty broad. So I'm going
to offer an amendment. I have
spoken with Miss Holly, whose
name I can never pronounce, uh,
about this and, and the sponsor,
um, and so,
This is gonna be a little bit
painful walking through the
amendment, but then I will read
it back to everyone as it would
read with the amount.
So on page 5, line 11.
Striking relevant.
And replacing that with recent.
Stress, so page 5, line 11,
striking the word relevant and,
and replacing it with recent.
So as, oh, go ahead.
We're going up
Yes, uh, I'm going off with the
point too so, which has that
been movedart, you wanna help us
or
do not pass the set of the 166,
and for purposes of discussion a
do pass on Senate Judiciary with
many substitute of the 166.
Thank you very much. What a
team, huh.
Thank you. All right, so, so
yes, page 5 of, of the sun. Line
11, striking relevant and
changing that to reason, as uh
Senator Mata said, we, we wanna
be looking at
What's on the ground happening
now. Um,
So then line 12.
There's the comma after the word
inflicted.
Striking that comma and
inserting there the word or.
The word or OR.
At the end of line 12, there's a
an or there as well, so striking
that or at the end of line 12.
On line 13, striking threatened
to inflict.
So that when we're talking about
harm to others, we're talking
about
Theater, a person has inflicted
or attempted to inflict.
serious bodily harm, not just
making, making a threat.
Then continuing online 15.
Striking.
The words that there is a
reasonable and continue to line
16, probability, striking that
there's a reasonable probability
and going back to that more
likely than not standard. So
inserting, it is more likely
than not.
And, and cause I think that that
is a standard that that our
courts are used to
wetracting.
Sure. So line 15.
Striking that there is a
reasonable problem and
probability on line 16.
And inserting instead.
It is more, it is more likely
than not.
And then online 16.
Before the semicolon, inserting
in the near future.
I
So I'll, I'll, let me read now
read what harm to others would
would be defined as with those
changes. Harm to others means
that within the recent past, the
person has inflicted or
attempted to inflict serious
bodily harm on another or has
acted in such a way as to create
a substantial risk of serious
bodily harm to another, and it
is more likely than not that the
conduct will be repeated in the
near future.
It's probably.
OK, and I can go on, do you want
me to go on to, to harm to self,
Mr. Chair, or, or pause. Let's
just take that one
and we'll repeat the, the same
changes would occur with the
definition appears again.
We see that definition again.
on page 11.
Yes, yes, yeah, everything that
we would be doing.
Here on page 5 and 6 would also
Be done on page 11, the same
changes take that as one motion
to make it easy for us, so
all right, we're gonna discuss
the definition of harm to others
to start with anyone on the
committee with questions or
comments.
When
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And Senator Du Ha I was
wondering why you were uh
mitting threat to inflict.
And Mr. Chair, Senator, when we
are when we are taking someone's
liberty when they have not been
convicted of a crime. Uh, we
have to be really careful about
that.
So I think
I think if you have inflicted
harm on someone, if you, or
you've tried to.
That's one thing, but just
making that threat, especially
for someone who, who is dealing
with mental illness. I, I, I
think it is unreasonable to take
someone's liberty simply for
making a threat.
I just, I just say that because
having experienced um
That with the unfortunately with
the sibling, my older brother
who unfortunately did take his
life.
It was 25 years of age. He did
uh threatened many times to do.
serious bodily harm to my
mother, and he was also very, as
a result of schizophrenia I was
very paranoid, and he also
You know I feel threatened, he
threatened on me as well, so I
was just wondering what that was
about. I, I, I, I don't, I mean,
I, I'm concerned too about the
issue of civil liberties quite
frankly.
I don't think he would have um
done very well in any kind of
institution, I think things were
just very difficult for him and
um I really don't think we could
have actually prevented him from
taking his life.
Quite frankly, but that's why I
asked that question.
But
Moment.
If there are any objection to
adopting the amendment.
said
Amendments constructive so there
being none, that amendment is
adopted for harm to others,
Senator Dewey then returned to
himself.
Yes, so still staying on page 5.
On line 18.
Striking or behavioral.
Um, like my 1 team striking
history at the beginning of that
line.
At the end of line 19.
striking to care.
On line 2.
Striking for the person's own
welfare or
And then online 22, and if I,
I'm going too fast at any point,
please just tell me to stop.
Um, on line 22,
Striking.
There is a reasonable and
continuing on to line 23,
probability of
And replacing that language with
It is more likely than not.
That the lack of capacity will
result in
And then
online 24.
After the word debilitation.
Inserting in the near future.
On line 25.
After the two parentheses.
Striking all of that language
and inserting, it is more likely
than not that the person will.
And then turning to page 6, line
1.
Striking person.
And changing suffering to
suffer.
So now I will read.
this definition back.
With what it would be with those
changes. It would be harm to
self means that one, the
person's recent behavior
demonstrates that the person
lacks the capacity to satisfy
the person's need for
nourishment, personal or medical
care, shelter or self-protection
and safety.
And that it is more likely than
not that the lack of capacity
will result in death, serious
bodily injury or serious
physical or mental debilitation
in the near future, if treatment
is not ordered, and #2, it is
more likely than not that the
person will suffer serious
physical debilitation in the
near future, unless adequate
treatment is provided pursuant
to the mental health and
developmental disabilities.
sponsor and Mr. Chair, we're
gonna have to change uh the
language on page 11 as well, and
that, and both those are
friendly, it's the same exact
paragraph for the folks
listening at home the 34.
Any other discussion or
questions?
Any objection to adopting those
amendments, Senator Thor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a
question with regards to
Um, and I think the ambiguity
now is in the near future.
Because I think there's no
timeline associated with that
and how can you predict the
future? So I think there's the
ambiguity. I'm OK with the
definitions other than that.
I think that would still be
some.
qualifications that we don't
really understand what that
means.
And Mr. Chair, Senator, I, I
hear that. Uh, the, the, in the
near future language is
His language that was being used
on page 6 to, to qualify the,
the serious physical
debilitation, um, and so,
And, and it's, uh, part of the
existing language as well,
that's being struck out. So I
think that, that in the near
future standard.
I think it's a standard that
That folks are used to operating
under, understanding that no one
can predict the future. Um, but
I think if you're, if you're
looking at someone and
There's a, a reason to believe
that they are going to instantly
deteriorate. Uh, that is
different than thinking, you
know, a year from now.
They might get off their meds
and deteriorate.
So, I think that's kind of what
that's getting at is that
The themediacy of the
deterioration.
Jordan. Anyone else?
On the proposed amendment for
definition of harm to self. Any
other questions? Is there any
objection to adopting the
amendment in the two locations,
see then, those amendments were
adopted.
That's all I have any other
proposed amendments, discussion.
We had to appreciate the
governor's council being here
today. We had a nice discussion
on this at length, I think a
couple of times that the changes
that Duke's making, um, more
likely than not. Probably makes
some sense that there was some
question about what is a
reasonable probability by
deduction is that comes from
civil practice where I deal with
personal injury cases and
medical cases and so forth where
the standard is reasonable
degree of medical probability
and so my guess is that when
that language was adopted or
reasonable probability was
probably intended to make that
akin to the medical definition
or diagnosis a reasonable degree
of medical probability that,
that was the only place we
could.
I could think that where we come
from, uh, but, um, not having a,
an anchor for that language, I
think the, the changes make some
sense,
uh, invariably we're gonna have
some subjective terminology
here, um, and it's probably
important to point out the
Supreme Court has said we're
going to leave it to the states
to come up with these
definitions, and then we're I
think they do that because they
don't want to try, um, and
because they realized it's
probably a fool's errand,
candidly, and so then they leave
it to us and concern I always
have when we do this is we're
gonna end up with a different
application of this language
among different judges in
different parts of the state.
Not too much unlike we talked
about from time to time, the
bail reform initiative language
and
the issues there when it comes
to pretrial detention, um, and,
and we do, we end up with a
different system. So I'm gonna
support this. I, I have no doubt
that that these um terms that
we're leaving undefined and my
colleagues have pointed out some
of these are undefined. What is
it, what is a recent past of a
judge is gonna have to decide
that.
And uh and some of these other
terms as well too. So we'll,
we'll do that and we'll get some
court decisions maybe over time
and maybe they'll help to
clarify this or begin to narrow
it down, but I don't think we
can do much better than the
language we're doing here
tonight, so I'll support the
bill in its form.
Anyone else? All right, motions,
centers story.
Somebody get us some coffee.
Uh, we could take motions now.
Anyone
I'll pass.
As a Mendes.
That's why I went to you,
Senator Stewart, you see,
I know what I'm doing not pass
the Senate Bill 166 and a due
pass on Senate Judiciary
Committee's substitute for
Senate 166.3 version with all of
the amendments we have just
adopted.
sub center, all right? We're
gonna send it out as a committee
sub.
Well, but with, with the
amendments, we're gonna have to
have another another clean
stuff, right?
You said you're right
just make sure, make sure I
We do pass motion.
It is, is there any objection to
the DuPass motion as
no
see now you have a du.
Senator Bran, are you still
here?
Yeah, so Brat still here? No?
OK.
359.
that are doing 259.
And um
I'm gonna, I'm gonna let folks
know.
Who is here for Senate.
Hi Bill, at 318.
No? All right. I, I won't hear
that tonight. We won't have the
time. He was here for 2:18.
Selection changes, I think I've
let the sponsor know, I'm likely
to be able to do that tonight.
With time.
Oh, I
sent it 58.
Childcare licensing.
OK.
OK, well then we've got a lot of
folks here we'll try to get to
58 then.
All right.
Senator Doig.
259.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So Senate
Bill 259 is a consumer
protection and transparency bill
that ensures that when New
Mexicans donate non-perishable
goods such as clothing,
furniture, electronics, and
household items, they clearly
understand whether their
contributions are benefiting a
non-profit charity or a
for-profit resale operation.
Right now, certain for-profit
thrift stores and third-party
solicitors mislead donors into
believing that their
contributions support.
able causes. When in reality,
while some non-profits might
receive a small portion as a
beneficiary through a
partnership, the vast majority
of of the revenue from resold
goods in this context goes to
private for-profit entities. I
have here with me, Nina Chavez
from Goodwill Industries, and uh
with that, Mr. Chair, we will
stand for questions.
Was there anything else?
All right, and support Samantha
Chavez and Shawna Castle by Zoo
or either one of those two
individuals there.
That's my first
and Mr. Chair, we have an
amendment as well, but we can do
that after the public comment,
OK.
We do have an amendment listed.
afternoon.
OK, we have a proposed
amendment. You want to move that
this yours? Sure, yes, and that
is, that is really just doing
some, some clean up, uh, but
I'll, I will move the amendment.
Expand a little bit more than
just saying it's clean up center
doing on the amendment.
Yes, so Mr. Chair, so this, this
is providing a a better
definition of donation in this
bill, uh, and also defining for
profit collections of goods.
And I think that's basically it.
Questions.
To the doctor.
motion to adopt the amendment.
Is there any objection? There is
none. The amendments adopted
consider to back to the bill.
Just like the same like.
Yeah
Yeah.
OK.
And that's all for our
presentation. OK, good. We had a
couple of people. Samantha
Chavez, Shawna Castle, both on
Zoom I believe. Do you have both
of those two individuals?
OK, Ms. Castle, you recognized
for one minute.
Good evening. My name is Shawna
Castle, and I'm the president of
Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico. I'm here to express our
strong support for Senate Bill
259, which addresses third-party
fundraisers and promotes
transparency in nonprofit thrift
operations. I could, well, we're
a local nonprofit. The revenue
generated from donations and
goods sold in our stores
directly supports a wide range
of workforce development
programs. This includes services
for homeless veterans and their
families, as well as seniors.
Title I high
school juniors and seniors,
individuals involved in prison
reentry and those preparing for
careers in high demand
industries like film and clean
clean energy.
Senate Bill 259 will strengthen
public trust in nonprofits by
ensuring that donors know
exactly where their
contributions are going and
whether they are supporting a
legitimate nonprofit or a
for-profit fundraiser. By
ensuring transparency, this bill
helps us continue our mission
with the community's full
confidence. These support Senate
Bill 259 and thank you for your
time. Thank you, Ms Chavez. We
have Samantha Chavez. Ms.
Chavez, you're recognized for a
minute.
Good evening.
My name is Samantha Chavez and
I'm the program manager for Next
Steps, a prison reintegration
workforce development program at
Goodwill Industries in New
Mexico, funded by our thrift
operations. I'm here today to
express my strong support for
Senate Bill 259, the revenue
generated through our store
stays right here in New Mexico
and how
Helps teams of case managers
like mine at Goodwill provide
individuals like the client
currently in my program who
submitted a letter of support to
this committee with the tools
and resources they need to
successfully reintegrate into
their local New Mexican
community by supporting Senate
Bill 259, you're helping ensure
that these operations.
remain transparent across all
organizations and entities so we
can continue to make a
meaningful impact in New Mexico.
And retain the trust and support
of the public.
The public wants to know where
their donations go, and the
community impact they'll make.
Please support Senate bill.
259. Thank you. Thank you, Ms.
Chavez. All right, that
completes red shirt, uh,
supporters, we had no opponents,
so we'll go to members of the
committee then.
259.
The
Any discussion with anyone?
Stewart, on the button
This move due pass the Senate
Bill 259 as amended.
Thank you.
Uh,
Senator that work I know there's
a purpose clause here that's
been struck. Oh, it's been
struck, yeah. I think my right
and that's been struck in a
prior amendment. Yes, Mr. Chair,
I was horrified with backs to
see that I have allowed a bill
with my name on it to have a
purpose clause, so it is
definitely out mistakes of
Other legislators years ago,
right? So that's good. Uh, I
appreciate that. So, you know,
the one thing that I didn't see
in the bill, and I'd like to
see, maybe it's easier to do it
quickly here, if not, maybe.
With a relatively simple format,
I'd like to see you're requiring
an, an, a disclosure, a lot of
disclosures that are made to the
Attorney General's office in
connection with these
third-party contractors and as I
understand it, I, I'm fond of
donating my clothing and things
like that to Big Brothers, Big
Sisters because they have the
big bright green bins all over
Las Cruces, #1 and #2, I like
the idea of the program. I like
everything they do and I, I
think it's a good program to
support, but when I drop it in
there, I like you like building
tents, I don't know how much of
this goes to.
And I don't know who's picking
it up and I don't know who's
selling it and I don't know how
much we actually goes into the
program or not. I don't expect
there's anybody here to answer
that question, but it would be
good to know that, and I think
your bill is intended to do
exactly that. The one thing that
I would suggest is your, your uh
proposing a lot of this
information is shared with the
attorney General's office. I
think the Attorney General's
office had to have it online uh
posting of this, this document,
this report that's prepared so
that we know that, um, I gotta
tell you where this comes up
with me is I can't go to uh W.
to buy a pack of gum these days
without being asked to donate to
some cause or the other, um, and
I really I can't buy anything
without being always asked to
donate to some cause, and I
pause a lot of times because I
want to support good causes, but
I don't know how much of the
money that I would donate when I
round up my change or whatever
else goes to anybody important
or how much goes to an
administrator.
Uh, or how much goes to the
company who's running the
program, or frankly, if I make a
donation at Best Buy, my guess
is they're making the donation
that I'm making to them, and
they're taking a charitable
deduction on that. So it's a
scam, uh, and it's a pretty good
scam, right? Which is, I'm, I'm
donating money to them. I'm not
getting the deduction. They're
taking the deduction and giving
it to somebody else, and they're
taking the deduction, right? So
every time I go to the little
pin pad and says, would you like
to donate something, I, I really
have to pause because I, the,
the guilt to me says, gee, I
should really be supporting
this.
very good noble cause reading or
whatever it may be. At the same
time, I realized
there's some information that
I'd really like to know. How
much is the administrative cost,
how much is getting skimmed, um,
and how much has been taken as a
charitable deduction by them. So
this is an interesting issue for
me. It's an important one. I, I
think that you're, it's good for
you to be requiring some of the
stud the Attorney General's
office, but I, I'd like as a
consumer, I'd like to know, I'd
like to know if I'm dropping my
clothes at Big Brothers Big
Sisters, that's the best place,
no offense to you goodwill.
Sorry to be Tony, I'm taking my
clothes to someplace else, but,
you know, if, if, if I find out
that there's a better benefit to
go to you. I'm gonna go to you,
um, and so this, I think this is
a novel and a good idea, but I'd
like to see that information
somehow in your bill or later
posted to the Attorney General's
office. I can go look it up, and
he said we' want to give my
things to. I think that's a
great idea, uh, and I would
commit to doing that as a floor
amendment on this bill.
Learn to trust you'll do a good
job with that and we won't have
anything to debate there, so
we're on to do pass motion with
the amendment. I there any
objection to do passing done,
you have a dope center.
Thank you.
259.
Senate 153, aggravated burglary.
preserve Chavez since the first
time you hear this?
So.
Yeah.
OK, Mr very spaced out the last
one, sir. Give me just a second.
You know every other page.
That's less than right.
Good. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, members.
Chief Weeler, uh, Terry Cole,
uh, sociocomposigs on Zoom and
Terry go by Zoom, so are they
part of your time presentation?
Yes, we'll lump it together. OK,
all right, uh, given the hours,
Senator, I'm gonna ask you to
try and keep it to 10 minutes.
All right. Sounds good. Thank
you. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, members. This is
Senate Bill 153, which amends
our state's aggravated burglary
statute 30-16-4 to close a
loophole in the law to include
the scenario when a person
breaks into one's home
unlawfully.
But doesn't
Touch that person.
Uh, my expert witness is Ms.
Sannisa Tinina dear family
friend who experienced a
horrific crime that occurred in
the comfort of her own home.
The defendant that broke into
her home was not there to
burglarize what was actually
running from the police. He had
just crashed a stolen vehicle,
ran off on foot, broke into Ms.
Tinnan's home because of her
courage and presence of mind,
the criminal was apprehended and
prosecuted. He was indicted with
aggravated burgery was chairman,
which is the 2nd degree crime,
but he was convicted of
residential burglary, a 3rd
degree crime because his actions
did not meet the elements of
aggravated burglary.
Because he didn't do one of the
following, he, when he broke
into our house, he wasn't there
with an intent to steal. He did
not have a weapon. He did not
grab a weapon, and once inside
the house, he did not, uh, you
know, batter her and therefore,
uh, the state couldn't prove
aggravated battery, Minnen's
frustration with the initial
charge of burglary upon arrest
and failure to convict for
aggravated burglary led me.
to drop this home invasion bill.
The administrative officer of
the court's analysis notes that
Senate Bill 153 does not
technically create a new crime,
but modifies an existing crime,
nor does this bill increase
penalties. This bill merely
closes a very peculiar nuance in
New Mexico's law that that needs
to be remedied. I want to thank
you, Mr. Chairman and the
judiciary staff for the
thoughtfulness and legal
analysis that went into this
bill and for the hearing today,
with that, I'll turn over to
Miss Tinnon, and then we'll go
to my co-sponsor, uh
Representative Chavez. Thank
you. Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee, I
thank you all for bringing this
to committee today.
March 21st, 2024 changed my life
forever.
I'm here to tell you that we
should fix the current law, but
first I want to tell you about
the terror that my granddaughter
Lennon and I experienced so you
can better understand how the
law is flawed.
I ask each of you to think about
some of the happiest times in
your life, the times when you
have felt safe and secure in
your home with your loved ones.
For me, one of those moments was
in the evening spending with my
granddaughter. I felt safe. I
felt happy, and so did she. But
in an instant everything
changed. Our sense of security
was shattered.
When someone invades your home,
the safety and security once
knew were ripped away.
I will never forget the moment I
saw an unknown man standing in
my dark dining room, the fear
that washed over me, the sinking
in my heart, the tingling in my
limbs, the horrifying
realization that my
granddaughter and I could die
that night will stay with me
forever.
For 3 agonizing minutes, I
pleaded with our, for our
safety, Mr. Rivera was
irrational, angry, anxious, and
unpredictable. He threatened to
hurt us if I didn't do as he
demanded. I secretly called 911,
but he saw me dial the phone and
he threatened me again,
demanding I hang up.
I remained calm telling him I
wasn't going to talk to the 911
operator and that I would help
him. Every second felt like an
eternity. The terror growing
with each passing moment.
When I finally managed to get
him out of the house. I thought
the nightmare was over, but it
wasn't. It would be another 9
minutes before police arrived.
During those long moments, I had
to make multiple life-altering
decisions, all while trying to
protect my granddaughter.
The hardest part of the night
when I came, when I, when I had
to put linen in our bedroom, she
cried, and she begged me not to
leave her.
The fear in her voice, the way
she clung to me, it was the most
difficult moment of the entire
night.
It broke my heart, but I knew I
had to do everything to keep her
safe.
When Mr. Rivera kicked in our
door for a 2nd time.
And charged at me. I had no
choice. I stood between him and
my granddaughter.
After I shot him, he tried to
crawl away. I screamed for him
to stay put when he collapsed,
he begged me to kill him. He
told me he was dying. My heart
sank.
Despite everything, I gave him
water, applied pressure to his
wound and prayed for the police
to arrive as soon as I stood
there, numb and helpless. The
memories of that night still
haunt me. The banging on the
door, the uncertainty of what
would happen next, the terror
that went through my body as he
charged towards me, I raised my
gun and I had to pull the
trigger. The constant
realization that I wasn't just
fighting for my own life, but
for the life of my granddaughter
as well.
The crime he committed wasn't
just an isolated act.
It had a devastating impact on
my family and his actions have
left lasting scars on our life.
I share these extremely
difficult and personal moments
to express how deeply I urge you
to support this bill.
The way the law is currently
written, it provides no real
protection to New Mexican
families from someone who
invades their home to terrorize
them. He didn't just burglarize
us, he terrorized us.
I have been contacted by several
victims across the state that
have unfortunately experienced a
home invasion. This bill is
about protecting families,
ensuring that those who violate
our homes and our sense of
security face the appropriate
consequences. It is about
justice for victims like me and
my granddaughter, who now live
with the trauma of that night.
It is about making sure that no
other family has to endure what
we did, knowing the law is on
their side. I urge you to pass
this bill so that New Mexican
families can feel safe in their
home again. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, committee members.
As you've heard, home invasions
are among some of the most
traumatic crime individuals and
families can experience, um, not
only did I talk to Miss Tennon,
but I also talked to several
other home invasion victims over
the summer and before fall.
These offenses not only result
in the loss of property
sometimes, but also inflicts
severe emotional and
psychological distress on the
victims, their families, and
especially if there are children
involved. This bill seeks to
expand definitions and truly
protect our.
v ul ner able populations.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We'll go to the, the supporters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Troyer chief from
Mexico State Police, um, state
police Sports Senate Bill 153
because it strengthens
protections for New Mexicans by
creating a distinct home
invasion crime or subsection
rather, um, unlike standard
burglary, home invasion involves
unlawful entry while occupants
are inside, increasing the risk
of violence. This bill closes
legal gaps by ensuring offenders
face proper penalties and helps
law enforcement effectively
charge criminals. It also
reinforces public safety by
making home invasion a
secondary.
felony deterring these violent
intrusions by clearly defining
home invasion Senate Bill 153
ensures stronger protection for
residents and hold offenders
accountable. I urge its passage
and helping make our communities
safer. I appreciate the sponsors
bringing the bill. Thank you.
Tur cool on Zoom.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee I'm
Thank you.
Good.
I'm Terry Cole, president and
CEO of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce. I'm here to
support SB 153. Within the last
year, two of our CEOs who serve
on our board at the chamber have
been victims of terrifying home
invasions. There is nothing more
terrifying to anyone than to
have their home invaded by a
menacing criminal armed and bent
not only on theft, but bodily
harm. This kind of crime leaves.
families with deep emotional
scars, robbing them of their
most precious possession, peace
of mind and safety in their own
home. It's a crime that deserves
to be punished severely in order
to bring some sense of justice
to the victims. Crime, poor
education, and lack of access to
healthcare, of course, are also
challenges we're dealing with in
New Mexico.
But this particular problem is
one that needs to be dealt with
immediately.
Employees and employers worry
about their safety, and if there
is something that we can do to
um make them feel safer in this
community because I'm home
invasions, we should do it. We
must deal head on with violent
criminals for the benefit of all
of us and particularly the Thank
you Ms. Cole.
So bids. Are you with us on
Zoom?
Biggs
Be with us?
Ms. Biggs, I can recognize you
for a minute and a half, please
begin I'm here. Oh, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, SB 153 creates
clarity around a dynamic
situation, it modernizes the
language and streamlines the
pathway for officers to do their
job and for victims to seek
justice. I'm with the
Albuquerque Police Department
and we support this bill.
All right, that completes the
presentation and supports still
have a minute or two left. Do
you want to hold on to that?
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
we really appreciate the, the
deep analysis from the various
agencies, uh, there is a
If I could move uh
No, that's true. OK, that's
true. I'll wait. Probably wanna
wait. Uh, Kim Travis Cook,
public defender's office. We
heard 10 minutes in support Ms.
Chavez Cook, I'll recognize you
for up to 3 minutes, and then we
have Andrew Valelejos.
And I recognize both of each set
up to 3 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Kim Chavez
Cook with the Law Offices of the
Public Defender, um, and I do
think the sponsors for their
sincere effort to try to address
a serious issue, and I certainly
feel for people who've been
experienced this, um, this type
of crime and the safety of their
own homes. It is our strong
position that we do not have a
gap in the law. So the
second-degree felony for
aggravated burglary is meant to
address the additional harm that
comes from a burglar being
armed.
with a deadly weapon or actually
committing an act of violence.
And so we need to maintain that
rational distinction in the law
between residential burglary and
aggravated burglary. I wholly
understand the fear that stems
from finding someone being in
your house. There are other
crimes to address the scenario
that was just described so
emotionally. The story I just
heard includes the crime of
residential burglary, false
imprisonment for two different
victims, that's 2 counts, a
crime of interference with
communications and to
accounts of simple assault.
That's what I heard just
described tonight. If you add
those crimes up, that's 8 years.
This bill wants to create a new
crime with a 9-year penalty, but
we actually have a very
comprehensive criminal code that
does account for all of those
downstream consequences of
having someone break into your
home when you're there.
This bill wants to create a
broader second degree felony for
anytime a burglar, um, burglar's
presence results in simple
assault. Simple assault is a
petty misdemeanor that carries 6
months in jail. That's simple
assault. So this bill wants to
take a 3-year crime plus a 6
month crime and make it a 9-year
crime. I understand the emotion
behind the bill, but criminal
penalty schemes must be
rational. All criminal conduct
is bad. That's why the law
declares.
to be a crime, but it is
necessary to recognize that the
harms and the culpabilities are
relative, and we need a
proportional response. This bill
blurs the lines of culpability
for very different types of
behavior. We would recommend
opposing this legislation
entirely as we do believe that
the law already provides all of
the tools prosecutors need to
get a very hefty sentence in
these cases. And if we want to
create a new second degree
felony that is less culpable. We
need to beef up
The mens rea requirements to
require knowledge that the home
is occupied when you go inside,
which is currently not required
or to require the intent that
was described tonight, the
intent to terrorize, none of
which is included in this
legislation. So we do ask you to
oppose uh HB 153, and thank you
for your time. Thank you
Andrews up to 3 minutes.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
committee, uh, Andrew Was for
the New Mexico Criminal Defense
Lawyers Association. I'll
associate my comments with um
Miss Cook and Travis Cook.
Uh, and just make the following
point. I want to be brief about
this, um, we firmly believe also
that there's statutes and laws
that cover this behavior
already, creating a new uh a new
cause, which is home invasion,
which kind of gets to the same
behavior but has different
elements to it is going to lead
to confusion. It's going to lead
to more litigation. We need more
clarity on this. These are laws,
and I've heard the chairman say
this before. We've, we've
have passed laws that that cover
most of human behavior at this
point, and by just additionally
passing additional laws that
overlap, it creates confusion
and will lead to more
litigation. Thank you. Thank
you. Right, that completes those
registered and opposition
excluded members of the
committee. Question Senator Do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
And
you could reserve some time. You
wanna wait now or you wanna wait
till the word's up? No, go do it
now. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members, a couple things in, in
reviewing the analysis.
The way it's currently written,
there's potentially two other
loopholes that it may have
created.
One is a home invasion when a
battery occurs and aggravated
burglary when unoccupied.
Uh dwelling.
So there's a, if we get down
that road, there's a proposed
amendment to close that out with
regards to
The uh this is the 2nd degree
crime does not increase
penalties for aggravated
burglary. We call it home
invasion because
Or we can call it super
aggravated burglary, but the
sentence is 0 to 9.
Someone is eligible for a
conditional discharge. So the
facts that go into that home
invasion determined the 0 to 9,
uh.
I just, so I just wanted to
mention that. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, sir.
You mentioned an amendment, so
we've been handed.
One amendment 85.1.
with this amendment?
Talks about aircraft.
Yes, yes, that's the one.
You're trying to expand your
built to aircraft.
That's um that's in.
Yes
this close to the two that I
mentioned.
I I.
Oh, OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
But, so, uh, so yeah, that's the
way the current law is written,
aggravated burglary occurs when
you enter a vehicle, a
watercraft, aircraft, dwelling,
or other structure, uh, with a
weapon. So this uh
This, uh, amendment further
modifies the aggravated burglary
statute to include an unoccupied
dwelling, and then amends the
proposed home invasion uh
portion of the bill to include
uh a committing a battery.
I'll take up the amendment first
of all, I'll, I'll take your
motion to be adopting this
amendment.
All right, we're on the
amendment then. Let's take a
moment on that.
questions.
You know
Oh, I'm puzzled by the
amendment. So I'm trying to read
in context.
I know some of the existing
language where you're you're
inserting language this is
requiring an aircraft be
unoccupied for aggravated
burglary.
Um, just looking at the title.
And then it would suggest that
for for this.
This type of a crime to occur,
there has to be an unoccupied
aircraft.
Yeah.
A
OK, yeah, that's, that's, you
know.
work on Occupy For the word
dwelling, not before the word
aircraft.
OK, so that amendment's
withdrawn withdrawn.
All right, back to the Bill.
Surgery.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, and I'm sorry that you
had that experience. That sounds
like a terrifying thing to have
happened and, uh, that is awful
that that happened. Um, I, I
don't, I don't think there's a
gap in the statute, uh, in
addition to
The, the list of of crimes uh by
the loss of public defender that
was listed out, uh, I feel like
this would also be a breaking
and entering, which is already a
felony, uh, possibly an unlawful
taking of the car.
Uh, there are.
We have, we have plenty of
criminal statutes in place.
That would have addressed this
situation. I think what happened
is that
Is that there, there's an
unhappiness with what happened
in the legal system.
As this went through, with how
it was charged or the and the
plea, uh negotiation.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure why those choices
were made.
But it wasn't because there
aren't enough laws on the books.
to address the situation, we
have
We have
Lots of laws on the books
already.
That could have been charged in
this situation, and, and I think
like they should have been.
Um, but I, I don't think that
there's a gap in our, our
criminal statutes for this. Um,
and
And I think that elevating
Elevating assault to the level
of battery.
is problematic. Assault.
Assault is when someone is
putting you in fear of a
battery.
It is, it is saying threatening
things to you. It is not
actually striking you.
When someone actually batters
you.
But yes, we want that to be a
higher penalty because that is
different.
Then, then saying things and or
or be acting in a threatening
manner that puts you in fear.
This equates those two things.
Uh, in a way that, that doesn't
make sense with
Our criminal statutes otherwise.
Um, so I
I'm very sorry that this
happened. Um,
I'm sorry that it, it looks like
it was charged in a weird way,
and, and for some reason, they
fled away at least half the
habitual offender, uh, something
that might, that could have,
have been applied here. I don't
know, and again,
I, I don't know why those
choices were made.
But it wasn't, it wasn't because
we don't have the laws on the
books. So, Mr. Chair, I'm gonna
have to oppose this.
Nor do anyone else.
the committee.
Bradley
I'm actually gonna ask.
a couple of questions of Senator
Duha if she'll, if she'll
elaborate the FIR on this bill
is not very friendly to it and
to your point, it says it
replaces battery with assaults
and for this penalty increases
and blurs the line between 3rd
and 2nd degree burglary, to your
point. So in an instant though,
where someone comes into your
home.
And may
Assaults, even verbally, but
does not matter.
What additional charges could
have.
been, been placed or they're
not.
So, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
breaking and entering.
Personal, which is like by
entering the home, um,
They're depending on what the
intent was in, in breaking into
the home, I think would change
the and
I see. Uh.
This, uh,
Travis Cook, thank you over
there. uh, who probably could
answer this question far better
than I could. Uh, so, if you
don't mind, I would, I'd love
to, uh, for a way in because I,
I don't practice criminal law,
um, but Ms. Travis Cook.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. Um, so as I had
identified as sort of freehand
while I was listening to the
presentation, um, because there
were 2 people in the house, 2
occupants, it'd be false
imprisonment was the first one
that came to mind, where that's
when you are um prevented from
leaving a place where it sounded
like from the description, he
was kind of keeping them there,
not letting her use her phone to
call 911. That's also
interference with
communications, which is a
misdemeanor carrying a year, um,
false imprisonment is a felony,
so that's 2 felonies for that,
assault itself is
a crime. Um, it's a misdemeanor,
but it's crime and there would
be two counts of that from what
I heard tonight. Um, I, there
was also as Senator Du pointed
out, the description that he was
fleeing from the police at the
time with a stolen car. So that
would be unlawful taking of a
motor vehicle, a felony, um, the
car was crashed, is what I
heard, which would be criminal
damage to property. Um, I also,
I'm fleeing from the police is a
crime, it's a felony. If it's
aggravated fleeing, if you do it
in a dangerous way, since he
crashed the car, it would be the
list is.
very long, Senator, Mr.
Chairman, thank you.
What about just the entering of
a home?
With a deadly weapon. There's no
battery.
So, so Senator, even, even
entering the home without a
deadly weapon would already be a
felony.
Uh, under criminal trespass, uh,
with a deadly weapon. I'm
looking at
I'm looking at the, the uniform
jury instruction here for
aggravated burglary. Um,
So it would also be aggravated
burglary.
So I, we
This was a terrible situation,
but it wasn't for lack of laws.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Senator, I've got a question, so
I'm hearing from another member
on the committee that's not a
lack of laws, and I'm wondering
if you can help me understand
from your perspective as to why
you brought this bill because
obviously you feel that there is
a lack of or a gap there, can
you help just reiterate your
point, um, for bringing this,
Mr. Chairman Senator Paul, there
is a gap.
You can get very creative as the
prosecutor, and I don't want to
critique this prosecutor. He
did, he did a great job. This
person's held accountable and
will go to prison. You can get
creative with the number of
charges based on the factual
scenario of what the defendant
did, but Miss Doig has the jury
instructions.
And the jury instructions are
the state has to prove 123 or
41234.
The state cannot prove the crime
of aggravated burglary in this
situation because he didn't
enter in with intending to
steal.
He didn't enter with a weapon,
didn't grab a weapon, and didn't
beat her up.
So, and, and so that's the way
it is. You, in other words, you
cannot charge aggravated
burglary under that factual
scenario, so there's not a
choice, Mr. Chairman. There's
not a choice. The prosecutor had
no choice but to drop it to
residential burglary, which is
as if no one was even there.
It's now granted, we can debate
all day long what's worse, the
battery and assault or an
assault, fear is horrible.
Fear is horrible, you know, the
uh.
The fear of getting into a
fight, sometimes it's more.
More
Anxiety than the fight, once the
fight starts, you're good to go.
In certain instances, so, so
this is a situation where the
facts that this person did in
Miss Tennant's home is not equal
the crime of aggravated
burglary. Yet the harm done was
the equivalent.
And so, so that is why we
created the.
And once again, the, the
administrative officer of the
courts says in its FIR this
isn't a new crime. It's, it's
amending the current statute,
given the factual scenario that
occurred in Miss Tennant's home.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. I appreciate you
clarifying that for me.
Just briefly, Mr. Chair.
So, but the fact that the facts
here didn't make me aggravated
burglary doesn't mean there
wasn't all these other crimes
that he could be charged with.
So
We don't usually make boutique
crimes or individual
experiences. Um, I understand
there is a frustration in this
case that aggravated burglary
specifically, they might not
have met the elements.
But that doesn't mean that
That doesn't mean that there is
no way, as evidenced by the fact
that this guy is going to
prison.
That doesn't mean that there was
no way to hold this person
responsible.
Um
So, if you don't mind, Miss Tin,
if you don't mind me asking,
when you and I spoke about this
a few days back, you indicated
the individual charge here was
going to be sentenced. Did that
happen?
Uh, Mr. Chairman and senators,
that it was supposed to happen
today, but the defense was not
prepared with the mitigation
report, so they asked for a
continuance, so it's been
rescheduled for April 7th.
Can I, can I share with my
colleagues the concern about
what happened to you and, and uh
can't imagine.
Um, how horrible that is for
you. I was curious to see what,
what he was ultimately sentenced
to because we've heard various
scenarios about how things go
here, um.
I don't practice criminal law. I
think I've told you and others
that I've struggled with this
bill for some time. We put it
off a bit, simply because there
was um quite a bit of
disagreement and question about
what this does or what this
doesn't do. It's not a, this is
not a easy one. This is it's a
little bit of a a question here
and you've heard some of the
other folks here. I'm, I'm
markedly
Um
Persuaded in part by the fact
that the the prosecutors are not
here. District attorneys are not
here, am I right? Anybody here
for the district attorneys?
They're the ones who I would
expect of anybody to come to me
and say, we have a problem with
the gap in the law. We have
people who are escaping certain
conduct and we can't charge
them, uh, because of a
deficiency in the lobby, that's
their job, and I've not heard
from them.
Um, now, this is not to jump on
them too hard, but a little bit
because again, we didn't hear
from them at all for the special
session.
Um,
we had a, we called, we all
showed up, we all came across
the state, we dropped what we're
doing, the governor made a lot
of uh of attention and interest
to the subject. I never heard
from the district attorneys at
all. Um, and, and they're not
here today on this, and that's
telling to me, to be very
candidly if there is in fact an
issue with the law. The other
thing that somewhat telling to
me because, because I don't do
this, I rely a great deal on the
people that I expect would have
the expertise. I think that's
the mark of a good.
elected official is to listen to
other people who might know more
about this than I do. The, the,
I asked uh the beginning of this
session for a greater role of
the sentencing commission in
what we do here, because I
understand the point that we
have a we have a structure that
we bump up the penalties in one
category we're we're somehow
implicating the penalties in
another category potentially,
and we end up with a, a system
that doesn't make any sense
where we're pushing up penalty
for one crime and not having the
whole thing looked at
electively, Senator, you've been
leading
For years on an effort to try
and reform the criminal code,
right, rewrite the whole
criminal code with that idea in
mind that we're gonna have some
consistency because as, as
politicians we're real quick
when there's a tragedy to run in
front of the cameras and get all
the evening news and talk about
what we need to increase some
penalties or, or make something
else a crime, but I, I do, um,
have, have repeated the refrain
here for several years now,
which is, I rarely see a
circumstance where we don't have
something that's already a
crime.
In New Mexico, I know the
concern here of late is that we
don't have a crime for this. We,
we do have a crime for this, uh,
but, but the, the penalties or
the enhancement may not be what
we want to do, but this seems to
be true across so many things
that we're told.
In New Mexico, we need a new
law, we need a new crime, and
invariably we come back to the
same issue, which is, well, the,
the laws and crimes we have on
the books now we're not frankly
being charged, and they're not
being closed, the cases are not
being closed, the prosecutions
are not being done, the the
judges are not sentencing
anywhere near the authority they
have already, so
I think we shine ourselves on,
we shine on the public to
suggest that we're going to do
this by by passing new laws to
get a handle around uh crime in
general, but this is a very
specific circumstance and I, I
realize that too. So I did at
the beginning of the session, I
asked for greater role, greater
input from the sentencing
commission, and my understanding
is the Sentencing commissioner
has not taken a position on this
bill either, and you're saying
you're nodding your head
affirmatively, senator, so that
sounds right. I wanted to give
them the time, frankly, that's
part of why I've postponed here
in this bill because I wanted to
give the Sentencing Commission
and the district.
Journeys to weigh in here, come
here tonight to tell us
something short, get on a Zoom,
you know, get on a laptop. It
doesn't take much.
Um, and the Sentencing
commission, I think is important
for the members of the committee
and the public to recognize who
sits on that sentencing
commission. It's a large group,
so bear with me, but uh we have
appointees by the state bar.
Actually, the secretary who's in
the front row here, I'm told is
on the sentencing commission at
you on the website as a member
of the Senencing Commission, uh,
Ben Bauer, the chief public
defender, Jason Bowie, the
secretary of the administration
for the Department of Public
Safety, that's the state police.
We have the Honorable Brian, an
appointee of the District of
Metropolitan Court judges. We
have a sheriff appointed by the
House minority floor leader. We
have Ms. Casado, secretary of
CYFD.
We have an appointee by the
Speaker of the House. We have,
uh, the Honorable John Chavez
appointed by the New Mexico
Supreme Court.
They have Mark Donatelli
appointed by the Speaker of the
House. I hope I've got the
current list, um, but I'm, I'm
going through what I'm finding
online. We have appointees of
the governor, we have appointees
of the Supreme Court.
We have appointees of the Senate
minority floor leader.
appointees of the dean of the
School of Law, we have a point
another appointee by the
governor. We have an appointee
of the Senate President Pro Tem.
We have another appointee by the
sheriff, appointed by the New
Mexico Association of Counties.
We have a designee for the
behavioral Health Services
division. We have an appointee,
another appointee of the Speaker
of the House.
We have the designee for the
Secretary of Public Education.
Um, I'm not gonna keep going
down the list. It's a long list,
it gets down to the Secretary of
Corrections. It includes the
Attorney General, and includes
an appointee for the district
attorneys association.
Um, and Mr. Carver, uh, who's
the acting director, right? So
it, it, I didn't get everybody
on the list. It's a pretty
extensive list and it's uh I
think in my mind, it's a pretty
well-balanced list. We've got
judges, we've got prosecutors,
we've got appointees of the
legislative body. We've got
queens of the government and the
executive branch. And so the
fact they're not coming to me
and saying, hey, we need to
correct this, this law. We've
got a problem or that we endorse
this a wholeheartedly. I have to
defer as a non criminal defense
lawyer and not a criminal
lawyer.
I appreciate the correction, but
yeah, yeah, I, I, uh, I, I, I
know there was some
misunderstanding that I make my
living as a criminal defense
lawyer, that's not what I do at
all and never have. I've never
let a criminal defense case in
my, in my lifetime. Um, so in
any event, I have to defer to
people whose expertise I think
is reliable to me and they're
not here, um, so I'm gonna rely
on that to a large degree on, on
my position for this.
Anyone else?
All right, uh, we're on a do
pass motion without an
amendment, I guess, right? So.
Well, that's true. We don't have
emotion, yeah. Thank you. We
have a motion move for do pass
that you pass motion.
We'll do it by roll call,
please.
Senator Bradley,
yes.
to him
Senator.
In her pub.
Ben Stewart, Ben Thornton. Yes.
Yeah no work.
Yes.
No.
The Dupin's motion fails, is an
alternative motion, or do we
move on to other business? Any
other motions?
Right, Singan we'll consider
that bill still in the committee
center. Thank you.
Senator Padilla, Senate 58,
childcare facility licensing and
others, a number of people here.
We'll see if we can get this one
to a vote tonight, Senator.
The folks that are here.
758.
OK, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair and Vice Chair and the
ranking member, um, Senator
Michael Padilla, and I have
Cabinet Secretary Elizabeth
Govinsky of the Early Childhood
Education and Care department,
also Shelby Strong, the chief
counsel for the department, uh,
essentially what we are here for
is Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senator
and the various committees
substitute, uh, it is 231-177.4,
the fourth version there for
this committee, uh, but
essentially we are
Attempting to enhance the child
care facility uh licensing uh
here in the state of New Mexico
and then also take a look at the
uh procurement uh component.
Uh, of how that works for this
particular department, um,
The reason that we, we want to
do this is uh is so that we
outline the licensing
requirements the bill
establishes comprehensive
licensing standards for
childcare facilities, ensuring
that they meet the, meet the
health, uh, safety and
operational criteria set by the
department, uh, in terms of
inspection protocols and
mandates regular inspections and
monitor compliance with
established standards, promoting
consistent quality across all of
these facilities, the training
and certification to get that
done and then the enforcement
measures, uh, which we actually
did remove in the um the
That we did remove in the
substitutes in front of you now.
The reason we want to do this is
enhance child safety, improved
quality of care, uh, public
confidence in these facilities
and then uh consistency across.
across these facilities. Um,
So it clarifies through
definition that ECECD is the
department to which early
childhood Care Accountability
Act applies. Uh, this was
overlooked when we created the
department back in 2020 and in
the, while we created the
department, and I'm gonna ask
the cabinet secretary to see if
he works.
Thank you, Senator Padilla, and
then, um, Mr. Chair and members
of the Senate Judiciary. um,
this substitute actually did
remove the licensing, um,
facility Act section, we wanna
work um in the interim with our
providers. There was some great
feedback we got, but this, um,
substitute does address the
procurement exemption for
childcare for childcare, um,
contracted slots, uh, this is an
important change to improve.
access, uh, and quality of
childcare um through a process
that um we, we will implement in
the department, uh, and it's
something that the LFC and the
department have both been
wanting to do for a while to.
Addres uh the needs in
childcare, what we call child
care deserts and also for care
for infants and toddlers and
also non-traditional hour care.
So it's a very um narrow
definition in the procurement
code uh for childcare assistance
for um contracts basically
contracted slots.
Um, but it is done through a
competitive process, just like
our pre-K, um, is that you'll
see in the, it's right, added to
the pre-K exemption. It also
updates the pre-kindergarten
Act, Senate Bill 58 does to
provide for continuity of care
for children with special needs
and for children enrolled in a
Head Start program. We also
updated to reflect the system we
have here in New Mexico now,
which is more of a universal
system, uh, then when we started
in 2005, um, and as Senator
Padilla said.
It clarifies that ECECD is the
department referred to, um, in
the childcare facility licensing
Act that's part of the
Children's code.
Thank you, I think we have
supporters online,
Oh, OK, sorry.
Thank you. We have, we have two
individuals who have registered
and support. They want me to
recognize those this time. Uh,
Barbara Luna Titro.
Christiro.
Yes. Thank you.
Mr. Chair and members of the
Senate Judiciary Committee. My
name is Barbara Luna Tedro, and
I serve as the policy chair for
the New Mexico Early Childhood
Association. I'm here today to
express NMECA support for Senate
Bill 58 and to provide context
to our role in shaping the
substitute bill before you from
the outset and MECA has worked
collaboratively with Senator
Padilla and Secretary Greginsky
to ensure that this legislation
aligns with the needs of both
early childhood providers and
the families we.
Over the course of 5 weeks, we
have engaged in extensive
discussions, negotiating key
elements of this bill. While
there were important aspects
where we did not initially
agree, particularly regarding
the pre-K section, we remained
committed to constructive
dialogue and ultimately reached
a consensus that balances the
needs of all the stakeholders.
We recognize that policymaking
is a process of give and take
and while compromises were
necessary, we believe the
substitute bill is a strong step
forward in our
testimony before the previous
committee, we urged members to
support this bill and that
advance it to the Judiciary
Committee, allowing NMECA to
continue our collaboration with
the sponsor and ECCD. Through
this process, we have achieved
meaningful improvements to SB
58, and we now stand in support
of its passage. We respectfully
ask this committee to advance
the bill, ensuring continued
progress for early childhood
education in New Mexico. Thank
you for your time and
consideration. Thank you, Angela
Garcia. Are you on the line,
please?
Yes, hello. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Angela Garcia. I own the
toybox early learning centers in
Las Cruces, serving
approximately 300 children, and
I'm also the president of Full
Circle Advocacy Group. We want
to thank the sponsor, Senator
Padilla, for being a true leader
in early childhood education and
always ensuring that those of us
working closest with children
are included in these important
matters. I also want to thank
Secretary Grogansky for her
commitment on this bill to
partner with us and to do what's
best for the youngest New
Mexican.
We stand in support of Senate
Bill SV 58, we believe it is
important to ensure pre-K
standards are consistent and
defined to produce best outcomes
for children. It will also
ensure ECECD can comply with the
federal government's mandate to
pay providers in advance of
services and slot-based
competitive, um, nature,
allowing us to have more stable
budgets in our programs. Please
support SB 58.
Its those uh registered and
support. We have nobody in
opposition, so we'll go to
members that you chairman. I do
believe you might have one more
Deborah Bach, if you're willing
to listen to her, I, I think she
might still know because she
didn't register.
Thank you sorry about that.
All right, members of the
committee.
Do
Um, Mr. Chair, I just wanna
thank Senator Padilla and the
Secretary of the Strong. I sat
with myron the other day and
went through concerns I had, uh,
On the bill and all of them are,
are addressed in this, so
looking forward to supporting
us. Thank you.
Others.
true.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
I just have a little curiosity
question.
Um, I was reading the last part
of it pages 20 and 21, that is
about the exemption to vaccine
vaccinations. And I was pleased
to see that this was only for a
period not to exceed one year.
But what does this mean on the
basis of any one certificate.
David or affirmation.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Stewart,
thank you for that question.
Uh, that language is, uh, what
was found in the immunization
exactly um that applies to
public schools, previously, just
that that um
Children and childcare would
have to be immunized for long.
We did want to clarify, uh, and
be consistent with the public
school requirements in the
Immunization Act, so that
certificate or exemption would
be so when they apply for an
exemption under this section
that will go to the Department
of Health.
And it would be evaluated by
them, and so that certificate or
exemption, so they get one year
and then they have to reapply
for the exemption Act.
Mr. Chairman, so does that
reapplication, I mean, is that
happen all the time, you know,
we've got that from measles in
part of our state. I think, you
know, we're all we've all been a
little crazy about vaccinations
during COVID, but it is a major
issue in our early childhood
centers when we have children
that are not vaccinated.
So I just wanna make sure that
we're doing the right thing. I'm
glad you took it from the PED
from public schools, but
Is it just, is it just a matter
of course that they get another
exemption?
Uh
Senators.
Oh, I'm sorry, Mr. Chair.
I'm sorry, it's late, um.
They
The new exemptions have to
follow the same standards as the
initial exemptions. I formerly
worked at the Department of
Health.
The exemption process and um
each new exemption, it's not
just that they, they care.
Here you go again, like just.
Reissue it, you actually have to
go through the same process. You
have to get the same statement
from the doctor or um uh
Nurse practitioner or you have
to issue the same in a religious
statement. So the, the process
happens anew each year.
All right. Thank you for that
explanation. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Anyone else?
Senator Thornton and we're ready
for a motion, I believe. Yeah,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Just real
quick, so
What's the financial impact on,
on any childcare facility that
wants to get fishery licensed
out. Have you done that
analysis?
In terms of what that fiscal
impact is on them.
Um, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Thornton in terms of actually
getting licensed by the state, I
think, um, currently, um, it's
cost, what is it? $50?
A year.
They get licensed annually.
and chair I think are you and
are you talking about just
preparation and, you know, so I
think that the department's done
an awful lot about this in the
promulgation of the rules on
licensing and it's, it's
dramatically been reduced
because they've developed most
of the process, but if you want
to comment on that.
Um, uh, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Thornton, I definitely could go
into more detail and I think I
actually have an appointment
with you tomorrow morning. Uh,
so, uh, but the, the process of
what they have to do to be
prepared, you know, they have to
have the proper facility, but
our team goes out and meets this
courtesy visits and meets with
providers as they're thinking
about setting up a license,
either a home or a center, and
then they have to do all the
fire and uh the the zoning, they
have all the permitting, um, but
we do lay it out as
Senator Paas had very um nicely
and um make sure that it's easy
for uh providers to follow so
that they we can expand license
care in the state, that's a goal
of the department.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I was just curious because I
would assume there's a, there's
a process by which one has to
prepare and uh I might imagine
that it may not necessarily be
cheap, uh, but you say it's,
it's uh
The normal process and that you
have something in mind, um, I'm
OK with that. I was just
curious, very much.
This chair
Who's that
we would do that.
And Mr. Chair, I don't know that
you adopted a substitute. I
don't know if you wanna make
sure that that's that way so we
don't have this held up.
I'm sorry, I mean do not pass
on, OK, go ahead.
I said it 15 and a do pass on
the the committee substitute for
Senate Bill 658.
OK.
Any objections to do pass
motion.
All right, we'll report this
with a due pass. Thank you.
Uh, 7:42.
With a very large committee sub.
And the hour is late, so we've
already been through all this.
We're just gonna pass it and see
what happens on the floor or
tomorrow
or the committee report or
whatever it may be, we'll see
where it goes. All right.
Well, well, they're coming up,
Mr. Chair. I'll just tell you we
did a lot of work on it. Thank
you very much for the feedback,
Mr. Chair and Senator Doha and
others, thank you for all the
wonderful feedback. Essentially,
uh, we went and cleared up all
of the editing errors and
mistakes that were pointed out
in the hearing on Friday.
We did remove a tremendous
amount of superfluous language
that did not make any sense, had
no business being in the bill.
Uh, we did remove the section
related to the assault and
battery on a child welfare
worker and uh we moved uh what
could be moved to rulemaking was
moved to there and I'm gonna,
and I just have to say, Mr.
Chair, that I, I'm, I'm so
thrilled to have Senator Truillo
as a part of this effort. She
did a phenomenal job of helping
us through this portion, and
others, uh, and,
and Senator um Burns as well and
the cabinet secretaries, but
So that's the same of the major
things that we did, but like
Senator Duig to walk you through
the about.
5 or 6 steps or 5 or 6 major
things we did to the
legislation.
I.
Curry Hill.
I'm just happy we're getting
this done, and I apologize.
Senator Trujillo, and I'm very,
very thankful for all the work
that everyone's done on it.
Chairman, I'd be happy to deal
this to Senator Duhig, um, but
I, I'm just gonna go over it
really quickly. What we did, um,
there was much of the language
in the original bill that had
been struck and then new
language had been added. The
challenge was that we couldn't
differentiate between the
current law and what was being
amended. And so I went back up
and worked with the drafter, and
we literally
struck
Current law added in the very
minimal requirements of what we
were looking for. So in section
one, for example, we just have
some cleanup language and we
make sure that the um uh care
program is moved to the or human
services is changed to
healthcare authority. Um, we
direct the CYFD to uh develop
and implement a family first
strategic plan.
Section 2, same thing, we just
have some general definitions,
including a plan of safe care, a
substance exposed newborn.
Section 3 is definitions that
are specific to the care program
where we define what car is. We
define the birthing facility,
and we cleaned out some of that
language that had caused some
confusion. Those definitions are
specifically under the voluntary
Placement and Family Services
Act, so they're specific to some
very specific programs and Cara
being one of those. Um, section
4, we just identified what the
plan of
safe care requirements are, and
we took and made sure that there
was an order to how the rules
and the requirements were
defined. In other words, we
defined, we put all of the care
navigator requirements together,
but all of the care
coordinators, um, things
together and put it in an order
that made more sense time-wise.
Section 4, we just removed some,
um, uh, and, oh, I wanted to
point this out to you actually.
Let's look at section 4.
There's some language on page
24.
But
is actually in current law, Mr.
Chairman, and we're not sure how
that got through in the first
place, um, but we removed it.
And I'm trying to find it real
quickly.
Is it on page 24?
Thank you.
I'm tired. I'm sorry, and I'm
not noticing it because it's
struck out. Um, this is current
law and it literally says that
no person shall have a cause of
action for any loss or damage
caused by an act or omission
resulting from the
implementation of the provisions
of Section G, subsection G of
this.
Section or resulting from any
training or lack thereof
required in subsection G. Then
it goes on in paragraph I, um,
the training or lack thereof
required by the provisions of
subsection G of the section
shall not be construed to impose
any specific duty of care. That
was language that shouldn't have
been in the statute in the first
place. And so in our cleanup of
this, we actually found some
things that needed to be
removed that we hadn't
identified
ified in current law.
Um, chapter.
Section 6 just has to do with
confidentiality definition,
chapters are section 7 really is
where the care program starts.
And we define what carrot
includes.
Section 8 is a multi-level
response system which
Prior to this legislation in the
current law, CYFD was given the
opportunity to implement a pilot
program. It hasn't been
implemented to the standard that
is required in the statute. So
now we're setting a date that
CYFD must implement this
multi-level response system by
July 1st of 2027. That gives
them plenty of time to come up
with the rules, plenty of time
to have the process and to begin
implementing it.
Section 9, has to do with
predispos predisposition
studies, which are part of, of,
uh, when CYFD goes to court to
remove a child from their
family. They have to go through
a uh predispos predisposition
study, and we're putting into
law that they have to include
things that they have provided
to the family to try to make
so that they don't have to
remove the child, and that
includes some of the things that
are required under a family's
first program. It also includes
um a referral to support
systems. The biggest thing that
it includes is to make sure that
we're not including poverty.
In making determinations that
there's neglect or abuse of a
child.
And then chapters, the sections
1110, 11, and 12 have to do with
confidentiality and um Senator
Bergman is here to do that.
Sections 1314, 15, and 16 have
to do with the submitting a
family's first plan to the
federal government. A plan was
submitted in December, and we
just learned this morning that
although the plan is required to
have a um
Uh.
Evidence-based.
program that it references, what
it's referenced that's been
submitted as of this date is a
plan from California that has
still not been approved.
as an evidence-based strategy.
And so we're saying to CYFD you
must submit a plan. You must get
the plan approved by the federal
government, and you must begin
implementing it. We give a
deadline September 1st of 2025,
that's this year, um, and then
we give a deadline of August 1st
of 2027 to begin implementing
the pilot strategic plan that's
part of the family's first and
then we give until
June 30th of 2032. That's really
far in the distance, but we give
that much time to actually
implement it statewide. Um, the
last section, Mr. Chairman, is
homeowners insurance, and we do
have some expert witnesses here
to answer questions for that.
s
Questions?
Yeah
Really, Motion for Du pass
I do not pass
on the Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 42,
and they do pass on the Senate
Judiciary Committee Substitute
for Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Sevil 42.
2 pounds.
Um, we're gonna skip my last
one. I'm sorry for those people
here, but I know some of you all
are here to hear mine I'm gonna
sacrifice myself for the sake of
time. It's 10 o'clock. We'll go
back and read this one later.
Thank you very much Mr. Chair.
If I could just say thank you to
your staff for helping me with
